the Odd woman 


 by 

 George Gissing 


 CHAPTER I 

 the FOLD and the shepherd 

 ' so to - morrow , Alice , ' say Dr. Madden , as he walk with his eld daughter on the coast - down by Clevedon , ' I shall take step for insure my life for a thousand pound . ' 

 it be the outcome of a long and intimate conversation . Alice Madden , aged nineteen , a plain , shy , gentle - mannered girl , short of stature , and in movement something less than graceful , wear a pleased look as she glance at her father 's face and then turn her eye across the blue channel to the Welsh hill . she be flatter by the confidence repose in she , for Dr. Madden , reticent by nature , have never be know to speak in the domestic circle about his pecuniary affair . he seem to be the kind of man who would inspire his child with affection : grave but benign , amiably diffident , with a hint of lurk mirthfulness about his eye and lip . and to - day he be in the good of humour ; professional prospect , as he have just explain to Alice , be more encouraging than hitherto ; for twenty year he have practise medicine at Clevedon , but with such trifling emolument that the need of his large family leave he scarce a margin over expenditure ; now , at the age of forty - nine it be 1872 he look forward with a large hope . might he not reasonably count on ten or fifteen more year of activity ? Clevedon be grow in repute as a seaside resort ; new house be rise ; assuredly his practice would continue to extend . 

 ' I do not   think girl ought to be trouble about this kind of thing , ' he add apologetically . ' let man grapple with the world ; for , as the old hymn say , " ' tis their nature to . " I should grieve indeed if I think my girl would ever have to distress themselves about money matter . but I find I have get into the habit , Alice , of talk to you very much as I should talk with your dear mother if she be with we . ' 

 Mrs. Madden , have give birth to six daughter , have fulfil her function in this wonderful world ; for two year she have be rest in the old churchyard that look upon the severn sea . Father and daughter sigh as they recall her memory . a sweet , calm , unpretending woman ; admirable in the domesticity ; in speech and think distinguish by a native refinement , which in the most fastidious eye would have establish her claim to the title of lady . she have know but little repose , and secret anxiety tell upon her countenance long before the final collapse of health . 

 ' and yet , ' pursue the doctor doctor only by courtesy when he have stoop to pluck and examine a flower , ' I make a point of never discuss these matter with she . as no doubt you guess , life have be rather an uphill journey with we . but the home must be guard against sordid care to the last possible moment ; nothing upset I more than the sight of those poor home where wife and child be oblige to talk from morning to night of how the sorry earning shall be lay out . no , no ; woman , old or young , should never have to think about money . 

 the magnificent summer sunshine , and the western breeze that taste of ocean , heighten his natural cheeriness . Dr. Madden fall into a familiar strain of prescience . 

 ' there will come a day , Alice , when neither man nor woman be trouble with such sordid care . not yet awhile ; no , no ; but the day will come . human being be not destine to struggle for ever like beast of prey . give they time ; let civilization grow . you know what our poet say : " there the common sense of most shall hold a fretful realm in awe " ' 

 he quote the couplet with a subdue fervour which characterize the man and explain his worldly lot . Elkanah Madden should never have enter the medical profession ; mere humanitarianism have prompt the choice in his dreamy youth ; he become an empiric , nothing more . ' our poet , ' say the doctor ; Clevedon be chiefly interesting to he for its literary association . Tennyson he worship ; he never pass Coleridge 's cottage without bow in spirit . from the contact of coarse actuality his nature shrank . 

 when he and Alice return from their walk it be the hour of family tea . a guest be present this afternoon ; the eight person who sit down to table be as many as the little parlour could comfortably contain . of the sister , next in age to Alice come Virginia , a pretty but delicate girl of seventeen . Gertrude , Martha , and Isabel , range from fourteen to ten , have no physical charm but that of youthfulness ; Isabel surpass her eld sister in downright plainness of feature . the young , Monica , be a bonny little maiden only just five year old , dark and bright - eyed . 

 the parent have omit no care in shepherd their fold . partly at home , and partly in local school , the young lady have receive instruction suitable to their breeding , and the elder one be dispose to better this education by private study . the atmosphere of the house be intellectual ; book , especially the poet , lie in every room . but it never occur to Dr. Madden that his daughter would do well to study with a professional object . in hour of melancholy he have of course dread the risk of life , and resolve , always with postponement , to make some practical provision for his family ; in educate they as well as circumstance allow , he conceive that he be do the next good thing to save money , for , if a fatality befell , teaching would always be their resource . the thought , however , of his girl have to work for money be so utterly repulsive to he that he could never seriously dwell upon it . a vague piety support his courage . providence would not deal harshly with he and his dear one . he enjoy excellent health ; his practice decidedly improve . the one duty clearly before he be to set an example of righteous life , and to develop the girl ' mind in every proper direction . for , as to train they for any path save those tread by english lady of the familiar type , he could not have dream of any such thing . Dr. Madden 's hope for the race be inseparable from a maintenance of moral and convention such as the average man assume in his estimate of woman . 

 the guest at table be a young girl name Rhoda Nunn . tall , thin , eager - looking , but with promise of bodily vigour , she be single at a glance as no member of the Madden family . her immaturity   but fifteen , she look two year old   appear in nervous restlessness , and in her manner of speak , childish at time in the hustling of inconsequent thought , yet strive to imitate the talk of her senior . she have a good head , in both sens of the phrase ; might or might not develop a certain beauty , but would assuredly put forth the fruit of intellect . her mother , an invalid , be spend the summer month at Clevedon , with Dr. Madden for medical adviser , and in this way the girl become friendly with the Madden household . its young member she treat rather condescendingly ; childish thing she have long ago put away , and her sole pleasure be in intellectual talk . with a frankness peculiar to she , indicative of pride , Miss Nunn let it be know that she would have to earn her living , probably as a school teacher ; study for examination occupy most of her day , and her hour of leisure be frequently spend either at the Maddens or with a family name Smithson people , these latter , for whom she have a profound and somewhat mysterious admiration . Mr. Smithson , a widower with a consumptive daughter , be a harsh - feature , rough - voice man of about five - and - thirty , secretly much dislike by Dr. Madden because of his aggressive radicalism ; if woman 's observation could be trust , Rhoda Nunn have simply fall in love with he , have make he , perhaps unconsciously , the object of her early passion . Alice and Virginia comment on the fact in their private colloquy with a shameface amusement ; they fear that it speak ill for the young lady 's breeding . none the less they think Rhoda a remarkable person , and listen to her utterance respectfully . 

 ' and what be your late paradox , Miss Nunn ? ' inquire the doctor , with grave facetiousness , when he have look round the young face at his board . 

 ' really , I forget , doctor . oh , but I want to ask you , do you think woman ought to sit in Parliament ? ' 

 ' why , no , ' be the response , as if after due consideration . ' if they be there at all they ought to stand . ' 

 ' oh , I can not   get you to talk seriously , ' rejoin Rhoda , with an air of vexation , whilst the other be good - naturedly laughing . ' Mr. Smithson think there ought to be female member of Parliament . 

 ' do he ? have the girl tell you that there be a nightingale in Mr. Williams 's orchard ? ' 

 it be always thus . Dr. Madden do not care to discuss even playfully the radical notion which Rhoda get from her objectionable friend . his daughter would not have venture to express an opinion on such topic when he be present ; apart with Miss Nunn , they betray a timid interest in whatever proposition she advance , but no gleam of originality distinguish their argument . 

 after tea the little company fall into group some out of door beneath the apple - tree , other near the piano at which Virginia be play Mendelssohn . Monica run about among they with her five - year - old prattle , ever watch by her father , who lounge in a canvas chair against the sunny ivie wall , pipe in mouth . Dr. Madden be think how happy they make he , these kind , gentle girl ; how his love for they seem to ripen with every summer ; what a delightful old age his would be , when some be married and have child of their own , and the other tend he they whom he have tend . Virginia would probably be seek in marriage ; she have good look , a graceful demeanour , a bright understanding . Gertrude also , perhaps . and little Monica ah , little Monica ! she would be the beauty of the family . when Monica have grow up it would be time for he to retire from practice ; by then he would doubtless have save money . 

 he must find more society for they ; they have always be too much alone , whence their shyness among stranger . if their mother have but live ! 

 ' Rhoda wish you to read we something , father , ' say his eld girl , who have approach whilst he be lose in dream . 

 he often read aloud to they from the poet ; Coleridge and Tennyson by preference . little persuasion be need . Alice bring the volume , and he select ' the Lotus - Eaters . ' the girl group themselves about he , delight to listen . many an hour of summer evening have they thus spend , none more peaceful than the present . the reader 's cadence voice blend with the song of a thrush . 

 ' " let we alone . Time driveth onward fast , and in a little while our lip be dumb . let we alone . what be it that will last ? all thing ' be take from we " ' 

 there come an interruption , hurried , peremptory . a farmer over at Kingston Seymour have be seize with alarming illness ; the doctor must come at once . 

 ' very sorry , girl . tell James to put the horse in , sharp as he can . 

 in ten minute Dr. Madden be drive at full speed , alone in his dog - cart , towards the scene of duty . 

 about seven o'clock Rhoda Nunn take leave , remark with her usual directness , that before go home she would walk along the sea - front in the hope of a meeting with Mr. Smithson and his daughter . Mrs. Nunn be not well enough to leave the house to - day ; but , say Rhoda , the invalid preferred be leave alone at such time . 

 ' be you sure she prefer it ? ' Alice venture to ask . the girl give she a look of surprise . 

 ' why should mother say what she do not   mean ? ' 

 it be utter with an ingenuousness which throw some light on Rhoda 's character . 

 by nine o'clock the young trio of sister have go to bed ; Alice , Virginia , and Gertrude sit in the parlour , occupy with book , from time to time exchange a quiet remark . a tap at the door scarcely draw their attention , for they suppose it be the maid - servant come to lay supper . but when the door open there be a mysterious silence ; Alice look up and see the expected face , wear , however , so strange an expression that she rise with sudden fear . 

 ' can I speak to you , please , miss ? ' 

 the dialogue out in the passage be brief . a messenger have just arrive with the tiding that Dr. Madden , drive back from Kingston Seymour , have be throw from his vehicle and lie insensible at a roadside cottage . 

 for some time the doctor have be intend to buy a new horse ; his faithful old roadster be very weak in the knee . as in other matter , so in this , postponement become fatality ; the horse stumble and fall , and its driver be fling head forward into the road . some hour later they bring he to his home , and for a day or two there be hope that he might rally . but the sufferer 's respite only permit he to dictate and sign a brief will ; this duty perform , Dr. Madden close his lip for ever . 




 CHAPTER II 

 ADRIFT 

 just before Christmas of 1887 , a lady past her twenty , and with a look of discouraged weariness on her thin face , knock at a house - door in a little street by Lavender Hill . a card in the window give notice that a bedroom be here to let . when the door open , and a clean , grave , elderly woman present herself , the visitor , regard she anxiously , make known that she be in search of a lodging . 

 ' it may be for a few week only , or it may be for a long period , ' she say in a low , tired voice , with an accent of good breeding . ' I have a difficulty in find precisely what I want . one room would be sufficient , and I ask for very little attendance . ' 

 she have but one room to let , reply the other . it might be inspect . 

 they go upstairs . the room be at the back of the house , small , but neatly furnish . its appearance seem to gratify the visitor , for she smile timidly . 

 ' what rent should you ask ? ' 

 ' that would depend , mum , on what attendance be require . ' 

 ' yes of course . I think will you permit I to sit down ? I be really very tired . thank you . I require very little attendance indeed . my way be very simple . I should make the bed myself , and and , do the other little thing that be necessary from day to day . perhaps I might ask you to sweep the room out once a week or so . ' 

 the landlady grow meditative . possibly she have have experience of lodger who be anxious to give as little trouble as possible . she glance furtively at the stranger . 

 ' and what , ' be her question at length , ' would you be think of pay ? ' 

 ' perhaps I have well explain my position . for several year I have be companion to a lady in Hampshire . her death have throw I on my own resource I hope only for a short time . I have come to London because a young sister of mine be employ here in a house of business ; she recommend I to seek for lodging in this part ; I might as well be near she whilst I be endeavour to find another post ; perhaps I may be fortunate enough to find one in London . quietness and economy be necessary to I . a house like yours would suit I very well very well indeed . could we not agree upon term within my within my power ? ' 

 again the landlady ponder . 

 ' would you be willing to pay five and sixpence ? ' 

 ' yes , I would pay five and sixpence if you be quite sure that you could let I live in my own way with satisfaction to yourself . I in fact , I be a vegetarian , and as the meal I take be so very simple , I feel that I might just as well prepare they myself . would you object to my do so in this room ? a kettle and a saucepan be really all absolutely all that I should need to use . as I shall be much at home , it will be of course necessary for I to have a fire . ' 

 in the course of half an hour an agreement have be devise which seem fairly satisfactory to both party . 

 ' I be not one of the graspin ' one , ' remark the landlady . ' I think I may say that of myself . if I make five or six shilling a week out of my spare room , I do not   grumble . but the party as take it must do their duty on their side . you have not   tell I your name yet , mum . ' 

 ' Miss Madden . my luggage be at the railway station ; it shall be bring here this evening . and , as I be quite unknown to you , I shall be glad to pay my rent in advance . ' 

 ' well , I do not   ask for that ; but it be just as you like . ' 

 ' then I will pay you five and sixpence at once . be so kind as to let I have a receipt . ' 

 so Miss Madden establish herself at Lavender Hill , and dwelt there alone for three month . 

 she receive letter frequently , but only one person call upon she . this be her sister Monica , now serve at a draper 's in Walworth Road . the young lady come every Sunday , and in bad weather spend the whole day up in the little bedroom . Lodger and landlady be on remarkably good term ; the one pay her due with exactness , and the other do many a little kindness not bargain for in the original contract . 

 Time go on to the spring of ' 88 . then , one afternoon , Miss Madden descend to the kitchen and tap in her usual timid way at the door . 

 ' be you at leisure , Mrs. Conisbee ? could I have a little conversation with you ? ' 

 the landlady be alone , and with no more engrossing occupation than the ironing of some linen she have recently wash . 

 ' I have mention my eld sister now and then . I be sorry to say she be leave her post with the family at Hereford . the child be go to school , so that her service be no long need . ' 

 ' indeed , mum ? ' 

 ' yes . for a short or long time she will be in need of a home . now it have occur to I , Mrs. Conisbee , that that I would ask you whether you would have any objection to she share my room with I ? of course there must be an extra payment . the room be small for two person , but then the arrangement would only be temporary . my sister be a good and experienced teacher , and I be sure she will have no difficulty in obtain another engagement . ' 

 Mrs. Conisbee reflect , but without a shade of discontent . by this time she know that her lodger be thoroughly to be trust . 

 ' well , it be if you can manage , mum , ' she reply . ' I do not   see as I could have any fault to find , if you think you could both live in that little room . and as for the rent , I should be quite satisfied if we say seven shilling instead of five and six . ' 

 ' thank you , Mrs. Conisbee ; thank you very much indeed . I will write to my sister at once ; the news will be a great relief to she . we shall have quite an enjoyable little holiday together . ' 

 a week later the eld of the three Miss Maddens arrive . as it be quite impossible to find space for her box in the bedroom , Mrs. Conisbee allow they to be deposit in the room occupy by her daughter , which be on the same floor . in a day or two the sister have begin a life of orderly tenor . when weather permit they be out either in the morning or afternoon . Alice Madden be in London for the first time ; she desire to see the sight , but suffer the restriction of poverty and ill - health . after nightfall , neither she nor Virginia ever leave home . 

 there be not much personal likeness between they . 

 the elder   now five - and - thirty   tend to corpulence , the result of sedentary life ; she have round shoulder and very short leg . her face would not have be disagreeable but for its spoilt complexion ; the homely feature , if health have but round and colour they , would have express pleasantly enough the gentleness and sincerity of her character . her cheek be loose , puffy , and permanently of the hue which be produce by cold ; her forehead generally have a few pimple ; her shapeless chin lose itself in two or three fleshy fissure . scarcely less shy than in girlhood , she walk with a quick , ungainly movement as if seek to escape from some one , her head bend forward . 

 Virginia   about thirty - three   have also an unhealthy look , but the poverty , or vitiation , of her blood manifest itself in less unsightly form . one see that she have be comely , and from certain point of view her countenance still have a grace , a sweetness , all the more noticeable because of its threatened extinction . for she be rapidly age ; her lax lip grow laxer , with emphasis of a characteristic one would rather not have perceive there ; her eye sink into deep hollow ; wrinkle extend their network ; the flesh of her neck wear away . her tall meagre body do not seem strong enough to hold itself upright . 

 Alice have brown hair , but very little of it . Virginia 's be inclined to be ruddy ; it surmount her small head in coil and plait not without beauty . the voice of the eld sister have contract an unpleasant hoarseness , but she speak with good enunciation ; a slight stiffness and pedantry of phrase come , no doubt , of her scholastic habit . Virginia be much more natural in manner and fluent in speech , even as she move far more gracefully . 

 it be now sixteen year since the death of Dr. Madden of Clevedon . the story of his daughter ' life in the interval may be tell with brevity suitable to so unexcite a narrative . 

 when the doctor 's affair be set in order , it be find that the patrimony of his six girl amount , as nearly as possible , to eight hundred pound . 

 eight hundred pound be , to be sure , a sum of money ; but how , in these circumstance , be it to be apply ? 

 there come over from Cheltenham a bachelor uncle , age about sixty . this gentleman live on an annuity of seventy pound , which would terminate when he do . it might be reckon to he for righteousness that he spend the railway fare between Cheltenham and Clevedon to attend his brother 's funeral , and to speak a kind word to his niece . influence he have none ; initiative , very little . there be no reckoning upon he for aid of any kind . 

 from Richmond in Yorkshire , in reply to a letter from Alice , write an old , old aunt of the late Mrs. Madden , who have occasionally send the girl present . her communication be barely legible ; it seem to contain fortifying text of scripture , but nothing in the way of worldly counsel . this old lady have no possession to bequeath . and , as far as the girl know , she be their mother 's only survive relative . 

 the executor of the will be a Clevedon tradesman , a kind and capable friend of the family for many year , a man of part and attainment superior to his station . in council with certain other well - dispose person , who regard the Maddens ' circumstance with friendly anxiety , Mr. Hungerford   testamentary instruction allow he much freedom of action   decide that the three elder girl must forthwith become self - support , and that the three young should live together in the care of a lady of small mean , who offer to house and keep they for the bare outlay necessitate . a prudent investment of the eight hundred pound might , by this arrangement , feed , clothe , and in some sort educate Martha , Isabel , and Monica . to see thus far ahead suffice for the present ; fresh circumstance could be deal with as they arise . 

 Alice obtain a situation as nursery - governess at sixteen pound a year . Virginia be fortunate enough to be accept as companion by a gentlewoman at Weston - super - mare ; her payment , twelve pound . Gertrude , fourteen year old , also go to Weston , where she be offer employment in a fancy - good shop her payment nothing at all , but lodge , board , and dress assure to she . 

 ten year go by , and see many change . 

 Gertrude and Martha be dead ; the former of consumption , the other drown by the overturning of a pleasure - boat . Mr. Hungerford also be dead , and a new guardian administer the fund which be still a common property of the four survive daughter . Alice ply her domestic teaching ; Virginia remain a ' companion . ' Isabel , now aged twenty , teach in a Board School at Bridgewater , and Monica , just fifteen , be on the point of be apprentice to a draper at Weston , where Virginia abode . to serve behind a counter would not have be Monica 's choice if any more liberal employment have seem within her reach . she have no aptitude whatever for give instruction ; indeed , have no aptitude for anything but be a pretty , cheerful , engage girl , much dependent on the love and gentleness of those about she . in speech and bear Monica greatly resemble her mother ; that be to say , she have native elegance . certainly it might be deem a pity that such a girl could not be introduce to one of the high walk of life ; but the time have come when she must ' do something ' , and the people to whose guidance she look have but narrow experience of life . Alice and Virginia sigh over the contrast with bygone hope , but their own career make it seem probable that Monica would be well off ' in business ' than in a more strictly genteel position . and there be every likelihood that , at such a place as Weston , with her sister for occasional chaperon , she would ere long find herself relieve of the necessity of work for a livelihood . 

 to the other , no wooer have yet present himself . Alice , if she have ever dream of marriage , must by now have resign herself to spinsterhood . Virginia could scarce hope that her faded prettiness , her health damage by attendance upon an exact invalid and in profitless study when she ought to have be sleep , would attract any man in search of a wife . poor Isabel be so extremely plain . Monica , if her promise be fulfil , would be by far the good looking , as well as the sprightliest , of the family . she must marry ; of course she must marry ! her sister gladden in the thought . 

 Isabel be soon work into illness . brain trouble come on , result in melancholia . a charitable institution ultimately receive she , and there , at two - and - twenty , the poor hard - feature girl drown herself in a bath . 

 their number have thus be reduce by half . up to now , the income of their eight hundred pound have serve , impartially , the end now of this , now of that one , do a little good to all , save they from many an hour of bitterness which must else have be add to their lot . by a new arrangement , the capital be at length make over to Alice and Virginia jointly , the young sister have a claim upon they to the extent of an annual nine pound . a trifle , but it would buy her clothing and then Monica be sure to marry . thank Heaven , she be sure to marry ! 

 without notable event , matrimonial or other , time go on to this present year of 1888 . 

 late in June , Monica would complete her twenty - first year ; the elder , full of affection for the sister , who so notably surpass they in beauty of person , talk much about she as the time approach , devise how to procure she a little pleasure on her birthday . Virginia think a suitable present would be a copy of ' the Christian Year ' . 

 ' she have really no time for continuous reading . a verse of Keble just one verse at bedtime and in the morning might be strength to the poor girl . ' 

 Alice assent . 

 ' we must join to buy it , dear , ' she add , with anxious look . ' it would not   be justifiable to spend more than two or three shilling . ' 

 ' I fear not . ' 

 they be prepare their midday meal , the substantial repast of the day . in a little saucepan on an oil cooking - stove be some plain rice , bubble as Alice stir it . Virginia fetch from downstair   Mrs. Conisbee have assign to they a shelf in her larder   bread , butter , cheese , a pot of preserve , and arrange the table   three foot by one and a half   at which they be accustom to eat . the rice be ready , it be turn out in two proportion ; make savoury with a little butter , pepper , and salt , it invite they to sit down . 

 as they have be out in the morning , the afternoon would be spend in domestic occupation . the low cane - chair Virginia have appropriate to her sister , because of the latter 's headache and backache , and other disorder ; she herself sit on an ordinary chair of the bedside specie , to which by this time she have become use . their sewing , when they do any , be strictly indispensable ; if nothing demand the needle , both prefer a book . Alice , who have never be a student in the proper sense of the word , read for the twentieth time a few volume in her possession poetry , popular history , and half a dozen novel such as the average mother of child would have approve in the governess 's hand . with Virginia the case be somewhat different . up to about her twenty - fourth year she have pursue one subject with a zeal limit only by her opportunity ; study absolutely disinterested , see that she have never suppose it would increase her value as a ' companion ' , or enable she to take any well position . her one intellectual desire be to know as much as possible about ecclesiastical history . not in a spirit of fanaticism ; she be devout , but in moderation , and never speak bitterly on religious topic . the growth of the Christian Church , old sect and schism , the Councils , affair of Papal policy these thing have a very genuine interest for she ; circumstance favour , she might have become an erudite woman ; but the condition be so far from favourable that all she succeed in do be to undermine her health . upon a sudden breakdown there follow mental lassitude , from which she never recover . it be subsequently her duty to read novel aloud for the lady whom she ' companion , ' new novel at the rate of a volume a day , she lose all power of give her mind to anything but the feebler fiction . nowadays she procure such work from a lending library , on a subscription of a shilling a month . ashamed at first to indulge this taste before Alice , she try more solid literature , but this either send she to sleep or induce headache . the feeble novel reappear , and as Alice make no adverse comment , they soon come and go with the old regularity . 

 this afternoon the sister be dispose for conversation . the same grave think preoccupy both of they , and they soon make it their subject . 

 ' surely , ' Alice begin by murmur , half absently , ' I shall soon hear of something . ' 

 ' I be dreadfully uneasy on my own account , ' her sister reply . 

 ' you think the person at Southend will not   write again ? ' 

 ' I be afraid not . and she seem so very unsatisfactory . positively illiterate oh , I could not   bear that . ' Virginia give a shudder as she speak . 

 ' I almost wish , ' say Alice , ' that I have accept the place at Plymouth . ' 

 ' oh , my dear ! five child and not a penny of salary . it be a shameless proposal . ' 

 ' it be , indeed , ' sigh the poor governess . ' but there be so little choice for people like myself . certificate , and even degree , be ask for on every hand . with nothing but reference to past employer , what can one expect ? I know it will end in my take a place without salary . ' 

 ' People seem to have still less need of I , ' lament the companion . ' I wish now that I have go to Norwich as lady - help . ' 

 ' dear , your health would never have support it . ' 

 ' I do not   know . possibly the more active life might do I good . it might , you know , Alice . ' 

 the other admit this possibility with a deep sigh . 

 ' let we review our position , ' she then exclaim . 

 it be a phrase frequently on her lip , and always make she more cheerful . Virginia also seem to welcome it as an encouragement . 

 ' mine , ' say the companion , ' be almost as serious as it could be . I have only one pound leave , with the exception of the dividend . ' 

 ' I have rather more than four pound still . now , let we think , ' Alice pause . ' suppose we neither of we obtain employment before the end of this year . we have to live , in that case , more than six month you on seven pound , and I on ten . ' 

 ' it be impossible , ' say Virginia . 

 ' let we see . put it in another form . we have both to live together on seventeen pound . that be ' she make a computation on a piece of paper ' that be two pound , sixteen shilling and eightpence a month let we suppose this month at an end . that represent fourteen shilling and twopence a week . yes , we can do it ! ' 

 she lay down her pencil with an air of triumph . her dull eye brighten as though she have discover a new source of income . 

 ' we can not , dear , ' urge Virginia in a subdued voice . ' seven shilling rent ; that leave only seven and twopence a week for everything everything . ' 

 ' we could do it , dear , ' persist the other . ' if it come to the very bad , our food need not cost more than sixpence a day three and sixpence a week . I do really believe , virgie , we could support life on less say , on fourpence . yes , we could dear ! ' 

 they look fixedly at each other , like people about to stake everything on their courage . 

 ' be such a life worthy of the name ? ' ask Virginia in tone of awe . 

 ' we shall not   be drive to that . oh , we certainly shall not . but it help one to know that , strictly speak , we be independent for another six month . ' 

 that word give Virginia an obvious thrill . 

 ' independent ! oh , Alice , what a blessed thing be independence ! do you know , my dear , I be afraid I have not exert myself as I might have do to find a new place . these comfortable lodging , and the pleasure of see Monica once a week , have tempt I into idleness . it be not   really my wish to be idle ; I know the harm it do I ; but oh ! if one could work in a home of one 's own ! ' 

 Alice have a startle , apprehensive look , as if her sister be touch on a subject hardly proper for discussion , or at least dangerous . 

 ' I be afraid it be no use thinking of that , dear , ' she answer awkwardly . 

 ' no use ; no use whatever . I be wrong to indulge in such thought . ' 

 ' whatever happen , my dear , ' say Alice presently , with all the impressiveness of tone she could command , ' we must never entrench upon our capital never never ! ' 

 ' oh , never ! if we grow old and useless ' 

 ' if no one will give we even board and lodge for our service ' 

 ' if we have not   a friend to look to , ' Alice throw in , as though they be answer each other in a doleful litany , ' then indeed we shall be glad that nothing tempt we to entrench on our capital ! it would just keep we ' her voice sink ' from the workhouse . ' 

 after this each take up a volume , and until teatime they read quietly . 

 from six to nine in the evening they again talk and read alternately . their conversation be now retrospective ; each revive memory of what she have endure in one or the other house of bondage . never have it be their lot to serve ' really nice ' people this phrase of theirs be anything but meaningless . they have live with more or less well - to - do family in the low middle class people who could not have inherit refinement , and have not acquire any , neither proletarian nor gentlefolk , consume with a disease of vulgar pretentiousness , inflate with the miasma of democracy . it would have be but a natural result of such a life if the sister have comment upon it in a spirit somewhat akin to that of their employer ; but they speak without rancour , without scandalmongere . they know themselves superior to the woman who have grudgingly pay they , and often smile at recollection which would have move the servile mind to venomous abuse . 

 at nine o'clock they take a cup of cocoa and a biscuit , and half an hour later they go to bed . lamp oil be costly ; and indeed they feel glad to say as early as possible that another day have go by . 

 their hour of rise be eight . Mrs. Conisbee provide hot water for their breakfast . on descend to fetch it , Virginia find that the postman have leave a letter for she . the writing on the envelope seem to be a stranger 's . she run upstairs again in excitement . 

 ' who can this be from , Alice ? ' 

 the eld sister have one of her headache this morning ; she be clay colour , and totter in move about . the close atmosphere of the bedroom would alone have account for such a malady . but an unexpected letter make she for the moment oblivious of suffering . 

 ' post in London , ' she say , examine the envelope eagerly . 

 ' some one you have be in correspondence with ? ' 

 ' it be month since I write to any one in London . ' 

 for full five minute they debate the mystery , afraid of dash their hope by break the envelope . at length Virginia summon courage . stand at a distance from the other , she take out the sheet of paper with tremulous hand , and glance fearfully at the signature . 

 ' what do you think ? it be Miss Nunn ! ' 

 ' Miss Nunn ! never ! how could she have get the address ? ' 

 again the difficulty be discuss whilst its ready solution lie neglect . 

 ' do read it ! ' say Alice at length , her throb head , make bad by the agitation , oblige she to sink down into the chair . 

 the letter run thus : 

 ' dear Miss MADDEN , this morning I chance to meet with Mrs. Darby , who be pass through London on her way home from the seaside . we have only five minute ' talk   it be at a railway station , but she mention that you be at present in London , and give I your address . after all these year , how glad I should be to see you ! the struggle of life have make I selfish ; I have neglect my old friend . and yet I be bind to add that some of they have neglect I . would you rather that I come to your lodging or you to mine ? which you like . I hear that your eld sister be with you , and that Monica be also in London somewhere . do let we all see each other once more . write as soon as you can . my kind regard to all of you . sincerely your , 
 RHODA NUNN . ' 

 ' how like she , ' exclaim Virginia , when she have read this aloud , ' to remember that perhaps we may not care to receive visitor ! she be always so thoughtful . and it be true that I ought to have write to she . ' 

 ' we shall go to she , of course ? ' 

 ' oh yes , as she give we the choice . how delightful ! I wonder what she be do ? she write cheerfully ; I be sure she must be in a good position . what be the address ? Queen 's Road , Chelsea . oh , I be so glad it be not very far . we can walk there and back easily . ' 

 for several year they have lose sight of Rhoda Nunn . she leave Clevedon shortly after the Maddens be scatter , and they hear she have become a teacher . about the date of Monica 's apprenticeship at Weston , Miss Nunn have a chance meeting with Virginia and the young girl ; she be still teach , but speak of her work with extreme discontent , and hint at vague project . whether she succeed in release herself the Maddens never hear . 

 it be a morning of doubtful fairness . before go to bed last night they have decide to walk out together this morning and purchase the present for Monica 's birthday , which be next Sunday . but Alice feel too unwell to leave the house . Virginia should write a reply to Miss Nunn 's letter , and then go to the bookseller 's alone . 

 she set forth at half - past nine . with extreme care she have preserve an out - of - door dress into the third summer ; it do not look shabby . her mantle be in its second year only ; the original fawn colour have go to an indeterminate grey . her hat of brown straw be a possession for ever ; it undergo new trimming , at an outlay of a few penny , when that become unavoidable . yet Virginia could not have be judge anything but a lady . she wear her garment as only a lady can   the position and movement of the arm have much to do with this , and have the step never to be acquire by a person of vulgar instinct . 

 a very long walk be before she . she wish to get as far as the Strand bookshop , not only for the sake of choice , but because this region please she and give she a sense of holiday . Past Battersea Park , over Chelsea Bridge , then the weary stretch to Victoria Station , and the upward labour to Charing Cross . five mile , at least , measure by pavement . but Virginia walk quickly ; at half - past eleven she be within sight of her goal . 

 a presentable copy of Keble 's work cost less than she have imagine . this rejoice she . but after leave the shop she have a singular expression on her face something more than weariness , something less than anxiety , something other than calculation . in front of Charing Cross Station she stop , look vaguely about she . perhaps she have it in her mind to return home by omnibus , and be dread the expense . yet of a sudden she turn and go up the approach to the railway . 

 at the entrance again she stop . her feature be now work in the strange way , as though a difficulty of breathing have assail she . in her eye be an eager yet frightened look ; her lip stand apart . 

 another quick movement , and she enter the station . she go straight to the door of the refreshment room , and look in through the glass . two or three people be stand inside . she draw back , a tremor pass through she . 

 a lady come out . then again Virginia approach the door . two man only be within , talk together . with a hurried , nervous movement , she push the door open and go up to a part of the counter as far as possible from the two customer . bend forward , she say to the barmaid in a voice just above a whisper , 

 ' kindly give I a little brandy . ' 

 bead of perspiration be on her face , which have turn to a ghastly pallor . the barmaid , conclude that she be ill , serve she promptly and with a sympathetic look . 

 Virginia add to the spirit twice its quantity of water , standing , as she do so , half turn from the bar . then she sip hurriedly two or three time , and at length take a draught . colour flow to her cheek ; her eye lose their frightened glare . another draught finish the stimulant . she hastily wipe her lip , and walk away with firm step . 

 in the meantime a threatening cloud have pass from the sun ; warm ray fall upon the street and its clamorous life . Virginia feel tired in body , but a delightful animation , rare of boon , give her new strength . she walk into Trafalgar Square and view it like a person who stand there for the first time , smile , interested . a quarter of an hour pass whilst she merely enjoy the air , the sunshine , and the scene about she . such a quarter of an hour so calm , contented , unconsciously hopeful as she have not know since Alice 's come to London . 

 she reach the house by half - past one , bring in a paper bag something which be to serve for dinner . Alice have a wretched appearance ; her head ache bad than ever . 

 ' virgie , ' she moan , ' we never take account of illness , you know . ' 

 ' oh , we must keep that off , ' reply the other , sit down with a look of exhaustion . she smile , but no long as in the sunlight of Trafalgar Square . 

 ' yes , I must struggle against it . we will have dinner as soon as possible . I feel faint . ' 

 if both of they have avow their faintness as often as they feel it , the complaint would have be perpetual . but they generally make a point of deceive each other , and try to delude themselves ; profess that no diet could be well for their particular need than this which poverty impose . 

 ' ah ! it be a good sign to be hungry , ' exclaim Virginia . ' you will be well this afternoon , dear . ' 

 Alice turn over ' the Christian Year , ' and endeavour to console herself out of it , whilst her sister prepare the meal . 




 CHAPTER III 

 an independent WOMAN 

 Virginia 's reply to Miss Nunn 's letter bring another note next morning Saturday . it be to request a call from the sister that same afternoon . 

 Alice , unfortunately , would not be able to leave home . her disorder have become a feverish cold catch , doubtless , between open window and door whilst the bedroom be be air for breakfast . she lie in bed , and her sister administer remedy of the chemist 's advise . 

 but she insist on Virginia leave she in the afternoon . Miss Nunn might have something of importance to tell or to suggest . Mrs. Conisbee , sympathetic in her crude way , would see that the invalid want for nothing . 

 so , after a dinner of mashed potato and milk   ' the irish peasantry live almost entirely on that , ' croak Alice , ' and they be physically a fine race ' , the young sister start on her walk to Chelsea . her destination be a plain , low roomy old house in Queen 's Road , over against the hospital garden . on ask for Miss Nunn , she be lead to a back room on the ground floor , and there wait for a few moment . several large bookcase , a well - equip writing - table , and kindre object , indicate that the occupant of the house be studious ; the numerous bunch of cut flower , which agreeably scent the air , seem to prove the student be a woman . 

 Miss Nunn enter . young only by a year or two than Virginia , she be yet far from present any sorrowful image of a person on the way to old - maidenhood . she have a clear though pale skin , a vigorous frame , a brisk movement all the sign of fairly good health . whether or not she could be call a comely woman might have furnish matter for male discussion ; the prevail voice of her own sex would have deny her charm of feature . at first view the countenance seem masculine , its expression somewhat aggressive eye shrewdly observant and lip consciously impregnable . but the connoisseur delay his verdict . it be a face that invite , that compel , study . self - confidence , intellectual keenness , a bright humour , frank courage , be trait legible enough ; and when the lip part to show their warmth , their fullness , when the eyelid droop a little in meditation , one become aware of a suggestiveness direct not solely to the intellect , of something like an unfamiliar sexual type , remote indeed from the voluptuous , but hint a possibility of subtle feminine force that might be release by circumstance . she wear a black serge gown , with white collar and cuff ; her thick hair ripple low upon each side of the forehead , and behind be gather into loose vertical coil ; in shadow the hue seem black , but when illumined it be see to be the dark , warm brown . 

 offer a strong , shapely hand , she look at her visitor with a smile which betray some mixture of pain in the hearty welcome . 

 ' and how long have you be in London ? ' 

 it be the tone of a busy , practical person . her voice have not much softness of timbre , and perhaps on that account she keep it carefully subdue . 

 ' so long as that ? how I wish I have know you be so near ! I have be in London myself about two year . and your sister ? ' 

 Virginia explain Alice 's absence , add , 

 ' as for poor Monica , she have only Sunday free except one evening a month . she be at business till half - past nine , and on Saturday till half - past eleven or twelve . ' 

 ' oh , dear , dear , dear ! ' exclaim the other rapidly , make a motion with her hand as if to brush away something disagreeable . ' that will never do . you must put a stop to that . ' 

 ' I be sure we ought to . ' 

 Virginia 's thin , timid voice and weak manner be throw into painful contrast by Miss Nunn 's personality . 

 ' yes , yes ; we will talk about it presently . poor little Monica ! but do tell I about yourself and Miss Madden . it be so long since I hear about you . ' 

 ' indeed I ought to have write . I remember that at the end of our correspondence I remain in your debt . but it be a troublesome and depressing time with I . I have nothing but groan and moan to send . ' 

 ' you do not   stay long , I trust , with that try Mrs. Carr ? ' 

 ' three year ! ' sigh Virginia . 

 ' oh , your patience ! ' 

 ' I wish to leave again and again . but at the end she always beg I not to desert she that be how she put it . after all , I never have the heart to go . ' 

 ' very kind of you , but those question be so difficult to decide . self - sacrifice may be quite wrong , I be afraid . ' 

 ' do you think so ? ' ask Virginia anxiously . 

 ' yes , I be sure it be often wrong all the more so because people proclaim it a virtue without any reference to circumstance . then how do you get away at last ? ' 

 ' the poor woman die . then I have a place scarcely less disagreeable . now I have none at all ; but I really must find one very soon . ' 

 she laugh at this allusion to her poverty , and make nervous motion . 

 ' let I tell you what my own course have be , ' say Miss Nunn , after a short reflection . ' when my mother die , I determine to have do with teaching you know that . I dislike it too much , and partly , of course , because I be incapable . half my teaching be a sham a pretence of know what I neither know nor care to know . I have go into it like most girl , as a dreary matter of course . ' 

 ' like poor Alice , I be afraid . ' 

 ' oh , it be a distressing subject . when my mother leave I that little sum of money I take a bold step . I go to Bristol to learn everything I could that would help I out of school life . shorthand , book - keeping , commercial correspondence I have lesson in they all , and work desperately for a year . it do I good ; at the end of the year I be vastly improve in health , and feel myself worth something in the world . I get a place as cashier in a large shop . that soon tire I , and by dint of advertising I find a place in an office at Bath . it be a move towards London , and I could not   rest till I have come the whole way . my first engagement here be as shorthand writer to the secretary of a company . but he soon want some one who could use a typewriter . that be a suggestion . I go to learn typewrite , and the lady who teach I ask I in the end to stay with she as an assistant . this be her house , and here I live with she . ' 

 ' how energetic you have be ! ' 

 ' how fortunate , perhaps . I must tell you about this lady Miss Barfoot . she have private mean not large , but sufficient to allow of her combine benevolence with business . she make it her object to train young girl for work in office , teach they the thing that I learn in Bristol , and typewrite as well . some pay for their lesson , and some get they for nothing . our workroom be in Great Portland Street , over a picture - cleaner 's shop . one or two girl have evening lesson , but our pupil for the most part be able to come in the day . Miss Barfoot have not   much interest in the low class ; she wish to be of use to the daughter of educated people . and she be of use . she be do admirable work . ' 

 ' oh , I be sure she must be ! what a wonderful person ! ' 

 ' it occur to I that she might help Monica . ' 

 ' oh , do you think she would ? ' exclaim Virginia , with eager attention . ' how grateful we should be ! ' 

 ' where be Monica employ ? ' 

 ' at a draper 's in Walworth Road . she be work to death . every week I see a difference in she , poor child . we hop to persuade she to go back to the shop at Weston ; but if this you speak of be possible how much well ! we have never reconcile ourselves to she be in that position never . ' 

 ' I see no harm in the position itself , ' reply Miss Nunn in her rather blunt tone , ' but I see a great deal in those outrageous hour . she will not   easily do well in London , without special qualification ; and probably she be reluctant to go back to the country . ' 

 ' yes , she be ; very reluctant . ' 

 ' I understand it , ' say the other , with a nod . ' will you ask she to come and see I ? ' 

 a servant enter with tea . Miss Nunn catch the expression in her visitor 's eye , and say cheerfully 

 ' I have no midday meal to - day , and really I feel the omission . Mary , please do put tea in the dining - room , and bring up some meat Miss Barfoot , ' she add , in explanation to Virginia , be out of town , and I be a shockingly irregular person about meal . I be sure you will sit down with I ? ' 

 Virginia sport with the subject . month of miserable eating and drink in her stuffy bedroom make an invitation such as this a veritable delight to she . seat in the dining - room , she at first refuse the offer of meat , allege her vegetarianism ; but Miss Nunn , convince that the poor woman be starve , succeed in persuade she . a slice of good beef have much the same effect upon Virginia as her more dangerous indulgence at Charing Cross Station . she brighten wonderfully . 

 ' now let we go back to the library , ' say Miss Nunn , when their meal be over . ' we shall soon see each other again , I hope , but we might as well talk of serious thing whilst we have the opportunity . will you allow I to be very frank with you ? ' 

 the other look startled . 

 ' what could you possibly say that would offend I ? ' 

 ' in the old day you tell I all about your circumstance . be they still the same ? ' 

 ' precisely the same . most happily , we have never need to entrench upon our capital . whatever happen , we must avoid that whatever happen ! ' 

 ' I quite understand you . but would not   it be possible to make a well use of that money ? it be eight hundred pound , I think ? have you never think of employ it in some practical enterprise ? ' 

 Virginia at first shrank in alarm , then tremble deliciously at her friend 's bold view . 

 ' would it be possible ? really ? you think ' 

 ' I can only suggest , of course . one must not   argue about other from one 's own habit of thought . Heaven forbid ' this sound rather profane to the listener ' that I should urge you to do anything you would think rash . but how much well if you could somehow secure independence . ' 

 ' ah , if we could ! the very thing we be say the other day ! but how ? I have no idea how . ' 

 Miss Nunn seem to hesitate . 

 ' I do not   advise . you must not   give any weight to what I say , except in so far as your own judgment approve it . but could not   one open a preparatory school , for instance ? at Weston , suppose , where already you know a good many people . or even at Clevedon . ' 

 Virginia draw in her breath , and it be easy for Miss Nunn to perceive that the proposal go altogether beyond her friend 's scope . impossible , perhaps , to inspire these worn and discourage woman with a particle of her own enterprise . perchance they altogether lack ability to manage a school for even the young child . she do not press the subject ; it might come up on another occasion . Virginia beg for time to think it over ; then , remember her invalid sister , feel that she must not prolong the visit . 

 ' do take some of these flower , ' say Miss Nunn , collect a rich nosegay from the vas . ' let they be my message to your sister . and I should be so glad to see Monica . Sunday be a good time ; I be always at home in the afternoon . ' 

 with a flutter heart Virginia make what haste she could homeward . the interview have fill she with a turmoil of strange new thought , which she be impatient to pour forth for Alice 's wonder comment . it be the first time in her life that she have speak with a woman dare enough to think and act for herself . 




 CHAPTER IV 

 MONICA 's majority 

 in the drapery establishment where Monica Madden work and live it be not   as be sometimes the case   positively forbid to the resident employee to remain at home on Sunday ; but they be strongly recommend to make the utmost possible use of that weekly vacation . Herein , no doubt , appear a laudable regard for their health . young people , especially young woman , who be laboriously engage in a shop for thirteen hour and a half every weekday , and on Saturday for an average of sixteen , may be suppose to need a Sabbath of open air . Messrs. Scotcher and Co. act like conscientious man in drive they forth immediately after breakfast , and enjoin upon they not to return until bedtime . by way of well - mean constraint , it be direct that only the very scanty meal   plain bread and cheese , in fact   should be supply to those who do not take advantage of the holiday . 

 Messrs. Scotcher and Co. be large - minded man . not only do they insist that the Sunday ought to be use for bodily recreation , but they have no objection whatever to their young friend take a stroll after closing - time each evening . Nay , so generous and confiding be they , that to each young person they allow a latchkey . the air of Walworth Road be pure and invigorate about midnight ; why should the reposeful ramble be hurry by consideration for weary domestic ? 

 Monica always feel too tired to walk after ten o'clock ; moreover , the usual conversation in the dormitory which she share with five other young woman be so little to her taste that she wish to be asleep when the talker come up to bed . but on Sunday she gladly follow the counsel of her employer . if the weather be bad , the little room at Lavender Hill offer she a retreat ; when the sun shine , she like to spend a part of the day in free wandering about London , which even yet have not quite disillusioned she . 

 and to - day it shine brightly . this be her birthday , the completion of her one - and - twentieth year . Alice and Virginia of course expect she early in the morning , and of course they be all to dine together at the table measure three foot by one and a half ; but the afternoon and evening she must have to herself the afternoon , because a few hour of her sister 's talk invariably depress she ; and the evening , because she have an appointment to keep . as she leave the big ugly ' establishment ' her heart beat cheerfully , and a smile flutter about her lip . she do not feel very well , but that be a matter of course ; the ride in an omnibus would perhaps make her head clear . 

 Monica 's face be of a recognize type of prettiness ; a pure oval ; from the smooth forehead to the dimpled little chin all its line be soft and graceful . her lack of colour , by heighten the effect of black eyebrow and darkly lustrous eye , give she at present a more spiritual cast than her character justify ; but a thoughtful firmness be native to her lip , and no possibility of smirk or simper lurk in the attractive feature . the slim figure be well fit in a costume of pale blue , cheap but become ; a modest little hat rest on her black hair ; her glove and her sunshade complete the dainty picture . 

 an omnibus would be meet in Kennington Park Road . on her way thither , in a quiet cross - street , she be overtake by a young man who have leave the house of business a moment after she , and have follow at a short distance timidly . a young man of unhealthy countenance , with a red pimple on the side of his nose , but not otherwise ill - looking . he be clothe with propriety stove - pipe hat , diagonal frockcoat , grey trouser , and he walk with a springy gait . 

 ' Miss Madden ' 

 he have venture , with perturbation in his face , to overtake , Monica . she stop . 

 ' what be it , Mr. Bullivant ? ' 

 her tone be far from encourage , but the young man smile upon she with timorous tenderness . 

 ' what a beautiful morning ! be you go far ? ' 

 he have the Cockney accent , but not in an offensive degree ; his manner be not flagrantly of the shop . 

 ' yes ; some distance . ' Monica walk slowly on . 

 ' will you allow I to walk a little way with you ? ' he plead , bend towards she . 

 ' I shall take the omnibus at the end of this street . ' 

 they go forward together . Monica no long smile , but neither do she look angry . her expression be one of trouble . 

 ' where shall you spend the day , Mr. Bullivant ? ' she ask at length , with an effort to seem unconcerned . 

 ' I really do not   know . ' 

 ' I should think it would be very nice up the river . ' and she add diffidently , ' Miss Eade be go to Richmond . ' 

 ' be she ? ' he reply vaguely . 

 ' at least she wish to go if she could find a companion . ' 

 ' I hope she will enjoy herself , ' say Mr. Bullivant , with careful civility . 

 ' but of course she will not   enjoy it very much if she have to go alone . as you have no particular engagement , Mr. Bullivant , would not   it be kind to ? ' 

 the suggestion be incomplete , but intelligible . 

 ' I could not   ask Miss Eade to let I accompany she , ' say the young man gravely . 

 ' oh , I think you could . she would like it . ' 

 Monica look rather frightened at her boldness , and quickly add 

 ' now I must say good - bye . there come the bus . ' 

 Bullivant turn desperately in that direction . he see there be as yet no inside passenger . 

 ' do allow I to go a short way with you ? ' burst from his lip . ' I positively do not   know how I shall spend the morning . ' 

 Monica have signal to the driver , and be hurry forward . Bullivant follow , reckless of consequence . in a minute both be seat within . 

 ' you will forgive I ? ' plead the young fellow , remark a look of serious irritation on his companion 's face . ' I must be with you a few minute long . ' 

 ' I think when I have beg you not to ' 

 ' I know how bad my behaviour must seem . but , Miss Madden , may I not be on term of friendship with you ? ' 

 ' of course you may but you be not content with that . ' 

 ' yes indeed I will be content ' 

 ' it be foolish to say so . have not   you break the understanding three or four time ? ' 

 the bus stop for a passenger , a man , who mount to the top . 

 ' I be so sorry , ' murmur Bullivant , as the start horse jolt they together . ' I try not to worry you . think of my position . you have tell I that there be no one else who whose right I ought to respect . feel as I do , it be not   in human nature to give up hope ! ' 

 ' then will you let I ask you a rude question ? ' 

 ' ask I any question , Miss Madden . ' 

 ' how would it be possible for you to support a wife ? ' 

 she flush and smile . Bullivant , dreadfully discompose , do not move his eye from she . 

 ' it would not   be possible for some time , ' he answer in a thick voice . ' I have nothing but my wretched salary . but every one hop . ' 

 ' what reasonable hope have you ? ' Monica urge , force herself to be cruel , because it seem the only way of put an end to this situation . 

 ' oh , there be so many opportunity in our business . I could point to half a dozen successful man who be at the counter a few year ago . I may become a walker , and get at least three pound a week . if I be lucky enough to be take on as a buyer , I might make why , some make many hundred a year many hundred . ' 

 ' and you would ask I to wait on and on for one of these wonderful chance ? ' 

 ' if I could move your feeling , Miss Madden , ' he begin , with a certain dolorous dignity ; but there his voice break . he see too plainly that the girl have neither faith in he nor like for he . 

 ' Mr. Bullivant , I think you ought to wait until you really have prospect . if you be encourage by some person , it would be a different thing . and indeed you have not   to look far . but where there have never be the slight encouragement , you be really wrong to act in this way . a long engagement , where everything remain doubtful for year , be so wretched that oh , if I be a man , I would never try to persuade a girl into that ! I think it wrong and cruel . ' 

 the stroke be effectual . Bullivant avert his face , naturally woebegone , and sit for some minute without speak . the bus again draw up ; four or five people be about to ascend . 

 ' I will say good - morning , Miss Madden , ' he whisper hurriedly . 

 she give her hand , glance at he with embarrassment , and so let he depart . 

 ten minute restore the mood in which she have set out . once more she smile to herself . indeed , her head be well for the fresh air and the movement . if only the sister would allow she to get away soon after dinner ! 

 it be Virginia who open the door to she , and embrace and kiss she with wonte fondness . 

 ' you be nice and early ! Poor Alice have be in bed since the day before yesterday ; a dreadful cold and one of her very bad headache . but I think she be a little well this morning . ' 

 Alice a sad spectacle be prop up on pillow . 

 ' do not   kiss I , darling , ' she say , in a voice barely audible . ' you must not   risk get a sore throat . how well you look ! ' 

 ' I be afraid she do not   look well , ' correct Virginia ; ' but perhaps she have a little more colour than of late . Monica , dear , as Alice can hardly ' use her voice , I will speak for both of we , and wish you many , many happy return of the day . and we ask you to accept this little book from we . it may be a comfort to you from time to time . ' 

 ' you be good , kind dear ! ' reply Monica , kiss the one on the lip and the other on her thinly - tresse head . ' it be no use say you ought not   to have spend money on I ; you will always do it . what a nice " Christian Year " ! I will do my good to read some of it now and then . ' 

 with a half - guilty air , Virginia then bring from some corner of the room a very small but delicate currant cake . Monica must eat a mouthful of this ; she always have such a wretched breakfast , and the journey from Walworth Road be enough to give an appetite . 

 ' but you be ruin yourself , foolish people ! ' 

 the other exchange a look , and smile with such a strange air that Monica could not but notice it . 

 ' I know ! ' she cry . ' there be good news . you have find something , and well than usual Virgie . ' 

 ' perhaps so . who know ? eat your slice of cake like a good child , and then I shall have something to tell you . ' 

 obviously the two be excited . Virginia move about with the recovered step of girlhood , hold herself upright , and could not steady her hand . 

 ' you would never guess whom I have see , ' she begin , when Monica be quite ready to listen . ' we have a letter the other morning which do puzzle we so I mean the writing before we open it . and it be from Miss Nunn ! ' 

 this name do not greatly stir Monica . 

 ' you have quite lose sight of she , have not   you ? ' she remark . 

 ' quite . I do not   suppose we should ever hear of she again . but nothing more fortunate could have happen . my dear , she be wonderful ! ' 

 at considerable length Virginia detail all she have learn of Miss Nunn 's career , and describe her present position . 

 ' she will be the most valuable friend to we . oh , her strength , her resolution ! the way in which she discover the right thing to do ! you be to call upon she as soon as possible . this very after noon you have well go . she will relieve you from all your trouble darle . her friend , Miss Barfoot , will teach you typewrite , and put you in the way of earn an easy and pleasant livelihood . she will , indeed ! ' 

 ' but how long do it take ? ' ask the astonished girl . 

 ' oh , quite a short time , I should think . we do not   speak of detail ; they be postpone . you will hear everything yourself . and she suggest all sort of way , ' pursue Virginia , with quite unintentional exaggeration , ' in which we could make well use of our invest money . she be full of practical expedient . the most wonderful person ! she be quite like a man in energy and resource . I never imagine that one of our sex could resolve and plan and act as she do ! ' 

 Monica inquire anxiously what the project for improve their income might be . 

 ' nothing be decide yet , ' be the reply , give with a confident smile . ' let we first of all put you in comfort and security ; that be the immediate need . ' 

 the listener be interested , but do not show any eagerness for the change propose . presently she stand at the window and lose herself in thought . Alice give sign of an inclination to doze ; she have have a sleepless night , in spite of soporific . though no sun enter the room , it be very hot , and the presence of a third person make the air oppressive . 

 ' do not   you think we might go out for half an hour ? ' Monica whisper , when Virginia have point to the invalid 's close eve . ' I be sure it be very unhealthy for we all to be in this little place . ' 

 I do not   like to leave she , ' the other whisper back . ' but I certainly think it would be well for you to have fresh air . would not   you like to go to church , dear ? the bell have not   stop yet . ' 

 the elder sister be not quite regular in their church - going . when weather or lassitude keep they at home on Sunday morning they read the service aloud . Monica find the duty of listen rather grievous . during the month that she be alone in London she have fall into neglect of public worship ; not from any conscious emancipation , but because her companion at the house of business never dream of enter a church , and their example by degree affect she with carelessness . at present she be glad of the pretext for escape until dinner - time . 

 she go forth with the intention of deceive her sister , of walk to Clapham Common , and on her return invent some sermon at a church the other never visit . but before she have go many yard conscience overcome she . be she not get to be a very lax - minded girl ? and it be shameful to impose upon the two after their love - kindness to she . as usual , her little prayer - book be in her pocket . she walk quickly to the familiar church , and reach it just as the door be be close . 

 of all the congregation she probably be the one who go through the service most mechanically . not a word reach her understanding . sitting , standing , or on her knee , she wear the same preoccupied look , with ever and again a slight smile or a movement of the lip , as if she be recall some conversation of special interest . 

 last Sunday she have have an adventure , the first of any real moment that have befall she in London . she have arrange to go with Miss Eade on a steamboat up the river . they be to meet at the Battersea Park landing - stage at half - past two . but Miss Eade do not keep her appointment , and Monica , unwilling to lose the trip , start alone . 

 she disembark at Richmond and stray about for an hour or two , then have a cup of tea and a bun . as it be still far too early to return , she go down to the riverside and seat herself on one of the bench . many boat be go by , a majority of they contain only two person a young man who pull , and a girl who hold the string of the tiller . some of these couple Monica disregard ; but occasionally there pass a skiff from which she could not take her eye . to lie back like that on the cushion and converse with a companion who have nothing of the shop about he ! 

 it seem hard that she must be alone . poor Mr. Bullivant would gladly have take she on the river ; but Mr. Bullivant 

 she think of her sister . their loneliness be for life , poor thing . already they be old ; and they would grow old , sad , perpetually struggle to supplement that dividend from the precious capital and merely that they might keep alive . oh ! her heart ache at the misery of such a prospect . how much well if the poor girl have never be bear . 

 her own future be more hopeful than theirs have ever be . she know herself good - look . man have follow she in the street and try to make her acquaintance . some of the girl with whom she live regard she enviously , spitefully . but have she really the least chance of marry a man whom she could respect not to say love ? 

 one - and - twenty a week hence . at Weston she have keep tolerable health , but certainly her constitution be not strong , and the slavery of Walworth Road threaten she with premature decay . her sister counsel wisely . come to London be a mistake . she would have have well chance at Weston , notwithstanding the extreme discretion with which she be oblige to conduct herself . 

 while she muse thus , a profound discouragement settle on her sweet face , some one take a seat by she on the same bench , that be to say . glance aside , she see that it be an oldish man , with grizzle whisker and rather a stern visage . Monica sigh . 

 be it possible that he have hear she ? he look this way , and with curiosity . ashamed of herself , she keep her eye avert for a long time . presently , follow the movement of a boat , her face turn unconsciously towards the silent companion ; again he be look at she , and he speak . the gravity of his appearance and manner , the good - natured commonplace that fall from his lip , could not alarm she ; a dialogue begin , and go on for about half an hour . 

 how old might he be ? after all , he be probably not fifty perchance not much more than forty . his utterance fall short of perfect refinement , but seem that of an educate man . and certainly his clothe be such as a gentleman wear . he have thin , hairy hand , unmarke by any effect of labour ; the nail could not have be well care for . be it a bad sign that he carry neither glove nor walk - stick ? 

 his talk aim at nothing but sober friendliness ; it be perfectly inoffensive indeed , respectful . now and then not too often he fix his eye upon she for an instant . after the introductory phrase , he mention that he have have a long drive , alone ; his horse be bait in preparation for the journey back to London . he often take such drive in the summer , though generally on a weekday ; the magnificent sky have tempt he out this morning . he live at Herne Hill . 

 at length he venture a question . Monica affect no reluctance to tell he that she be in a house of business , that she have relative in London , that only by chance she find herself alone to - day . 

 ' I should be sorry if I never see you again . ' 

 these word he utter with embarrassment , his eye on the ground . Monica could only keep silence . half an hour ago she would not have think it possible for any remark of this man 's seriously to occupy her mind , yet now she wait for the next sentence in discomposure which be quite free from resentment . 

 ' we meet in this casual way , and talk , and then say good - bye . why may not   I tell you that you interest I very much , and that I be afraid to trust only to chance for another meeting ? if you be a man ' he smile ' I should give you my card , and ask you to my house . the card I may at all event offer . ' 

 whilst speak , he draw out a little case , and lay a visit - card on the bench within Monica 's reach . murmur she ' thank you , ' she take the bit of pasteboard , but do not look at it . 

 ' you be on my side of the river , ' he continue , still with scrupulous modesty of tone . ' may I not hope to see you some day , when you be walk ? all day and time be the same to I ; but I be afraid it be only on Sunday that you be at leisure ? ' 

 ' yes , only on a Sunday . ' 

 it take a long time , and many circumlocution , but in the end an appointment be make . Monica would see her acquaintance next Sunday evening on the river front of Battersea Park ; if it rain , then the Sunday after . she be ashamed and confused . other girl be constantly do this kind of thing other girl in business ; but it seem to put she on the level of a servant . and why have she consent ? the man could never be anything to she ; he be too old , too hard - feature , too grave . well , on that very account there would be no harm in meet he . in truth , she have not feel the courage to refuse ; in a manner he have overawe she . 

 and perhaps she would not keep the engagement . nothing compel she . she have not tell he her name , nor the house where she be employ . there be a week to think it over . 

 all day and time be the same to he he say . and he drive about the country for his pleasure . a man of mean . his name , accord to the card , be Edmund Widdowson . 

 he be upright in his walk , and strongly build . she notice this as he move away from she . fearful lest he should turn round , her eye glance at his figure from moment to moment . but he do not once look back . 

 ' and now to God the Father . ' the bustle throughout the church waken she from reverie so complete that she know not a syllable of the sermon . after all she must deceive her sister by invent a text , and perhaps a comment . 

 by an arrangement with Mrs. Conisbee , dinner be down in the parlour to - day . a luxurious meal , moreover ; for in her excitement Virginia have resolve to make a feast of Monica 's birthday . there be a tiny piece of salmon , a dainty cutlet , and a cold blackcurrant tart . Virginia , at home a constant vegetarian , take no share of the fish and meat which be only enough for one person . Alice , alone upstairs , make a dinner of gruel . 

 Monica be to be at Queen 's Road , Chelsea , by three o'clock . the sister hop she would return to Lavender Hill with her news , but that be leave uncertain by Monica herself purposely . as an amusement , she have decide to keep she promise to Mr. Edmund Widdowson . she be curious to see he again , and receive a new impression of his personality . if he behave as inoffensively as at Richmond , acquaintance with he might be continue for the variety it bring into her life . if anything unpleasant happen , she have only to walk away . the slight , very slight , tremor of anticipation be reasonably to be prize by a shop - girl at Messrs. Scotcher 's . 

 draw near to Queen 's Road the wrap - up Keble in her hand she begin to wonder whether Miss Nunn would have any serious proposal to offer . Virginia 's report and ecstatic forecast be , she know , not completely trustworthy ; though more than ten year her sister 's junior , Monica see the world with eye much less disposed to magnify and colour ordinary fact . 

 Miss Barfoot be still from home . Rhoda Nunn receive the visitor in a pleasant , old - fashioned drawing - room , where there be nothing costly , nothing luxurious ; yet to Monica it appear richly furnish . a sense of strangeness amid such surrounding have more to do with her constrain silence for the first few minute than the difficulty with which she recognize in this lady before she the Miss Nunn whom she have know year ago . 

 ' I should never have know you , ' say Rhoda , equally surprised . ' for one thing , you look like a fever patient just recover . what can be expect ? your sister give I a shocking account of how you live . ' 

 ' the work be very hard . ' 

 ' preposterous . why do you stay at such a place , Monica ? ' 

 ' I be get experience . ' 

 ' to be use in the next world ? ' 

 they laugh . 

 ' Miss Madden be well to - day , I hope ? ' 

 ' Alice ? not much , I be sorry to say . ' 

 ' will you tell I something more about the " experience " you be get ? for instance , what time be give you for meal ? ' 

 Rhoda Nunn be not the person to manufacture light gossip when a matter of the grave interest wait for discussion . with a face that express thoughtful sympathy , she encourage the girl to speak and confide in she . 

 ' there be twenty minute for each meal , ' Monica explain ; ' but at dinner and tea one be very likely to be call into the shop before finish . if you be long away you find the table clear . ' 

 ' Charming arrangement ! no sit down behind the counter , I suppose ? ' 

 ' oh , of course not . we stiffer a great deal from that . some of we get disease . a girl have just go to the hospital with varicose vein , and two or three other have the same thing in a less troublesome form . sometimes , on Saturday night , I lose all feeling in my foot ; I have to stamp on the floor to be sure it be still under I . ' 

 ' ah , that Saturday night ! ' 

 ' yes , it be bad enough now ; but at Christmas ! there be a week or more of Saturday night go on to one o'clock in the morning . a girl by I be twice carry out fainting , one night after another . they give she brandy , and she come back again . ' 

 ' they compel she to ? ' 

 ' well , no , it be her own wish . her " book of taking " be not   very good , poor thing , and if it do not   come up to a certain figure at the end of the week she would lose her place . she lose it after all . they tell she she be too weak . after Christmas she be lucky enough to get a place as a lady's - maid at twenty - five pound a year at Scotcher 's she have fifteen . but we hear that she burst a blood - vessel , and now she be in the hospital at Brompton . ' 

 ' delightful story ! have not   you an early - closing day ? ' 

 ' they have before I go there ; but only for about three month . then the agreement break down . ' 

 ' like the assistant . a pity the establishment do not   follow suit . ' 

 ' but you would not   say so , Miss Nunn , if you know how terribly hard it be for many girl to find a place , even now . ' 

 ' I know it perfectly well . and I wish it be hard . I wish girl fall down and die of hunger in the street , instead of creep to their garret and the hospital . I should like to see their dead body collect together in some open place for the crowd to stare at . ' 

 Monica gaze at she with wide eye . 

 ' you mean , I suppose , that people would try to reform thing . ' 

 ' who know ? perhaps they might only congratulate each other that a few of the superfluous female have be strike off . do they give you any summer holiday ? ' 

 ' a week , with salary continue . ' 

 ' really ? with salary continue ? that take one 's breath away . - be many of the girl lady ? ' 

 ' none , at Scotcher 's . they nearly all come from the country . several be daughter of small farmer and those be dreadfully ignorant . one of they ask I the other day in what country Africa be . ' 

 ' you do not   find they very pleasant company ? ' 

 ' one or two be nice quiet girl . ' 

 Rhoda draw a deep sigh , and move with impatience . 

 ' well , do not   you think you have   have about enough of it experience and all ? ' 

 ' I might go into a country business : it would be easy . ' 

 ' but you do not   care for the thought ? ' 

 ' I wish now they have bring I up to something different . Alice and Virginia be afraid of have I train for a school ; you remember that one of our sister who go through it die of overwork . and I be not clever , Miss Nunn . I never do much at school . ' 

 Rhoda regard she , smile gently . 

 ' you have no inclination to study now ? ' 

 ' I be afraid not , ' reply the other , look away . ' certainly I should like to be well educate , but I do not   think I could study seriously , to earn my living by it . the time for that have go by . ' 

 ' perhaps so . but there be thing you might manage . no doubt your sister tell you how I get my living . there be a good deal of employment for woman who learn to use a typewriter . do you ever have piano lesson ? ' 

 ' no . ' 

 ' no more do I , and I be sorry for it when I go to typewrite . the finger have to be light and supple and quick . come with I , and I will show you one of the machine . ' 

 they go to a room downstairs a bare little room by the library . here be two remington , and Rhoda patiently explain their use . 

 ' one must practise until one can do fifty word a minute at least . I know one or two people who have reach almost twice that speed . it take a good six month ' work to learn for any profitable use . Miss Barfoot take pupil . ' 

 Monica , at first very attentive , be grow absent . her eye wander about the room . the other observe she closely , and , it seem , doubtfully . 

 ' do you feel any impulse to try for it ? ' 

 ' I should have to live for six month without earn anything . ' 

 ' that be by no mean impossible for you , I think ? ' 

 ' not really impossible , ' Monica reply with hesitation . 

 something like dissatisfaction pass over Miss Nunn 's face , though she do not allow Monica to see it . her lip move in a way that perhaps signify disdain for such timidity . tolerance be not one of the virtue express in her physiognomy . 

 ' let we go back to the drawing - room and have some tea . ' 

 Monica could not become quite at ease . this energetic woman have little attraction for she . she see the characteristic which make Virginia enthusiastic , but fear rather than admire they . to put herself in Miss Nunn 's hand might possibly result in a bad form of bondage than she suffer at the shop ; she would never be able to please such a person , and failure , she imagine , would result in more or less contemptuous dismissal . 

 then of a sudden , as it she have divine these thought , Rhoda assume an air of gaiety of frank kindness . 

 ' so it be your birthday ? I no long keep count of mine , and could not   tell you without a calculation what I be exactly . it do not   matter , you see . thirty - one or fifty - one be much the same for a woman who have make up her mind to live alone and work steadily for a definite object . but you be still a young girl , Monica . my good wish ! ' 

 Monica embolden herself to ask what the object be for which her friend work . 

 ' how shall I put it ? ' reply the other , smile . ' to make woman hard - hearted . ' 

 ' hard - hearted ? I think I understand . ' 

 ' do you ? ' 

 ' you mean that you like to see they live unmarried . ' 

 Rhoda laugh merrily . 

 ' you say that almost with resentment . ' 

 ' no indeed I do not   intend it . ' 

 Monica redden a little . 

 ' nothing more natural if you have do . at your age , I should have resent it . ' 

 ' but ' the girl hesitate ' do not   you approve of any one marrying ? ' 

 ' oh , I be not so severe ! but do you know that there be half a million more woman than man in this happy country of our ? ' 

 ' half a million ! ' 

 her naive alarm again excite Rhoda to laughter . 

 ' something like that , they say . so many odd woman no make a pair with they . the pessimist call they useless , lost , futile life . I , naturally be one of they myself take another view . I look upon they as a great reserve . when one woman vanish in matrimony , the reserve offer a substitute for the world 's work . true , they be not all train yet far from it . I want to help in that to train the reserve . ' 

 ' but married woman be not idle , ' protest Monica earnestly . 

 ' not all of they . some cook and rock cradle . ' 

 again Miss Nunn 's mood change . she laugh the subject away , and abruptly begin to talk of old day down in Somerset , of ramble about Cheddar Cliffs , or at Glastonbury , or on the Quantocks . Monica , however , could not listen , and with difficulty command her face to a pleasant smile . 

 ' will you come and see Miss Barfoot ? ' Rhoda ask , when it have become clear to she that the girl would gladly get away . ' I be only her subordinate , but I know she will wish to be of all the use to you she can . ' 

 Monica express she thank , and promise to act as soon as possible on any invitation that be send she . she take leave just as the servant announce another caller . 




 CHAPTER V 

 the CASUAL acquaintance 

 at that corner of Battersea Park which be near Albert Bridge there have lie for more than twenty year a curious collection of architectural fragment , chiefly dismember column , spread in order upon the ground , and look like portion of a raze temple . it be the colonnade of old Burlington House , convey hither from Piccadilly who know why , and likely to rest here , the sporting ground for adventurous infant , until its origin be lose in the abyss of time . 

 it be at this spot that Monica have agree to meet with her casual acquaintance , Edmund Widdowson , and there , from a distance , she see his lank , upright , well - dress figure move backwards and forwards upon the grass . even at the last moment Monica doubt whether to approach . emotional interest in he she have none , and the knowledge of life she have gain in London assure she that in thus encourage a perfect stranger she be do a very hazardous thing . but the evening must somehow be spend , and if she go off in another direction it would only be to wander about with an adventurous mind ; for her conversation with Miss Nunn have have precisely the opposite effect of that which Rhoda doubtless intend ; she feel something of the recklessness which formerly excite her wonder when she remark it in the other shop - girl . she could no long be without a male companion , and as she have give her promise to this man 

 he have see she , and be come forward . today he carry a walking - stick , and wear glove ; otherwise his appearance be the same as at Richmond . at the distance of a few yard he raise his hat , not very gracefully . Monica do not offer her hand , nor do Widdowson seem to expect it . but he give proof of an intense pleasure in the meeting ; his sallow cheek grow warm , and in the many wrinkle about his eye play a singular smile , good - natured but anxious , apprehensive . 

 ' I be so glad you be able to come , ' he say in a low voice , bend towards she . 

 ' it have be even fine than last Sunday , ' be Monica 's rather vague reply , as she glance at some people who be pass . 

 ' yes , a wonderful day . but I only leave home an hour ago . shall we walk this way ? ' 

 they go along the path by the river . Widdowson exhibit none of the artifice of gallantry practise by man who be in the habit of pick up an acquaintance with shop - girl . his smile do not return ; an extreme sobriety characterize his manner and speech ; for the most part he keep his eye on the ground , and when silent he have the look of one who inwardly debate a grave question . 

 ' have you be into the country ? ' be one of his first inquiry . 

 ' no . I spend the morning with my sister , and in the afternoon I have to see a lady in Chelsea . ' 

 ' your sister be old than yourself ? ' 

 ' yes , some year old . ' 

 ' be it long since you go to live apart from they ? ' 

 ' we have never have a home of our own since I be quite a child . ' 

 and , after a moment 's hesitation , she go on to give a brief account of her history . Widdowson listen with the close attention , his lip twitch now and then , his eye half close . but for cheek - bone that be too prominent and nostril rather too large , he be not ill - featured . no particular force of character declare itself in his countenance , and his mode of speech do not suggest a very active brain . speculate again about his age , Monica conclude that he must be two or three and forty , in spite of the fact that his grizzle beard argue for a high figure . he have brown hair untouched by any sign of advanced life , his tooth be white and regular , and something she could not make clear to her mind exactly what convince she that he have a right to judge himself comparatively young . 

 ' I suppose you be not a Londoner , ' he say , when she come to a pause . 

 ' how ? ' 

 ' your speech . not , ' he add quickly , ' that you have any provincial accent . and even if you have be a Londoner you would not have show it in that way . ' 

 he seem to be reprove himself for a blunder , and after a short silence ask in a tone of kindness , 

 ' do you prefer the town ? ' 

 ' in some way not in all . ' 

 ' I be glad you have relative here , and friend . so many young lady come up from the country who be quite alone . ' 

 ' yes , many . ' 

 their progress to familiarity could hardly have be slow . now and then they speak with a formal coldness which threaten absolute silence . Monica 's brain be so actively at work that she lose consciousness of the people who be move about they , and at time her companion be scarcely more to she than a voice . 

 they have walk along the whole front of the park , and be near Chelsea Bridge . Widdowson gaze at the pleasure - boat lie below on the strand , and say diffidently , 

 ' would you care to go on the river ? ' 

 the proposal be so unexpected that Monica look up with a startled air . she have not think of the man as likely to offer any kind of amusement . 

 ' it would be pleasant , I think , ' he add . ' the tide be still run up . we might go very quietly for a mile or two , and be back as soon as you like . ' 

 ' yes , I should like it . ' 

 he brighten up , and move with a lively step . in a few minute they have choose their boat , have push off , and be glide to the middle of the broad water . Widdowson manage the scull without awkwardness , but by no mean like a man well train in this form of exercise . on sit down , he have take off his hat , stow it away , and put on a little travel - cap , which he draw from his pocket . Monica think this become he . after all , he be not a companion to be ashamed of . she look with pleasure at his white hairy hand with their firm grip ; then at his boot very good boot indeed . he have gold link in his white shirt - cuff , and a gold watch - guard choose with a gentleman 's taste . 

 ' I be at your service , ' he say , with an approach to gaiety . ' direct I . shall we go quickly some distance , or only just a little quick than the tide would float we ? ' 

 ' which you like . to row much would make you too hot . ' 

 ' you would like to go some distance I see . ' 

 ' no , no . do exactly what you like . of course we must be back in an hour or two . ' 

 he draw out his watch . 

 ' it be now ten minute past six , and there be daylight till nine or after . when do you wish to be home ? ' 

 ' not much later than nine , ' Monica answer , with the insincerity of prudence . 

 ' then we will just go quietly along . I wish we could have start early in the afternoon . but that may be for another day , I hope . ' 

 on her lap Monica have the little brown - paper parcel which contain her present . she see that Widdowson glance at it from time to time , but she could not bring herself to explain what it be . 

 ' I be very much afraid that I should not see you to - day , ' he say , as they glide softly by Chelsea Embankment . 

 ' but I promise to come if it be fine . ' 

 ' yes . I fear something might prevent you . you be very kind to give I your company . ' he be look at the tip of her little boot . ' I can not   say how I thank you . ' 

 much embarrassed , Monica could only gaze at one of the scull , as it rise and fall , the water dripping from it in bright bead . 

 ' last year , ' he pursue , ' I go on the river two or three time , but alone . this year I have not   be in a boat till to - day . ' 

 ' you prefer drive ? ' 

 ' oh , it be only chance . I do drive a good deal , however . I wish it be possible to take you through the splendid country I see a day or two ago down in Surrey . perhaps some day you will let I . I live rather a lonely life , as you see . I have a housekeeper ; no relative live with I . my only relative in London be a sister - in - law , and we very seldom meet . ' 

 ' but do not   you employ yourself in any way ? ' 

 ' I be very idle . but that be partly because I have work very hard and hopelessly all my life till a year and a half ago . I begin to earn my own living when I be fourteen , and now I be forty - four to - day . ' 

 ' this be your birthday ? ' say Monica , with an odd look the other could not understand . 

 ' yes I only remember it a few hour ago . strange that such a treat should have be provide for I . yes , I be very idle . a year and a half ago my only brother die . he have be very successful in life , and he leave I what I regard as a fortune , though it be only a small part of what he have . ' 

 the listener 's heart throb . without intend it , she pull the tiller so that the boat begin to turn towards land . 

 ' the left hand a little , ' say Widdowson , smile correctly . ' that be right . many day I do not   leave home . I be fond of reading , and now I make up for all the time lose in year go by . do you care for book ? ' 

 ' I never read very much , and I feel very ignorant . ' 

 ' but that be only for want of opportunity , I be sure . ' 

 he glance at the brown - paper parcel . act on an impulse which perturb she , Monica begin to slip off the loosely - tie string , and to unfold the paper . 

 ' I think it be a book ! ' exclaim Widdowson merrily , when she have reveal a part of her present . 

 ' when you tell I your name , ' say Monica , ' I ought perhaps to have tell you mine . it be write here . my sister give I this to - day . ' 

 she offer the little volume . he take it as though it be something fragile , and the scull fix under his elbow turn to the fly - leaf . 

 ' what ? it be your birthday ? ' 

 ' yes . I be twenty - one . ' 

 ' will you let I shake hand with you ? ' his pressure of her finger be the light possible . ' now that be rather a strange thing be not   it ? oh , I remember this book very well , though I have not   see it or hear of it for twenty year . my mother use to read it on Sundays . and it be really your birthday ? I be more than twice your age , Miss Madden . ' 

 the last remark be utter anxiously , mournfully . then , as if to reassure himself by exert physical strength , he drive the boat along with half a dozen vigorous stroke . Monica be rustle over the page , but without see they . 

 ' I do not   think , ' say her companion presently , ' you be very well content with your life in that house of business . ' 

 ' no , I be not . ' 

 ' I have hear a good deal of the hardship of such a life . will you tell I something about your ? ' 

 readily she give he a sketch of her existence from Sunday to Sunday , but without indignation , and as if the subject have no great interest for she . 

 ' you must be very strong , ' be Widdowson 's comment . 

 ' the lady I go to see this afternoon tell I I look ill . ' 

 ' of course I can see the effect of overwork . my wonder be that you endure it at all . be that lady an old acquaintance ? ' 

 Monica answer with all necessary detail , and go on to mention the proposal that have be make to she . the hearer reflect , and put further question . unwilling to speak of the little capital she possess , Monica tell he that her sister might perhaps help she to live whilst she be learn a new occupation . but Widdowson have become abstract ; he cease pull , cross his arm on the oar , and watch other boat that be near . two deep wrinkle , ripple in their course , have form across his forehead , and his eye widen in a gaze of complete abstraction at the far shore . 

 ' yes , ' fall from he at length , as though in continuation of something he have be say , ' I begin to earn my bread when I be fourteen . my father be an auctioneer at Brighton . a few year after his marriage he have a bad illness , which leave he completely deaf . his partnership with another man be dissolve , and as thing go bad and bad with he , my mother start a lodging - house , which somehow support we for a long time . she be a sensible , good , and brave woman . I be afraid my father have a good many fault that make her life hard . he be of a violent temper , and of course the deafness do not   improve it . well , one day a cab knock he down in the King 's Road , and from that injury , though not until a year after , he die . there be only two child ; I be the elder . my mother could not   keep I at school very long , so , at fourteen , I be send into the office of the man who have be my father 's partner , to serve he and learn the business . I do serve he for year , and for next to no payment , but he teach I nothing more than he could help . he be one of those heartless , utterly selfish man that one meet too often in the business world . I ought never to have be send there , for my father have always an ill opinion of he ; but he pretend a friendly interest in I just , I be convince , to make the use of I that he do . ' 

 he be silent , and begin row again . 

 ' what happen they ? ' ask Monica . 

 ' I must not   make out that I be a faultless boy , ' he continue , with the smile that grave wrinkle about his eye ; ' quite the opposite . I have a good deal of my father 's temper ; I often behave very badly to my mother ; what I need be some stern but conscientious man to look after I and make I work . in my spare time I lay about on the shore , or get into mischief with other boy . it need my mother 's death to make a more sensible fellow of I , and by that time it be too late . I mean I be too old to be train into profitable business habit . up to nineteen I have be little more than an errand and office boy , and all through the after year I never get a much well position . ' 

 ' I can not   understand that , ' remark Monica thoughtfully . 

 ' why not ? ' 

 ' you seem to to be the kind of man that would make your way . ' 

 ' do I ? ' the description please he ; he laugh cheerfully . ' but I never find what my way be to be . I have always hat office work , and business of every kind ; yet I could never see an opening in any other direction . I have be all my life a clerk like so many thousand of other man . nowadays , if I happen to be in the City when all the clerk be come away from business , I feel an inexpressible pity for they . I feel I should like to find two or three of the hard drive , and just divide my superfluous income between . a clerk 's life a life of the office without any hope of rise that be a hideous fate ! ' 

 ' but your brother get on well . why do not   he help you ? ' 

 ' we could not   agree . we always quarrel . ' 

 ' be you really so ill - temper ? ' 

 it be ask in Monica 's most naive tone , with a serious air of investigation which at first confused Widdowson , then make he laugh . 

 ' since I be a lad , ' he reply , ' I have never quarrel with any one except my brother . I think it be only very unreasonable people that irritate I . some man have tell I that I be far too easy - go , too good - natured . certainly I desire to be good - natured . but I do not   easily make friend ; as a rule I can not   talk to stranger . I keep so much to myself that those who know I only a little think I surly and unsociable . ' 

 ' so your brother always refuse to help you ? ' 

 ' it be not   easy for he to help I . he get into a stockbroker 's , and go on step by step until he have save a little money ; then he speculate in all sort of way . he could not   employ I himself and if he could have do so , we should never have get on together . it be impossible for he to recommend I to any one except as a clerk . he be a bear money - maker . I will give you an example of how he grow rich . in consequence of some mortgage business he come into possession of a field at Clapham . as late as 1875 this field bring he only a rent of forty pound ; it be freehold property , and he refuse many offer of purchase . well , in 1885 , the year before he die , the ground - rent from that field now cover with house be seven hundred and ninety pound a year . that be how man get on who have capital and know how to use it . if I have have capital , it would never have yield I more than three or four per cent . I be doom to work for other people who be grow rich . it do not   matter much now , except that so many year of life have be lose . ' 

 ' have your brother any child ? ' 

 ' no child . all the same , it astonish I when I hear his will ; I have expect nothing . in one day in one hour I pass from slavery to freedom , from poverty to more than comfort . we never hat each other ; I do not   want you to think that . ' 

 ' but do not   it bring you friend as well as comfort ? ' 

 ' oh , ' he laugh , ' I be not so rich as to have people press for my acquaintance . I have only about six hundred a year . ' 

 Monica draw in her breath silently , then gaze at the distance . 

 ' no , I have not   make any new friend . the one or two man I care for be not much well off than I use to be , and I always feel ashamed to ask they to come and see I . perhaps they think I shun they because of their position , and I do not   know how to justify myself . life have always be full of worry problem for I . I can not   take thing in the simple way that come natural to other man . ' 

 ' do not   you think we ought to be turn back , Mr. Widdowson ? ' 

 ' yes , we will . I be sorry the time go so quickly . ' 

 when a few minute have pass in silence , he ask , 

 ' do you feel that I be no long quite a stranger to you , Miss Madden ? ' 

 ' yes you have tell I so much . ' 

 ' it be very kind of you to listen so patiently . I wish I have more interesting thing to tell , but you see what a dull life mine have be . ' he pause , and let the boat waver on the stream for a moment . ' when I dare to speak to you last Sunday I have only the faint hope that you would grant I your acquaintance . you can not , I be sure , repent of have do I that kindness ? ' 

 ' one never know . I doubt whether I ought to talk with a stranger ' 

 ' rightly quite rightly . it be my perseverance you see , I hope , that I could never dream of give you offence . the rule be necessary , but you see there may be exceptional case . ' he be give a lazy stroke now and then , which , as the tide be still , just move the boat onwards . ' I see something in your face that compel I to speak to you . and now we may really be friend , I hope ? ' 

 ' yes I can think of you as a friend , Mr. Widdowson . ' 

 a large boat be pass with four or five young man and girl who sing in good time and tune . only a song of the music - hall or of the nigger minstrel , but it sound pleasantly with the plash of the oar . a fine sunset have begin to glow upon the river ; its warmth give a tone to Monica 's thin cheek . 

 ' and you will let I see you again before long ? let I drive you to Hampton Court next Sunday or any other place you would choose . ' 

 ' very likely I shall be invite to my friend 's in Chelsea . ' 

 ' do you seriously think of leave the shop ? ' 

 ' I do not   know I must have time to think about it ' 

 ' yes yes . but if I write a line to you , say on Friday , would you let I know whether you can come ? ' 

 ' please to let I refuse for next Sunday . the one after , perhaps ' 

 he bend his head , look desperately grave , and drive the boat on Monica be disturb , but hold to her resolution , which Widdowson silently accept . the rest of the way they exchange only brief sentence , about the beauty of the sky , the scene on river or bank , and other impersonal matter . after land , they walk in silence towards Chelsea Bridge . 

 ' now I must go quickly home , ' say Monica . 

 ' but how ? ' 

 ' by train from York Road to Walworth Road . ' 

 Widdowson cast a curious glance at she . one would have imagine that he find something to disapprove in this ready knowledge of London transit . 

 ' I will go with you to the station , then . ' 

 without a word speak , they walk the short distance to York Road . Monica take her ticket , and offer a hand for good - bye . 

 ' I may write to you , ' say Widdowson , his face set in an expression of anxiety , ' and make an appointment , if possible , for the Sunday after next ? ' 

 ' I shall be glad to come if I can . ' 

 ' it will be a very long time to I . ' 

 with a faint smile , Monica hurry away to the platform . in the train she look like one whose mind be occupy with grave trouble . fatigue have suddenly overcome she ; she lean back and close her eye . 

 at a street corner very near to Messrs. Scotcher 's establishment she be intercept by a tall , showily - dress , rather coarse - feature girl , who seem to have be loiter about . it be Miss Eade . 

 ' I want to speak to you , Miss Madden . where do you go with Mr. Bullivant this morning ? ' 

 the voice could not have be more distinctive of a London shop - girl ; its tone signify irritation . 

 ' with Mr. Bullivant ? I go nowhere with he . ' 

 ' but I see you both get into the bus in Kennington Park Road . ' 

 ' do you ? ' Monica return coldly . ' I can not   help it if Mr. Bullivant happen to be go the same way . ' 

 ' oh , very well ! I think you be to be trust . it be nothing to I ' 

 ' you behave very foolishly , Miss Eade , ' exclaim the other , whose nerve at this moment would not allow she to use patience with the jealous girl . ' I can only tell you that I have never think again of Mr. Bullivant since he leave the bus somewhere in Clapham Road . I be tired of talk about such thing . ' 

 ' now , see here , do not   be cross . come and walk a bit and tell I ' 

 ' I be too tired . and there be nothing whatever to tell you . ' 

 ' oh , well , if you be go to be narsty ? ' 

 Monica walk on , but the girl catch she up . 

 ' do not   be so sharp with I , Miss Madden . I do not   say as you want he to go in the bus with you . but you might tell I what he have to say . ' 

 ' nothing at all ; except that he wish to know where I be go , which be no business of his . I do what I could for you . I tell he that if he ask you to go up the river with he I feel sure you would not   refuse . ' 

 ' oh , you do ! ' Miss Eade throw up her head . ' I do not   think it be a very delicate thing to say . ' 

 ' you be very unreasonable . I myself do not   think it be very delicate , but have not   you worry I to say something of the kind ? ' 

 ' no , that I be sure I have not ! worrite you , indeed ! ' 

 ' then please never to speak to I on the subject again . I be tired of it . ' 

 ' and what do he say , when you have say that ? ' 

 ' I can not   remember . ' 

 ' oh , you be narsty to - day ! really you be ! if it have be the other way about , I would never have treat you like this , that I would not . ' 

 ' good - night ! ' 

 they be close to the door by which Messrs. Scotcher 's resident employee enter at night . Monica have take out her latchkey . but Miss Eade could not endure the thought of be leave in torture ignorance . 

 ' do tell I ! ' she whisper . ' I will do anything for you I can . do not   be unkind , Miss Madden ! ' 

 Monica turn back again . 

 ' if I be you , I would not   be so silly . I can not   do more than assure you and promise you that I shall never listen to Mr. Bullivant . ' 

 ' but what do he say about I , dear ? ' 

 ' nothing . ' 

 Miss Eade keep a mortified silence . 

 ' you have much well not think of he at all . I would have more pride . I wish I could make you see he as I do . ' 

 ' and you do really speak about I ? oh , I do wish you would find some one to go out with . then perhaps ' 

 Monica stand still , hesitate , and at length say , 

 ' well I have find some one . ' 

 ' you have ? ' the girl all but dance with joy . ' you really have ? ' 

 ' yes so now do not   trouble I any more . ' 

 this time she be allow to turn back and enter the house . 

 no one else have yet come in . Monica eat a mouthful of bread and cheese , which be in readiness on the long table down in the basement , and at once go to bed . but no welcome drowsiness fall upon she . at half - past eleven , when two of the other five girl who sleep in the room make their appearance , she be still change uneasily from side to side . they light the gas   it be not turn off till midnight , after which hour the late arrival have to use a candle of their own procuring , and begin a lively conversation on the event of the day . afraid of be oblige to talk , Monica feign sleep . 

 at twelve , just as the gas go out , another pair come to repose . they have be quarrel , and be very gloomy . after a long and acrimonious discussion in the dark as to which of they should find a candle it end in one of the girl who be in bed impatiently supply a light they begin sullenly to throw off their garment . 

 ' be Miss Madden awake ? ' say one of they , look in Monica 's direction . 

 there be no reply . 

 ' she be pick up some feller to - day , ' continue the speaker , lower her voice , and glance round at her companion with a grin . ' or else she be have he all along I should not   wonder . ' 

 head be put forward eagerly , and inquiry whisper . 

 ' he be oldish , I should say . I catch sight of they just as they be go off in a boat from Battersea Park , but I could not   see his face very well . he look rather like Mr. Thomas . ' 

 Mr. Thomas be a member of the drapery firm , a man of fifty , ugly and austere . at this description the listener giggle and utter exclamation . 

 ' be he a swell ? ' ask one . 

 ' should not   wonder if he be . you can trust Miss M. to keep her eye open . she be one of the sly and quiet ' un . ' 

 ' oh , be she ? ' murmur another enviously . ' she be just one of those as get make a fool of that be my opinion . ' 

 the point be argue for some minute . it lead to talk about Miss Eade , who be treat with frank contempt because of her ill - disguised pursuit of a mere counter - man . these other damsel have , at present , more exalt view , for they be all young than Miss Eade . 

 just before one o'clock , when silence have reign for a quarter of an hour , there enter with much bustle the last occupant of the bedroom . she be a young woman with a morally unenviable reputation , though some of her colleague certainly envy she . money come to she with remarkable readiness whenever she have need of it . as usual , she begin to talk very loud , at first with innocent vulgarity ; excite a little laughter , she become anecdotic and very scandalous . it take she a long time to disrobe , and when the candle be out , she still have her rich story to relate of point so Rabelaisian that one or two voice make themselves hear in serious protest . the gifted anecdotist reply with a long laugh , then cry , ' good - night , young lady ! ' and sink peacefully to slumber . 

 as for Monica , she see the white dawn peep at the window , and close her tear - stain eye only when the life of a new week have begin noisily in Walworth Road . 




 CHAPTER VI 

 a camp of the RESERVE 

 in consequence of letter exchange during the week , next Sunday bring the three Miss Maddens to Queen 's Road to lunch with Miss Barfoot . Alice have recover from her cold , but be still ail , and take rather a gloomy view of the situation she have lately review with such courage . Virginia maintain her enthusiastic faith in Miss Nunn , and be prepared to reverence Miss Barfoot with hardly less fervour . both of they find it difficult to understand their young sister , who , in her letter , have betray distaste for the change of career propose to she . they be receive with the utmost kindness , and all greatly enjoy their afternoon , for not even Monica 's prejudice against a house , which in her own mind she have stigmatize as ' an old - maid factory , ' could resist the charm of the hostess . 

 though Miss Barfoot have something less than a woman 's average stature , the note of her presence be personal dignity . she be handsome , and her carriage occasionally betray a consciousness of the fact . accord to circumstance , she bear herself as the lady of aristocratic taste , as a genial woman of the world , or as a fervid prophetess of female emancipation , and each character be support with a spontaneity , a good - natured confidence , which inspire liking and respect . a brilliant complexion and eye that sparkle with habitual cheerfulness give she the benefit of doubt when her age be in question ; her style of dress , gracefully ornate , would have lead a stranger to presume she a wed lady of some distinction . yet Mary Barfoot have know many trouble , poverty among they . her experience and struggle bear a close resemblance to those which Rhoda Nunn have go through , and the time of trial have last long . mental and moral stamina would have assure she against such evil of celibacy as appear in the eld Maddens , but it be to a change of worldly fortune that she owe this revival of youthful spirit and energy in middle life . 

 ' you and I must be friend , ' she say to Monica , hold the girl 's soft little hand . ' we be both black but comely . ' 

 the compliment to herself seem the most natural thing in the world . Monica blush with pleasure , and could not help laugh . 

 it be all but decide that Monica should become a pupil at the school in Great Portland Street . in a brief private conversation , Miss Barfoot offer to lend she the money that might be needful . 

 ' nothing but a business transaction , Miss Madden . you can give I security ; you will repay I at your convenience . if , in the end , this occupation do not   please you , you will at all event have regain health . it be clear to I that you must not   go on in that dreadful place you describe to Miss Nunn . ' 

 the visitor take their leave at about five o'clock . 

 ' poor thing ! poor thing ! ' sigh Miss Barfoot , when she be alone with her friend . ' what can we possibly do for the old one ? ' 

 ' they be excellent creature , ' say Rhoda ; ' kind , innocent woman ; but useful for nothing except what they have do all their life . the eld can not   teach seriously , but she can keep young child out of mischief and give they a nice way of speak . her health be break down , you can see . ' 

 ' poor woman ! one of the sad type . ' 

 ' decidedly . Virginia be not   quite so depressng but how childish ! ' 

 ' they all strike I as childish . Monica be a dear little girl ; it seem a great absurdity to talk to she about business . of course she must find a husband . ' 

 ' I suppose so . ' 

 Rhoda 's tone of slighting concession amuse her companion . 

 ' my dear , after all we do not   desire the end of the race . ' 

 ' no , I suppose not , ' Rhoda admit with a laugh . 

 ' a word of caution . your zeal be eat you up . at this rate , you will hinder our purpose . we have no mission to prevent girl from marry suitably only to see that those who can not   shall have a mean of live with some satisfaction . ' 

 ' what chance be there that this girl will marry suitably ? ' 

 ' oh , who know ? at all event , there will be more likelihood of it if she come into our sphere . ' 

 ' really ? do you know any man that would dream of marry she ? ' 

 ' perhaps not , at present . ' 

 it be clear that Miss Barfoot stand in some danger of become subordinate to her more vehement friend . her little body , for all its natural dignity , put she at a disadvantage in the presence of Rhoda , who tower above she with rather imperious stateliness . her suavity be no match for Rhoda 's vigorous abruptness . but the two be very fond of each other , and by this time think themselves able safely to dispense with the form at first impose by their mutual relation . 

 ' if she marry at all , ' declare Miss Nunn , ' she will marry badly . the family be brand . they belong to the class we know so well with no social position , and unable to win an individual one . I must find a name for that ragged regiment . ' 

 Miss Barfoot regard her friend thoughtfully . 

 ' Rhoda , what comfort have you for the poor in spirit ? ' 

 ' none whatever , I be afraid . my mission be not to they . ' 

 after a pause , she add , 

 ' they have their religious faith , I suppose ; and it be answerable for a good deal . ' 

 ' it would be a terrible responsibility to rob they of it , ' remark the eld woman gravely . 

 Rhoda make a gesture of impatience . 

 ' it be a terrible responsibility to do anything at all . but I be glad ' she laugh scornfully ' that it be not my task to release they . ' 

 Mary Barfoot muse , a compassionate shadow on her fine face . 

 ' I do not   think we can do without the spirit of that religion , ' she say at length ' the essential human spirit . these poor woman one ought to be very tender with they . I do not   like your " ragged regiment " phrase . when I grow old and melancholy , I think I shall devote myself to poor hopeless and purposeless woman try to warm their heart a little before they go hence . ' 

 ' admirable ! ' murmur Rhoda , smile . ' but in the meantime they cumber we ; we have to fight . ' 

 she throw forward her arm , as though with spear and buckler . Miss Barfoot be smile at this Palladin attitude when a servant announce two lady Mrs. Smallbrook and Miss Haven . they be aunt and niece ; the former a tall , ungainly , sharp - feature widow ; the later a sweet - faced , gentle , sensible - look girl of five - and - twenty . 

 ' I be so glad you be back again , ' exclaim the widow , as she shake hand with Miss Barfoot , speak in a hard , unsympathetic voice . ' I do so want to ask your advice about an interesting girl who have apply to I . I be afraid her past will not   bear look into , but most certainly she be a reform character . Winifred be most favourably impressed with she ' 

 Miss Haven , the Winifred in question , begin to talk apart with Rhoda Nunn . 

 ' I do wish my aunt would not   exaggerate so , ' she say in a subdued voice , whilst Mrs. Smallbrook still talk loudly and urgently . ' I never say that I be favourably impressed . the girl protest far too much ; she have play on aunt 's weakness , I fear . ' 

 ' but who be she ? ' 

 ' oh , some one who lose her character long ago , and life , I should say , on charitable people . just because I say that she must once have have a very nice face , aunt misrepresent I in this way it be too bad . ' 

 ' be she an educate person ? ' Miss Barfoot be hear to ask . 

 ' not precisely well educate . ' 

 ' of the low class , then ? ' 

 ' I do not   like that term , you know . of the poor class . ' 

 ' she never be a lady , ' put in Miss Haven quietly but decidedly . 

 ' then I fear I can be of no use , ' say the hostess , betray some of her secret satisfaction in be able thus to avoid Mrs. Smallbrook 's request . Winifred , a pupil at Great Portland Street , be much like by both her teacher ; but the aunt , with her ceaseless philanthropy at other people 's expense , could only be consider a bore . 

 ' but surely you do not   limit your humanity , Miss Barfoot , by the artificial division of society . ' 

 ' I think those division be anything but artificial , ' reply the hostess good - humouredly . ' in the uneducated class I have no interest whatever . you have hear I say so . 

 ' yes , but I can not think be not   that just a little narrow ? ' 

 ' perhaps so . I choose my sphere , that be all . let those work for the low class   I must call they lower , for they be , in every sense , let those work for they who have a call to do so . I have none . I must keep to my own class . ' 

 ' but surely , Miss Nunn , ' cry the widow , turn to Rhoda , ' we work for the abolition of all unjust privilege ? to we , be not a woman a woman ? ' 

 ' I be oblige to agree with Miss Barfoot . I think that as soon as we begin to meddle with uneducated people , all our scheme and view be unsettled . we have to learn a new language , for one thing . but your missionary enterprise be admirable . ' 

 ' for my part , ' declare Mrs. Smallbrook , ' I aim at the solidarity of woman . you , at all event , agree with I , winifre ? ' 

 ' I really do not   think , aunt , that there can be any solidarity of lady with servant girl , ' respond Miss Haven , encourage by a look from Rhoda . 

 ' then I grieve that your charity fall so far below the christian standard . ' 

 Miss Barfoot firmly guide the conversation to a more hopeful subject . 

 not many people visit this house . every Wednesday evening , from half - past eight to eleven , Miss Barfoot be at home to any of her acquaintance , include her pupil , who choose to call upon she ; but this be in the nature of an association with recognize object . of society in the common sense Miss Barfoot see very little ; she have no time to sacrifice in the pursuit of idle ceremony . by the successive death of two relative , a widow sister and an uncle , she have come into possession of a modest fortune ; but no thought of a life such as would have suggest itself to most woman in her place ever tempt she . her study have always be of a very positive nature ; her ability be of a kind uncommon in woman , or at all event very rarely develop in one of her sex . she could have manage a large and complicated business , could have fill a place on a board of director , have take an active part in municipal government nay , perchance in national . and this turn of intellect consist with many trait of character so strongly feminine that people who know her good thought of she with as much tenderness as admiration . she do not seek to become know as the leader of a ' movement , ' yet her quiet work be probably more effectual than the public career of woman who propagandize for female emancipation . her aim be to draw from the overstocked profession of teaching as many capable young woman as she could lay hand on , and to fit they for certain of the pursuit nowadays throw open to their sex . she hold the conviction that whatever man could do , woman could do equally well those task only except which demand great physical strength . at her instance , and with help from her purse , two girl be prepare themselves to be pharmaceutical chemist ; two other have be aid by she to open a bookseller 's shop ; and several who have clerkship in view receive an admirable training ' at her school in Great Portland Street . 

 Thither every weekday morning Miss Barfoot and Rhoda repair ; they arrive at nine o'clock , and with an hour 's interval work go on until five . 

 enter by the private door of a picture - cleaner 's shop , they ascend to the second story , where two room have be furnish like comfortable office ; two small on the floor above serve for dressing - room . in one of the office , typewrite and occasionally other kind of work that demand intelligence be carry on by three or four young woman regularly employ . to superintend this department be Miss Nunn 's chief duty , together with business correspondence under the principal 's direction . in the second room Miss Barfoot instruct her pupil , never more than three be with she at a time . a bookcase full of work on the Woman Question and ally topic serve as a circulate library ; volume be lend without charge to the member of this little society . once a month Miss Barfoot or Miss Nunn , by turn , give a brief address on some set subject ; the hour be four o'clock , and about a dozen hearer generally assemble . both work very hard . Miss Barfoot do not look upon her enterprise as a source of pecuniary profit , but she have make the establishment more than self - support . her pupil increase in number , and the work department promise occupation for a large staff than be at present engage . the young woman in general answer their friend 's expectation , but of course there be disappointing instance . one of these have cause Miss Barfoot special distress . a young girl whom she have release from a life of much hardship , and who , after a couple of month ' trial , bade fair to develop noteworthy ability , of a sudden disappear . she be without relative in London , and Miss Barfoot 's endeavour to find she prove for several week very futile . then come news of she ; she be live as the mistress of a married man . every effort be make to bring she back , but the girl resist ; presently she again pass out of sight , and now more than a year have elapse since Miss Barfoot 's last interview with she . 

 this Monday morning , among letter deliver at the house , be one from the stray girl . Miss Barfoot read it in private , and throughout the day remain unusually grave . at five o'clock , when staff and pupil have all depart , she sit for a while in meditation , then speak to Rhoda , who be glance over a book by the window . 

 ' here be a letter I should like you to read . ' 

 ' something that have be troubling you since morning , be not   it ? ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 Rhoda take the sheet and quickly run through its content . her face harden , and she throw down the letter with a smile of contempt . 

 ' what do you advise ? ' ask the eld woman , closely observe she . 

 ' an answer in two line with a cheque enclose , if you see fit . ' 

 ' do that really meet the case ? ' 

 ' More than meet it , I should say . ' 

 Miss Barfoot ponder . 

 ' I be doubtful . that be a letter of despair , and I can not   close my ear to it . ' 

 ' you have an affection for the girl . help she , by all mean , if you feel compel to . but you would hardly dream of take she back again ? ' 

 ' that be the point . why should not   I ? ' 

 ' for one thing , ' reply Rhoda , look coldly down upon her friend , ' you will never do any good with she . for another , she be not   a suitable companion for the girl she would meet here . ' 

 ' I can not   be sure of either objection . she act with deplorable rashness , with infatuation , but I never discover any sign of evil in she . do you ? ' 

 ' evil ? well , what do the word mean ? I be not a Puritan , and I do not   judge she as the ordinary woman would . but I think she have put herself altogether beyond our sympathy . she be twenty - two year old no child and she act with her eye open . no deceit be practise with she . she know the man have a wife , and she be base enough to accept a share of his attention . do you advocate polygamy ? that be an intelligible position , I admit . it be one way of meet the social difficulty . but not mine . ' 

 ' my dear Rhoda , do not   enrage yourself . ' 

 ' I will try not to . ' 

 ' but I can not   see the temptation to do so . come and sit down , and talk quietly . no , I have no fondness for polygamy . I find it very hard to understand how she could act as she do . but a mistake , however wretched , must not   condemn a woman for life . that be the way of the world , and decidedly it must not   be ours . ' 

 ' on this point I practically agree with the world . ' 

 ' I see you do , and it astonish I . you be go through curious change , in several respect . a year ago you do not   speak of she like this . ' 

 ' partly because I do not   know you well enough to speak my mind . partly yes , I have change a good deal , no doubt . but I should never have propose to take she by the hand and let bygone be bygone . that be an amiable impulse , but anti - social . ' 

 ' a favourite word on your lip just now , Rhoda . why be it anti - social ? ' 

 ' because one of the supreme social need of our day be the education of woman in self - respect and self - restraint . there be plenty of people man chiefly , but a few woman also of a certain temperament who cry for a reckless individualism in these matter . they would tell you that she behave laudably , that she be live out herself and thing of that kind . but I do not   think you share such view . ' 

 ' I do not , altogether . " the education of woman in self - respect . " very well . here be a poor woman whose self - respect have give way under grievous temptation . circumstance have teach she that she make a wild mistake . the man give she up , and bid she live as she can ; she be induce to beggary . now , in that position a girl be tempt to sink still far . the letter of two line and an enclose cheque would as likely as not plunge she into depth from which she could never be rescue . it would assure she that there be no hope . on the other hand , we have it in our power to attempt that very education of which you speak . she have brain , and do not   belong to the vulgar . it seem to I that you be move by illogical impulse and certainly anything but kind one . ' 

 Rhoda only grow more stubborn . 

 ' you say she yield to a grievous temptation . what temptation ? will it bear put into word ? ' 

 ' oh yes , I think it will , ' answer Miss Barfoot , with her gentle smile . ' she fall in love with the man . 

 ' fall in love ! ' Concentration of scorn be in this echo . ' oh , for what be not   that phrase responsible ! ' 

 ' Rhoda , let I ask you a question on which I have never venture . do you know what it be to be in love ? ' 

 Miss Nunn 's strong feature be move as if by a suppress laugh ; the colour of her cheek grow very slightly warm . 

 ' I be a normal human being , ' she answer , with an impatient gesture . ' I understand perfectly well what the phrase signify . ' 

 ' that be no answer , my dear . have you ever be in love with any man ? ' 

 ' yes . when I be fifteen . ' 

 ' and not since , ' rejoin the other , shake her head and smile . ' no , not since ? ' 

 ' thank Heaven , no ! ' 

 ' then you be not very well able to judge this case . I , on the other hand , can judge it with the very large understanding . do not   smile so witheringly , Rhoda . I shall neglect your advice for once . ' 

 ' you will bring this girl back , and continue teach she as before ? ' 

 ' we have no one here that know she , and with prudence she need never be talk about by those of our friend who do . ' 

 ' oh , weak weak weak ! ' 

 ' for once I must act independently . ' 

 ' yes , and at a stroke change the whole character of your work . you never propose keep a reformatory . your aim be to help choose girl , who promise to be of some use in the world . this Miss Royston represent the profitless average no , she be below the average . be you so blind as to imagine that any good will ever come of such a person ? if you wish to save she from the street , do so by all mean . but to put she among your choose pupil be to threaten your whole undertaking . let it once become know and it would become know that a girl of that character come here , and your usefulness be at an end . in a year 's time you will have to choose between give up the school altogether and make it a refuge for outcast . ' 

 Miss Barfoot be silent . she tap with her finger on the table . 

 ' personal feeling be mislead you , ' Rhoda pursue . ' Miss Royston have a certain cleverness , I grant ; but do you think I do not   know that she would never become what you hop ? all her spare time be give to novel - reading . if every novelist could be strangle and throw into the sea we should have some chance of reform woman . the girl 's nature be corrupt with sentimentality , like that of all but every woman who be intelligent enough to read what be call the good fiction , but not intelligent enough to understand its vice . love love love ; a sicken sameness of vulgarity . what be more vulgar than the ideal of novelist ? they will not   represent the actual world ; it would be too dull for their reader . in real life , how many man and woman fall in love ? not one in every ten thousand , I be convinced . not one married pair in ten thousand have feel for each other as two or three couple do in every novel . there be the sexual instinct , of course , but that be quite a different thing ; the novelist dare not   talk about that . the paltry creature dare not   tell the one truth that would be profitable . the result be that woman imagine themselves noble and glorious when they be most near the animal . this Miss Royston when she rush off to perdition , ten to one she have in mind some idiot heroine of a book . oh , I tell you that you be lose sight of your first duty . there be people enough to act the good Samaritan ; you have quite another task in life . it be your work to train and encourage girl in a path as far as possible from that of the husband - hunter . let they marry later , if they must ; but at all event you will have clear their view on the subject of marriage , and put they in a position to judge the man who offer himself . you will have teach they that marriage be an alliance of intellect not a means of support , or something more ignoble still . but to do this with effect you must show yourself relentless to female imbecility . if a girl get to know that you have receive back such a person as Miss Royston she will be corrupt by your spirit of charity corrupt , at all event , for our purpose . the endeavour to give woman a new soul be so difficult that we can not   be cumber by side - task , such as fish foolish people out of the mud they have walk into . charity for human weakness be all very well in its place , but it be precisely one of the virtue that you must not teach . you have to set an example of the sterner quality to discourage anything that resemble sentimentalism . and think if you illustrate in your own behaviour a sympathy for the very vice of character we be try our hard to extirpate ! ' 

 ' this be a terrible harangue , ' say Miss Barfoot , when the passionate voice have be silent for a few tick of the clock . ' I quite enter into your point of view , but I think you go beyond practical zeal . however , I will help the girl in some other way , if possible . ' 

 ' I have offend you . ' 

 ' impossible to take offence at such obvious sincerity . ' 

 ' but surely you grant the force of what I say ? ' 

 ' we differ a good deal , Rhoda , on certain point which as a rule would never come up to interfere with our work in harmony . you have come to dislike the very thought of marriage and everything of that kind . I think it be a danger you ought to have avoid . true , we wish to prevent girl from marry just for the sake of be support , and from degrade themselves as poor Bella Royston have do ; but surely between ourselves we can admit that the vast majority of woman would lead a waste life if they do not marry . ' 

 ' I maintain that the vast majority of woman lead a vain and miserable life because they do marry . ' 

 ' do not   you blame the institution of marriage with what be chargeable to human fate ? a vain and miserable life be the lot of nearly all mortal . Most woman , whether they marry or not , will suffer and commit endless folly . ' 

 ' Most woman as life be at present arrange for they . thing be change , and we try to have our part in hasten a new order . ' 

 ' ah , we use word in a different sense . I speak of human nature , not of the effect of institution . ' 

 ' now it be you who be unpractical . those view lead only to pessimism and paralysis of effort . ' 

 Miss Barfoot rise . 

 ' I give in to your objection against bring the girl back to work here . I will help she in other way . it be quite true that she be not   to be rely upon . ' 

 ' impossible to trust she in any detail of life . the pity be that her degradation can not   be use as an object lesson for our other girl . ' 

 ' there again we differ . you be quite mistaken in your idea of how the mind be influence . the misery of Bella Royston would not in the least affect any other girl 's way of think about the destiny of her sex . we must avoid exaggeration . if our friend get to think of we as fanatic , all our usefulness be over . the ideal we set up must be human . do you think now that we know one single girl who in her heart believe it be well never to love and never to marry ? ' 

 ' perhaps not , ' admit Rhoda , more cheerful now that she have gain her point . ' but we know several who will not dream of marry unless reason urge they as strongly as inclination . ' 

 Miss Barfoot laugh . 

 ' pray , who ever distinguish in such a case between reason and inclination ? ' 

 ' you be most unusually sceptical to - day , ' say Rhoda , with an impatient laugh . 

 ' no , my dear . we happen to be go to the root of thing , that be all . perhaps it be as well to do so now and then . oh , I admire you immensely , Rhoda . you be the ideal adversary of those care - nothing and believe - nothing woman who keep the world back . but do not   prepare for yourself a woeful disillusion . ' 

 ' take the case of Winifred Haven , ' urge Miss Nunn . ' she be a good - look and charming girl , and some one or other will want to marry she some day , no doubt . ' 

 ' forgive my interrupt you . there be great doubt . she have no money but what she can earn , and such girl , unless they be exceptionally beautiful , be very likely indeed to remain unsought . ' 

 ' grant . but let we suppose she have an offer . should you fear for her prudence ? ' 

 ' winifre have much good sense , ' admit the other . ' I think she be in as little danger as any girl we know . but it would not   startle I if she make the most lamentable mistake . certainly I do not   fear it . the girl of our class be not like the uneducated , who , for one reason or another , will marry almost any man rather than remain single . they have at all event personal delicacy . but what I insist upon be , that Winifred would rather marry than not . and we must carefully bear that fact in mind . a strained ideal be as bad , practically , as no ideal at all . only the most exceptional girl will believe it her duty to remain single as an example and support to what we call the odd woman ; yet that be the most human way of urge what you desire . by take up the proud position that a woman must be altogether independent of sexual thing , you damage your cause . let we be glad if we put a few of they in the way of live single with no more discontent than an unmarried man experience . ' 

 ' surely that be an unfortunate comparison , ' say Rhoda coldly . ' what man live in celibacy ? consider that unmentionable fact , and then say whether I be wrong in refuse to forgive Miss Royston . Women 's battle be not only against themselves . the necessity of the case demand what you call a strained ideal . I be seriously convince that before the female sex can be raise from its low level there will have to be a widespread revolt against sexual instinct . Christianity could not   spread over the world without help of the ascetic ideal , and this great movement for woman 's emancipation must also have its ascetic . ' 

 ' I can not   declare that you be wrong in that . who know ? but it be not   good policy to preach it to our young disciple . ' 

 ' I shall respect your wish ; but ' 

 Rhoda pause and shake her head . 

 ' my dear , ' say the eld woman gravely , ' believe I that the less we talk or think about such thing the well for the peace of we all . the odious fault of working - class girl , in town and country alike , be that they be absorb in preoccupation with their animal nature . we , thank to our education and the tone of our society , manage to keep that in the background . do not   interfere with this satisfactory state of thing . be content to show our girl that it be their duty to lead a life of effort to earn their bread and to cultivate their mind . simply ignore marriage that be the wise . Behave as if the thing do not   exist . you will do positive harm by take the other course the aggressive course . ' 

 ' I shall obey you . ' 

 ' good , humble creature ! ' laugh Miss Barfoot . ' come , let we be off to Chelsea . do Miss Grey finish that copy for Mr. Houghton ? ' 

 ' yes , it have go to post . ' 

 ' look , here be a big manuscript from our friend the antiquary . two of the girl must get to work on it at once in the morning . ' 

 manuscript entrust to they be keep in a fire - proof safe . when this have be lock up , the lady go to their dressing - room and prepare for departure . the people who live on the premise be responsible for clean the room and other care ; to they Rhoda deliver the door - key . 

 Miss Barfoot be grave and silent on the way home . Rhoda , annoy at the subject that doubtless occupy her friend 's thought , give herself up to reflection of her own . 




 CHAPTER VII 

 a SOCIAL advance 

 a week 's notice to her employer would release Monica from the engagement in Walworth Road . such notice must be give on Monday , so that , if she could at once make up her mind to accept Miss Barfoot 's offer , the come week would be she last of slavery behind the counter . on the way home from Queen 's Road , Alice and Virginia press for immediate decision ; they be unable to comprehend how Monica could hesitate for another moment . the question of her place of abode have already be discuss . one of Miss Barfoot 's young woman , who live at a convenient distance from Great Portland Street , would gladly accept a partner in she lodge an arrangement to be recommend for its economy . yet Monica shrink from speak the final word . 

 ' I do not   know whether it be worth while , ' she say , after a long silence , as they draw near to York Road Station , whence they be to take train for Clapham Junction . 

 ' not worth while ? ' exclaim Virginia . ' you do not   think it would be an improvement ? ' 

 ' yes , I suppose it would . I shall see how I feel about it tomorrow morning . ' 

 she spend the evening at Lavender Hill , but without change in the mood thus indicate . a strange inquietude appear in her behaviour . it be as though she be be urge to undertake something hard and repugnant . 

 on her return to Walworth Road , just as she come within sight of the shop , she observe a man 's figure some twenty yard distant , which instantly hold her attention . the dim gaslight occasion some uncertainty , but she believe the figure be that of Widdowson . he be walk on the other side of the street , and away from she . when the man be exactly opposite Scotcher 's establishment he gaze in that direction , but without stop . Monica hasten , fear to be see and approach . already she have reach the door , when Widdowson yes , he it be turn abruptly to walk back again . his eye be at once upon she ; but whether he recognize she or not Monica could not know . at that moment she open the door and pass in . 

 a fit of trembling seize she , as if she have barely escape some peril . in the passage she stand motionless , listen with the intensity of dread . she could hear footstep on the pavement ; she expect a ring at the door - bell . if he be so thoughtless as to come to the door , she would on no account see he . 

 but there be no ring , and after a few minute ' wait she recover her self - command . she have not make a mistake ; even his feature have be discernible as he turn towards she . be this the first time that he have come to look at the place where she live possibly to spy upon she ? she resent this behaviour , yet the feeling be confuse with a certain satisfaction . 

 from one of the dormitory there be a view of Walworth Road . she run upstairs , softly open the door of that room , and peep in . the low burn gas show she that only one bed have an occupant , who appear to be asleep . softly she go to the window , draw the blind aside , and look down into the street . but Widdowson have disappear . he might of course be on this side of the way . 

 ' who be that ? ' suddenly ask a voice from the occupy bed . 

 the speaker be Miss Eade . Monica look at she , and nod . 

 ' you ? what be you do here ? ' 

 ' I want to see if some one be stand outside . ' 

 ' you mean he ? ' 

 the other nod . 

 ' I have   get a beastly headache . I could not   hold myself up , and I have to come home at eight o'clock . there be such pain all down my back too . I shall not   stay at this beastly place much long . I do not   want to get ill , like Miss Radford . somebody go to see she at the hospital this afternoon , and she be awfully bad . well , have you see he ? ' 

 ' he be go . good - night . ' 

 and Monica leave the room . 

 next day she notify her intention of leave her employment . no question be ask ; she be of no particular importance ; fifty , or , for the matter of that , five score , young woman equally capable could be find to fill her place . 

 on Tuesday morning there come a letter from Virginia a few line request she to meet her sister , as soon as possible after closing time that evening , in front of the shop . ' we have something very delightful to tell you . we do hope you give notice to - day , as thing be get so bright in every direction . ' 

 at a quarter to ten she be able to run out , and close at hand be the two eagerly await she . 

 ' Mrs. Darby have find a place for Alice , ' begin Virginia . ' we hear by the afternoon post yesterday . a lady at Yatton want a governess for two young child . be not   it fortunate ? ' 

 ' so delightfully convenient for what we be think of , ' put in the eld , with her croak voice . ' nothing could have be well . ' 

 ' you mean about the school ? ' say Monica dreamily . 

 ' yes , the school , ' Virginia reply , with tremble earnestness . ' Yatton be convenient both for Clevedon and Weston . Alice will be able to run over to both place and make enquiry , and ascertain where the good opening would be . ' 

 Miss Nunn 's suggestion , hitherto but timidly discuss , have take hold upon their mind as soon as Alice receive the practical call to her native region . both be enthusiastic for the undertaking . it afford they a novel subject of conversation , and inspirit they by seem to restore their self - respect . after all , they might have a mission , a task in the world . they picture themselves the head of a respectable and thriving establishment , with subordinate teacher , with pleasant social relation ; they feel young again , and capable of indefinite activity . why have they not think of this long ago ? and thereupon they revert to antistrophic laudation of Rhoda Nunn . 

 ' be it a good place ? ' their young sister inquire . 

 ' oh , pretty good . only twelve pound a year , but nice people , Mrs. Darby say . they want I at once , and it be very likely that in a few week I shall go with they to the seaside . ' 

 ' what could have be well ? ' cry Virginia . ' her health will be establish , and in half a year , or less , we shall be able to come to a decision about the great step . oh , and have you give notice , darling ? ' 

 ' yes , I have . ' 

 both clap their hand like child . it be an odd little scene on the London pavement at ten o'clock at night ; so intimately domestic amid surrounding the very antithesis of domesticity . only a few yard away , a girl , to whom the pavement be a place of commerce , stand laugh with two man . the sound of her voice hint to Monica the advisability of walk as they converse , and they move towards Walworth Road Station . 

 ' we think at first , ' say Virginia , ' that when Alice have go you might like to share my room ; but then the distance from Great Portland Street would be a decide objection . I might move , but we doubt whether that would be worth while . it be so comfortable with Mrs. Conisbee , and for the short remain time Christmas , I should think , would be a very good time for opening . if it be possible to decide upon dear old Clevedon , of course we should prefer it ; but perhaps Weston will offer more scope . Alice will weigh all the argument on the spot . do not   you envy she , Monica ? think of be there in this summer weather ! ' 

 ' why do not   you go as well ? ' Monica ask . 

 ' I ? and take lodging , you mean ? we never think of that . but we still have to consider expenditure very seriously , you know . if possible , I must find employment for the rest of the year . remember how very likely it be that Miss Nunn will have something to suggest for I . and when I think it will be of so much practical use for I to see she frequently for a few week . already I have learn so much from she and from Miss Barfoot . their conversation be so encouraging . I feel that it be a training of the mind to be in contact with they . ' 

 ' yes , I quite share that view , ' say Alice , with tremulous earnestness . ' Virginia can reap much profit from intercourse with they . they have the new idea in education , and it would be so good if our school begin with the advantage of quite a modern system . ' 

 Monica become silent . when her sister have talk in the same strain for a quarter of an hour , she say absently , 

 ' I write to Miss Barfoot last night , so I suppose I shall be able to move to those lodging next Sunday . ' 

 it be eleven o'clock before they part . have take leave of her sister near the station , Monica turn to walk quickly home . she have go about half the way , when her name be speak just behind she , in Widdowson 's voice . she stop , and there stand the man , offer his hand . 

 ' why be you here at this time ? ' she ask in an unsteady voice . 

 ' not by chance . I have a hope that I might see you . ' 

 he be gloomy , and look at her searchingly . 

 ' I must not   wait to talk now , Mr. Widdowson . it be very late . ' 

 ' very late indeed . it surprise I to see you . ' 

 ' surprise you ? why should it ? ' 

 ' I mean that it seem so very unlikely at this hour . ' 

 ' then how could you have hop to see I ? ' 

 Monica walk on , with an air of displeasure , and Widdowson keep beside she , incessantly eye her countenance . 

 ' no , I do not   really think of see you , Miss Madden . I wish to be near the place where you be , that be all . ' 

 ' you see I come out I dare say . ' 

 ' no . ' 

 ' if you have do , you would have know that I come to meet two lady , my sister . I walk with they to the station , and now I be go home . you seem to think an explanation necessary ' 

 ' do forgive I ! what right have I to ask anything of the kind ? but I have be very restless since Sunday . I wish so to meet you , if only for a few minute . only an hour or two ago I post a letter to you . ' 

 Monica say nothing . 

 ' it be to ask you to meet I next Sunday , as we arrange . shall you be able to do so ? ' 

 ' I be afraid I can not . at the end of this week I leave my place here , and on Sunday I shall be move to another part of London . ' 

 ' you be leave ? you have decide to make the change you speak of ? ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' and will you tell I where you be go to live ? ' 

 ' in lodging near Great Portland Street . I must say good - night , Mr. Widdowson . I must , indeed . ' 

 ' please do give I one moment ! ' 

 ' I can not   stay I can not   good - night ! ' 

 it be impossible for he to detain she . ungracefully he catch at his hat , make the salute , and move away with rapid , uneven stride . in less than half an hour he be back again at this spot . he walk past the shop many time without pausing ; his eye devour the front of the building , and note those window in which there be a glimmer of light . he see girl enter by the private door , but Monica do not again show herself . some time after midnight , when the house have long be dark and perfectly quiet , the uneasy man take a last look , and then seek a cab to convey he home . 

 the letter of which he have speak reach Monica 's hand next morning . it be a very respectful invitation to accompany the writer on a drive in Surrey . Widdowson propose to meet she at Herne Hill railway station , where his vehicle would be wait . ' in pass , I shall be able to point out to you the house which have be my home for about a year . ' 

 as circumstance be , it would be hardly possible to accept this invitation without exciting curiosity in her sister . the Sunday morning would be occupy , probably , in go to the new lodging and make the acquaintance of her future companion there ; in the afternoon , her sister be to pay she a visit , as Alice have decide to start for Somerset on the Monday . she must write a refusal , but it be by no mean her wish to discourage Widdowson altogether . the note which at length satisfy she run thus : 

 ' DEAR MR . WIDDOWSON I be very sorry that it will be impossible for I to see you next Sunday . all day I shall be occupy . my eld sister be leave London , and Sunday will be my last day with she , perhaps for a long time . please do not think that I make light of your kindness . when I be settle in my new life , I hope to be able to let you know how it suit I . sincerely your , 

 monica MADDEN . ' 

 in a postscript she mention her new address . it be write in very small character perhaps an unpurposed indication of the misgiving with which she allow herself to pen the word . 

 two day go by , and again a letter from Widdowson be deliver , 

 ' dear MISS MADDEN my chief purpose in write again so soon be to apologize sincerely for my behaviour on Tuesday evening . it be quite unjustifiable . the good way of confess my fault be to own that I have a foolish dislike of your walking in the street unaccompanie at so late an hour . I believe that any man who have newly make your acquaintance , and have think as much about you as I have , would have experience the same feeling . the life which make it impossible for you to see friend at any other time of the day be so evidently unsuited to one of your refinement that I be make angry by the thought of it . happily it be come to an end , and I shall be greatly relieve when I know that you have leave the house of business . 

 ' you remember that we be to be friend . I should be much less than your friend if I do not desire for you a position very different from that which necessity force upon you . thank you very much for the promise to tell I how you like the new employment and your new friend . shall you not henceforth be at leisure on other day besides Sunday ? as you will now be near Regent 's Park , perhaps I may hope to meet you there some evening before long . I would go any distance to see you and speak with you for only a few minute . 

 ' do forgive my impertinence , and believe I , dear Miss Madden . ever your , 

 EDMUND WIDDOWSON . ' 


 now this undoubtedly might be consider a love - letter , and it be the first of its kind that Monica have ever receive . no man have ever write to she that he be willing to go ' any distance ' for the reward of look on her face . she read the composition many time , and with many thought . it do not enchant she ; presently she feel it to be dull and prosy anything but the ideal of a love - letter , even at this early stage . 

 the remark concern Widdowson make in the bedroom by the girl who fancy she asleep have greatly disturb her conception of he . he be old , and look still old to a casual eye . he have a stiff dry way , and already have begin to show how precise and exact he could be . a year or two ago the image of such a man would have repel she . she do not think it possible to regard he with warm feeling ; yet , if he ask she to marry he and that seem likely to happen very soon almost certainly her answer would be yes . provide , of course , that all he have tell she about himself could be in some satisfactory way confirm . 

 her acquaintance with he be an extraordinary thing . with what amazement and rapture would any one of her shop companion listen to the advance of a man who have six hundred a year ! yet Monica do not doubt this truthfulness and the honesty of his intention . his life - story sound credible enough , and the very dryness of his manner inspire confidence . as thing go in the marriage war , she might esteem herself a most fortunate young woman . it seem that he have really fall in love with she ; he might prove a devoted husband . she feel no love in return ; but between the prospect of a marriage of esteem and that of no marriage at all there be little room for hesitation . the chance be that she might never again receive an offer from a man whose social standing she could respect . 

 in the meantime there have come a civil little note from the girl whose room she be to share . ' Miss Barfoot have speak of you so favourably that I do not think it necessary to see you before consent to what she suggest . perhaps she have tell you that I have my own furniture ; it be very plain , but , I think , comfortable . for the two room , with attendance , I pay eight and sixpence a week ; my landlady will ask eleven shilling when there be two of we , so that your share would be five - and - six . I hope you will not   think this be too much . I be a quiet and I think a very reasonable person . ' the signature be ' Mildred H. Vesper . ' 

 the day of release arrive . as it pour with rain all the morning , Monica the less regretted that she have be oblige to postpone her meeting with Widdowson . at breakfast - time she say good - bye to the three or four girl in whom she have any interest . Miss Eade be delighted to see she go . this rival finally out of the way , Mr. Bullivant might perchance turn his attention to the faithful admirer who remain . 

 she go by train to Great Portland Street , and thence by cab , with her two box , to Rutland Street , Hampstead Road an uphill little street of small house . when the cab stop , the door of the house she seek at once open , and on the threshold appear a short , prim , plain - feature girl , who smile a welcome . 

 ' you be Miss Vesper ? ' Monica say , approach she . 

 ' yes very pleased to see you , Miss Madden . as London cabman have a narrow view of their duty , I will help you to get the box in . ' 

 Monica like the girl at once . Jehu condescend to hand down the luggage , they transfer it to the foot of the staircase , then , the fare have be pay , go up to the second floor , which be the top of the house . Miss Vesper 's two room be very humble , but homely . she look at Monica to remark the impression produce by they . 

 ' will it do ? ' 

 ' oh , very nicely indeed . after my quarter in Walworth Road ! but I feel ashamed to intrude upon you . ' 

 ' I have be try to find someone to share my rent , ' say the other , with a simple frankness that be very agreeable . ' Miss Barfoot be full of your praise and indeed I think we may suit each other . ' 

 ' I shall try to be as little disturbance to you as possible . ' 

 ' and I to you . the street be a very quiet one . up above here be Cumberland Market ; a hay and straw market . quite pleasant odour country odour reach we on market day . I be country - breed ; that be why I speak of such a trifle . ' 

 ' so be I , ' say Monica . ' I come from Somerset . ' 

 ' and I from Hampshire . do you know , I have a strong suspicion that all the really nice girl in London be country girl . ' 

 Monica have to look at the speaker to be sure that this be say in pleasantry . Miss Vesper be fond of make dry little joke in the grave tone ; only a twinkle of her eye and a movement of her tight little lip betray she . 

 ' shall I ask the landlady to help I up with the luggage ? ' 

 ' you be rather pale , Miss Madden . well let I see to that . I have to go down to remind Mrs. Hocking to put salt into the saucepan with the potato . she cook for I only on Sunday , and if I do not   remind she every week she would boil the potato without salt . such a state of mind be curious , but one end by accept it as a fact in nature . ' 

 they join in merry laughter . when Miss Vesper give way to open mirth , she enjoy it so thoroughly that it be a delight to look at she . 

 by the time dinner be over they be on excellent term , and have exchange a great deal of personal information . Mildred Vesper seem to be one of the most contented of young woman . she have sister and brother , whom she love , all scatter about England in pursuit of a livelihood ; it be rare for any two of they to see each other , but she speak of this as quite in the order of thing . for Miss Barfoot her respect be unbounded . 

 ' she have make more of I than any one else could have do . when I first meet she , three year ago , I be a simpleton ; I think myself ill - used because I have to work hard for next to no payment and live in solitude . now I should be ashamed to complain of what fall to the lot of thousand of girl . ' 

 ' do you like Miss Nunn ? ' ask Monica . 

 ' not so well as Miss Barfoot , but I think very highly of she . her zeal make she exaggerate a little now and then , but then the zeal be so splendid . I have not   it myself not in that form . ' 

 ' you mean ' 

 ' I mean that I feel a shameful delight when I hear of a girl get marry . it be very weak , no doubt ; perhaps I shall improve as I grow old . but I have half a suspicion , do you know , that Miss Barfoot be not without the same weakness . ' 

 Monica laugh , and speak of something else . she be in good spirit ; already her companion 's view of life begin to have an effect upon she ; she think of people and thing in a more lightsome way , and be less disposed to commiserate herself . 

 the bedroom which both be to occupy might with advantage have be large , but they know that many girl of instinct no less delicate than their own have to endure far bad accommodation in London where poverty pay for its shelter breathing - space at so much a square foot . it be only of late that Miss Vesper have be able to buy furniture   four sovereign it cost in all , and thus to allow herself the luxury of two room at the rent she previously pay for one . Miss Barfoot do not remunerate her worker on a philanthropic scale , but strictly in accordance with market price ; common sense dictate this principle . in talk over their arrangement , Monica decide to expend a few shilling on the purchase of a chair - bedstead for her own use . 

 ' I often have nightmare , ' she remark , ' and kick a great deal . it would not   be nice to give you bruise . ' 

 a week pass . Alice have write from Yatton , and in a cheerful tone . Virginia , chronically excited , have make call at Rutland Street and at Queen 's road ; she talk like one who have suddenly receive a great illumination , and her zeal in the cause of independent womanhood rival Miss Nunn 's . without enthusiasm , but seemingly content , Monica work at the typewrite machine , and have begin certain study which her friend judge to be useful . she experience a growth of self - respect . it be much to have rise above the status of shop - girl , and the change of moral atmosphere have a very beneficial effect upon she . 

 Mildred Vesper be a studious little person , after a fashion of her own . she possess four volume of Maunder 's ' treasury ' , and to one or other of these she apply herself for at least an hour every evening . 

 ' by nature , ' she say , when Monica seek an explanation of this study , ' my mind be frivolous . what I need be a store of solid information , to reflect upon . no one could possibly have a bad memory , but by persevere I manage to learn one or two fact a day . ' 

 Monica glance at the book now and then , but have no desire to cultivate Maunder 's acquaintance . instead of read , she meditate the problem of her own life . 

 Edmund Widdowson , of course , write to she at the new address . in her reply she again postpone their meeting . whenever she go out in the evening , it be with expectation of see he somewhere in the neighbourhood ; she feel assure that he have long ago come to look at the house , and more likely than not his eye have several time be upon she . that do not matter ; her life be innocent , and Widdowson might watch she come and go as much as he would . 

 at length , about nine o'clock one evening , she come face to face with he . it be in Hampstead Road ; she have be buy at a draper 's , and carry the little parcel . at the moment of recognition , Widdowson 's face so flushed and brighten that Monica could not help a sympathetic feeling of pleasure . 

 ' why be you so cruel to I ? ' he say in a low voice , as she give her hand . ' what a time since I see you ! ' 

 ' be that really true ? ' she reply , with an air more resemble coquetry than any he have yet see in she . 

 ' since I speak to you , then . ' 

 ' when do you see I ? ' 

 ' three evening ago . you be walk in Tottenham Court Road with a young lady . ' 

 ' Miss Vesper , the friend I live with . ' 

 ' will you give I a few minute now ? ' he ask humbly . ' be it too late ? ' 

 for reply Monica move slowly on . they turn up one of the way parallel with Rutland Street , and so come into the quiet district that skirt Regent 's Park , Widdowson talk all the way in a strain of all but avow tenderness , his head bend towards she and his voice so much subdue that occasionally she lose a few word . 

 ' I can not   live without see you , ' he say at length . ' if you refuse to meet I , I have no choice but to come wander about the place where you be . do not , pray do not   think I spy upon you . indeed , it be only just to see your face or your form as you walk along . when I have have my journey in vain I go back in misery . you be never out of my thought never . ' 

 ' I be sorry for that , Mr. Widdowson . ' 

 ' sorry ? be you really sorry ? do you think of I with less friendliness than when we have our evening on the river ? ' 

 ' oh , not with less friendliness . but if I only make you unhappy ' 

 ' in one way unhappy , but as no one else ever have the power to . if you would let I meet you at certain time my restlessness would be at an end . the summer be go so quickly . will not   you come for that drive with I next Sunday ? I will be wait for you at any place you like to appoint . if you could imagine what joy it would give I ! ' 

 presently Monica assent . if it be fine , she would be by the southeast entrance to Regent 's Park at two o'clock . he thank she with word of the most submissive gratitude , and then they part . 

 the day prove doubtful , but she keep her appointment . Widdowson be on the spot with horse and trap . these be not , as he presently inform Monica , his own property , but hire from a livery stable , accord to his custom . 

 ' it will not   rain , ' he exclaim , gaze at the sky . ' it shall not   rain ! these few hour be too precious to I . ' 

 ' it would be very awkward if it do , ' Monica reply , in merry humour , as they drive along . 

 the sky threaten till sundown , but Widdowson be able to keep declare that rain would not come . he take a south - westward course , cross Waterloo Bridge , and thence by the highway make for Herne Hill . Monica observe that he make a short detour to avoid Walworth Road . she ask his reason . 

 ' I hate the road ! ' Widdowson answer , with vehemence . 

 ' you hate it ? ' 

 ' because you slave and suffer there . if I have the power , I would destroy it every house . many a time , ' he add , in a low voice , ' when you be lie asleep , I walk up and down there in horrible misery . ' 

 ' just because I have to stand at a counter ? ' 

 ' not only that . it be not   fit for you to work in that way but the people about you ! I hat every face of man or woman that pass along the street . ' 

 ' I do not   like the society . ' 

 ' I should hope not . of course , I know you do not . why do you ever come to such a place ? ' 

 there be severity rather than sympathy in his look . 

 ' I be tired of the dull country life , ' Monica reply frankly . ' and then I do not   know what the shop and the people be like . ' 

 ' do you need a life of excitement ? ' he ask , with a sidelong glance . 

 ' Excitement ? no , but one must have change . ' 

 when they reach Herne Hill , Widdowson become silent , and presently he allow the horse to walk . 

 ' that be my house , Miss Madden the right - hand one . 

 Monica look , and see two little villa , build together with stone facing , porche at the door and ornament gable . 

 ' I only want to show it you , ' he add quickly . ' there be nothing pretty or noticeable about it , and it be not   at all grandly furnish . my old housekeeper and one servant manage to keep it in order . ' 

 they pass , and Monica do not allow herself to look back . 

 ' I think it be a nice house , ' she say presently . 

 ' all my life I have wish to have a house of my own , but I do not   dare to hope I ever should . man in general do not   seem to care so long as they have lodging that suit they I mean unmarried man . but I always want to live alone without stranger , that be to say . I tell you that I be not very sociable . when I get my house , I be like a child with a toy ; I could not   sleep for satisfaction . I use to walk all over it , day after day , before it be furnish . there be something that delight I in the sound of my footstep on the staircase and the bare floor . here I shall live and die , I keep say to myself . not in solitude , I hop . perhaps I might meet some one ' 

 Monica interrupt he to ask a question about some object in the landscape . he answer she very briefly , and for a long time neither speak . then the girl , glance at he with a smile of apology , say in a gentle tone 

 ' you be tell I how the house please you . have you still the same pleasure in live there ? ' 

 ' yes . but lately I have be hop I dare not   say more . you will interrupt I again . ' 

 ' which way be we go now , Mr. Widdowson ? ' 

 ' to Streatham , then on to Carshalton . at five o'clock we will use our right as traveller , and get some innkeeper to make tea for we . look , the sun be try to break through ; we shall have a fine evening yet . may I , without rudeness , say that you look well since you leave that abominable place . ' 

 ' oh , I feel well . ' 

 after keep his look fix for a long time on the horse 's ear , Widdowson turn gravely to his companion . 

 ' I tell you about my sister - in - law . would you be willing to make her acquaintance ? ' 

 ' I do not   feel able to do that , Mr. Widdowson , ' Monica answer with decision . 

 prepare for this reply , he begin a long and urgent persuasion . it be useless ; Monica listen quietly , but without sign of yield . the subject drop , and they talk of indifferent thing . 

 on the homeward drive , when the dull sky grow dusk about they , and the suburban street - lamp begin to show themselves in long glimmering line , Widdowson return with shameface courage to the subject which for some hour have be in abeyance . 

 ' I can not   part from you this evening without a word of hope to remember . you know that I want you to be my wife . will you tell I if there be anything I can say or do to make your consent possible ? have you any doubt of I ? ' 

 ' no doubt whatever of your sincerity . ' 

 ' in one sense , I be still a stranger to you . will you give I the opportunity of make thing between we more regular ? will you allow I to meet some friend of yours whom you trust ? ' 

 ' I have rather you do not   yet . ' 

 ' you wish to know still more of I , personally ? ' 

 ' yes I think I must know you much well before I can consent to any step of that kind . ' 

 ' but , ' he urge , ' if we become acquaintance in the ordinary way , and know each other 's friend , would not   that be most satisfactory to you ? ' 

 ' it might be . but you forget that so much would have to be explain . I have behave very strangely . if I tell everything to my friend I should leave myself no choice . ' 

 ' oh , why not ? you would be absolutely free . I could no more than try to recommend myself to you . if I be so unhappy as to fail , how would you be anything but quite free ? ' 

 ' but surely you must understand I . in this position , I must either not speak of you at all , or make it know that I be engaged to you . I can not   have it take for grant that I be engaged to you when I do not   wish to be . ' 

 Widdowson 's head droop ; he set his lip in a hard gloomy expression . 

 ' I have behave very imprudently , ' continue the girl . but I do not   see I can not   see what else I could have do . thing be so badly arrange . it be not   possible for we to be introduce by any one who know we both , so I have either to break off your acquaintance after that first conversation , or conduct myself as I have be do . I think it be a very hard position . my sister would call I an immodest girl , but I do not   think it be true . I may perhaps come to feel you as a girl ought to when she marry , and how else can I tell unless I meet you and talk with you ? and your position be just the same . I do not   blame you for a moment ; I think it would be ridiculous to blame you . yet we have go against the ordinary rule , and people would make we suffer for it or I , at all event . 

 her voice at the close be uncertain . Widdowson look at she with eye of passionate admiration . 

 ' thank you for say that for put it so well , and so kindly for I . let we disregard people , then . let we go on see each other . I love you with all my soul ' he choke a little at this first utterance of the solemn word ' and your rule shall be mine . give I a chance of win you . tell I if I offend you in anything if there be anything you dislike in I . ' 

 ' will you cease come to look for I when I do not   know of it ? ' 

 ' I promise you . I will never come again . and you will meet I a little oftener ? ' 

 ' I will see you once every week . but I must still be perfectly free . ' 

 ' perfectly ! I will only try to win you as any man may who love a woman . ' 

 the tired horse clatter upon the hard highway and cloud gather for a night of storm . 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 COUSIN EVERARD 

 as Miss Barfoot 's eye fall on the letter bring to she at breakfast - time , she utter an exclamation , doubtful in its significance . Rhoda Nunn , who rarely have a letter from any one , look up inquiringly . 

 ' I be greatly mistaken if that be not   my cousin Everard 's writing . I think so . he be in London . ' 

 Rhoda make no remark . 

 ' pray read it , ' say the other , hand her friend the epistle after she have go through it . 

 the handwriting be remarkably bold , but careful . Punctuation be strictly attend to , and in place a word have be obliterate with a circular scrawl which leave it still legible . 

 ' DEAR COUSIN MARY , I hear that you be still active in an original way , and that civilization be more and more indebted to you . since my arrival in London a few week ago , I have several time be on the point of call at your house , but scruple withhold I . our last interview be not quite friendly on your side , you will remember , and perhaps your failure to write to I mean continued displeasure ; in that case I might be reject at your door , which I should not   like , for I be trouble with a foolish sense of personal dignity . I have take a flat , and mean to stay in London for at least half a year . please let I know whether I may see you . indeed I should like to . nature mean we for good friend , but prejudice come between we . just a line , either of welcome or " get thee behind I ! " in spite of your censure , I always be , and still be , affectionately your , 

 EVERARD BARFOOT . ' 

 Rhoda peruse the sheet very attentively . 

 ' an impudent letter , ' say Miss Barfoot . ' just like he . ' 

 ' where do he appear from ? ' 

 ' Japan , I suppose . " but prejudice come between we . " I like that ! moral conviction be always prejudice in the eye of these advanced young man . of course he must come . I be anxious to see what time have make of he . ' 

 ' be it really moral censure that keep you from write to he ? ' inquire Rhoda , with a smile . 

 ' decidedly . I do not   approve of he at all , as I have frequently tell you . ' 

 ' but I gather that he have not   change much . ' 

 ' not in theory , ' reply Miss Barfoot . ' that be not   to be expect . he be far too stubborn . but in mode of life he may possibly be more tolerable . ' 

 ' after two or three year in Japan , ' rejoin Rhoda , with a slight raising of the eyebrow . 

 ' he be about three - and - thirty , and before he leave England I think he show possibility of future wisdom . of course I disapprove of he , and , if necessary , shall let he understand that quite as plainly as before . but there be no harm in see if he have learn to behave himself . ' 

 Everard Barfoot receive an invitation to dine . it be promptly accept , and on the evening of the appointment he arrive at half - past seven . his cousin sit alone in the drawing - room . at his entrance she regard he with keen but friendly scrutiny . 

 he have a tall , muscular frame , and a head of striking outline , with large nose , full lip , deep - set eye , and prominent eyebrow . his hair be the rich tone of chestnut ; his moustache and beard the latter peaking slightly forward inclined to redness . excellent health manifest itself in the warm purity of his skin , in his cheerful aspect , and the lightness of his bearing . the low half of his forehead be wrinkle , and when he do not fix his look on anything in particular , his eyelid droop , give he for the moment an air of languor . on sit down , he at once abandon himself to a posture of the complete ease , which his admirable proportion make graceful . from his appearance one would have expect he to speak in rather loud and decide tone ; but he have a soft voice , and use it with all the discretion of good - breeding , so that at time it seem to caress the ear . to this mode of utterance correspond his smile , which be frequent , but restrain to the expression of a delicate , good - natured irony . 

 ' no one have tell I of your return , ' be Miss Barfoot 's first word as she shake hand with he . 

 ' I fancy because no one know . you be the first of my kinsfolk to whom I write . ' 

 ' much honour , Everard . you look very well . ' 

 ' I be glad to be able to say the same of you . and yet I hear that you work hard than ever . ' 

 ' who be the source of your information about I ? ' 

 ' I have an account of you from Tom , in a letter that catch I at Constantinople . ' 

 ' Tom ? I think he have forget my existence . who tell he about I I can not   imagine . so you do not   come straight home from Japan ? ' 

 Barfoot be nurse his knee , his head throw back . 

 ' no ; I loiter a little in Egypt and Turkey . be you live quite alone ? ' 

 he drawl slightly on the last word , its second vowel make quite a musical note , of wonderful expressiveness . the clear decision of his cousin 's reply be a sharp contrast . 

 ' a lady live with I Miss Nunn . she will join we in a moment . ' 

 ' Miss Nunn ? ' he smile . ' a partner in your activity ? ' 

 ' she give I valuable help . ' 

 ' I must hear all about it if you will kindly tell I some day . it will interest I greatly . you always be the most interesting of our family . Brother Tom promise to be a genius , but marriage have blight the hope , I fear . ' 

 ' the marriage be a very absurd one . ' 

 ' be it ? I fear so ; but Tom seem satisfied . I suppose they will stay at Madeira . ' 

 ' until his wife be tired of her imaginary phthisis , and amuse herself with imagine some other ailment that require they to go to Siberia . ' 

 ' ah , that kind of person , be she ? ' he smile indulgently , and play for a moment with the lobe of his right ear . his ear be small , and of the ideal contour ; the hand , too , thus display , be a fine example of blended strength and elegance . 

 Rhoda come in , so quietly that she be able to observe the guest before he have detect her presence . the movement of Miss Barfoot 's eye first inform he that another person be in the room . in the quiet possible way the introduction be perform , and all seat themselves . 

 dress , like the hostess , in black , and without ornament of any kind save a silver buckle at her waist , Rhoda seem to have endeavour to liken herself to the suggestion of her name by the excessive plainness with which she have arrange her hair ; its tight smoothness be nothing like so become as the mode she usually adopt , and it make she look old . whether by accident or design , she take an upright chair , and sit upon it in a stiff attitude . find it difficult to suspect Rhoda of shyness , Miss Barfoot once or twice glance at she with curiosity . for settle conversation there be no time ; a servant announce dinner almost immediately . 

 ' there shall be no form , cousin Everard , ' say the hostess . ' please to follow we . ' 

 do so , Everard examine Miss Nunn 's figure , which in its way be strong and shapely as his own . a motion of his lip indicate amused approval , but at once he command himself , and enter the dining - room with exemplary gravity . naturally , he sit opposite Rhoda , and his eye often skim her face ; when she speak , which be very seldom , he gaze at she with close attention . 

 during the first part of the meal , Miss Barfoot question her relative concern his oriental experience . Everard speak of they in a light , agreeable way , avoid the tone of instruction , and , in short , give evidence of good taste . Rhoda listen with a look of civil interest , but ask no question , and smile only when it be unavoidable . presently the talk turn to thing of home . 

 ' have you hear of your friend Mr. Poppleton ? ' the hostess ask . 

 ' Poppleton ? nothing whatever . I should like to see he . ' 

 ' I be sorry to tell you he be in a lunatic asylum . ' 

 as Barfoot keep the silence of astonishment , his cousin go on to tell he that the unhappy man seem to have lose his wit among business trouble . 

 ' yet I should have suggest another explanation , ' remark the young man , in his most discreet tone , ' you never meet Mrs. Poppleton ? ' 

 see that Miss Nunn have look up with interest , he address himself to she . 

 ' my friend Poppleton be one of the most delightful man perhaps the good and kind I ever know , and so overflowing with natural wit and humour that there be no resist his cheerful influence . to the amazement of every one who know he , he marry perhaps the dull woman he could have find . Mrs. Poppleton not only never make a joke , but could not   understand what joke mean . only the flat literalism be intelligible to she ; she could follow nothing but the very macadam of conversation have no palate for anything but the suet - pudding of talk . ' 

 Rhoda 's eye twinkle , and Miss Barfoot laugh . Everard be allow himself a freedom in expression which hitherto he have sedulously avoid . 

 ' yes , ' he continue , ' she be by birth a lady which make the infliction hard to bear . poor old Poppleton ! again and again I have hear he what do you think ? laboriously explain jest to she . that be a trial , as you may imagine . there we sit , we three , in the unbeautiful little parlour for they be anything but rich . Poppleton would say something that convulse I with laughter in spite of my effort , for I always dread the result so much that I strove my hard to do no more than smile appreciation . my laugh compel Mrs. Poppleton to stare at I oh , her eye I thereupon , her husband begin his dread performance . the patience , the heroic patience , of that dear , good fellow ! I have know he explain , and re - explain , for a quarter of an hour , and invariably without success . it might be a mere pun ; Mrs. Poppleton no more understand the nature of a pun than of the binomial theorem . but bad be when the jest involve some allusion . when I hear Poppleton begin to elucidate , to expound , the perspiration already on his forehead , I look at he with implore anguish . why would he attempt the impossible ? but the kind fellow could not   disregard his wife 's request . shall I ever forget she . " oh yes I see " ? when obviously she see nothing but the wall at which she sit star . ' 

 ' I have know she like , ' say Miss Barfoot merrily . 

 ' I be convince his madness do not   come from business anxiety . it be the necessity , ever recur , ever before he , of expound joke to his wife . believe I , it be nothing but that . ' 

 ' it seem very probable , ' assert Rhoda dryly . 

 ' then there be another friend of yours whose marriage have be unfortunate , ' say the hostess . ' they tell I that Mr. Orchard have forsake his wife , and without intelligible reason . ' 

 ' there , too , I can offer an explanation , ' reply Barfoot quietly , ' though you may doubt whether it justify he . I meet Orchard a few month ago in Alexandria , meet he by chance in the street , and do not   recognize he until he speak to I . he be wear to skin and bone . I find that he have abandon all his possession to Mrs. Orchard , and just keep himself alive on casual work for the magazine , wander about the shore of the Mediterranean like an uneasy spirit . he show I the thing he have last write , and I see it be publish in this month 's Macmillan . do read it . an exquisite description of a night in Alexandria . one of these day he will starve to death . a pity ; he might have do fine work . ' 

 ' but we await your explanation . what business have he to desert his wife and child ? ' 

 ' let I give an account of a day I spend with he at Tintern , not long before I leave England . he and his wife be have a holiday there , and I call on they . we go to walk about the Abbey . now , for some two hour I will be strictly truthful whilst we be in the midst of that lovely scenery , Mrs. Orchard discourse unceasingly of one subject the difficulty she have with her domestic servant . ten or twelve of these handmaiden be marshal before our imagination ; their name , their age , their antecedent , the wage they receive , be carefully specify . we listen to a catalogue raisonne of the plate , cup , and other utensil that they have break . we hear of the enormity which in each case lead to their dismissal . Orchard try repeatedly to change the subject , but only with the effect of irritate his wife . what could he or I do but patiently give ear ? our walk be ruin , but there be no help for it . now , be good enough to extend this kind of thing over a number of year . Picture Orchard sit down in his home to literary work , and liable at any moment to an invasion from Mrs. Orchard , who come to tell he , at great length , that the butcher have charge for a joint they have not consume or something of that kind . he assure I that his choice lie between flight and suicide , and I firmly believe he . ' 

 as he conclude , his eye meet those of Miss Nunn , and the latter suddenly speak . 

 ' why will man marry fool ? ' 

 Barfoot be startle . he look down into his plate , smile . 

 ' a most sensible question , ' say the hostess , with a laugh . ' why , indeed ? ' 

 ' but a difficult one to answer , ' remark Everard , with his most restrained smile . ' possibly , Miss Nunn , narrow social opportunity have something to do with it . they must marry some one , and in the case of most man choice be seriously restrict . ' 

 ' I should have think , ' reply Rhoda , elevate her eyebrow , ' that to live alone be the less of two evil . ' 

 ' undoubtedly . but man like these two we have be speak of have not   a very logical mind . ' 

 Miss Barfoot change the topic . 

 when , not long after , the lady leave he to meditate over his glass of wine , Everard curiously survey the room . then his eyelid droop , he smile absently , and a calm sigh seem to relieve his chest . the claret have no particular quality to recommend it , and in any case he would have drink very little , for as regard the bottle his nature be abstemious . 

 ' it be as I expect , ' Miss Barfoot be say to her friend in the drawing - room . ' he have change very noticeably . ' 

 ' Mr. Barfoot be not   quite the man your remark have suggest to I , ' Rhoda reply . 

 ' I fancy he be no long the man I know . his manner be wonderfully improve . he use to assert himself in rather alarming way . his letter , to be sure , have the old tone , or something of it . ' 

 ' I will go to the library for an hour , ' say Rhoda , who have not seat herself . ' Mr. Barfoot will not   leave before ten , I suppose ? ' 

 ' I do not   think there will be any private talk . ' 

 ' still , if you will let I ' 

 so , when Everard appear , he find his cousin alone . 

 ' what be you go to do ? ' she ask of he good - naturedly . 

 ' to do ? you mean , how do I propose to employ myself ? I have nothing whatever in view , beyond enjoy life . ' 

 ' at your age ? ' 

 ' so young ? or so old ? which ? ' 

 ' so young , of course . you deliberately intend to waste your life ? ' 

 ' to enjoy it , I say . I be not prompt to any business or profession ; that be all over for I ; I have learn all I care to of the active world . ' 

 ' but what do you understand by enjoyment ? ' ask Miss Barfoot , with knitted brow . 

 ' be not   the spectacle of existence quite enough to occupy one through a lifetime ? if a man merely travel , could he possibly exhaust all the beauty and magnificence that be offer to he in every country ? for ten year and more I work as hard as any man ; I shall never regret it , for it have give I a feeling of liberty and opportunity such as I should not have know if I have always live at my ease . it teach I a great deal , too ; supplement my so - call education as nothing else could have do . but to work for ever be to lose half of life . I can not   understand those people who reconcile themselves to quit the world without have see a millionth part of it . ' 

 ' I be quite reconcile to that . an infinite picture gallery be not   my idea of enjoyment . ' 

 ' nor mine . but an infinite series of mode of living . a ceaseless exercise of all one 's faculty of pleasure . that sound shameless to you ? I can not   understand why it should . why be the man who toil more meritorious than he who enjoy ? what be the sanction for this judgment ? ' 

 ' social usefulness , Everard . ' 

 ' I admit the demand for social usefulness , up to a certain point . but , really , I have do my share . the mass of man do not   toil with any such ideal , but merely to keep themselves alive , or to get wealth . I think there be a vast amount of unnecessary labour . ' 

 ' there be an old proverb about Satan and idle hand . pardon I ; you allude to that personage in your letter . ' 

 ' the proverb be a very true one , but , like other proverb , it apply to the multitude . if I get into mischief , it will not be because I do not   perspire for so many hour every day , but simply because it be human to err . I have no intention whatever of get into mischief . ' 

 the speaker stroke his beard , and smile with a distant look . 

 ' your purpose be intensely selfish , and all indulge selfishness react on the character , ' reply Miss Barfoot , still in a tone of the friendly criticism . 

 ' my dear cousin , for anything to be selfish , it must be a deliberate refusal of what one believe to be duty . I do not   admit that I be neglect any duty to other , and the duty to myself seem very clear indeed . ' 

 ' of that I have no doubt , ' exclaim the other , laugh . ' I see that you have refine your argument . ' 

 ' not my argument only , I hope , ' say Everard modestly . ' my time have be very ill spend if I have not   in some degree , refine my nature . ' 

 ' that sound very well , Everard . but when it come to degree of self - indulgence ' 

 she pause and make a gesture of dissatisfaction . 

 ' it come to that , surely , with every man . but we certainly shall not agree on this subject . you stand at the social point of view ; I be an individualist . you have the advantage of a tolerably consistent theory ; whilst I have no theory at all , and be full of contradiction . the only thing clear to I be that I have a right to make the most of my life . ' 

 ' no matter at whose expense ? ' 

 ' you be quite mistaken . my conscience be a tender one . I dread to do any one an injury . that have always be true of I , in spite of your sceptical look ; and the tendency increase as I grow old . let we have do with so unimportant a matter . be not   Miss Nunn able to rejoin we ? ' 

 ' she will come presently , I think . ' 

 ' how do you make this lady 's acquaintance ? ' 

 Miss Barfoot explain the circumstance . 

 ' she make an impression , ' resume Everard . ' a strong character , of course . more decidedly one of the new woman than you yourself be not   she ? ' 

 ' oh , I be a very old - fashioned woman . woman have think as I do at any time in history . Miss Nunn have much more zeal for womanhood militant . ' 

 ' I should delight to talk with she . really , you know , I be very strongly on your side . ' 

 Miss Barfoot laugh . 

 ' oh , sophist ! you despise woman . ' 

 ' why , yes , the great majority of woman the typical woman . all the more reason for my admire the exception , and wish to see they become more common . you , undoubtedly , despise the average woman . ' 

 ' I despise no human being , Everard . ' 

 ' oh , in a sense ! but Miss Nunn , I feel sure , would agree with I . ' 

 ' I be very sure Miss Nunn would not . she do not   admire the feebler female , but that be very far from be at one with your point of view , my cousin . ' 

 Everard muse with a smile . 

 ' I must get to understand her line of thought . you permit I to call upon you now and then ? ' 

 ' oh , whenever you like , in the evening . except , ' Miss Barfoot add , ' Wednesday evening . then we be always engage . ' 

 ' summer holiday be unknown to you , I suppose ? ' 

 ' not altogether . I have mine a few week ago . Miss Nunn will be go away in a fortnight , I think . ' 

 just before ten o'clock , when Barfoot be talk of some acquaintance he have leave in Japan , Rhoda enter the room . she seem little disposed for conversation , and Everard do not care to assail her taciturnity this evening . he talk on a little long , observe she as she listen , and presently take an opportunity to rise for departure . 

 ' Wednesday be the forbidden evening , be it not ? ' he say to his cousin . 

 ' yes , that be devoted to business . ' 

 as soon as he have go , the friend exchange a look . each understand the other as refer to this point of Wednesday evening , but neither make a remark . they be silent for some time . when Rhoda at length speak it be in a tone of half - indifferent curiosity . 

 ' you be sure you have not   exaggerate Mr. Barfoot 's failing ? ' 

 the reply be delay for a moment . 

 ' I be a little indiscreet to speak of he at all . but no , I do not   exaggerate . ' 

 ' curious , ' muse the other dispassionately , as she stand with one foot on the fender . ' he hardly strike one as that kind of man . 

 ' oh , he have certainly change a great deal . ' 

 Miss Barfoot go on to speak of her cousin 's resolve to pursue no calling . 

 ' his mean be very modest . I feel rather guilty before he ; his father bequeath to I much of the money that would in the natural course have be Everard 's . but he be quite superior to any feeling of grudge on that score . ' 

 ' practically , his father disinherit he ? ' 

 ' it amount to that . from quite a child , Everard be at odd with his father . a strange thing , for in so many respect they resemble each other very closely . physically , Everard be his father walk the earth again . in character , too , I think they must be very much alike . they could not   talk about the simple thing without disagree . my uncle have rise from the rank but he dislike to be remind of it . he dislike the commerce by which he make his fortune . his desire be to win social position ; if baronetcy could be purchase in our time , he would have give a huge sum to acquire one . but he never distinguish himself , and one of the reason be , no doubt , that he marry too soon . I have hear he speak bitterly , and very indiscreetly , of early marriage ; his wife be dead then , but every one know what he mean . Rhoda , when one think how often a woman be a clog upon a man 's ambition , no wonder they regard we as they do . ' 

 ' of course , woman be always retard one thing or another . but man be intensely stupid not to have remedie that long ago . ' 

 ' he determine that his boy should be gentleman . Tom , the elder , follow his wish exactly ; he be remarkably clever , but idleness spoil he , and now he have make that ridiculous marriage the end of poor Tom . Everard go to Eton , and the school have a remarkable effect upon he ; it make he a furious Radical . instead of imitate the young aristocrat he hat and scorn they . there must have be great force of originality in the boy . of course I do not   know whether any Etonians of his time preach Radicalism , but it seem unlikely . I think it be sheer vigour of character , and the strange desire to oppose his father in everything . from Eton he be of course to pass to Oxford , but at that stage come practical rebellion . no , say the boy ; he would not   go to a university , to fill his head with useless learning ; he have make up his mind to be an engineer . this be an astonishment to every one ; engineering do not   seem at all the thing for he ; he have very little ability in mathematic , and his bent have always be to liberal study . but nothing could shake his idea . he have get it into his head that only some such work as engineer something of a practical kind , that call for strength and craftsmanship be worthy of a man with his opinion . he would rank with the class that keep the world go with their sturdy toil : that be how he speak . and , after a great fight , he have his way . he leave Eton to study civil engineering . ' 

 Rhoda be listen with an amused smile . 

 ' then , ' pursue her friend , ' come another display of firmness or obstinacy , whichever you like to call it . he soon find out that he have make a complete mistake . the study do not   suit he at all , as other have foresee . but he would have work himself to death rather than confess his error ; none of we know how he be feel till long after . engineering he have choose , and an engineer he would be , cost he what effort it might . his father should not   triumph over he . and from the age of eighteen till nearly thirty he stick to a profession which I be sure he loathe . by force of resolve he even get on to it , and reach a good position with the firm he work for . of course his father would not   assist he with money after he come of age ; he have to make his way just like any young man who have no influence . ' 

 ' all this put he in quite another light , ' remark Rhoda . 

 ' yes , it would be all very well , if there be no vice to add to the picture . I never experience such a revulsion of feeling as the day when I learn shameful thing about Everard . you know , I always regard he as a boy , and very much as if he have be my young brother ; then come the shock a shock that have a great part in shape my life thenceforward . since , I have think of he as I have speak of he to you as an illustration of evil we have to combat . a man of the world would tell you that I grossly magnify trifle ; it be very likely that Everard be on a high moral level than most man . but I shall never forgive he for destroy my faith in his honour and nobility of feeling . ' 

 Rhoda have a puzzled look . 

 ' perhaps even now you be unintentionally mislead I , ' she say . ' I have suppose he an outrageous profligate . ' 

 ' he be vicious and cowardly I can not   say any more . ' 

 ' and that be the immediate cause of his father 's leave he poorly provide for ? ' 

 ' it have much to do with it , I have no doubt . ' 

 ' I see . I imagine that he be cast out of all decent society . ' 

 ' if society be really decent , he would have be . it be strange how completely his Radicalism have disappear . I believe he never have a genuine sympathy with the labour class . and what be more , I fancy he have a great deal of his father 's desire for command and social distinction . if he have see his way to become a great engineer , a director of vast enterprise , he would not   have abandon his work . an incredible stubbornness have possibly spoil his whole life . in a congenial pursuit he might by this time have attain to something noteworthy . it be too late now , I fear . ' 

 Rhoda meditate . 

 ' do he aim at nothing whatever ? ' 

 ' he will not   admit any ambition . he have no society . his friend be nearly all obscure people , like those you hear he speak of this evening . ' 

 ' after all , what ambition should he have ? ' say Rhoda , with a laugh . ' there be one advantage in be a woman . a woman with brain and will may hope to distinguish herself in the great movement of our time that of emancipate her sex . but what can a man do , unless he have genius ? ' 

 ' there be the emancipation of the working class . that be the great sphere for man ; and Everard care no more for the working class than I do . ' 

 ' be not   it enough to be free oneself ? ' 

 ' you mean that he have task enough in strive to be an honourable man ? ' 

 ' perhaps . I hardly know what I mean . ' 

 Miss Barfoot muse , and her face light up with a glad thought . 

 ' you be right . it be well to be a woman , in our day . with we be all the joy of advance , the glory of conquering . man have only material progress to think about . but we we be win soul , propagate a new religion , purify the earth ! ' 

 Rhoda nod thrice . 

 ' my cousin be a fine speciman of a man , after all , in body and mind . but what a poor , ineffectual creature compare with you , Rhoda ! I do not   flatter you , dear . I tell you bluntly of your fault and extravagance . but I be proud of your magnificent independence , proud of your pride , dear , and of your stainless heart . thank Heaven we be woman ! ' 

 it be rare indeed for Miss Barfoot to be move to rhapsody . again Rhoda nod , and then they laugh together , with joyous confidence in themselves and in their cause . 




 CHAPTER IX 

 the simple faith 

 seat in the reading - room of a club to which he have newly procure admission , Everard Barfoot be glance over the advertisement column of a literary paper . his eye fall on an announcement that have a personal interest to he , and at once he go to the writing - table to pen a letter . 

 ' DEAR micklethwaite , I be back in England , and ought before this to have write to you . I see you have just publish a book with an alarming title , " a Treatise on Trilinear Co - ordinate . " my hearty congratulation on the completion of such a labour ; be you not the most disintereste of mortal , I would add a hope that it may somehow benefit you financially . I presume there be people who purchase such work . but of course the main point with you be to have deliver your soul on Trilinear Co - ordinate . shall I run down to Sheffield to see you , or be there any chance of the holiday bring you this way ? I have find a cheap flat , poorly furnish , in bayswater ; the man who let it to I happen to be an engineer , and be absent on italian railway work for a year or so . my stay in London will not , I think , be for long than six month , but we must see each other and talk over old time , ' etc . 

 this he address to a school at Sheffield . the answer , direct to the club , reach he in three day . 

 ' my DEAR barfoot , I also be in London ; your letter have be forward from the school , which I quit last Easter . disinterested or not , I be happy to tell you that I have get a vastly well appointment . let I know when and where to meet you ; or if you like , come to these lodging of mine . I do not   enter upon duty till end of October , and be at present revelling in mathematical freedom . there be a great deal to tell . sincerely your , 

 THOMAS micklethwaite . ' 

 have no occupation for his morning , Barfoot go at once to the obscure little street by Primrose Hill where his friend be lodge . he reach the house about noon , and , as he have anticipate , find the mathematician deep in study . Micklethwaite be a man of forty , bent in the shoulder , sallow , but not otherwise of unhealthy appearance ; he have a merry countenance , a great deal of lank , disorderly hair , and a beard that reach to the middle of his waistcoat . Everard 's acquaintance with he date from ten year ago , when Micklethwaite have act as his private tutor in mathematic . 

 the room be a musty little back - parlour on the ground floor . 

 ' quiet , perfectly quiet , ' declare its occupant , ' and that be all I care for . two other lodger in the house ; but they go to business every morning at half - past eight , and be in bed by ten at night . besides , it be only temporary . I have great thing in view portentous change ! I will tell you all about it presently . ' 

 he insist , first of all , on hear a full account of Barfoot 's history since they both meet . they have correspond about twice a year , but Everard be not fond of letter - writing , and on each occasion give only the brief account of himself . in listen , Micklethwaite assume extraordinary position , the result , presumably , of a need of physical exercise after hour spend over his work . now he stretch himself at full length on the edge of his chair , his arm extend above he ; now he draw up his leg , fix his foot on the chair , and lock his hand round his knee ; thus perch , he sway his body backwards and forwards , till it seem likely that he would pitch head foremost on to the floor . Barfoot know these eccentricity of old , and pay no attention to they . 

 ' and what be the appointment you have get ? ' he ask at length , dismiss his own affair with impatience . 

 it be that of mathematical lecturer at a London college . 

 ' I shall have a hundred and fifty a year , and be able to take private pupil . on two hundred , at least , I can count , and there be possibility I will not   venture to speak of , because it do not   do to be too hopeful . two hundred a year be a great advance for I . ' 

 ' quite enough , I suppose , ' say Everard kindly . 

 ' not not enough . I must make a little more somehow . ' 

 ' Hollo ! why this spirit of avarice all at once ? ' 

 the mathematician give a shrill , cackle laugh , and roll upon his chair . 

 ' I must have more than two hundred . I should be satisfied with three hundred , but I will take as much more as I can get . ' 

 ' my revere tutor , this be shameless . I come to pay my respect to a philosopher , and I find a sordid worldling . look at I ! I be a man of the large need , spiritual and physical , yet I make my pittance of four hundred and fifty suffice , and never grumble . perhaps you aim at an income equal to my own ? ' 

 ' I do ! what be four hundred and fifty ? if you be a man of enterprise you would double or treble it . I put a high value on money . I wish to be rich ! ' 

 ' you be either mad or be go to get marry . ' 

 Micklethwaite cackle louder than ever . 

 ' I be plan a new algebra for school use . if I be not much mistaken , I can turn out something that will supplant all the present book . think ! if Micklethwaite 's Algebra get accept in all the school , what would that mean to Mick ? hundred a year , my boy hundred . ' 

 ' I never know you so indecent . ' 

 ' I be renew my youth . Nay , for the first time I be youthful . I never have time for it before . at the age of sixteen I begin to teach in a school , and ever since I have peg away at it , school and private . now luck have come to I , and I feel five - and - twenty . when I be really five - and - twenty , I feel forty . ' 

 ' well , what have that to do with money - making ? ' 

 ' After Mick 's Algebra would follow naturally Mick 's Arithmetic , Mick 's Euclid , Mick 's Trigonometry . twenty year hence I should have an income of thousand thousand ! I would then cease to teach   resign my professorship that be to say , for of course I should be professor , and devote myself to a great work on Probability . many a man have begin the good of his life at sixty the most enjoyable part of it , I mean . ' 

 Barfoot be perplexed . he know his friend 's turn for humorous exaggeration , but have never once hear he scheme for material advancement , and evidently this present talk mean something more than a jest . 

 ' be I right or not ? you be go to get marry ? ' 

 Micklethwaite glance at the door , then say in a tone of caution , 

 ' I do not   care to talk about it here . let we go somewhere and eat together . I invite you to have dinner with I or lunch , as I suppose you would call it , in your aristocratic language . ' 

 ' no , you have well have lunch with I . come to my club . ' 

 ' confound your impudence ! be I not your father in mathematic ? ' 

 ' be so good as to put on a decent pair of trouser , and brush your hair . ah , here be your trilinear production . I will look over it whilst you make yourself presentable . ' 

 ' there be a bad misprint in the Preface . let I show you ' 

 ' it be all the same to I , my dear fellow . ' 

 but Micklethwaite be not content until he have indicate the error , and have talk for five minute about the absurdity that it involve . 

 ' how do you suppose I get the thing publish ? ' he then ask . ' Old Bennet , the Sheffield headmaster , be security for loss if the book do not   pay for itself in two year ' time . kind of he , be not   it ? he press the offer upon I , and I think he be prouder of the book than I be myself . but it be quite remarkable how kind people be when one be fortunate . I fancy a great deal of nonsense be talk about the world 's enviousness . now as soon as it get know that I be come to this post in London , people behave to I with surprising good nature all round . old Bennet talk in quite an affectionate strain . " of course , " he say , " I have long know that you ought to be in a well place than this ; your payment be altogether inadequate ; if it have depend upon I , I should long ago have increase it . I truly rejoice that you have find a more fitting sphere for your remarkable ability . " no ; I maintain that the world be always ready to congratulate you with sincerity , if you will only give it a chance . ' 

 ' very gracious of you to give it the chance . but , by - the - bye , how do it come about ? ' 

 ' yes , I ought to tell you that . why , about a year ago , I write an answer to a communication sign by a Big Gun in one of the scientific paper . it be a question in Probability you would not   understand it . my answer be print , and the Big Gun write privately to I a very flattering letter . that correspondence lead to my appointment ; the Big Gun exert himself on my behalf . the fact be , the world be burst with good nature . ' 

 ' obviously . and how long do it take you to write this little book ? ' 

 ' oh , only about seven year the actual composition . I never have much time to myself , you must remember . ' 

 ' you be a good soul , Thomas . go and equip yourself for civilized society . ' 

 to the club they repair on foot . Micklethwaite would talk of anything but that which his companion most desire to hear . 

 ' there be solemnity in life , ' he answer to an impatient question , ' thing that can not   be speak of in the highway . when we have eat , let we go to your flat , and there I will tell you everything . ' 

 they lunch joyously . the mathematician drink a bottle of excellent hock , and do correspond justice to the dish . his eye gleam with happiness ; again he enlarge upon the benevolence of mankind , and the admirable ordering of the world . from the club they drive to bayswater , and make themselves comfortable in Barfoot 's flat , which be very plainly , but sufficiently , furnish . Micklethwaite , cigar in mouth , throw his leg over the side of the easy - chair in which he be sit . 

 ' now , ' he begin gravely , ' I do not   mind tell you that your conjecture be right . I be go to be marry . ' 

 ' well , ' say the other , ' you have reach the age of discretion . I must suppose that you know what you be about . ' 

 ' yes , I think I do . the story be unexciting . I be not a romantic person , nor be my future wife . now , you must know that when I be about twenty - three year old I fall in love . you never suspect I of that , I dare say ? ' 

 ' why not ? ' 

 ' well , I do fall in love . the lady be a clergyman 's daughter at Hereford , where I have a place in a school ; she teach the infant in an elementary school connect with our ; her age be exactly the same as my own . now , the remarkable thing be that she take a liking for I , and when I be scoundrel enough to tell she of my feeling , she do not   reject I . ' 

 ' Scoundrel enough ? why scoundrel ? ' 

 ' why ? but I have not   a penny in the world . I live at the school , and receive a salary of thirty pound , half of which have to go towards the support of my mother . what could possibly have be more villainous ? what earthly prospect be there of my be able to marry ? ' 

 ' well , grant the monstrosity of it . ' 

 ' this lady a very little low than the angel declare that she be content to wait an indefinite time . she believe in I , and hop for my future . her father the mother be dead sanction our engagement . she have three sister , one of they a governess , another keep house , and the third a blind girl . excellent people , all of they . I be at their house as often as possible , and they make much of I . it be a pity , you know , for in those few leisure hour I ought to have be work like a nigger . ' 

 ' plainly you ought . ' 

 ' fortunately , I leave Hereford , and go to a school at Gloucester , where I have thirty - five pound . how we glory over that extra five pound ! but it be no use go on with the story in this way ; it would take I till to - morrow morning . seven year go by ; we be thirty year old , and no prospect whatever of our engagement come to anything . I have work pretty hard ; I have take my London degree ; but not a penny have I save , and all I could spare be still needful to my mother . it strike I all at once that I have no right to continue the engagement . on my thirtieth birthday I write a letter to Fanny that be her name and beg she to be free . now , would you have do the same , or not ? ' 

 ' really , I be not imaginative enough to put myself in such a position . it would need a stupendous effort , at all event . ' 

 ' but be there anything gross in the proceeding ? ' 

 ' the lady take it ill ? ' 

 ' not in the sense of be offend . but she say it have cause she much suffering . she beg I to consider myself free . she would remain faithful , and if , in time to come , I care to write to she again after all these year , I can not   speak of it without huskiness . it seem to I that I have behave more like a scoundrel than ever . I think I have well kill myself , and even plan way of do it I do indeed . but after all we decide that our engagement should continue . ' 

 ' of course . ' 

 ' you think it natural ? well , the engagement have continue till this day . a month ago I be forty , so that we have wait for seventeen year . ' 

 Micklethwaite pause on a note of awe . 

 ' two of Fanny 's sister be dead ; they never marry . the blind one Fanny have long support , and she will come to live with we . long , long ago we have both of we give up thought of marriage . I have never speak to any one of the engagement ; it be something too absurd , and also too sacred . ' 

 the smile die from Everard 's face , and he sit in thought . 

 ' now , when be you go to marry ? ' cry Micklethwaite , with a revival of his cheerfulness . 

 ' probably never . ' 

 ' then I think you will neglect a grave duty . yes . it be the duty of every man , who have sufficient mean , to maintain a wife . the life of unmarried woman be a wretched one ; every man who be able ought to save one of they from that fate . ' 

 ' I should like my cousin Mary and her female friend to hear you talk in that way . they would overwhelm you with scorn . ' 

 ' not sincere scorn , be my belief . of course I have hear of that kind of woman . tell I something about they . ' 

 Barfoot be lead on to a broad expression of his view . 

 ' I admire your old - fashioned sentiment , Micklethwaite . it sit well on you , and you be a fine fellow . but I have much more sympathy with the new idea that woman should think of marriage only as man do I mean , not to grow up in the thought that they must marry or be blight creature . my own view be rather extreme , perhaps ; strictly , I do not   believe in marriage at all . and I have not   anything like the respect for woman , as woman , that you have . you belong to the Ruskin school ; and I well , perhaps my experience have be unusual , though I do not   think so . you know , by - the - bye , that my relative consider I a blackguard ? ' 

 ' that affair you tell I about some year ago ? ' 

 ' chiefly that . I have a good mind to tell you the true story ; I do not   care to at the time . I accept the charge of black - guardism ; it do not   matter much . my cousin will never forgive I , though she have an air of friendliness once more . and I suspect she have tell her friend Miss Nunn all about I . perhaps to put Miss Nunn on her guard Heaven know ! ' 

 he laugh merrily . 

 ' Miss Nunn , I dare say , need no protection against you . ' 

 ' I have an odd thought whilst I be there . ' Everard lean his head back , and half close his eye . ' Miss Nunn , I warrant , consider herself proof against any kind of wooing . she be one of the grandly severe woman ; a terror , I imagine , to any young girl at their place who betray weak thought of matrimony . now , it be rather a temptation to a man of my kind . there would be something piquant in make vigorous love to Miss Nunn , just to prove her sincerity . ' 

 Micklethwaite shake his head . 

 ' unworthy of you , Barfoot . of course you could not   really do such a thing . ' 

 ' but such woman really challenge one . if she be rich , I think I could do it without scruple . ' 

 ' you seem to be take it for grant , ' say the mathematician , smile , ' that this lady would would respond to your lovemaking . ' 

 ' I confess to you that woman have spoil I . and I be rather resentful when any one cry out against I for lack of respect to womanhood . I have be the victim of this groundless veneration for female . now you shall hear the story ; and bear in mind that you be the only person to whom I have ever tell it . I never try to defend myself when I be vilify on all hand . probably the attempt would have be useless ; and then it would certainly have increase the odium in which I stand . I think I will tell cousin Mary the truth some day ; it would be good for she . ' 

 the listener look uneasy , but curious . 

 ' well now , I be stay in the summer with some friend of our at a little place call Upchurch , on a branch line from Oxford . the people be well - to - do Goodall their name and go in for philanthropy . Mrs. Goodall always have a lot of Upchurch girl about she , educate and not ; her idea be to civilize one class by mean of the other , and to give a new spirit to both . my cousin Mary be stay at the house whilst I be there . she have more reasonable view than Mrs. Goodall , but take a great interest in what be go on . 

 ' now one of the girl in process of spiritualization be call Amy Drake . in the ordinary course of thing I should not   have meet she , but she serve in a shop where I go two or three time to get a newspaper ; we talk a little with absolute propriety on my part , I assure you and she know that I be a friend of the Goodalls . the girl have no parent , and she be on the point of go to London to live with a married sister . 

 ' it happen that by the very train which take I back to London , when my visit be over , this girl also travel , and alone . I see she at Upchurch Station , but we do not   speak , and I get into a smoking carriage . we have to change at Oxford , and there , as I walk about the platform , Amy put herself in my way , so that I be oblige to begin talk with she . this behaviour rather surprise I . I wonder what Mrs. Goodall would think of it . but perhaps it be a sign of innocent freedom in the intercourse of man and woman . at all event , Amy manage to get I into the same carriage with herself , and on the way to London we be alone . you foresee the end of it . at Paddington Station the girl and I go off together , and she do not   get to her sister 's till the evening . 

 ' of course I take it for grant that you believe my account of the matter . Miss Drake be by no mean the spiritual young person that Mrs. Goodall think she , or hop to make she ; plainly , she be a reprobate of experience . this , you will say , do not   alter the fact that I also behave like a reprobate . no ; from the moralist 's point of view I be to blame . but I have no moral pretention , and it be too much to expect that I should rebuke the young woman and preach she a sermon . you admit that , I dare say ? ' 

 the mathematician , frown uncomfortably , give a nod of assent . 

 ' Amy be not only a reprobate , but a rascal . she betray I to the people at Upchurch , and , I be quite sure , mean from the first to do so . imagine the outcry . I have commit a monstrous crime have lead astray an innocent maiden , have outraged hospitality and so on . in Amy 's case there be awkward result . of course I must marry the girl forthwith . but of course I be determined to do no such thing . for the reason I have explain , I let the storm break upon I . I have be a fool , to be sure , and could not   help myself . no one would have believe my plea no one would have allow that the truth be an excuse . I be abuse on all hand . and when , shortly after , my father make his will and die , doubtless he cut I off with my small annuity on this very account . my cousin Mary get a good deal of the money that would otherwise have be mine . the old man have be on rather well term with I just before that ; in a will that he destroy I believe he have treat I handsomely . ' 

 ' well , well , ' say Micklethwaite , ' every one know there be detestable woman to be find . but you ought not   to let this affect your view of woman in general . what become of the girl ? ' 

 ' I make she a small allowance for a year and a half . then her child die , and the allowance cease . I know nothing more of she . probably she have inveigle some one into marriage . ' 

 ' well , Barfoot , ' say the other , roll about in his chair , ' my opinion remain the same . you be in debt to some worthy woman to the extent of half your income . be quick and find she . it will be well for you . ' 

 ' and do you suppose , ' ask Everard , with a smile of indulgence , ' that I could marry on four hundred and fifty a year . 

 ' Heavens ! why not ? ' 

 ' quite impossible . a wife might be acceptable to I ; but marriage with poverty I know myself and the world too well for that . ' 

 ' poverty ! ' scream the mathematician . ' four hundred and fifty pound ! ' 

 ' grind poverty for married people . ' 

 Micklethwaite burst into indignant eloquence , and Everard sit listen with the restrained smile on his lip . 




 CHAPTER X 

 first principle 

 have allow exactly a week to go by , Everard Barfoot make use of his cousin 's permission , and call upon she at nine in the evening . Miss Barfoot 's dinner - hour be seven o'clock ; she and Rhoda , when alone , rarely sit for more than half an hour at table , and in this summer season they often go out together at sunset to enjoy a walk along the river . this evening they have return only a few minute before Everard 's ring sound at the door . Miss Barfoot   they be just enter the library   look at her friend and smile . 

 ' I should not   wonder if that be the young man . very flattering if he have come again so soon . ' 

 the visitor be in mirthful humour , and meet with a reception of correspond tone . he remark at once that Miss Nunn have a much pleasanter aspect than a week ago ; her smile be ready and agreeable ; she sit in a sociable attitude and answer a jesting triviality with indulgence . 

 ' one of my reason for come to - day , ' say Everard , ' be to tell you a remarkable story . it connect ' he address his cousin ' with our talk about the matrimonial disaster of those two friend of mine . do you remember the name of Micklethwaite a man who use to cram I with mathematic ? I think you would . he be on the point of marrying , and his engagement have last just seventeen year . ' 

 ' the wise of your friend , I should say . ' 

 ' an excellent fellow . he be forty , and the lady the same . an astonishing case of constancy . ' 

 ' and how be it likely to turn out ? ' 

 ' I can not   predict , as the lady be unknown to I . but , ' he add with facetious gravity , ' I think it likely that they be tolerably well acquainted with each other . nothing but sheer poverty have keep they apart . Pathetic , do not   you think ? I have a theory that when an engagement have last ten year , with constancy on both side , and poverty still prevent marriage , the State ought to make provision for a man in some way , accord to his social standing . when one think of it , a whole socialistic system lie in that suggestion . ' 

 ' if , ' remark Rhoda , ' it be first provide that no marriage should take place until after a ten year ' engagement . ' 

 ' yes , ' Barfoot assent , in his smooth and most graceful tone . ' that complete the system . unless you like to add that no engagement be permit except between people who have pass a certain examination ; equivalent , let we say , to that which confer a university degree . ' 

 ' Admirable . and no marriage , except where both , for the whole decennium , have earn their living by work that the State recognize . ' 

 ' how would that affect Mr. Micklethwaite 's betroth ? ' ask Miss Barfoot . 

 ' I believe she have support herself all along by teach . ' 

 ' of course ! ' exclaim the other impatiently . ' and more likely than not , with loathing of her occupation . the usual kind of drudgery , be it ? ' 

 ' after all , there must be some one to teach child to read and write . ' 

 ' yes ; but people who be thoroughly well train for the task , and who take a pleasure in it . this lady may be an exception ; but I picture she as have spend a lifetime of uncongenial toil , long miserably for the day when poor Mr. Micklethwaite be able to offer she a home . that be the ordinary teacher - woman , and we must abolish she altogether . ' 

 ' how be you to do that ? ' inquire Everard suavely . ' the average man labour that he may be able to marry , and the average woman certainly have the same end in view . be female teacher to be vow to celibacy ? ' 

 ' nothing of the kind . but girl be to be bring up to a calling in life , just as man be . it be because they have no calling that , when need come , they all offer themselves as teacher . they undertake one of the most difficult and arduous pursuit as if it be as simple as wash up dish . we can not   earn money in any other way , but we can teach child ! a man only become a schoolmaster or tutor when he have go through laborious preparation anything but wise or adequate , of course , but still conscious preparation ; and only a very few man , comparatively , choose that line of work . woman must have just as wide a choice . ' 

 ' that be plausible , cousin Mary . but remember that when a man choose his calling he choose it for life . a girl can not but remember that if she marry she call at once change . the old business be throw aside henceforth profitless . ' 

 ' no . not henceforth profitless ! there be the very point I insist upon . so far be it from profitless , that it have make she a wholly different woman from what she would otherwise have be . instead of a moping , mawkish creature , with in most instance a very unhealthy mind , she be a complete human being . she stand on an equality with the man . he can not   despise she as he now do . ' 

 ' very good , ' assent Everard , observe Miss Nunn 's satisfied smile . ' I like that view very much . but what about the great number of girl who be claim by domestic duty ? do you abandon they , with a helpless sigh , to be mop and mawkish and unhealthy ? ' 

 ' in the first place , there need not   be a great number of unmarried woman claim by such duty . Most of those you be think of be not fulfil a duty at all ; they be only potter about the house , because they have nothing well to do . and when the whole course of female education be alter ; when girl be train as a matter of course to some definite pursuit ; then those who really be oblige to remain at home will do their duty there in quite a different spirit . home work will be their serious business , instead of a disagreeable drudgery , or a way of get through the time till marriage offer . I would have no girl , however wealthy her parent , grow up without a profession . there should be no such thing as a class of female vulgarize by the necessity of find daily amusement . ' 

 ' nor of male either , of course , ' put in Everard , stroke his beard . 

 ' nor of male either , cousin Everard . ' 

 ' you thoroughly approve all this , Miss Nunn ? ' 

 ' oh yes . but I go far . I would have girl teach that marriage be a thing to be avoid rather than hop for . I would teach they that for the majority of woman marriage mean disgrace . ' 

 ' ah ! now do let I understand you . why do it mean disgrace ? ' 

 ' because the majority of man be without sense of honour . to be bind to they in wedlock be shame and misery . ' 

 Everard 's eyelid droop , and he do not speak for a moment . 

 ' and you seriously think , Miss Nunn , that by persuade as many woman as possible to abstain from marriage you will improve the character of man ? ' 

 ' I have no hope of sudden result , Mr. Barfoot . I should like to save as many as possible of the woman now live from a life of dishonour ; but the spirit of our work look to the future . when all woman , high and low alike , be train to self - respect , then man will regard they in a different light , and marriage may be honourable to both . ' 

 again Everard be silent , and seemingly impressed . 

 ' we will go on with this discussion another time , ' say Miss Barfoot , with cheerful interruption . ' Everard , do you know Somerset at all ? ' 

 ' never be in that part of England . ' 

 ' Miss Nunn be go to take her holiday at Cheddar and we have be look over some photograph of that district take by her brother . ' 

 from the table she reach a scrapbook , and Everard turn it over with interest . the view be evidently make by an amateur , but in general have no serious fault . Cheddar cliff be represent in several aspect . 

 ' I have no idea the scenery be so fine . Cheddar cheese have quite overshadow the hill in my imagination . this might be a bit of Cumberland , or of the Highlands . ' 

 ' it be my playground when I be a child , ' say Rhoda . 

 ' you be bear at Cheddar ? ' 

 ' no ; at Axbridge , a little place not far off . but I have an uncle at Cheddar , a farmer , and very often stay with he . my brother be farm there now . ' 

 ' axbridge ? here be a view of the market - place . what a delightful old town ! ' 

 ' one of the sleepy spot in England , I should say . the railway go through it now , but have not   make the slight difference . nobody pull down or build ; nobody open a new shop ; nobody think of extend his trade . a delicious place ! ' 

 ' but surely you find no pleasure in that kind of thing , Miss Nunn ? ' 

 ' oh yes at holiday time . I shall doze there for a fortnight , and forget all about the ' so - call nineteenth century . " ' 

 ' I can hardly believe it . there will be a disgraceful marriage at this beautiful old church , and the sight of it will exasperate you . ' 

 Rhoda laugh gaily . 

 ' oh , it will be a marriage of the golden age ! perhaps I shall remember the bride when she be a little girl ; and I shall give she a kiss , and pat she on the rosy cheek , and wish her joy . and the bridegroom will be such a good - hearted simpleton , unable to pronounce f and s. I do not   mind that sort of marriage a bit ! ' 

 the listener be both regard her Miss Barfoot with an affectionate smile , Everard with a puzzle , search look , end in amusement . 

 ' I must run down into that country some day , ' say the latter . 

 he do not stay much long , but leave only because he fear to burden the lady with too much of his company . 

 again a week pass , and the same evening find Barfoot approach the house in Queen 's Road . to his great annoyance he learn that Miss Barfoot be not at home ; she have din , but afterwards have go out . he do not venture to ask for Miss Nunn , and be move disappointedly away , when Rhoda herself , return from a walk , come up to the door . she offer her hand gravely , but with friendliness . 

 ' Miss Barfoot , I be sorry to say , have go to visit one of our girl who be ill . but I think she will very soon be back . will you come in ? ' 

 ' gladly . I have so count on an hour 's talk . ' 

 Rhoda lead he to the drawing - room , excuse herself for a few moment , and come back in her ordinary evening dress . Barfoot notice that her hair be much more becomingly arrange than when he first see she ; so it have be on the last occasion , but for some reason its appearance attract his eye this evening . he scrutinize she , at discreet interval , from head to foot . to Everard , nothing female be alien ; woman , merely as woman , interest he profoundly . and this example of her sex have excite his curiosity in no common degree . his concern with she be purely intellectual ; she have no sensual attraction for he , but he long to see far into her mind , to probe the sincerity of the motif she profess , to understand her mechanism , her process of growth . Hitherto he have enjoy no opportunity of study this type . for his cousin be a very different person ; by habit he regard she as old , whereas Miss Nunn , in spite of she thirty year , could not possibly be consider past youth . 

 he enjoy her air of equality ; she sit down with he as a male acquaintance might have do , and he feel sure that her behaviour would be the same under any circumstance . he delight in the frankness of her speech ; it be doubtful whether she regard any subject as improper for discussion between mature and serious people . part cause of this , perhaps , be her calm consciousness that she have not a beautiful face . no , it be not beautiful ; yet even at the first meeting it do not repel he . study her feature , he see how fine be their expression . the prominent forehead , with its little unevenness that mean brain ; the straight eyebrow , strongly mark , with deep vertical furrow generally draw between they ; the chestnut - brown eye , with long lash ; the high - bridged nose , thin and delicate ; the intellectual lip , a protrusion of the low one , though very slight , mark itself when he catch her profile ; the big , strong chin ; the shapely neck why , after all , it be a kind of beauty . the head might have be sculpture with fine effect . and she have a well - build frame . he observe her strong wrist , with exquisite vein - tracing on the pure white . probably her constitution be very sound ; she have good tooth , and a healthy brownish complexion . 

 with reference to the sick girl whom Miss Barfoot be visit , Everard begin what be practically a resumption of their last talk . 

 ' have you a formal society , with rule and so on ? ' 

 ' oh no ; nothing of the kind . ' 

 ' but you of course select the girl whom you instruct or employ ? ' 

 ' very carefully . ' 

 ' how I should like to see they all ! I mean , ' he add , with a laugh , ' it would be so very interesting . the truth be , my sympathy be strongly with you in much of what you say the other day about woman and marriage . we regard the matter from different point of view , but our end be the same . ' 

 Rhoda move her eyebrow , and ask calmly , 

 ' be you serious ? ' 

 ' perfectly . you be absorb in your present work , that of strengthen woman 's mind and character ; for the final issue of this you can not   care much . but to I that be the practical interest . in my mind , you be work for the happiness of man . ' 

 ' indeed ? ' escape Rhoda 's lip , which have curl in irony . 

 ' do not   misunderstand I . I be not speak cynically or trivially . the gain of woman be also the gain of man . you be bitter against the average man for his low morality ; but that fault , on the whole , be directly traceable to the ignobleness of woman . think , and you will grant I this . ' 

 ' I see what you mean . man have themselves to thank for it . ' 

 ' assuredly they have . I say that I be on your side . our civilization in this point have always be absurdly defective . man have keep woman at a barbarous stage of development , and then complain that they be barbarous . in the same way society do its good to create a criminal class , and then rag against the criminal . but , you see , I be one of the man , and an impatient one too . the mass of woman I see about I be so contemptible that , in my haste , I use unjust language . put yourself in the man 's place . say that there be a million or so of we very intelligent and highly educated . well , the woman of correspond mind number perhaps a few thousand . the vast majority of man must make a marriage that be doom to be a dismal failure . we fall in love it be true ; but do we really deceive ourselves about the future ? a very young man may ; why , we know of very young man who be so frantic as to marry girl of the work class mere lump of human flesh . but most of we know that our marriage be a pis aller . at first we be sad about it ; then we grow cynical , and snap our finger at moral obligation . ' 

 ' make a bad case very much bad , instead of bravely better it . ' 

 ' yes , but human nature be human nature . I be only urge to you the case of average intelligent man . as likely as not so preposterous be our convention you have never hear it put honestly . I tell you the simple truth when I say that more than half these man regard their wife with active disgust . they will do anything to be relieve of the sight of they for as many hour as possible at a time . if circumstance allow , wife would be abandon very often indeed . ' 

 Rhoda laugh . 

 ' you regret that it be not   do ? ' 

 ' I prefer to say that I approve it when it be do without disregard of common humanity . there be my friend Orchard . with he it be suicide or freedom from his hateful wife . most happily , he be able to make provision for she and the child , and have strength to break his bond . if he have leave they to starve , I should have understand it , but could not   have approve it . there be man who might follow his example , but prefer to put up with a life of torture . well , they do prefer it , you see . I may think that they be foolishly weak , but I can only recognize that they make a choice between two form of suffering . they have tender conscience ; the thought of desertion be too painful to they . and in a great number of case , mere consideration of money and the like keep a man bind . but conscience and habit detestable habit and fear of public opinion generally hold he . ' 

 ' all this be very interesting , ' say Rhoda , with grave irony . ' by - the - bye , under the head of detestable habit you would put love of child ? ' 

 Barfoot hesitate . 

 ' that be a motive I ought not   to have leave out . yet I believe , for most man , it be represent by conscience . the love of child would not generally , in itself , be strong enough to outweigh matrimonial wretchedness . many an intelligent and kind - hearted man have be drive from his wife notwithstanding thought for his child . he provide for they as well as he can but , and even for their sake , he must save himself . ' 

 the expression of Rhoda 's countenance suddenly change . an extreme mobility of facial muscle be one of the thing in she that hold Everard 's attention . 

 ' there be something in your way of put it that I do not   like , ' she say , with much frankness ; ' but of course I agree with you in the fact . I be convinced that most marriage be hateful , from every point of view . but there will be no improvement until woman have revolt against marriage , from a reasonable conviction of its hatefulness . ' 

 ' I wish you all success most sincerely I do . ' 

 he pause , look about the room , and stroke his ear . then , in a grave tone , 

 ' my own ideal of marriage involve perfect freedom on both side . of course it could only be realize where condition be favourable ; poverty and other wretched thing force we so often to sin against our good belief . but there be plenty of people who might marry on these ideal term . perfect freedom , sanction by the sense of intelligent society , would abolish most of the evil we have in mind . but woman must first be civilized ; you be quite right in that . ' 

 the door open , and Miss Barfoot come in . she glance from one to the other , and without speak give her hand to Everard . 

 ' how be your patient ? ' he ask . 

 ' a little well , I think . it be nothing dangerous . here be a letter from your brother Tom . perhaps I have well read it at once ; there may be news you would like to hear . ' 

 she sit down and break the envelope . whilst she be read the letter to herself , Rhoda quietly leave the room . 

 ' yes , there be news , ' say Miss Barfoot presently , ' and of a disagreeable kind . a few week ago before write , that is he be throw off a horse and have a rib fracture . ' 

 ' oh ? how be he go on ? ' 

 ' get right again , he say . and they be come back to England ; his wife 's consumptive symptom have disappear , of course , and she be very impatient to leave Madeira . it be to be hop she will allow poor Tom time to get his rib set . probably that consideration do not   weigh much with she . he say that he be write to you by the same mail . ' 

 ' poor old fellow ! ' say Everard , with feeling . ' do he complain about his wife ? ' 

 ' he never have do till now , but there be a sentence here that read doubtfully . " Muriel , " he say , " have be terribly upset about my accident . I can not   persuade she that I do not   get throw on purpose ; yet I assure you I do not . " ' 

 Everard laugh . 

 ' if old Tom become ironical , he must be hard drive . I have no great longing to meet Mrs. Thomas . ' 

 ' she be a silly and a vulgar woman . but I tell he that in plain term before he marry . it say much for his good nature that he remain so friendly with I . read the letter , Everard . ' 

 he do so . 

 ' H'm very kind thing about I . good old Tom ! why do not   I marry ? well , now , one would have think that his own experience ' 

 Miss Barfoot begin to talk about something else . before very long Rhoda come back , and in the conversation that follow it be mention that she would leave for her holiday in two day . 

 ' I have be read about Cheddar , ' exclaim Everard , with animation . ' there be a flower grow among the rock call the Cheddar pink . do you know it ? ' 

 ' oh , very well , ' Rhoda answer . ' I will bring you some specimen . ' 

 ' will you ? that be very kind . ' 

 ' bring I a genuine pound or two of the cheese , Rhoda , ' request Miss Barfoot gaily . 

 ' I will . what they sell in the shop there be all sham , Mr. Barfoot like so much else in this world . ' 

 ' I care nothing about the cheese . that be all very well for a matter - of - fact person like cousin Mary , but I have a strong vein of poetry ; you must have notice it ? ' 

 when they shake hand , 

 ' you will really bring I the flower ? ' Everard say in a voice sensibly soften . 

 ' I will make a note of it , ' be the reassuring answer . 




 CHAPTER XI 

 AT NATURE 's bidding 

 the sick girl whom Miss Barfoot have be to see be Monica Madden . 

 with strange suddenness , after several week of steady application to her work , in a cheerful spirit which at time rise to gaiety , Monica become dull , remiss , unhappy ; then violent headache attack she , and one morning she declare herself unable to rise . Mildred Vesper go to Great Portland Street at the usual hour , and inform Miss Barfoot of her companion 's illness . a doctor be summon ; to he it seem probable that the girl be suffer from consequence of overstrain at her old employment ; there be nervous collapse , hysteria , general disorder of the system . have the patient any mental disquietude ? be trouble of any kind   the doctor smile   weigh upon she ? Miss Barfoot , unable to answer these question , hold private colloquy with Mildred ; but the latter , though she ponder a good deal with corrugated brow , could furnish no information . 

 in a day or two Monica be remove to her sister 's lodging at Lavender Hill . Mrs. Conisbee manage to put a room at her disposal , and Virginia tend she . Thither Miss Barfoot go on the evening when Everard find she away ; she and Virginia , talk together after be with the invalid for a quarter of an hour , agree that there be considerable improvement , but feel a like uneasiness regard Monica 's state of mind . 

 ' do you think , ' ask the visitor , ' that she regret the step I persuade she to take ? ' 

 ' oh , I can not   think that ! she have be so delighted with her progress each time I have see she . no , I feel sure it be only the result of what she suffer at Walworth Road . in a very short time we shall have she at work again , and bright than ever . ' 

 Miss Barfoot be not convince . after Everard 's departure that evening she talk of the matter with Rhoda . 

 ' I be afraid , ' say Miss Nunn , ' that Monica be rather a silly girl . she do not   know her own mind . if this kind of thing be repeat , we have well send she back to the country . ' 

 ' to shop work again ? ' 

 ' it might be well . ' 

 ' oh , I do not   like the thought of that . ' 

 Rhoda have one of her fit of wrathful eloquence . 

 ' now could one have a well instance than this Madden family of the crime that middle - class parent commit when they allow their girl to go without rational training ? of course I know that Monica be only a little child when they be leave orphan ; but her sister have already grow up into uselessness , and their example have be harmful to she all along . her guardian deal with she absurdly ; they make she half a lady and half a shop - girl . I do not   think she will ever be good for much . and the elder one will go on just keep themselves alive ; you can see that . they will never start the school that there be so much talk of . that poor , helpless , foolish Virginia , alone there in her miserable lodge ! how can we hope that any one will take she as a companion ? and yet they be capitalist ; eight hundred pound between they . think what capable woman might do with eight hundred pound . ' 

 ' I be really afraid to urge they to meddle with the investment . ' 

 ' of course ; so be I. One be afraid to do or propose anything . Virginia be starve , must be starve . poor creature ! I can never forget how her eye shine when I put that joint of meat before she . ' 

 ' I do , do wish , ' sigh Miss Barfoot , with a pained smile , ' that I know some honest man who would be likely to fall in love with little Monica ! in spite of you , my dear , I would devote myself to make the match . but there be no one . ' 

 ' oh , I would help , ' laugh Rhoda , not unkindly . ' she be fit for nothing else , I be afraid . we must not   look for any kind of heroism in Monica . ' 

 Less than half an hour after Miss Barfoot have leave the house at Lavender Hill , Mildred Vesper make a call there . it be about half - past nine ; the invalid , after sit up since midday , have go to bed , but could not sleep . summon to the house - door , Virginia acquaint Miss Vesper with the state of affair . 

 ' I think you might see she for a few minute . ' 

 ' I should like to , if you please , Miss Madden , ' reply Mildred , who have a rather uneasy look . 

 she go upstairs and enter the bedroom , where a lamp be burn . at the sight of her friend Monica show much satisfaction ; they kiss each other affectionately . 

 ' good old girl ! I have make up my mind to come back tomorrow , or at all event the day after . it be so frightfully dull here . oh , and I want to know if anything any letter have come for I . ' 

 ' that be just why I come to see you to - night . ' 

 Mildred take a letter from her pocket , and half avert her face as she hand it . 

 ' it be nothing particular , ' say Monica , put it away under her pillow . ' thank you , dear . ' 

 but her cheek have become hot , and she tremble . 

 ' Monica ' 

 ' well ? ' 

 ' you would not   care to tell I about anything ? you do not   think it would make your mind easy ? ' 

 for a minute Monica lie back , gaze at the wall , then she look round quickly , with a shameface laugh . 

 ' it be very silly of I not to have tell you long before this . but you be so sensible ; I be afraid . I will tell you everything . not now , but as soon as I get to Rutland Street . I shall come to - morrow . ' 

 ' do you think you can ? you look dreadfully bad still . ' 

 ' I shall not   get any well here , ' reply the invalid in a whisper . ' poor Virgie do depress I so . she do not   understand that I can not   bear to hear she repeat the kind of thing she have hear from Miss Barfoot and Miss Nunn . she try so hard to look forward hopefully but I know she be miserable , and it make I more miserable still . I ought not   to have leave you ; I should have be all right in a day or two , with you to help I . you do not   make - believe , Milly ; it be all real and natural good spirit . it have do I good only to see your dear old face . ' 

 ' oh , you be a flatterer . and do you really feel well ? ' 

 ' very much well . I shall go to sleep very soon . ' 

 the visitor take she leave . when , a few minute after , Monica have bid good - night to her sister   request that the lamp might be leave , she read what Mildred have bring . 

 ' my dearest MONICA , ' the missive begin ' why have you not write before this ? I have be dreadfully uneasy ever since receive your last letter . your headache soon go away , I hope ? why have not   you make another appointment ? it be all I can do to keep from break my promise and come to ask about you . write at once , I implore you , my dearest . it be no use tell I that I must not use these word of affection ; they come to my lip and to my pen irresistibly . you know so well that I love you with all my heart and soul ; I can not   address you like I do when we first correspond . my darling ! my dear , sweet , beautiful little girl ' 

 four close page of this , with scarce room at the end for ' E.W. ' when she have go through it , Monica turn her face upon the pillow and lie so for a long time . a clock in the house strike eleven ; this rouse she , and she slip out of the bed to hide the letter in her dress - pocket . not long after she be asleep . 

 the next day , on return from her work and open the sit - room door , Mildred Vesper be greet with a merry laugh . Monica have be here since three o'clock , and have make tea in readiness for her friend 's arrival . she look very white , but her eye gleam with pleasure , and she move about the room as actively as before . 

 ' Virgie come with I , but she would not   stay . she say she have a most important letter to write to Alice about the school , of course . oh , that school ! I do wish they could make up their mind . I have   tell they they may have all my money , if they like . ' 

 ' have you ? I should like the sensation of offer hundred of pound to some one . it must give a strange feeling of dignity and importance . ' 

 ' oh , only two hundred ! a wretched little sum . ' 

 ' you be a person of large idea , as I have often tell you . where do you get they , I wonder ? ' 

 ' do not   put on that face ! it be the one I like least of all your many face . it be suspicious . ' 

 Mildred go to take off her thing , and be quickly at the tea - table . she have a somewhat graver look than usual , and choose rather to listen than talk . 

 not long after tea , when there have be a long and unnatural silence , Mildred make pretence of absorption in a ' Treasury ' and her companion stand at the window , whence she throw back furtive glance , the thunder of a postman 's knock downstair cause both of they to start , and look at each other in a conscience - stricken way . 

 ' that may be for I , ' say Monica , step to the door . ' I will go and look . ' 

 her conjecture be right . another letter from Widdowson , still more alarmed and vehement than the last . she read it rapidly on the staircase , and enter the room with sheet and envelope squeeze together in her hand . 

 ' I be go to tell you all about this , Milly . ' 

 the other nod and assume an attitude of sober attention . in relate her story , Monica move hither and thither ; now play with object on the mantlepiece , now stand in the middle of the floor , hand lock nervously behind she . throughout , her manner be that of defence ; she seem doubtful of herself , and anxious to represent the case as favourably as possible ; not for a moment have her voice the ring of courageous passion , nor the softness of tender feeling . the narrative hang together but awkwardly , and in truth give a very indistinct notion of how she have comport herself at the various stage of the irregular courtship . her behaviour have be mark by far more delicacy and scruple than she succeed in represent . painfully conscious of this , she exclaim at length , 

 ' I see your opinion of I have suffer . you do not   like this story . you wonder how I could do such thing . ' 

 ' well , dear , I certainly wonder how you could begin , ' Mildred make answer , with her natural directness , but gently . ' afterwards , of course , it be different . when you have once get to be sure that he be a gentleman ' 

 ' I be sure of that so soon , ' exclaim Monica , her cheek still red . ' you will understand it much well when you have see he . ' 

 ' you wish I to ? ' 

 ' I be go to write now , and say that I will marry he . ' 

 they look long at each other . 

 ' you be really ? ' 

 ' yes . I make up my mind last night . ' 

 ' but , Monica you must not   mind my speaking plainly I do not   think you love he . ' 

 ' yes , I love he well enough to feel that I be do right in marry he . ' she sit down by the table , and prop her head on her hand . ' he love I ; I can not   doubt that . if you could read his letter , you would see how strong his feeling be . ' 

 she shake with the cold induce by excitement ; her voice be at moment all but choke . 

 ' but , put love aside , ' go on the other , very gravely , ' what do you really know of Mr. Widdowson ? nothing whatever but what he have tell you himself . of course you will let your friend make inquiry for you ? ' 

 ' yes . I shall tell my sister , and no doubt they will go to Miss Nunn at once . I do not   want to do anything rash . but it will be all right I mean , he have tell I the truth about everything . you would be sure of that if you know he . ' 

 Mildred , with hand before she on the table , make the tip of her finger meet . her lip be draw in ; her eye seem look for something minute on the cloth . 

 ' you know , ' she say at length , ' I suspect what be go on . I could not   help . ' 

 ' of course you could not . ' 

 ' naturally I think it be some one whose acquaintance you have make at the shop . ' 

 ' how could I think of marry any one of that kind ? ' 

 ' I should have be grieve . ' 

 ' you may believe I , Milly ; Mr. Widdowson be a man you will respect and like as soon as you know he . he could not   have behave to I with more delicacy . not a word from he , speak or write , have ever pain I except that he tell I he suffer so dreadfully , and of course I can not   hear that without pain . ' 

 ' to respect , and even to like , a man , be not   at all the same as love he . ' 

 ' I say you would respect and like he , ' exclaim Monica , with humorous impatience . ' I do not   want you to love he . ' 

 Mildred laugh , with constraint . 

 ' I never love any one yet , dear , and it be very unlikely I ever shall . but I think I know the sign of the feeling . ' 

 Monica come behind she , and lean upon her shoulder . 

 ' he love I so much that he have make I think I must marry he . and I be glad of it . I be not like you , milly ; I can not   be content with this life . Miss Barfoot and Miss Nunn be very sensible and good people , and I admire they very much , but I can not   go their way . it seem to I that it would be dreadful , dreadful , to live one 's life alone . do not   turn round and snap at I ; I want to tell you the truth whilst you can not   see I . whenever I think of Alice and Virginia , I be frightened ; I have rather , oh , far rather , kill myself than live such a life at their age . you can not   imagine how miserable they be , really . and I have the same nature as theirs , you know . compare with you and Miss Haven I be very weak and childish . ' 

 after drum on the table for a moment , with wrinkle brow , Mildred make grave response . 

 ' you must let I tell the truth as well . I think you be go to marry with altogether wrong idea . I think you will do an injustice to Mr. Widdowson . you will marry he for a comfortable home that be what it amount to . and you will repent it bitterly some day you will repent . ' 

 Monica raise herself and stand apart . 

 ' for one thing , ' pursue Mildred , with nervous earnestness , ' he be too old . your habit and his will not   suit . ' 

 ' he have assure I that I shall live exactly the kind of life I please . and that will be what he please . I feel his kindness to I very much , and I shall do my utmost to repay he . ' 

 ' that be a very nice spirit ; but I believe married life be no easy thing even when the people be well match . I have hear the most dreadful story of quarrel and all sort of unhappiness between people I think safe from any such danger . you may be fortunate ; I only say that the chance be very much against it , marry from such motif as you confess . ' 

 Monica draw herself up . 

 ' I have not   confess any motive to be ashamed of , Milly . ' 

 ' you say you have decide to marry now because you be afraid of never have another chance . ' 

 ' no ; that be turn it very unkindly . I only say that after I have tell you that I do love he . and I do love he . he have make I love he . ' 

 ' then I have no right to say any more . I can only wish you happiness . ' 

 Mildred heave a sigh , and pretend to give her attention to Maunder . 

 after wait irresolutely for some minute , Monica look for notepaper , and take it , together with her inkstand , into the bedroom . she be absent half an hour . on her return there be a stamp letter in her hand . 

 ' it be go , Milly . ' 

 ' very well , dear . I have nothing more to say . ' 

 ' you give I up for lost . we shall see . ' 

 it be speak light - heartedly . again she leave the room , put on her out - of - door thing , and go to post the letter . by this time she begin to feel the result of exertion and excitement ; headache and tremulous failing of her strength oblige she to go to bed almost as soon as she return . Mildred wait upon she with undiminished kindness . 

 ' it be all right , ' Monica murmur , as her head sink on the pillow . ' I feel so relieved and so glad so happy now I have do it . ' 

 ' good - night , dear , ' reply the other , with a kiss , and go back to her semblance of reading . 

 two day later Monica call unexpectedly at Mrs. Conisbee 's . be tell by that worthy woman that Miss Madden be at home , she run upstairs and tap at the door . Virginia 's voice inquire hurriedly who be there , and on Monica 's announce herself there follow a startled exclamation . 

 ' just a minute , my love ! only a minute . ' 

 when the door open Monica be surprise by a disorder in her sister 's appearance . Virginia have flush cheek , curiously vague eye , and hair ruffle as if she have just rise from a nap . she begin to talk in a hurried , disconnected way , try to explain that she have not be quite well , and be not yet properly dress . 

 ' what a strange smell ! ' Monica exclaim , look about the room . ' it be like brandy . ' 

 ' you notice it ? I have I be oblige to get to ask Mrs. Conisbee for I do not   want to alarm you , dear , but I feel rather faint . indeed , I think I should have a fainting fit . I be oblige to call Mrs. Conisbee but do not   think anything about it . it be all over . the weather be very try ' 

 she laugh nervously and begin to pat Monica 's hand . the girl be not quite satisfied , and press many question , but in the end she accept Virginia 's assurance that nothing serious have happen . then her own business occupy she ; she sit down , and say with a smile , 

 ' I have bring you astonishing news . if you do not   faint before you will be very likely to do so now . ' 

 her sister exhibit fresh agitation , and beg not to be keep in suspense . 

 ' my nerve be in a shocking state to - day . it must be the weather . what can you have to tell I , Monica ? ' 

 ' I think I shall not   need to go on with typewrite . ' 

 ' why ? what be you go to do , child ? ' the other ask sharply . 

 ' virgie I be go to be marry . ' 

 the shock be a severe one . Virginia 's hand fall , her eye start , her mouth open ; she become the colour of clay , even her lip lose for the moment all their colour . 

 ' married ? ' she at length gasp . ' who who be it ? ' 

 ' some one you have never hear of . his name be Mr. Edmund Widdowson . he be very well off , and have a house at Herne Hill . ' 

 ' a private gentleman ? ' 

 ' yes . he use to be in business , but be retire . now , I be not go to tell you much more about he until you have make his acquaintance . do not   ask a lot of question . you be to come with I this afternoon to his house . he live alone , but a relative of his , his sister - in - law , be go to be with he to meet we . ' 

 ' oh , but it be so sudden ! I can not   go to pay a call like that at a moment 's notice . impossible , darling ! what do it all mean ? you be go to be marry , Monica ? I can not   understand it . I can not   realize it . who be this gentleman ? how long ' 

 ' no ; you will not   get I to tell you more than I have do , till you have see he . ' 

 ' but what have you tell I ? I could not   grasp it . I be quite confused . Mr. what be the name ? ' 

 it take half an hour to familiarize Virginia with the simple fact . when she be convince of its truth , a paroxysm of delight appear in she . she laugh , utter cry of joy , even clap her hand . 

 ' Monica to be marry ! a private gentleman a large fortune ! my darling , how shall I ever believe it ? yet I feel so sure that the day would come . what will Alice say ? and Rhoda Nunn ? have you have you venture to tell she ? ' 

 ' no , that I have not . I want you to do that you shall go and see they to - morrow , as it be Sunday . ' 

 ' oh , the delight ! Alice will not   be able to contain herself . we always say the day would come . ' 

 ' you will not   have any more anxiety , Virgie . you can take the school or not , as you like . Mr. Widdowson ' 

 ' oh , my dear , ' interpose Virginia , with sudden dignity , ' we shall certainly open the school . we have make up our mind ; that be to be our life 's work . it be far , far more than a mere mean of subsistence . but perhaps we shall not need to hurry . everything can be mature at our leisure . if you would only just tell I , darling , when you be first introduce ? ' 

 Monica laugh gaily , and refuse to explain . it be time for Virginia to make herself ready , and here arise a new perturbation ; what have she suitable for wear under such circumstance ? Monica have deck herself a little , and help the other to make the good of her narrow resource . at four o'clock they set out . 




 CHAPTER XII 

 wedding 

 when they reach the house at Herne Hill the sister be both in a state of nervous tremor . Monica have only the vague idea of the kind of person Mrs. Luke Widdowson would prove to be , and Virginia seem to herself to be walk in a dream . 

 ' have you be here often ? ' whisper the latter , as soon as they come in view of the place . its aspect delight she , but the conflict of her emotion be so disturbing that she have to pause and seek the support of her sister 's arm . 

 ' I have   never be inside , ' Monica answer indistinctly . ' come ; we shall be unpunctual . ' 

 ' I do wish you would tell I , dear ' 

 ' I can not   talk , Virgie . try and keep quiet , and behave as if it be all quite natural . ' 

 this be altogether beyond Virginia 's power . it happen most luckily , though greatly to Widdowson 's annoyance , that the sister - in - law , Mrs. Luke Widdowson , arrive nearly half an hour later than the time she have appoint . lead by the servant into a comfortable drawing - room , the visitor be receive by the master of the house alone ; with a grim smile , the result of his embarrassment , with profuse apology and a courtesy altogether excessive , Widdowson do his good to put they at their ease of course with small result . the sister side by side on a settee at one end of the room , and the host seat far away from they , they talk with scarcely any understanding of what be say on either side the weather and the vastness of London serve as topic until of a sudden the door be throw open , and there appear a person of such impose presence that Virginia give a start and Monica gaze in painful fascination . Mrs. Luke be a tall and portly woman in the prime of life , with rather a high colour ; her feature be handsome , but without much refinement , their expression a condescend good - humour . her mourning garb , if mourn it could be call , represent an extreme of the prevail fashion ; its glint and rustle inspire awe in the female observer . a moment ago the drawing - room have seem empty ; Mrs. Luke , in her sole person , fill and illumine it . 

 Widdowson address this resplendent personage by her christian name , his familiarity exciting in Monica an irrational surprise . he present the sister to she , and Mrs. Luke , bow grandly at a distance , draw from her bosom a gold - rim pince - nez , through which she scrutinize Monica . the smile which follow might have be interpret in several sens ; Widdowson , alone capable of remark it , answer with a look of severe dignity . 

 Mrs. Luke have no thought of apologize for the lateness of her arrival , and it be evident that she do not intend to stay long . her purpose seem to be to make the occasion as informal as possible . 

 ' do you , by chance , know the Hodgson Bulls ? ' she ask of her relative , interrupt he in the nervous commonplace with which he be endeavour to smooth the way to a general conversation . she have the accent of cultivation , but speak rather imperiously . 

 ' I never hear of they , ' be the cold reply . 

 ' no ? they live somewhere about here . I have to make a call on they . I suppose my coachman will find the place . ' 

 there be an awkward silence . Widdowson be about to say something to Monica , when Mrs. Luke , who have again closely observe the girl through the glass , interpose in a gentle tone . 

 ' do you like this neighbourhood , Miss Madden ? ' 

 Monica give the expected answer , her voice sound very weak and timid by comparison . and so , for some ten minute , an appearance of dialogue be sustain . Mrs. Luke , though still condescend , evince a desire to be agreeable ; she smile and nod in reply to the girl 's remark , and occasionally address Virginia with careful civility , convey the impression , perhaps involuntarily , that she commiserate the shy and shabbily - dress person . Tea be bring in , and after pretend to take a cup , she rise for departure . 

 ' perhaps you will come and see I some day , Miss Madden , ' fall from she with unanticipated graciousness , as she step forward to the girl and offer her hand . ' edmund must bring you at some quiet time when we can talk . very glad to have meet you very glad indeed . ' 

 and the personage be go ; they hear her carriage roll away from beneath the window . all three draw a breath of relief , and Widdowson , suddenly quite another man , take a place near to Virginia , with whom in a few minute he be converse in the friendly way . Virginia , experience a like relief , also become herself ; she find courage to ask needful question , which in every case be satisfactorily meet . of Mrs. Luke there be no word , but when they have take their leave the visit last altogether some two hour Monica and her sister discuss that great lady with the utmost freedom . they agree that she be personally detestable . 

 ' but very rich , my dear , ' say Virginia in a murmur voice . ' you can see that . I have meet such people before ; they have a manner oh ! of course Mr. Widdowson will take you to call upon she . ' 

 ' when nobody else be likely to be there ; that be what she mean , ' remark Monica coldly . 

 ' never mind , my love . you do not   wish for grand society . I be very glad to tell you that Edmund impress I very favourably . he be reserve , but that be no fault . oh , we must write to Alice at once ! her surprise ! her delight ! ' 

 when , on the next day , Monica meet she betroth in Regent 's Park she still live with Mildred Vesper , but no long go to Great Portland Street their talk be naturally of Mrs. Luke . Widdowson speedily lead to the topic . 

 ' I have tell you , ' he say , with careful accent , ' that I see very little of she . I can not   say that I like she , but she be a very difficult person to understand , and I fancy she often give offence when she do not   at all mean it . still , I hope you be not displeased ? ' 

 Monica avoid a direct answer . 

 ' shall you take I to see she ? ' be her word . 

 ' if you will go , dear . and I have no doubt she will be present at our wedding . unfortunately , she be my only relative ; or the only one I know anything about . after our marriage I do not   think we shall see much of she ' 

 ' no , I dare say not , ' be Monica 's remark . and thereupon they turn to pleasanter theme . 

 that morning Widdowson have receive from his sister - in - law a scribble post - card , ask he to call upon Mrs. Luke early the day that follow . of course this mean that the lady be desirous of further talk concern Miss Madden . unwillingly , but as a matter of duty , he keep the appointment . it be at eleven in the morning , and , when admit to the flat in Victoria Street which be his relative 's abode , he have to wait a quarter of an hour for the lady 's appearance . 

 luxurious fashion , as might have be expect , distinguish Mrs. Luke 's drawing - room . costly and beautiful thing superabounde ; perfume soothe the air . only since her bereavement have Mrs. Widdowson be able to indulge this taste for modern exuberance in domestic adornment . the deceased Luke be a plain man of business , who cling to the fashion which have be familiar to he in his youth ; his second wife find a suburban house already furnish , and her influence with he could not prevail to banish the horror amid which he choose to live : chair in maroon rep , Brussels carpet of red rose on a green ground , horse - hair sofas of the most uncomfortable shape ever design , antimacassar everywhere , chimney ornament of cut glass tremble in sympathy with the kindre chandelier . she belong to an obscure branch of a house that culminate in an obscure baronetcy ; penniless and ambitious , she have to thank she impose physique for rescue at a perilous age , and though despise Mr. Luke Widdowson for his plebeian taste , she shrewdly retain the good - will of a husband who seem no candidate for length of year . the money - maker die much soon than she could reasonably have hop , and leave she an income of four thousand pound . thereupon begin for Mrs. Luke a life of feverish aspiration . the baronetcy to which she be akin have inspire she , even from childhood , with an aristocratic ideal ; a handsome widow of only eight - and - thirty , she resolve that her wealth should pave the way for she to a titled alliance . her acquaintance lie among City people , but with the opportunity of freedom it be soon extend to the sphere of what be know as smart society ; her flat in Victoria Street attract a heterogeneous cluster of pleasure - seeker and fortune - hunter , among they one or two vagrant member of the young aristocracy . she live at the utmost pace compatible with technical virtue . when , as shortly happen , it become evident that her income be not large enough for her serious purpose , she take counsel with an old friend great in finance , and thenceforth the excitement of the gambler give a new zest to her turbid existence . like most of her female associate , she have free recourse to the bottle ; but for such stimulus the life of a smart woman would be physically impossible . and Mrs. Luke enjoy life , enjoy it vastly . the goal of her ambition , if all go well in the City , be quite within reasonable hope . she foretaste the day when a vulgar prefix would no long attach to her name , and when the journal of society would reflect her rise effulgence . 

 Widdowson be grow impatient , when his relative at length appear . she throw herself into a deep chair , cross her leg , and gaze at he mockingly . 

 ' well , it be not   quite so bad as I fear , edmund . ' 

 ' what do you mean ? ' 

 ' oh , she be a decent enough little girl , I can see . but you be a silly fellow for all that . you could not   have deceive I , you know . if there have be anything you understand ? I should have spot it at once . ' 

 ' I do not   relish this kind of talk , ' observe Widdowson acidly . ' in plain English , you suppose I be go to marry some one about whom I could not   confess the truth . ' 

 ' of course I do . now come ; tell I how you get to know she . ' 

 the man move uneasily , but in the end relate the whole story . Mrs. Luke keep nodding , with an amused air . 

 ' yes , yes ; she manage it capitally . clever little witch . fetch eye she have . ' 

 ' if you send for I to make insulting remark ' 

 ' bosh ! I will come to the wedding gaily . but you be a silly fellow . now , why do not   you come and ask I to find you a wife ? why , I know two or three girl of really good family who would have jump , simply jump , at a man with your money . pretty girl too . but you always be so horribly unpractical . do not   you know , my dear boy , that there be heap of lady , real lady , wait the first decent man who offer they five or six hundred a year ? why have not   you use the opportunity that you know I could put in your way ? ' 

 Widdowson rise from his seat and stand stiffly . 

 ' I see you do not   understand I in the least . I be go to marry because , for the first time in my life , I have meet the woman whom I can respect and love . ' 

 ' that be very nice and proper . but why should not   you respect and love a girl who belong to good society ? ' 

 ' Miss Madden be a lady , ' he reply indignantly . 

 ' oh yes to be sure , ' hum the other , let her head roll back . ' well , bring she here some day when we can lunch quietly together . I see it be no use . you be not a sharp man , Edmund . ' 

 ' do you seriously tell I , ' ask Widdowson , with grave curiosity , ' that there be lady in good society who would have marry I just because I have a few hundred a year ? ' 

 ' my dear boy , I would get together a round dozen in two or three day . girl who would make good , faithful wife , in mere gratitude to the man who save they from horror . ' 

 ' excuse I if I say that I do not   believe it . ' 

 Mrs. Luke laugh merrily , and the conversation go on in this strain for another ten minute . at the end , Mrs. Luke make herself very agreeable , praise Monica for her sweet face and gentle manner , and so dismiss the solemn man with a renew promise to countenance the marriage by her gracious presence . 

 when Rhoda Nunn return from her holiday it want but a week to Monica 's wedding , so speedily have everything be determine and arrange . Miss Barfoot , have learn from Virginia all that be to be know concern Mr. Widdowson , feel able to hope for the good ; a grave husband , of mature year , and with mean more than sufficient , seem , to the eye of experience , no unsuitable match for a girl such as Monica . this view of the situation cause Rhoda to smile with contemptuous tolerance . 

 ' and yet , ' she remark , ' I have hear you speak severely of such marriage . ' 

 ' it be not   the ideal wedlock , ' reply Miss Barfoot . ' but so much in life be compromise . after all , she may regard he more affectionally than we imagine . ' 

 ' no doubt she have weigh advantage . if the prospect you offer she have prove more to her taste she would have dismiss this elderly admirer . his fate have be decide during the last few week . it be probable that the invitation to your Wednesday evening give she a hope of meet young man . ' 

 ' I see no harm if it do , ' say Miss Barfoot , smile . ' but Miss Vesper would very soon undeceive she on that point . ' 

 ' I hardly think of she as a girl likely to make chance friendship with man in highway and by - way . ' 

 ' no more do I ; and that make all the more content with what have come about . she run a terrible risk , poor child . you see , Rhoda , nature be too strong for we . ' 

 Rhoda throw her head back . 

 ' and the delight of her sister ! it be really pathetic . the mere fact that Monica be to be marry blind the poor woman to every possibility of misfortune . ' in the course of the same conversation , Rhoda remark thoughtfully , 

 ' it strike I that Mr. Widdowson must be of a confiding nature . I do not   think man in general , at all event those with money , care to propose marriage to girl they encounter by the way . ' 

 ' I suppose he see that the case be exceptional . ' 

 ' how be he to see that ? ' 

 ' you be severe . her shop training account for much . the elder sister could never have find a husband in this way . the revelation must have shock they at first . ' 

 Rhoda dismiss the subject lightly , and henceforth show only the faint interest in Monica 's concern . 

 Monica meanwhile rejoice in her liberation from the work and philosophic severity of Great Portland Street . she see Widdowson somewhere or other every day , and hear he discourse on the life that be before they , herself for the most part keep silence . together they call upon Mrs. Luke , and have luncheon with she . Monica be not displeased with her reception , and begin secretly to hope that more than a glimpse of that gorgeous world might some day be vouchsafe to she . 

 apart from her future husband , Monica be in a sportive mood , with occasional fit of exhilaration which seem rather unnatural . she have declare to Mildred her intention of invite Miss Nunn to the wedding , and her mind be evidently set on carry out this joke , as she regard it . when the desire be intimate by letter , Rhoda reply with a civil refusal : she would be altogether out of place at such a ceremony , but hop that Monica would accept her heartiest good wish . Virginia be then dispatch to Queen 's Road , and appeal so movingly that the prophetess at length yield . on hear this Monica dance with delight , and her companion in Rutland Street could not help share her merriment . 

 the ceremony be perform at a church at Herne Hill . by an odd arrangement like everything else in the story of this pair , a result of social and personal embarrassment Monica 's belonging , include her apparel for the day , be previously dispatch to the bridegroom 's house , whither , in company with Virginia , the bride go early in the morning . it be one of the quiet of wedding , but all ordinary formality be comply with , Widdowson have no independent view on the subject . Present be Virginia   to give away the bride , Miss Vesper   who look decidedly odd in a pretty dress give she by Monica , Rhoda Nunn   who appear to advantage in a costume of quite unexpected appropriateness , Mrs. Widdowson   an imposing figure , evidently feel that she have get into strange society , and , as friend of the bridegroom , one Mr. Newdick , a musty and nervous City clerk . depression be manifest on every countenance , not except Widdowson 's ; the man have such a stern , gloomy look , and hold himself with so much awkwardness , that he might have be imagine to stand here on compulsion . for an hour before go to the church , Monica cry and seem unutterably doleful ; she have not sleep for two night ; her face be ghastly . Virginia 's gladness give way just before the company assemble , and she too shed many tear . 

 there be a breakfast , more dismal fooling than even this specie of fooling be will not to be . Mr. Newdick , trembling and bloodless , propose Monica 's health ; Widdowson , stern and dark as ever , gloomily respond ; and then , that be happily over . by one o'clock the gathering begin to disperse . Monica draw Rhoda Nunn aside . 

 ' it be very kind of you to come , ' she whisper , with half a sob . ' it all seem very silly , and I be sure you have wish yourself away a hundred time . I be really , seriously , grateful to you . ' 

 Rhoda put a hand on each side of the girl 's face , and kiss she , but without say a word ; and thereupon leave the house . Mildred Vesper , after change her dress in the room use by Monica , as she have do on arrive , go off by train to her duty in Great Portland Street . Virginia alone remain to see the married couple start for their honeymoon . they be go into Cornwall , and on the return journey would manage to see Miss Madden at her Somerset retreat . for the present , Virginia be to live on at Mrs. Conisbee 's , but not in the old way ; henceforth she would have proper attendance , and modify her vegetarian diet at the express bidding of the doctor , as she explain to her landlady . 

 though that very evening Everard Barfoot make a call upon his friend in Chelsea , the first since Rhoda 's return from Cheddar , he hear nothing of the event that mark the day . but Miss Nunn appear to he unlike herself ; she be absent , have little to say , and look , what he have never yet know she , oppress by low spirit . for some reason or other Miss Barfoot leave the room . 

 ' you be think with regret of your old home , ' Everard remark , take a seat nearer to Miss Nunn . ' 

 ' no . why should you fancy that ? ' 

 ' only because you seem rather sad . ' 

 ' one be sometimes . ' 

 ' I like to see you with that look . may I remind you that you promise I some flower from Cheddar ? ' 

 ' oh , so I do , ' exclaim the other in a tone of natural recollection . ' I have bring they , scientifically press between blot - paper . I will fetch they . ' 

 when she return it be together with Miss Barfoot , and the conversation become lively . 

 a day or two after this Everard leave town , and be away for three week , part of the time in Ireland . 

 ' I leave London for a while , ' he write from Killarney to his cousin , ' partly because I be afraid I have begin to bore you and Miss Nunn . do not   you regret give I permission to call upon you ? the fact be , I can not   live without intelligent female society ; talk with woman , as I talk with you two , be one of my chief enjoyment . I hope you will not   get tired of my visit ; in fact , they be all but a necessity to I , as I have discover since come away . but it be fair that you should have a rest . ' 

 ' do not   be afraid , ' Miss Barfoot reply to this part of his letter . ' we be not at all weary of your conversation . the truth be , I like it much well than in the old day . you seem to I to have a healthy mind , and I be quite sure that the society of intelligent woman   we affect no foolish self - depreciation , Miss Nunn and I   be a good thing for you . come back to we as soon as you like ; I shall welcome you . ' 

 it happen that his return to England be almost simultaneous with the arrival from Madeira of Mr. and Mrs. Thomas Barfoot . Everard at once go to see his brother , who for the present be stay at Torquay . Ill - health dictate his choice of residence ; Thomas be still suffer from the result of his accident ; his wife have leave he at a hotel , and be visit relative in different part of England . the brother exhibit much affectionate feeling after their long separation ; they spend a week together , and plan for another meeting when Mrs. Thomas should have return to her husband . 

 an engagement call Everard back to town . he be to be present at the wedding of his friend Micklethwaite , now actually on the point of take place . the mathematician have find a suitable house , very small and of very low rental , out at South Tottenham , and thither be transfer the furniture which have be in his bride 's possession since the death of her parent ; Micklethwaite buy only a few new thing . by discreet inquiry , Barfoot have discover that ' fanny , ' though musically inclined , would not possess a piano , her old instrument be quite wear out and not worth the cost of conveyance ; thus it come to pass that , a day or two before the wedding , Micklethwaite be astonish by the arrival of an instrument of the Cottage specie , mysteriously address to a person not yet in existence , Mrs. Micklethwaite . 

 ' you scoundrel ! ' he cry , when , on the next day , Barfoot present himself at the house . ' this be your doing . what the deuce do you mean ? a man who complain of poverty ! well , it be the great kindness I ever receive , that be all . Fanny will be devoted to you . with music in the house , our blind sister will lead quite a different life . confound it ! I want to begin cry . why , man , I be not accustomed to receive present , even as a proxy ; I have not   have one since I be a schoolboy . ' 

 ' that be an audacious statement . when you tell I that Miss Wheatley never allow your birthday to pass without send something . ' 

 ' oh , Fanny ! but I have never think of Fanny as a separate person . upon my word , now I think of it , I never have . Fanny and I have be one for age . ' 

 that evening the sister arrive from their country home . Micklethwaite give up the house to they , and go to a lodging . 

 it be with no little curiosity that , on the appoint morning , Barfoot repair to South Tottenham . he have see a photograph of Miss Wheatley , but it date from seventeen year ago . stand in her presence , he be move with compassion , and with another feeling more rarely excited in he by a woman 's face , that of reverential tenderness . impossible to recognize in this countenance the feature know to he from the portrait . at three - and - twenty she have possess a sweet , simple comeliness on which any man 's eye would have rest with pleasure ; at forty she be wrinkle , hollow - cheek , sallow , indelible weariness stamp upon her brow and lip . she look much old than Mary Barfoot , though they be just of an age . and all this for want of a little money . the life of a pure , gentle , tender - hearted woman wear away in hopeless longing and in hard struggle for daily bread . as she take his hand and thank he with an exquisite modesty for the present she have receive , Everard feel a lump rise in his throat . he be ashamed to notice that the year have deal so unkindly with she ; fix his look upon her eye , he gladden at the gladness which shine in they , at the soft light which they could still shed forth . 

 Micklethwaite be probably unconscious of the poor woman 's faded appearance . he have see she from time to time , and always with the love which idealize . in his own pathetic phrase , she be simply a part of himself ; he no more thought of criticize her feature than of stand before the glass to mark and comment upon his own . it be enough to glance at he as he take his place beside she , the proud and happy of man . a miracle have be work for he ; kind fate , in give she to his arm , have blot out those long year of sorrow , and to - day fanny be the betrothed of his youth , beautiful in his sight as when first he look upon she . 

 her sister , young by five year , have more regular lineament , but she too be wear with suffering , and her sightless eye make it more distressing to contemplate she . she speak cheerfully , however , and laugh with joy in Fanny 's happiness . Barfoot press both her hand with the friendly warmth . 

 one vehicle convey they all to the church , and in half an hour the lady to whom the piano be address have come into being . the simple of transformation ; no bridal gown , no veil , no wreath ; only the gold ring for symbol of union . and it might have happen nigh a score of year ago ; nigh a score of year lose from the span of human life all for want of a little money . 

 ' I will say good - bye to you here , ' mutter Everard to his friend at the church door . 

 the married man grip he by the arm . 

 ' you will do nothing of the kind . Fanny , he want to be off at once ! you will not   go until you have hear my wife play something on that bless instrument . ' 

 so all enter a cab again and drive back to the house . a servant who have come with Fanny from the country , a girl of fifteen , open the door to they , smile and curtseying . and all sit together in happy talk , the blind woman gayest among they ; she wish to have the clergyman describe to she , and the appearance of the church . then Mrs. Micklethwaite place herself at the piano , and play simple , old - fashioned music , neither well nor badly , but to the infinite delight of two of her hearer . 

 ' Mr. Barfoot , ' say the sister at length , ' I have know your name for a long time , but I little think to meet you on such a day as this , and to owe you such endless thank . so long as I can have music I forget that I can not   see . 

 ' Barfoot be the fine fellow on earth , ' exclaim Micklethwaite . ' at least , he would be if he understand Trilinear Co - ordinate . ' 

 ' be you strong in mathematic , Mrs. Micklethwaite ? ' ask Everard . 

 ' I ? oh dear , no ! I never get much past the Rule of Three . but Tom have forgive I that long ago . ' 

 ' I do not   despair of get you into plane trigonometry , Fanny . we will gossip about sine and co - sine before we die . ' 

 it be say half - seriously , and Everard could not but burst into laughter . 

 he sit down with they to their plain midday meal , and early in the afternoon take his leave . he have no inclination to go home , if the empty fiat could be dignify with such a name . after read the paper at his club , he walk aimlessly about the street until it be time to return to the same place for dinner . then he sit with a cigar , dreaming , and at half - past eight go to the Royal Oak Station , and journey to Chelsea . 




 CHAPTER XIII 

 discord of leader 

 a disappointment await he . Miss Barfoot be not well enough to see any one . have she be suffer long ? he inquire . no ; it be only this evening ; she have not din , and be go to her room . Miss Nunn could not receive he . 

 he go home , and write to his cousin . 

 the next morning he come upon a passage in the newspaper which seem to suggest a cause for Miss Barfoot 's indisposition . it be the report of an inquest . a girl name Bella Royston have poison herself . she be live alone , without occupation , and receive visit only from one lady . this lady , her name Miss Barfoot , have be supply she with money , and have just find she a situation in a house of business ; but the girl appear to have go through trouble which have so disturb her mind that she could not make the effort require of she . she leave a few line address to her benefactress , just say that she choose death rather than the struggle to recover her position . 

 it be Saturday . he decide to call in the afternoon and see whether Mary have recover . 

 again a disappointment . Miss Barfoot be well , and have be away since breakfast ; Miss Nunn be also absent . 

 Everard saunter about the neighbourhood , and presently find himself in the garden of Chelsea Hospital . it be a warm afternoon , and so still that he hear the fall of yellow leaf as he walk hither and thither along the alley . his failure to obtain an interview with Miss Nunn annoy he ; but for her presence in the house he would not have get into this habit of go there . as far as ever from harbour any serious thought concern Rhoda , he feel himself impel along the way which he have jokingly indicate in talk with Micklethwaite ; he be tempt to make love to she as an interesting pastime , to observe how so strong - minded a woman would conduct herself under such circumstance . have she or not a vein of sentiment in her character ? be it impossible to move she as other woman be move ? meditate thus , he look up and see the subject of his thought . she be seat a few yard away , and seemingly have not yet become aware of he , her eye be on the ground , and trouble reverie appear in her countenance . 

 ' I have just call at the house , Miss Nunn . how be my cousin to - day ? ' 

 she have look up only a moment before he speak , and seem vex at be thus discover . 

 ' I believe Miss Barfoot be quite well , ' she answer coldly , as they shake hand . 

 ' but yesterday she be not so . ' 

 ' a headache , or something of the kind . ' 

 he be astonish . Rhoda speak with a cold indifference . she have rise , and show her wish to move from the spot . 

 ' she have to attend an inquest yesterday . perhaps it rather upset she ? ' 

 ' yes , I think it do . ' 

 unable to adapt himself at once to this singular mood of Rhoda 's , but resolve not to let she go before he have try to learn the cause of it , he walk along by her side . in this part of the garden there be only a few nursemaid and child ; it would have be a capital place and time for improve his intimacy with the remarkable woman . but possibly she be determined to be rid of he . a contest between his will and hers would be an amusement decidedly to his taste . 

 ' you also have be disturb by it , Miss Nunn . ' 

 ' by the inquest ? ' she return , with barely veil scorn . ' indeed I have not . ' 

 ' do you know that poor girl ? ' 

 ' some time ago . ' 

 ' then it be only natural that her miserable fate should sadden you . ' 

 he speak as if with respectful sympathy , ignore what she have say . 

 ' it have no effect whatever upon I , ' Rhoda answer , glance at he with surprise and displeasure . 

 ' forgive I if I say that I find it difficult to believe that . perhaps you ' 

 she interrupt he . 

 ' I do not   easily forgive anyone who charge I with falsehood , Mr. Barfoot . ' 

 ' oh , you take it too seriously . I beg your pardon a thousand time . I be go to say that perhaps you will not   allow yourself to acknowledge any feeling of compassion in such a case . ' 

 ' I do not   acknowledge what I do not   feel . I will bid you good - afternoon . ' 

 he smile at she with all the softness and persuasiveness of which he be capable . she have offer her hand with cold dignity , and instead of take it merely for good - bye he retain it . 

 ' you must , you shall forgive I ! I shall be too miserable if you dismiss I in this way . I see that I be altogether wrong . you know all the particular of the case , and I have only read a brief newspaper account . I be sure the girl do not   deserve your pity . ' 

 she be try to draw her hand away . Everard feel the strength of her muscle , and the sensation be somehow so pleasant that he could not at once release she . 

 ' you do pardon I , Miss Nunn ? ' 

 ' please do not   be foolish . I will thank you to let my hand go . ' 

 be it possible ? her cheek have colour , ever so slightly . but with indignation , no doubt , for her eye flash sternly at he . very unwillingly , Everard have no choice but to obey the command . 

 ' will you have the kindness to tell I , ' he say more gravely , ' whether my cousin be suffer only from that cause ? ' 

 ' I can not   say , ' she add after a pause . ' I have not   speak with Miss Barfoot for two or three day . ' 

 he look at she with genuine astonishment . 

 ' you have not   see each other ? ' 

 ' Miss Barfoot be angry with I . I think we shall be oblige to part . ' 

 ' to part ? what can possibly have happen ? Miss Barfoot angry with you ? ' 

 ' if I must satisfy your curiosity , Mr. Barfoot , I have well tell you at once that the subject of our difference be the girl you mention . not very long ago she try to persuade your cousin to receive she again to give her lesson at the place in Great Portland Street , as before she disgrace herself . Miss Barfoot , with too ready good - nature , be willing to do this , but I resist . it seem to I that it would be a very weak and wrong thing to do . at the time she end by agree with I . now that the girl have kill herself , she throw the blame upon my interference . we have a painful conversation , and I do not   think we can continue to live together . ' 

 Barfoot listen with gratification . it be much to have compel Rhoda to explain herself , and on such a subject . 

 ' nor even to work together ? ' he ask . 

 ' it be doubtful . ' 

 Rhoda still move forward , but very slowly , and without impatience . 

 ' you will somehow get over this difficulty , I be sure . such friend as you and Mary do not   quarrel like ordinary unreasonable woman . will not   you let I be of use ? ' 

 ' how ? ' ask Rhoda with surprise . 

 ' I shall make my cousin see that she be wrong . ' 

 ' how do you know that she be wrong ? ' 

 ' because I be convinced that you must be right . I respect Mary 's judgment , but I respect yours still more . ' 

 Rhoda raise her head and smile . 

 ' that compliment , ' she say , ' please I less than the one you have utter without intend it . ' 

 ' you must explain . ' 

 ' you say that by make Miss Barfoot see she be wrong you could alter her mind towards I . the world 's opinion would hardly support you in that , even in the case of man . ' 

 Everard laugh . 

 ' now this be well . now we be talk in the old way . surely you know that the world 's opinion have no validity for I . ' 

 she keep silence . 

 ' but , after all , be Mary wrong ? I be not afraid to ask the question now that your face have clear a little . how angry you be with I ! but surely I do not   deserve it . you would have be much more forbearing if you have know what delight I feel when I see you sit over there . it be nearly a month since we meet , and I could not   keep away any long . ' 

 Rhoda sweep the distance with indifferent eye . 

 ' Mary be fond of this girl ? ' he inquire , watch she . 

 ' yes , she be . ' 

 ' then her distress , and even anger , be natural enough . we will not   discuss the girl 's history ; probably I know all that I need to . but whatever her misdoing , you certainly do not   wish to drive she to suicide . ' 

 Rhoda deign no reply . 

 ' all the same , ' he continue in his gentle tone , ' it turn out that you have practically do so . if Mary have take the girl back that despair would most likely never have come upon she . be not   it natural that Mary should repent of have be guide by you , and perhaps say rather severe thing ? ' 

 ' natural , no doubt . but it be just as natural for I to resent blame where I have do nothing blameworthy . ' 

 ' you be absolutely sure that this be the case ? ' 

 ' I think you express a conviction that I be in the right ? ' 

 there be no smile , but Everard believe that he detect its possibility on the closed lip . 

 ' I have get into the way of always think so in question of this kind . but perhaps you tend to err on the side of severity . perhaps you make too little allowance for human weakness . ' 

 ' human weakness be a plea that have be much abuse , and generally in an interested spirit . ' 

 this be something like a personal rebuke . whether she so mean it , Barfoot could not determine . he hop she do , for the more personal their talk become the well he would be please . 

 ' I , for one , ' he say , ' ve ry seldom urge that plea , whether in my own defence or another 's . but it answer to a spirit we can not   altogether dispense with . do not   you feel ever so little regret that your severe logic prevail ? ' 

 ' not the slight regret . ' 

 Everard think this answer magnificent . he have anticipate some evasion . however inappropriately , he be constrain to smile . 

 ' how I admire your consistency ! we other be poor halting creature in comparison . ' 

 ' Mr. Barfoot , ' say Rhoda suddenly , ' I have have enough of this . if your approval be sincere , I do not   ask for it . if you be practise your power of irony , I have rather you choose some other person . I will go my way , if you please . ' 

 she just bent her head , and leave he . 

 Enough for the present . have raise his hat and turn on his heel , Barfoot stroll away in a mood of peculiar satisfaction . he laugh to himself . she be certainly a fine creature yes , physically as well . her out - of - door appearance on the whole please he ; she could dress very plainly without disguise the advantage of figure she possess . he picture she ramble about the hill , and long to be her companion on such an expedition ; there would be no consulting with feebleness , as when one set forth to walk with the everyday woman . what dare topic might come up in the course of a twenty - mile stretch across country ! no Grundyism in Rhoda Nunn ; no simpering , no mincing of phrase . why , a man might do bad than secure she for his comrade through the whole journey of life . 

 suppose he push his joke to the very point of ask she to marry he ? undoubtedly she would refuse ; but how enjoyable to watch the proud vigour of her freedom assert itself ! yet would not an offer of marriage be too commonplace ? rather propose to she to share his life in a free union , without sanction of form which neither for she nor he be sanction at all . be it too bold a thought ? 

 not if he really mean it . utter insincerely , such word would be insult ; she would see through his pretence of earnestness , and then farewell to she for ever . but if his intellectual sympathy become ting with passion and do he discern no possibility of that ? an odd thing be he to fall in love with Rhoda Nunn . Hitherto his ideal have be a widely different type of woman ; he have demand rare beauty of face , and the charm of a refined voluptuousness . to be sure , it be but an ideal ; no woman that approach it have ever come within his sphere . the dream exercise less power over he than a few year ago ; perhaps because his youth be behind he . Rhoda might well represent the desire of a mature man , strengthen by modern culture and with his sens fairly subordinate to reason . Heaven forbid that he should ever tie himself to the tame domestic female ; and just as little could he seek for a mate among the woman of society , the creature all surface , with empty pate and vitiate blood . no marriage for he , in the common understanding of the word . he want neither offspring nor a ' home ' . Rhoda Nunn , if she think of such thing at all , probably desire a union which would permit she to remain an intellectual being ; the kitchen , the cradle , and the work - basket have no power over her imagination . as likely as not , however , she be perfectly content with single life even regard it as essential to her purpose . in her face he read chastity ; her eye avoid no scrutiny ; her palm be cold . 

 one do not break the heart of such a woman . Heartbreak be a very old - fashioned disorder , associate with poverty of brain . if Rhoda be what he think she , she enjoy this opportunity of study a modern male , and care not how far he proceed in his own investigation , sure that at any moment she could bid he fall back . the amusement be only just begin . and if for he it become earnest , why what do he seek but strong experience ? 

 Rhoda , in the meantime , have go home . she shut herself in her bedroom , and remain there until the bell ring for dinner . 

 Miss Barfoot enter the dining - room just before she ; they sit down in silence , and through the meal exchange but a few sentence , relative to a topic of the hour which interested neither of they . 

 the eld woman have a very unhappy countenance ; she look wear out ; her eye never lift themselves from the table . 

 Dinner over , Miss Barfoot go to the drawing - room alone . she have sit there about half an hour , brooding , unoccupied , when Rhoda come in and stand before she . 

 ' I have be think it over . it be not   right for I to remain here . such an arrangement be only possible whilst we be on term of perfect understanding . ' 

 ' you must do what you think well , Rhoda , ' the other reply gravely , but with no accent of displeasure . 

 ' yes , I have well take a lodging somewhere . what I wish to know be , whether you can still employ I with any satisfaction ? ' 

 ' I do not   employ you . that be not the word to describe your relation with I . if we must use business language , you be simply my partner . ' 

 ' only your kindness put I into that position . when you no long regard I as a friend , I be only in your employment . ' 

 ' I have not   cease to regard you as a friend . the estrangement between we be entirely of your making . ' 

 see that Rhoda would not sit down , Miss Barfoot rise and stand by the fireplace . 

 ' I can not   bear reproach , ' say the former ; ' least of all when they be irrational and undeserved . ' 

 ' if I reproach you , it be in a tone which should never have give you offence . one would think that I have rat you like a disobedient servant . ' 

 ' if that have be possible , ' answer Rhoda , with a faint smile , ' I should never have be here . you say that you bitterly repent have give way to I on a certain occasion . that be unreasonable ; in give way , you declare yourself convince . and the reproach I certainly do not   deserve , for I have behave conscientiously . ' 

 ' be not   it allow I to disapprove of what your conscience dictate ? ' 

 ' not when you have take the same view , and act upon it . I do not   lay claim to many virtue , and I have not   that of meekness . I could never endure anger ; my nature resent it . ' 

 ' I do wrong to speak angrily , but indeed I hardly know what I be say . I have suffer a terrible shock . I love that poor girl ; I love she all the more for what I have see of she since she come to implore my help . your utter coldness it seem to I inhuman I shrink from you . if your face have show ever so little compassion ' 

 ' I feel no compassion . ' 

 ' no . you have harden your heart with theory . guard yourself , Rhoda ! to work for woman one must keep one 's womanhood . you be become you be wander as far from the true way oh , much far than Bella do ! ' 

 ' I can not   answer you . when we argue about our difference in a friendly spirit , all be permissible ; now if I speak my thought it would be mere harshness and cause of embitterment . I fear all be at an end between we . I should perpetually remind you of this sorrow . ' 

 there be a silence of some length . Rhoda turn away , and stand in reflection . 

 ' let we do nothing hastily , ' say Miss Barfoot . ' we have more to think of than our own feeling . ' 

 ' I have say that I be quite willing to go on with my work , but it must be on a different footing . the relation between we can no long be that of equal . I be content to follow your direction . but your dislike of I will make this impossible . ' 

 ' dislike ? you misunderstand I wretchedly . I think rather it be you who dislike I , as a weak woman with no command of her emotion . ' 

 again they cease from speech . presently Miss Barfoot step forward . 

 ' Rhoda , I shall be away all to - morrow ; I may not return to London until Monday morning . will you think quietly over it all ? believe I , I be not angry with you , and as for dislike you what nonsense be we talk ! but I can not   regret that I let you see how painfully your behaviour impress I . that hardness be not natural to you . you have encourage yourself in it , and you be warp a very noble character . ' 

 ' I wish only to be honest . where you feel compassion I feel indignation . ' 

 ' yes ; we have go through all that . the indignation be a forced , exaggerated sentiment . you can not   see it in that light perhaps . but try to imagine for a moment that Bella have be your sister ' 

 ' that be confuse the point at issue , ' Rhoda exclaim irritably . ' have I ever deny the force of such feeling ? my grief would have blind I to all large consideration , of course . but she be happily not my sister , and I remain free to speak the simple truth about her case . it be not   personal feeling that direct a great movement in civilization . if you be right , I also be right . you should have recognize the inevitable discord of our opinion at that moment . ' 

 ' it do not   seem to I inevitable . ' 

 ' I should have despise myself if I could have affect sympathy . ' 

 ' affect yes . ' 

 ' or have really feel it . that would have mean that I do not know myself . I should never again have dare to speak on any grave subject . ' 

 Miss Barfoot smile sadly . 

 ' how young you be ! oh , there be far more than ten year between our age , Rhoda ! in spirit you be a young girl , and I an old woman . no , no ; we will not quarrel . your companionship be far too precious to I , and I dare to think that mine be not without value for you . wait till my grief have have its course ; then I shall be more reasonable and do you more justice . ' 

 Rhoda turn towards the door , linger , but without look back , and so leave the room . 

 Miss Barfoot be absent as she have announce , return only in time for her duty in Great Portland Street on Monday morning . she and Rhoda then shake hand , but without a word of personal reference . they go through the day 's work as usual . 

 this be the day of the month on which Miss Barfoot would deliver her four o'clock address . the subject have be announce a week ago : ' woman as an Invader . ' an hour early than usual work be put aside , and seat be rapidly arrange for the small audience ; it number only thirteen the girl already on the premise and a few who come specially . all be aware of the tragedy in which Miss Barfoot have recently be concern ; her air of sadness , so great a contrast to that with which she be will not to address they , they naturally attribute to this cause . 

 as always , she begin in the simple conversational tone . not long since she have receive an anonymous letter , write by some clerk out of employment , abuse she roundly for her encouragement of female competition in the clerkly world . the taste of this epistle be as bad as its grammar , but they should hear it ; she read it all through . now , whoever the writer might be , it seem pretty clear that he be not the kind of person with whom one could profitably argue ; no use in reply to he , even have he give the opportunity . for all that , his uncivil attack have a meaning , and there be plenty of people ready to urge his argument in more respectable term . ' they will tell you that , in enter the commercial world , you not only unsex yourself , but do a grievous wrong to the numberless man struggle hard for bare sustenance . you reduce salary , you press into an already overcrowded field , you injure even your own sex by make it impossible for man to marry , who , if they earn enough , would be support a wife . ' to - day , continue Miss Barfoot , it be not her purpose to debate the economic aspect of the question . she would consider it from another point of view , repeat , perhaps , much that she have already say to they on other occasion , but do so because these thought have just now very strong possession of her mind . 

 this abusive correspondent , who declare that he be supplant by a young woman who do his work for small payment , doubtless have a grievance . but , in the miserable disorder of our social state , one grievance have to be weigh against another , and Miss Barfoot hold that there be much more to be urge on behalf of woman who invade what have be exclusively the man 's sphere , than on behalf of the man who begin to complain of this invasion . 

 ' they point to half a dozen occupation which be deem strictly suitable for woman . why do not   we confine ourselves to this ground ? why do not   I encourage girl to become governess , hospital nurse , and so on ? you think I ought to reply that already there be too many applicant for such place . it would be true , but I do not   care to make use of the argument , which at once involve we in a debate with the out - crowded clerk . no ; to put the truth in a few word , I be not chiefly anxious that you should earn money , but that woman in general shall become rational and responsible human being . 

 ' follow I carefully . a governess , a nurse , may be the most admirable of woman . I will dissuade no one from follow those career who be distinctly fit for they . but these be only a few out of the vast number of girl who must , if they be not to be despicable person , somehow find serious work . because I myself have have an education in clerkship , and have most capacity for such employment , I look about for girl of like mind , and do my good to prepare they for work in office . and   here I must become emphatic once more   I be glad to have enter on this course . I be glad that I can show girl the way to a career which my opponent call unwomanly . 

 ' now see why . womanly and womanish be two very different word ; but the latter , as the world use it , have become practically synonymous with the former . a womanly occupation mean , practically , an occupation that a man disdain . and here be the root of the matter . I repeat that I be not first of all anxious to keep you supply with daily bread . I be a troublesome , aggressive , revolutionary person . I want to do away with that common confusion of the word womanly and womanish , and I see very clearly that this can only be effect by an armed movement , an invasion by woman of the sphere which man have always forbid we to enter . I be strenuously opposed to that view of we set forth in such charming language by Mr. Ruskin for it tell on the side of those man who think and speak of we in a way the reverse of charming . be we live in an ideal world , I think woman would not go to sit all day in office . but the fact be that we live in a world as far from ideal as can be conceive . we live in a time of warfare , of revolt . if woman be no long to be womanish , but a human being of power and responsibility , she must become militant , defiant . she must push her claim to the extremity . 

 ' an excellent governess , a perfect hospital nurse , do work which be invaluable ; but for our cause of emancipation they be no good nay , they be harmful . man point to they , and say , imitate these , keep to your proper world . our proper world be the world of intelligence , of honest effort , of moral strength . the old type of womanly perfection be no long helpful to we . like the Church service , which to all but one person in a thousand have become meaningless gabble by dint of repetition , these type have lose their effect . they be no long educational . we have to ask ourselves , what course of training will wake woman up , make they conscious of their soul , startle they into healthy activity ? 

 ' it must be something new , something free from the reproach of womanliness . I do not   care whether we crowd out the man or not . I do not   care what result , if only woman be make strong and self - reliant and nobly independent ! the world must look to its concern . most likely we shall have a revolution in the social order great than any that yet seem possible . let it come , and let we help its coming . when I think of the contemptible wretchedness of woman enslave by custom , by their weakness , by their desire , I be ready to cry , let the world perish in tumult rather than thing go on in this way ! ' 

 for a moment her voice fail . there be tear in her eye . the hearer , most of they , understand what make she so passionate ; they exchange grave look . 

 ' our abusive correspondent shall do as well he can . he suffer for the folly of man in all age . we can not   help it . it be very far from our wish to cause hardship to any one , but we ourselves be escape from a hardship that have become intolerable . we be educate ourselves . there must be a new type of woman , active in every sphere of life : a new worker out in the world , a new ruler of the home . of the old ideal virtue we can retain many , but we have to add to they those which have be think appropriate only in man . let a woman be gentle , but at the same time let she be strong ; let she be pure of heart , but none the less wise and instruct . because we have to set an example to the sleepy of our sex , we must carry on an active warfare must be invader . whether woman be the equal of man I neither know nor care . we be not his equal in size , in weight , in muscle , and , for all I can say , we may have less power of brain . that have nothing to do with it . enough for we to know that our natural growth have be stunt . the mass of woman have always be paltry creature , and their paltriness have prove a curse to man . so , if you like to put it in this way , we be work for the advantage of man as well as for our own . let the responsibility for disorder rest on those who have make we despise our old self . at any cost at any cost we will free ourselves from the heritage of weakness and contempt ! ' 

 the assembly be long than usual in disperse . when all be go , Miss Barfoot listen for a footstep in the other room . as she could detect no sound , she go to see if Rhoda be there or not . 

 yes ; Rhoda be sit in a thoughtful attitude . she look up , smile , and come a few pace forward . 

 ' it be very good . ' 

 ' I think it would please you . ' 

 Miss Barfoot draw nearer , and add , 

 ' it be address to you . it seem to I that you have forget how I really think about these thing . ' 

 ' I have be ill - temper , ' Rhoda reply . ' obstinacy be one of my fault . ' 

 ' it be . ' 

 their eye meet . 

 ' I believe , ' continue Rhoda , ' that I ought to ask your pardon . right or wrong , I behave in an unmannerly way . ' 

 ' yes , I think you do . ' 

 Rhoda smile , bend her head to the rebuke . 

 ' and there be the last of it , ' add Miss Barfoot . ' let we kiss and be friend . ' 




 CHAPTER XIV 

 motives MEETING 

 when Barfoot make his next evening call Rhoda do not appear . he sit for some time in pleasant talk with his cousin , no reference whatever be make to Miss Nunn ; then at length , begin to fear that he would not see she , he inquire after her health . Miss Nunn be very well , answer the hostess , smile . 

 ' not at home this evening ? ' 

 ' busy with some kind of study , I think . ' 

 plainly , the difference between these woman have come to a happy end , as Barfoot foresaw that it would . he think it well to make no mention of his meeting with Rhoda in the garden . 

 ' that be a very unpleasant affair that I see your name connect with last week , ' he say presently . 

 ' it make I very miserable ill indeed for a day or two . ' 

 ' that be why you could not   see I ? ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' but in your reply to my note you make no mention of the circumstance . ' 

 Miss Barfoot keep silence ; frown slightly , she look at the fire near which they be both sit , for the weather have become very cold . 

 ' no doubt , ' pursue Everard , glance at she , ' you refrain out of delicacy on my account , I mean . ' 

 ' need we talk of it ? ' 

 ' for a moment , please . you be very friendly with I nowadays , but I suppose your estimate of my character remain very much the same as year ago ? ' 

 ' what be the use of such question ? ' 

 ' I ask for a distinct purpose . you can not   regard I with any respect ? ' 

 ' to tell you the truth , Everard , I know nothing about you . I have no wish to revive disagreeable memory , and I think it quite possible that you may be worthy of respect . ' 

 ' so far so good . now , in justice , please answer I another question . how have you speak of I to Miss Nunn ? ' 

 ' how can it matter ? ' 

 ' it matter a good deal . have you tell she any scandal about I ? ' 

 ' yes , I have . ' 

 Everard look at she with surprise . 

 ' I speak to Miss Nunn about you , ' she continue , ' before I think of your come here . frankly , I use you as an illustration of the evil I abominate . ' 

 ' you be a courageous and plain - speak woman , cousin Mary , ' say Everard , laugh a little . ' could not   you have find some other example ? ' 

 there be no reply . 

 ' so , ' he proceed , ' Miss Nunn regard I as a proved scoundrel ? ' 

 ' I never tell she the story . I make known the general ground of my dissatisfaction with you , that be all . ' 

 ' come , that be something . I be glad you do not   amuse she with that unedifying bit of fiction . ' 

 ' Fiction ? ' 

 ' yes , fiction , ' say Everard bluntly . ' I be not go into detail ; the thing be over and do with , and I choose my course at the time . but it be as well to let you know that my behaviour be grossly misrepresented . in use I to point a moral you be grievously astray . I shall say no more . Ii you can believe I , do ; if you can not , dismiss the matter from your mind . ' 

 there follow a silence of some moment . then , with a perfectly calm manner , Miss Barfoot begin to speak of a new subject . Everard follow her lead . he do not stay much long , and on leave ask to be remember to Miss Nunn . 

 a week later he again find his cousin alone . he now feel sure that Miss Nunn be keep out of his way . her parting from he in the garden have be decidedly abrupt , and possibly it signify more serious offence than at the time he attribute to she . it be so difficult to be sure of anything in regard to Miss Nunn . if another woman have act thus he would have judge it coquetry . but perhaps Rhoda be quite incapable of anything of that kind . perhaps she take herself so very seriously that the mere suspicion of banter in his talk have move she to grave resentment . or again , she might be half ashamed to meet he after confess her disagreement with Miss Barfoot ; on recovery from ill - temper   unmistakable ill - temper it be , she have see her behaviour in an embarrassing light . between these various conjecture he waver whilst talk with Mary . but he do not so much as mention Miss Nunn 's name . 

 some ten day go by , and he pay a call at the hour sanction by society , five in the afternoon ; it be Saturday . one of his reason for come at this time be the hope that he might meet other caller , for he feel curious to see what sort of people visit the house . and this wish be gratify . on enter the drawing - room , whither he be lead by the servant straightway , after the manner of the world , he find not only his cousin and her friend , but two stranger , lady . a glance inform he that both of these be young and good - look , one be a type that particularly please he dark , pale , with very bright eye . 

 Miss Barfoot receive he as any hostess would have do . she be her cheerful self once more , and in a moment introduce he to the lady with whom she have be talk the dark one , by name Mrs. Widdowson . Rhoda Nunn , sit apart with the second lady , give he her hand , but at once resume her conversation . 

 with Mrs. Widdowson he be soon chat in his easy and graceful way , Miss Barfoot put in a word now and then . he see that she have not long be marry ; a pleasant diffidence and the maidenly glance of her bright eye indicate this . she be dress very prettily , and seem aware of it . 

 ' we go to hear the new opera at the Savoy last night , ' she say to Miss Barfoot , with a smile of remembered enjoyment . 

 ' do you ? Miss Nunn and I be there . ' 

 Everard gaze at his cousin with humorous incredulity . 

 ' be it possible ? ' he exclaim . ' you be at the Savoy ? ' 

 ' where be the impossibility ? why should not   Miss Nunn and I go to the theatre ? ' 

 ' I appeal to Mrs. Widdowson . she also be astonish . ' 

 ' yes , indeed I be , Miss Barfoot ! ' exclaim the young lady , with a merry little laugh . ' I hesitate before speak of such a frivolous entertainment . ' 

 lower her voice , and cast a smile in Rhoda 's direction , Miss Barfoot reply , 

 ' I have to make a concession occasionally on Miss Nunn 's account . it would be unkind never to allow she a little recreation . ' 

 the two at a distance be talk earnestly , with grave countenance . in a few moment they rise , and the visitor come towards Miss Barfoot to take she leave . Thereupon Everard cross to Miss Nunn . 

 ' be there anything very good in the new Gilbert and Sullivan opera ? ' he ask . 

 ' many good thing . you really have not   be yet ? ' 

 ' no I be ashamed to say . ' 

 ' do go this evening , if you can get a seat . which part of the theatre do you prefer ? ' 

 his eye rest on she , but he could detect no irony . 

 ' I be a poor man , you know . I have to be content with the cheap place . which do you like well , the Savoy opera or the burlesque at the Gaiety ? ' 

 a few more such question and answer , of laboured commonplace or strained flippancy , and Everard , after search his companion 's face , break off with a laugh . 

 ' there now , ' he say , ' we have talk in the approve five o'clock way . precisely the dialogue I hear in a drawing - room yesterday . it go on day after day , year after year , through the whole of people 's life . ' 

 ' you be on friendly term with such people ? ' 

 ' I be on friendly term with people of every kind . ' he add , in an undertone , ' I hope I may include you , Miss Nunn ? ' 

 but to this she pay no attention . she be look at Monica and Miss Barfoot , who have just rise from their seat . they approach , and presently Barfoot find himself alone with the familiar pair . 

 ' another cup of tea , Everard ? ' ask his cousin . 

 ' thank you . who be the young lady you do not   introduce I to ? ' 

 ' Miss Haven one of our pupil . ' 

 ' do she think of go into business ? ' 

 ' she have just get a place in the publishing department of a weekly paper . ' 

 ' but really from the few word of her talk that fall upon my ear I should have think she a highly educate girl . ' 

 ' so she be , ' reply Miss Barfoot . ' what be your objection ? ' 

 ' why do not   she aim at some well position ? ' 

 Miss Barfoot and Rhoda exchange smile . 

 ' but nothing could be well for she . some day she hop to start a paper of her own , and to learn all the detail of such business be just what she want . oh , you be still very conventional , Everard . you mean she ought to take up something graceful and pretty something ladylike . ' 

 ' no , no . it be all right . I thoroughly approve . and when Miss Haven start her paper , Miss Nunn will write for it . ' 

 ' I hope so , ' assent his cousin . 

 ' you make I feel that I be in touch with the great movement of our time . it be delightful to know you . but come now , be not   there any way in which I could help ? ' 

 Mary laugh . 

 ' none whatever , I be afraid . ' 

 ' well , " they also serve who only stand and wait . " ' 

 if Everard have please himself he would have visit the house in Queen 's Road every other day . as this might not be , he spend a good deal of his time in other society , not care to read much , or otherwise occupy his solitude . start with one or two acquaintance in London , people of mean and position , he easily extend his social sphere . have he care to marry , he might , notwithstanding his poverty , have woo with fair chance in a certain wealthy family , where two daughter , the sole child , plain but well - instruct girl , wait for the man of brain who should appreciate they . so rare in society , these man of brain , and , alas ! so frequently desert by their wisdom when it come to choose a wife . it be his principle to reflect on every possibility , Barfoot of course ask himself whether it would not be reasonable to approach one or other of these young woman the Miss Brissendens . he need a large income ; he want to travel in a more satisfactory way than during his late absence . Agnes Brissenden strike he as a very calm and sensible girl ; not at all likely to marry any one but the man who would be a suitable companion for she , and probably disposed to look on marriage as a permanent friendship , which must not be endanger by feminine folly . she have no beauty , but mental power above the average superior , certainly , to her sister 's . 

 it be worth think about , but in the meantime he want to see much more of Rhoda Nunn . Rhoda he be begin to class with woman who be attractive both physically and mentally . strange how her face have alter to his perception since the first meeting . he smile now when he behold it smile as a man do when his sens be pleasantly affect . he be get to know it so well , to be prepare for its constant change , to watch for certain movement of brow or lip when he have say certain thing . that forcible holding of her hand have mark a stage in progressive appreciation ; since then he feel a desire to repeat the experiment . 

 ' or if thy mistress some rich anger show , Imprison her soft hand , and let she rave ' 

 the line occur to his memory , and he understand they well than heretofore . it would delight he to enrage Rhoda , and then to detain she by strength , to overcome her sens , to watch her long lash droop over the eloquent eye . but this be something very like be in love , and he by no mean wish to be seriously in love with Miss Nunn . 

 it be another three week before he have an opportunity of private talk with she . try a Sunday afternoon , about four , he find Rhoda alone in the drawing - room ; Miss Barfoot be out of town . Rhoda 's greeting have a frank friendliness which she have not bestow upon he for a long time ; not , indeed , since they meet on her return from Cheddar . she look very well , readily laugh , and seem altogether in a come - on disposition . Barfoot notice that the piano be open . 

 ' do you play ? ' he inquire . ' strange that I should still have to ask the question . ' 

 ' oh , only a hymn on Sunday , ' she answer off - hand . 

 ' a hymn ? ' 

 ' why not ? I like some of the old tune very much . they remind I of the golden age . ' 

 ' in your own life , you mean ? ' 

 she nod . 

 ' you have once or twice speak of that time as if you be not quite happy in the present . ' 

 ' of course I be not quite happy . what woman be ? I mean , what woman above the level of a pet pussy - cat ? ' 

 Everard be lean towards she on the head of the couch where he sit . he gaze into her face fixedly . 

 ' I wish it be in my power to remove some of your discontent . I would , more gladly than I can tell you . ' 

 ' you abound in good nature , Mr. Barfoot , ' she reply laugh . ' but unfortunately you can not   change the world . ' 

 ' not the world at large . but might I not change your view of it in some respect ? ' 

 ' indeed I do not   see how you could . I think I have rather have my own view than any you might wish to substitute for it . ' 

 in this humour she seem more than ever a challenge to his manhood . she be arm at all point . she fear nothing that he might say . no flush of apprehension ; no nervous tremor ; no weak self - consciousness . yet he see she as a woman , and desirable . 

 ' my view be not ignoble , ' he murmur . 

 ' I hope not . but they be the view of a man . ' 

 ' man and woman ought to see life with much the same eye . ' 

 ' ought they ? perhaps so . I be not sure . but they never will in our time . ' 

 ' individual may . the man and woman who have throw away prejudice and superstition . you and I , for instance . ' 

 ' oh , those word have such different meaning . in your judgment I should seem full of idle prejudice . ' 

 she like this conversation ; he read pleasure in her face , see in her eye a glint of merry defiance . and his pulse throb the quick for it . 

 ' you have a prejudice against I , for instance . ' 

 ' pray , do you go to the Savoy ? ' inquire Rhoda absently . 

 ' I have no intention of talk about the Savoy , Miss Nunn . it be teacup time , but as yet we have the room to ourselves . ' 

 Rhoda go and rang the bell . 

 ' the teacup shall come at once . ' 

 he laugh slightly , and look at she from beneath droop lid . Rhoda go on with talk of trifle , until the tea be bring and she have give a cup . have empty it at two draught , he resume his former lean position . 

 ' well , you be say that you have a prejudice against I . of course my cousin Mary be accountable for that . Mary have use I rather ill . before ever you see I , I represent to your mind something very disagreeable indeed . that be too bad of my cousin . ' 

 Rhoda , sip her tea , have a cold , uninterested expression . 

 ' I do not   know of this , ' he proceed , ' when we meet that day in the garden , and when I make you so angry . 

 ' I be not   dispose to jest about what have happen . ' 

 ' but neither be I. you quite misunderstood I . will you tell I how that unpleasantness come to an end ? ' 

 ' oh yes . I admit that I have be ill - mannered and obstinate . ' 

 ' how delightful ! obstinate ? I have a great deal of that in my character . all the active part of my life be one long fit of obstinacy . as a lad I determine on a certain career , and I stick to it in spite of conscious unfitness , in spite of a great deal of suffering , out of sheer obstinacy . I wonder whether Mary ever tell you that . ' 

 ' she mention something of the kind once . ' 

 ' you could hardly believe it , I dare say ? I be a far more reasonable be now . I have change in so many respect that I hardly know my old self when I look back on it . above all , in my thought about woman . if I have marry during my twenty I should have choose , as the average man do , some simpleton with unpleasant result . if I marry now , it will be a woman of character and brain . Marry in the legal sense I never shall . my companion must be as independent of form as I be myself . ' 

 Rhoda look into her teacup for a second or two , then say with a smile , 

 ' you also be a reformer ? ' 

 ' in that direction . ' 

 he have difficulty in suppress sign of nervousness . the bold declaration have come without forethought , and Rhoda 's calm acceptance of it delight he . 

 ' question of marriage , ' she go on to say , ' do not   interest I much ; but this particular reform do not   seem very practical . it be try to bring about an ideal state of thing whilst we be yet struggle with elementary obstacle . ' 

 ' I do not   advocate this liberty for all mankind . only for those who be worthy of it . ' 

 ' and what ' she laugh a little ' be the sure sign of worthiness ? I think it would be very needful to know they . ' 

 Everard keep a grave face . 

 ' true . but a free union presuppose equality of position . no honest man would propose it , for instance , to a woman incapable of understand all it involve , or incapable of resume her separate life if that become desirable . I admit all the difficulty . one must consider those of feeling , as well as the material . if my wife should declare that she must be release , I might suffer grievously , but be a man of some intelligence , I should admit that the suffering could not   be help ; the brutality of enforce marriage do not   seem to I an alternative worth consider . it would not   seem so to any woman of the kind I mean . ' 

 would she have the courage to urge one grave difficulty that he leave aside ? no . he fancy she about to speak , but she end by offer he another cup of tea . 

 ' after all , that be not your ideal ? ' he say . 

 ' I have not   to do with the subject at all , ' Rhoda answer , with perhaps a trace of impatience . ' my work and thought be for the woman who do not marry the ' odd woman ' I call they . they alone interest I . one must not   undertake too much . ' 

 ' and you resolutely class yourself with they ? ' 

 ' of course I do . ' 

 ' and therefore you have certain view of life which I should like to change . you be do good work , but I have rather see any other woman in the world devote her life to it . I be selfish enough to wish ' 

 the door open , and the servant announce , 

 ' Mr. and Mrs. Widdowson . ' 

 with perfect self - command Miss Nunn rise and step forward . Barfoot , rise more slowly , look with curiosity at the husband of the pretty , black - browed woman whom he have already meet . Widdowson surprise and amuse he . how have this stiff , stern fellow with the grizzle beard win such a wife ? not that Mrs. Widdowson seem a remarkable person , but certainly it be an ill - assorted union . 

 she come and shake hand . as he speak a few natural word , Everard chance to notice that the husband 's eye be upon he , and with what a look ! if ever a man declare in his countenance the bad specie of jealous temper , Mr. Widdowson do so . his fixed smile become sardonic . 

 presently Barfoot and he be introduce . they have nothing to say to each other , but Everard maintain a brief conversation just to observe the man . turn at length , he begin to talk with Mrs. Widdowson , and , because he be conscious of the jealous eye , assume an especial sprightliness , an air of familiar pleasantry , to which the lady respond , but with a nervous hesitation . 

 the arrival of these people be an intense annoyance to he . another quarter of an hour and thing would have come to an exciting pass between Rhoda and himself ; he would have hear how she receive a declaration of love . Rhoda 's self - possession notwithstanding , he believe that he be not without power over she . she like to talk with he , enjoy the freedom he allow himself in choice of subject . perhaps no man before have ever show an appreciation of her quality as woman . but she would not yield , be in no real danger from his love - making . Nay , the danger be to his own peace . he feel that resistance would intensify the ardour of his wooing , and possibly end by make he a victim of genuine passion . well , let she enjoy that triumph , if she be capable of win it . 

 he have make up his mind to outstay the Widdowsons , who clearly would not make a long call . but the fate be against he . another visitor arrive , a lady name Cosgrove , who settle herself as if for at least an hour . bad than that , he hear she say to Rhoda , 

 ' oh , then do come and dine with we . do , I beg ! ' 

 ' I will , with pleasure , ' be Miss Nunn 's reply . ' can you wait and take I with you ? ' 

 useless to stay long . as soon as the Widdowsons have depart he go up to Rhoda and silently offer his hand . she scarcely look at he , and do not in the least return his pressure . 

 Rhoda din at Mrs. Cosgrove 's , and be home again at eleven o'clock . when the house be lock up , and the servant have go to bed , she sit in the library , turn over a book that she have bring from her friend 's house . it be a volume of essay , one of which deal with the relation between the sex in a very modern spirit , treat the subject as a perfectly open one , and arrive at unorthodox conclusion . Mrs. Cosgrove have speak of this dissertation with lively interest . Rhoda peruse it very carefully , pause now and then to reflect . 

 in this reading of her mind , Barfoot come near the truth . 

 no man have ever make love to she ; no man , to her knowledge , have ever be tempt to do so . in certain mood she derive satisfaction from this thought , use it to strengthen her life 's purpose ; have pass her thirtieth year , she might take it as a settle thing that she would never be seek in marriage , and so could shut the door on every instinct tend to trouble her intellectual decision . but these instinct sometimes refuse to be thus treat . as Miss Barfoot tell she , she be very young for her year , young in physique , young in emotion . as a girl she have dream passionately , and the fire of her nature , though hide beneath aggregation of moral and mental attainment , be not yet smother . an hour of lassitude fill she with despondency , none the less real because she be ashamed of it . if only she have once be love , like other woman if she have listen to an offer of devotion , and reject it her heart would be more securely at peace . so she think . secretly she deem it a hard thing never to have know that common triumph of her sex . and , moreover , it take away from the merit of her position as a leader and encourager of woman live independently . there might be some who say , or think , that she make a virtue of necessity . 

 Everard Barfoot 's advance surprise she not a little . judge he as a man wholly without principle , she suppose at first that this be merely his way with all woman , and resent it as impertinence . but even then she do not dislike the show of homage ; what her mind regard with disdain , her heart be all but willing to feed upon , after its long hunger . Barfoot interested she , and not the less because of his evil reputation . here be one of the man for whom woman doubtless more than one have sacrifice themselves ; she could not but regard he with sexual curiosity . and her interest grow , her curiosity be more haunting , as their acquaintance become a sort of friendship ; she find that her moral disapprobation waver , or be altogether forget . perhaps it be to compensate for this that she go the length of outrage Miss Barfoot 's feeling on the death of Bella Royston . 

 certainly she think with much frequency of Barfoot , and look forward to his coming . never have she wish so much to see he again as after their encounter in Chelsea Gardens , and on that account she force herself to hold aloof when he come . it be not love , nor the beginning of love ; she judge it something less possible to avow . the man 's presence affect she with a perturbation which she have no difficulty in conceal at the time , though afterwards it distress and sham she . she take refuge in the undeniable fact that the quality of his mind make an impression upon she , that his talk be sympathetic . Miss Barfoot submit to this influence ; she confess that her cousin 's talk have always have a charm for she . 

 could it be that this man reciprocate , and more than reciprocated , her complex feeling ? to - day only accident have prevent he from make an avowal of love unless she strangely mistake he . all the evening she have dwell on this thought ; it grow more and more astonishing . be he bad than she have imagine ? under cover of independent thought , of serious moral theory , do he conceal mere profligacy and heartlessness ? it be an extraordinary thing to have to ask such question in relation to herself . it make she feel as if she have to learn herself anew , to form a fresh conception of her personality . she the object of a man 's passion ! 

 and the thought be exultant . even thus late , then , the satisfaction of vanity have be grant her nay , not of vanity alone . 

 he must be sincere . what motive could he possibly have for play a part ? might it not be true that he be a changed man in certain respect , and that a genuine emotion at length have control of he ? if so , she have only to wait for his next speech with she in private ; she could not misjudge a lover 's pleading . 

 the interest would only be that of comedy . she do not love Everard Barfoot , and see no likelihood of ever do so ; on the whole , a subject for thankfulness . nor could he seriously anticipate an assent to his proposal for a free union ; in declare that legal marriage be out of the question for he , he have remove his love - making to the region of mere ideal sentiment . but , if he love she , these theory would soon or later be sweep aside ; he would plead with she to become his legal wife . 

 to that point she desire to bring he . offer what he might , she would not accept it ; but the secret chagrin that be upon she would be remove . love would no long be the privilege of other woman . to reject a lover in so many respect desirable , whom so many woman might envy she , would fortify her self - esteem , and enable she to go forward in the choose path with firm tread . 

 it be one o'clock ; the fire have die out and she begin to shiver with cold . but a trembling of joy at the same time go through her limb ; again she have the sense of exultation , of triumph . she would not dismiss he peremptorily . he should prove the quality of his love , if love it be . come so late , the experience must yield she all it have to yield of delight and contentment . 




 CHAPTER XV 

 the JOYS of HOME 

 Monica and her husband , on leave the house in Queen 's Road , walk slowly in the eastward direction . though night have fall , the air be not unpleasant ; they have no object before they , and for five minute they occupy themselves with their thought . then Widdowson stop . 

 ' shall we go home again ? ' he ask , just glance at Monica , then let his eye stray vaguely in the gloom . 

 ' I should like to see Milly , but I be afraid I can hardly take you there to call with I . ' 

 ' why not ? ' 

 ' it be a very poor little sitting - room , you know , and she might have some friend . be not   there anywhere you could go , and meet I afterwards ? ' 

 frown , Widdowson look at his watch . 

 ' nearly six o'clock . there be not   much time . ' 

 ' edmund , suppose you go home , and let I come back by myself ? you would not   mind , for once ? I should like so much to have a talk with Milly . if I get back about nine or half - past , I could have a little supper , and that be all I should want . ' 

 he answer abruptly , 

 ' oh , but I can not   have you go about alone at night . ' 

 ' why not ? ' answer Monica , with a just perceptible note of irritation . ' be you afraid I shall be rob or murder ? ' 

 ' nonsense . but you must not   be alone . ' 

 ' do not   I always use to be alone ? ' 

 he make an angry gesture . 

 ' I have beg you not to speak of that . why do you say what you know be disagreeable to I ? you use to do all sort of thing that you never ought to have be oblige to do , and it be very painful to remember it . ' 

 Monica , see that people be approach , walk on , and neither speak until they have nearly reach the end of the road . 

 ' I think we have well go home , ' Widdowson at length remark . 

 ' if you wish it ; but I really do not   see why I should not   call on Milly , now that we be here . ' 

 ' why do not   you speak of it before we leave home ? you ought to be more methodical , Monica . each morning I always plan how my day be to be spend , and it would be much well if you would do the same . then you would not   be so restless and uncertain . ' 

 ' if I go to Rutland Street , ' say Monica , without heed this admonition , ' could not   you leave I there for an hour ? ' 

 ' what in the world be I to do ? ' 

 ' I should have think you might walk about . it be a pity you do not   know more people , edmund . it would make thing so much pleasanter for you . ' 

 in the end he consent to see she safely as far as Rutland Street , occupy himself for an hour , and come back for she . they go by cab , which be dismiss in Hampstead Road . Widdowson do not turn away until he have ocular proof of his wife 's admittance to the house where Miss Vesper live , and even then he walk no far than the neighbouring street , return about every ten minute to watch the house from a short distance , as though he fear Monica might have some project of escape . his look be very bilious ; trudge mechanically hither and thither where few people be to be meet , he keep his eye on the ground , and clump to a dismal rhythm with the end of his walking - stick . in the three or four month since his marriage , he seem to have grow old ; he no long hold himself so upright . 

 at the very moment agree upon he be wait close by the house . five minute pass ; twice he have look at his watch , and he grow excessively impatient , stamp as if it be necessary to keep himself warm . another five minute , and he utter a nervous ejaculation . he have all but make up his mind to go and knock at the door when Monica come forth . 

 ' you have not   be wait here long , I hope ? ' she say cheerfully . 

 ' ten minute . but it do not   matter . ' 

 ' I be very sorry . we be talk on ' 

 ' yes , but one must always be punctual . I wish I could impress that upon you . life without punctuality be quite impossible . ' 

 ' I be very sorry , edmund . I will be more careful . please do not   lecture I , dear . how shall we go home ? ' 

 ' we have well take a cab to Victoria . no know how long we may have to wait for a train when we get there . ' 

 ' now do not   be so grumpy . where have you be all the time ? ' 

 ' oh , walk about . what else be I to do ? ' 

 on the drive they hold no conversation . at Victoria they be delay about half an hour before a train start for Herne Hill ; Monica sit in a waiting - room , and her husband trudge about the platform , still clump rhythmically with his stick . 

 their Sunday custom be to dine at one o'clock , and at six to have tea . Widdowson hat the slight interference with domestic routine , and he have reluctantly indulge Monica 's desire to go to Chelsea this afternoon . hunger be now add to his cause of discontent . 

 ' let we have something to eat at once , ' he say on enter the house . ' this disorder really will not   do : we must manage well somehow . ' 

 without reply , Monica ring the dining - room bell , and give order . 

 little change have be make in the interior of the house since its master 's marriage . the dressing - room adjoining the principal bed - chamber be adapt to Monica 's use , and a few ornament be add to the drawing - room . unlike his deceased brother , Widdowson have the element of artistic taste ; in furnish his abode he take counsel with approve decorator , and at moderate cost have make himself a home which present no original feature , but give no offence to a cultivate eye . the first sight of the room please Monica greatly . she declare that all be perfect , nothing need be alter . in those day , if she have bid he spend a hundred pound on reconstruction , the lover would have obey , delight to hear she express a wish . 

 though competence have come to he only after a lifetime of narrow mean , Widdowson feel no temptation to parsimony . secure in his all - suffice income , he grudge no expenditure that could bring himself or his wife satisfaction . on the wedding - tour in Cornwall , Devon , and Somerset it last about seven week Monica learn , among other thing less agreeable , that her husband be generous with money . 

 he be anxious she should dress well , though only , as Monica soon discover , for his own gratification . soon after they have settle down at home she equip herself for the cold season , and Widdowson care little about the price so long as the effect of her new costume be pleasing to he . 

 ' you be make a butterfly of I , ' say Monica merrily , when he express strong approval of a bright morning dress that have just come home . 

 ' a beautiful woman , ' he reply , with the nervous gravity which still possess he when compliment she , or say tender thing , ' a beautiful woman ought to be beautifully clothe . ' 

 at the same time he endeavour to impress she with the grave sense of a married woman 's obligation . his rapture , genuine enough , be sometimes interrupt in the oddest way if Monica chance to utter a careless remark of which he could not strictly approve , and such interruption frequently become the opportunity for a long and solemn review of the wifely status . without much trouble he have bring she into a daily routine which satisfy he . during the whole of the morning she be to be absorb in household care . in the afternoon he would take she to walk or drive , and the evening he wish she to spend either in drawing - room or library , occupy with a book . Monica soon find that his idea of wed happiness be that they should always be together . most reluctantly he consent to she go any distance alone , for whatever purpose . public entertainment he regard with no great favour , but when he see how Monica enjoy herself at concert or theatre , he make no objection to indulge she at interval of a fortnight or so ; his own fondness for music make this compliance easy . he be jealous of her form new acquaintance ; indifferent to society himself , he think his wife should be satisfied with her present friend , and could not understand why she wish to see they so often . 

 the girl be docile , and for a time he imagine that there would never be conflict between his will and her . whilst enjoy their holiday they naturally go everywhere together , and be scarce an hour out of each other 's presence , day or night . in quiet spot by the seashore , when they sit in solitude , Widdowson 's tongue be loosen , and he pour forth his philosophy of life with the happy assurance that Monica would listen passively . his devotion to she prove itself in a thousand way ; week after week he grow , if anything , more kind , more tender ; yet in his view of their relation he be unconsciously the most complete despot , a monument of male autocracy . never have it occur to Widdowson that a wife remain an individual , with right and obligation independent of her wifely condition . everything he say presuppose his own supremacy ; he take for grant that it be his to direct , her to be guide . a display of energy , purpose , ambition , on Monica 's part , which have no reference to domestic pursuit , would have gravely trouble he ; at once he would have set himself to subdue , with all gentleness , impulse so inimical to his idea of the married state . it rejoice he that she speak with so little sympathy of the principle support by Miss Barfoot and Miss Nunn ; these person seem to he well - meaning , but grievously mistaken . Miss Nunn he judge ' unwomanly , ' and hop in secret that Monica would not long remain on term of friendship with she . of course his wife 's former pursuit be an abomination to he ; he could not bear to hear they refer to . 

 ' Woman 's sphere be the home , Monica . unfortunately girl be often oblige to go out and earn their living , but this be unnatural , a necessity which advanced civilization will altogether abolish . you shall read John Ruskin ; every word he say about woman be good and precious . if a woman can neither have a home of her own , nor find occupation in any one else 's she be deeply to be pity ; her life be bind to be unhappy . I sincerely believe that an educated woman have well become a domestic servant than try to imitate the life of a man . ' 

 Monica seem to listen attentively , but before long she accustom herself to wear this look whilst in truth she be think her own thought . and as often as not they be of a nature little suspect by her prose companion . 

 he believe himself the happy of man . he have take a daring step , but fortune smile upon he , Monica be all he have imagine in his love - fever ; knowledge of she have as yet bring to light no single untruth , not trait of character that he could condemn . that she return his love he would not and could not doubt . and something she say to he one day , early in their honeymoon , fill up the measure of his bliss . 

 ' what a change you have make in my life , edmund ! how much I have to thank you for ! ' 

 that be what he have hop to hear . he have think it himself ; have wonder whether Monica see her position in this light . and when the word actually fall from her lip he glow with joy . this , to his mind , be the perfect relation of wife to husband . she must look up to he as her benefactor , her providence . it would have please he still well if she have not possess a penny of her own , but happily Monica seem never to give a thought to the sum at her disposal . 

 surely he be the easy of man to live with . when he first become aware that Monica suffer an occasional discontent , it cause he troublous surprise . as soon as he understand that she desire more freedom of movement , he become anxious , suspicious irritable . nothing like a quarrel have yet take place between they , but Widdowson begin to perceive that he must exert authority in a way he have imagine would never be necessary . all his fear , after all , be not groundless . Monica 's undomestic life , and perhaps the association with those Chelsea people , have leave result upon her mind . by way of mild discipline , he first of all suggest a close attention to the affair of the house . would it not be well if she spend an hour a day in sewing or fancy work ? Monica so far obey as to provide herself with some plain needlework , but Widdowson , watch with keen eye , soon remark that her use of the needle be only a feint . he lie awake o ' night , ponder darkly . 

 on the present evening he be more decidedly out of temper than ever hitherto . he satisfy his hunger hurriedly and in silence . then , observe that Monica eat only a few morsel , he take offence at this . 

 ' I be afraid you be not well , dear . you have have no appetite for several day . ' 

 ' as much as usual , I think , ' she reply absently . 

 they go into the library , commonly their resort of an evening . Widdowson possess several hundred volume of English literature , most of they the work which be suppose to be indispensible to a well - inform man , though very few man even make a pretence of read they . self - educate , Widdowson deem it his duty to make acquaintance with the great , the solid author . nor be his study of they affectation . for the poet he have little taste ; the novelist he consider only profitable in interval of graver reading ; but history , political economy , even metaphysic , genuinely appeal to he . he have always two or three solid book on hand , each with its marker ; he study they at stated hour , and always sit at a table , a notebook open beside he . a little work once well - know , Todd 's ' student 's Manual , ' have form his method and inspire he with zeal . 

 to - night , it be Sunday , he take down a volume of Barrow 's sermon . though not strictly orthodox in religious faith , he conform to the practice of the Church of England , and since his marriage have be more scrupulous on this point than before . he abhor unorthodoxy in a woman , and would not on any account have suffer Monica to surmise that he have his doubt concern any article of the christian faith . like most man of his kind , he view religion as a precious and powerful instrument for direct the female conscience . frequently he read aloud to his wife , but this evening he show no intention of do so . Monica , however , sit unoccupied . after glance at she once or twice , he say reprovingly , 

 ' have you finish your Sunday book ? ' 

 ' not quite . but I do not   care to read just now . ' 

 the silence that follow be break by Monica herself . 

 ' have you accept Mrs. Luke 's invitation to dinner ? ' she ask . 

 ' I have decline it , ' be the reply , carelessly give . 

 Monica bite her lip . 

 ' but why ? ' 

 ' surely we need not   discuss that over again , Monica . ' 

 his eye be still on the book , and he stir impatiently . 

 ' but , ' urge his wife , ' do you mean to break with she altogether ? if so , I think it be very unwise , edmund . what an opinion you must have of I , if you think I can not   see people 's fault ! I know it be very true , all you say about she . but she wish to be kind to we , I be sure and I like to see something of a life so different from our own . ' 

 Widdowson drum on the floor with his foot . in a few moment , ignore Monica 's remark , he stroke his beard , and ask , with a show of casual interest 

 ' how be it you know that Mr. Barfoot ? ' 

 ' I have meet he before when I go there on the Saturday . ' 

 Widdowson 's eye fall ; his brow be wrinkle . 

 ' he be often there , then ? ' 

 ' I do not   know . perhaps he be . he be Miss Barfoot 's cousin , you know . ' 

 ' you have not   see he more than once before ? ' 

 ' no . why do you ask ? ' 

 ' oh , it be only that he seem to speak as if you be old acquaintance . ' 

 ' that be his way , I suppose . ' 

 Monica have already learn that the jealousy which Widdowson so often betray before their manage still lurk in his mind . perceive why he put these question , she could not look entirely unconcerned , and the sense of his eye be upon she cause she some annoyance . 

 ' you talk to he , do not   you ? ' she say , change her position in the deep chair . 

 ' oh , the kind of talk that be possible with a perfect stranger . I suppose he be in some profession ? ' 

 ' I really do not   know . why , edmund ? do he interest you ? ' 

 ' only that one like to know something about the people that be introduce to one 's wife , ' Widdowson answer rather acridly . 

 their bedtime be half - past ten . precisely at that moment Widdowson close his book glad to be relieve from the pretence of reading and walk over the low part of the house to see that all be right . he have a passion for routine . every night , before go upstairs , he do a number of little thing in unvarye sequence change the calendar for next day , make perfect order on his writing - table , wound lip his watch , and so on . that Monica could not direct her habit with like exactitude be frequently a distress to he ; if she chance to forget any most trivial detail of daily custom he look very solemn , and beg she to be more vigilant . 

 next morning after breakfast , as Monica stand by the dining - room window and look rather cheerlessly at a leaden sky , her husband come towards she as if he have something to say . she turn , and see that his face no long wear the austere expression which have make her miserable last night , and even during the meal this morning . 

 ' be we friend ? ' he say , with the attempt at playfulness which always make he look particularly awkward . 

 ' of course we be , ' Monica answer , smile , but not regard he . 

 ' do not   he behave gruffly last night to his little girl ? ' 

 ' just a little . ' 

 ' and what can the old bear do to show that he be sorry ? ' 

 ' never be gruff again . ' 

 ' the old bear be sometimes an old goose as well , and torment himself in the silly way . tell he so , if ever he begin to behave badly . be not   it account - book morning ? ' 

 ' yes . I will come to you at eleven . ' 

 ' and if we have a nice , quiet , comfortable week , I will take you to the Crystal Palace concert next Saturday . ' 

 Monica nod cheerfully , and go off to look after her housekeeping . 

 the week be in all respect what Widdowson desire . not a soul come to the house ; Monica go to see no one . save on two day , it rain , sleet , drizzle , fogged ; on those two afternoon they have an hour 's walk . Saturday bring no improvement of the atmosphere , but Widdowson be in his happy mood ; he cheerfully keep his promise about the concert . as they sit together at night , his contentment overflow in tenderness like that of the first day of marriage . 

 ' now , why can not   we always live like this ? what have we to do with other people ? let we be everything to each other , and forget that any one else exist . ' 

 ' I can not   help think that be a mistake , ' Monica venture to reply . ' for one thing , if we see more people , we should have so much more to talk about when we be alone . ' 

 ' it be well to talk about ourselves . I should not   care if I never again see any living creature but you . you see , the old bear love his little girl well than she love he . ' 

 Monica be silent . 

 ' be not   it true ? you do not   feel that my company would be enough for you ? ' 

 ' would it be right if I cease to care for every one else ? there be my sister . I ought to have ask Virginia to come to - morrow ; I be sure she think I neglect she , and it must be dreadful living all alone like she do . ' 

 ' have not   they make up their mind yet about the school ? I be sure it be the right thing for they to do . if the venture be to fail , and they lose money , we would see that they never come to want . ' 

 ' they be so timid about it . and it would not   be nice , you know , to feel they be go to be dependent upon we for the rest of their life . I have well go and see Virgie to - morrow morning , and bring she back for dinner . 

 ' if you like , ' Widdowson assent slowly . ' but why not send a message , and ask she to come here ? ' 

 ' I have rather go . it make a change for I . ' 

 this be a word Widdowson detest . Change , on Monica 's lip , always seem to mean a release from his society . but he swallow his dissatisfaction , and finally consent to the arrangement . 

 Virginia come to dinner , and stay until nightfall . thank to her sister 's kindness , she be well clothe than in former day , but her face signify no improvement of health . the enthusiasm with which Rhoda Nunn have inspire she appear only in fitful affectation of interest when Monica press she concern the project undertaking down in Somerset . in general she have a dreamy , reticent look , and become uncomfortable when any one gaze at she inquiringly . her talk be of the most insignificant thing ; this afternoon she spend nearly half an hour in describe a kitten which Mrs. Conisbee have give she ; care of the little animal appear to have absorb her whole attention for many day past . 

 another visitor to - day be Mr. Newdick , the City clerk who have be present at Monica 's wedding . he and Mrs. Luke Widdowson be the sole friend of her husband that Monica have see . Mr. Newdick enjoy come to Herne Hill . always lugubrious to begin with , he gradually cheer up , and by the time for departure be loquacious . but he have the oddest idea of talk suitable to a drawing - room . have he be permit , he would have hold forth to Monica by the hour on the history of the business firm which he have serve for a quarter of a century . this subject alone could animate he . his anecdote be as often as not quite unintelligible , save to people of City experience . for all that Monica do not dislike the man ; he be a good , simple , unselfish fellow , and to she he behave with exaggeration of respect . 

 a few day later Monica have a sudden fit of illness . her marriage , and the long open - air holiday , have give she a much healthy appearance than when she be at the shop ; but this present disorder resemble the attack she have suffer in Rutland Street . Widdowson hop that it signify a condition for which he be anxiously wait . that , however , do not seem to be the case . the medical man who be call in ask question about the patient 's mode of life . do she take enough exercise ? have she wholesome variety of occupation ? at these inquiry Widdowson inwardly rag . he be torment with a suspicion that they result from something Monica have say to the doctor . 

 she keep her bed for three or four day , and on rise could only sit by the fireside , silent , melancholy . Widdowson indulge his hope , though Monica herself laugh it aside , and even show annoyance if he return to the subject . her temper be strangely uncertain ; some chance word in a conversation would irritate she beyond endurance , and after an outburst of petulant displeasure she become obstinately mute . at other time she behave with such exquisite docility and sweetness that Widdowson be beside himself with rapture . 

 after a week of convalescence , she say one morning , 

 ' could not   we go away somewhere ? I do not   think I shall ever be quite well stay here . ' 

 ' it be wretched weather , ' reply her husband . 

 ' oh , but there be place where it would not   be like this . you do not   mind the expense , do you , edmund ? ' 

 ' Expense ? not I , indeed ! but be you think of abroad ? ' 

 she look at he with eye that have suddenly brighten . 

 ' oh ! would it be possible ? People do go out of England in the winter . ' 

 Widdowson pluck at his grizzle beard and finger his watch - chain . it be a temptation . why not take she away to some place where only foreigner and stranger would be about they ? yet the enterprise alarm he . 

 ' I have never be out of England , ' he say , with misgiving . 

 ' all the more reason why we should go . I think Miss Barfoot could advise we about it . she have be abroad , I know , and she have so many friend . ' 

 ' I do not   see any need to consult Miss Barfoot , ' he reply stiffly . ' I be not such a helpless man , Monica . ' 

 yet a feeling of inability to grapple with such an undertaking as this grow on he the more he think of it . naturally , his mind busy itself with such vague knowledge as he have gather of those place in the South of France , where rich english people go to escape their own climate : Nice , Cannes . he could not imagine himself set forth to these region . doubtless it be possible to travel thither , and live there when one arrive , without a knowledge of French ; but he picture all sort of humiliating situation result from his ignorance . above everything he dread humiliation in Monica 's sight ; it would be intolerable to have she compare he with man who speak foreign language , and be at home on the continent . 

 nevertheless , he write to his friend Newdick , and invite he to dine , solely for the purpose of talk over this question with he in private . after dinner he broach the subject . to his surprise , Newdick have idea concern Nice and Cannes and such place . he have hear about they from the junior partner of his firm , a young gentleman who talk largely of his experience abroad . 

 ' an immoral lot there , ' he say , smile and shake his head . ' queer going on . ' 

 ' oh , but that be among the foreigner , be not   it ? ' 

 Thereupon Mr. Newdick reveal his acquaintance with english literature . 

 ' do you ever read any of Ouida 's novel ? ' 

 ' no , I never do . ' 

 ' I advise you to before you think of take your wife over there . she write a great deal about those part . People get mix up so , it seem . you could not   live by yourself . you have to eat at public table , and you would have all sort of people try to make acquaintance with Mrs. Widdowson . they be a queer lot , I believe . ' 

 he abandon the thought , at once and utterly . when Monica learn this he give only vague and unsatisfactory reason she fall back into her despondent mood . for a whole day she scarcely utter a word . 

 on the next day , in the dreary afternoon , they be surprise by a call from Mrs. Luke . the widow less than ever a widow in external come in with a burst of exuberant spirit , and begin to scold the moping couple like an affectionate parent . 

 ' when be you silly young people come to an end of your honeymoon ? do you sit here day after day and call each other pretty name ? really it be very charming in its way . I never know such an obstinate case . Monica , my black - eyed beauty , change your frock , and come with I to look up the Hodgson Bulls . they be quite too awful ; I can not   face they alone ; but I be bind to keep in with they . be off , and let I pitch into your young man for dare to refuse my dinner . do not   you know , sir , that my invitation be like those of Royalty polite command ? ' 

 Widdowson keep silence , wait to see what his wife would do . he could not with decency object to her accompany Mrs. Luke , yet hat the thought of such a step . a grim smile on his face , he sit stiffly , star at the wall . to his inexpressible delight , Monica , after a short hesitation , excuse herself ; she be not well ; she do not feel able 

 ' oh ! ' laugh the visitor . ' I see , I see ! do just as you like , of course . but if Edmund have any nous ' this phrase she have learn from a young gentleman , late of Oxford , now of Tattersall 's and elsewhere ' he will not   let you sit here in the dump . you be in the dump , I can see . ' 

 the vivacious lady do not stay long . when she have rustle forth again to her carriage , Widdowson break into a paean of amorous gratitude . what could he do to show how he appreciate Monica 's self - denial on his behalf ? for a day or two he be absent rather mysteriously , and in the meantime make up his mind , after consultation with Newdick , to take his wife for a holiday in Guernsey . 

 Monica , when she hear of this project , be at first moderately grateful , but in a day or two show by revive strength and spirit that she look forward eagerly to the departure . her husband advertise for lodging in St. Peter Port ; he would not face the disagreeable chance of a hotel . in a fortnight 's time all their preparation be make . during their absence , which might extend over a month , Virginia be to live at Herne Hill , in supervision of the two servant . 

 on the last Sunday Monica go to see her friend in Queen 's Road . Widdowson be ashamed to offer an objection ; he much dislike she go there alone , but dislike equally the thought of accompany she , for at Miss Barfoot 's he could not pretend to sit , stand , or converse with ease . 

 it happen that Mrs. Cosgrove be again call . on the first occasion of meet with Monica this lady pay she no particular attention ; to - day she address she in a friendly manner , and their conversation lead to the discovery that both of they be about to spend the ensue month in the same place . Mrs. Cosgrove hop they might occasionally see each other . 

 of this coincidence Monica think well to say nothing on her return home . she could not be sure that her husband might not , at the last moment , decide to stay at Herne Hill rather than incur the risk of her meet an acquaintance in Guernsey . on this point he could not be trust to exercise common sense . for the first time Monica have a secret she desire to keep from he , and the necessity be one which could not but have an unfavourable effect on her manner of regard Widdowson . they be to start on Monday evening . through the day her mind be divide between joy in the thought of see a new part of the world and a sense of weary dislike for her home . she have not understand until now how terrible would be the prospect of live here for a long time with no companionship but her husband 's . on the return that prospect would lie before she . but no ; their way of life must somehow be modify ; on that she be resolve . 




 CHAPTER XVI 

 health from the sea 

 from Herne Hill to St. Peter Port be a change which make of Monica a new creature . the weather could not have be more propitious ; day after day of still air and magnificent sky , with temperature which make a brisk walk at any hour thoroughly enjoyable , yet allow one to sit at ease in the midday sunshine . their lodging be in the good part of the town , high up , look forth over blue sea to the cliff of Sark . Widdowson congratulate himself on have take this step ; it be like a revival of his honeymoon ; never since their settle down at home have Monica be so grateful , so affectionate . why , his wife be what he have think she from the first , perfect in every wifely attribute . how lovely she look as she sit down to the breakfast - table , after breathe sea air at the open window , in her charming dress , her black hair arrange in some new fashion just to please he ! or when she walk with he about the quay , obviously admire by man who pass they . or when she seat herself in the open carriage for a drive which would warm her cheek and make her lip red and sweeter . 

 ' edmund , ' she say to he one evening , as they talk by the fireside , ' do not   you think you take life rather too gravely ? ' 

 he laugh . 

 ' gravely ? do not   I seem to enjoy myself ? ' 

 ' oh yes ; just now . but still in a rather serious way . one would think you always have care on your mind , and be struggle to get rid of they . ' 

 ' I have not   a care in the world . I be the most blessed of mortal . ' 

 ' so you ought to think yourself . but when we get back again , how will it be ? you will not   be angry with I ? I really do not   think I can live again as we be do . ' 

 ' not live as ' 

 his brow darken ; he look at she in astonishment . 

 ' we ought to have more enjoyment , ' she pursue courageously . ' think of the number of people who live a dull , monotonous life just because they can not   help it . how they would envy we , with so much money to spend , free to do just what we like ! do not   it seem a pity to sit there day after day alone ' 

 ' do not , my darling ! ' he implore . ' do not ! that make I think you do not   really love I . 

 ' Nonsense ! I want you to see what I mean . I be not one of the silly people who care for nothing but amusement , but I do think we might enjoy our life more when we be in London . we shall not   live for ever , you know . be it right to spend day after day sit there in the house ' 

 ' but come , come ; we have our occupation . surely it ought to be a pleasure to you to see that the house be keep in order . there be duty ' 

 ' yes , I know . but these duty I could perform in an hour or two . ' 

 ' not thoroughly . ' 

 ' quite thoroughly enough . ' 

 ' in my opinion , Monica , a woman ought never to be so happy as when she be look after her home . ' 

 it be the old pedantic tone . his figure , in sympathy with it , abandon an easy attitude and become awkward . but Monica would not allow herself to be alarm . during the past week she have conduct herself so as to smooth the way for this very discussion . unsuspecting husband ! 

 ' I wish to do my duty , ' she say in a firm tone , ' but I do not   think it be right to make dull work for oneself , when one might be live . I do not   think it be live to go on week after week like that . if we be poor , and I have a lot of child to look after as well as all the housework to do , I believe I should not   grumble at least , I hope I should not . I should know that I ought to do what there be no one else to do , and make the good of it . but ' 

 ' make the good of it ! ' he interrupt indignantly . ' what an expression to use ! it would not only be your duty , dear , but your privilege ! ' 

 ' wait a moment , edmund . if you be a shopman earn fifteen shilling a week , and work from early morning to late at night , should you think it not only your duty but your privilege ? ' 

 he make a wrathful gesture . 

 ' what comparison be there ? I should be earn a hard livelihood by slave for other people . but a married woman who work in her own home , for her husband 's child ' 

 ' work be work , and when a woman be overburden with it she must find it difficult not to weary of home and husband and child all together . but of course I do not   mean to say that my work be too hard . all I mean be , that I do not   see why any one should make work , and why life should not   be as full of enjoyment as possible . ' 

 ' Monica , you have get these idea from those people at Chelsea . that be exactly why I do not   care for you to see much of they . I utterly disapprove of ' 

 ' but you be mistaken . Miss Barfoot and Miss Nunn be all for work . they take life as seriously as you do . ' 

 ' work ? what kind of work ? they want to make woman unwomanly , to make they unfit for the only duty woman ought to perform . you know very well my opinion about that kind of thing . ' 

 he be tremble with the endeavour to control himself , to speak indulgently . 

 ' I do not   think , Edmund , there be much real difference between man and woman . that is , there would not   be , if woman have fair treatment . ' 

 ' not much difference ? oh , come ; you be talk nonsense . there be as much difference between their mind as between their body . they be make for entirely different duty . ' 

 Monica sigh . 

 ' oh , that word Duty ! ' 

 pain unutterably , Widdowson bend forward and take her hand . he speak in a tone of the grave but soft rebuke . she be give entertainment to thought that would lead she who know whither , that would undermine her happiness , would end by make both of they miserable . he beseech she to put all such monstrous speculation out of her mind . 

 ' dear , good little wife ! do be guide by your husband . he be old than you , darling , and have see so much more of the world . ' 

 ' I have not   say anything dreadful , dear . my thought do not   come from other people ; they rise naturally in my own head . ' 

 ' now , what do you really want ? you say you can not   live as we be do . what change would you make ? ' 

 ' I should like to make more friend , and to see they often . I want to hear people talk , and know what be go on round about I . and to read a different kind of book ; book that would really amuse I , and give I something I could think about with pleasure . life will be a burden to I before long if I do not   have more freedom . ' 

 ' freedom ? ' 

 ' yes , I do not   think there be any harm in say that . ' 

 ' freedom ? ' he glare at she . ' I shall begin to think that you wish you have never marry I . ' 

 ' I should only wish that if I be make to feel that you shut I up in a house and could not   trust I to go where I choose . suppose the thought take you that you would go and walk about the City some afternoon , and you wish to go alone , just to be more at ease , should I have a right to forbid you , or grumble at you ? and yet you be very dissatisfied if I wish to go anywhere alone . ' 

 ' but here be the old confusion . I be a man ; you be a woman . ' 

 ' I can not   see that that make any difference . a woman ought to go about just as freely as a man . I do not   think it be just . when I have do my work at home I think I ought to be every bit as free as you be every bit as free . and I be sure , Edmund , that love need freedom if it be to remain love in truth . ' 

 he look at she keenly . 

 ' that be a dreadful thing for you to say . so , if I disapprove of your become the kind of woman that acknowledge no law , you will cease to love I ? ' 

 ' what law do you mean ? ' 

 ' why , the natural law that point out a woman 's place , and ' he add , with shake voice ' command she to follow her husband 's guidance . ' 

 ' now you be angry . we must not   talk about it any more just now . ' 

 she rise and pour out a glass of water . her hand tremble as she drink . Widdowson fall into gloomy abstraction . later , as they lie side by side , he wish to renew the theme , but Monica would not talk ; she declare herself too sleepy , turn she back to he , and soon sleep indeed . 

 that night the weather become stormy ; a roar wind sweep the Channel , and when day break nothing could be see but cloud and rain . Widdowson , who have rest little , be in a heavy , taciturn mood ; Monica , on the other hand , talk gaily , seem not to observe her companion 's irresponsiveness . she be glad of the wild sky ; now they would see another aspect of island life the fierce and perilous surge beat about these granite shore . 

 they have bring with they a few book , and Widdowson , after breakfast , sit down by the fire to read . Monica first of all write a letter to her sister ; then , as it be still impossible to go out , she take up one of the volume that lie on a side - table in their sitting - room , novel leave by former lodger . her choice be something or other with yellow back . Widdowson , watch all her movement furtively , become aware of the picture cover . 

 ' I do not   think you will get much good out of that , ' he remark , after one or two effort to speak . 

 ' no harm , at all event , ' she reply good - humouredly . 

 ' I be not so sure . why should you waste your time ? take " Guy Mannering , " if you want a novel . ' 

 ' I will see how I like this first . ' 

 he feel himself powerless , and suffer acutely from the thought that Monica be in rebellion against he . he could not understand what have bring about this sudden change . fear of lose his wife 's love restrain he from practical despotism , yet he be very near to utter a definite command . 

 in the afternoon it no long rain , and the wind have less violence . they go out to look at the sea . many people be gather about the harbour , whence be a fine view of the great wave that break into leap foam and spray against the crag of Sark . as they stand thus Occupied , Monica hear her name speak in a friendly voice that of Mrs. Cosgrove . 

 ' I have be expect to see you , ' say the lady . ' we arrive three day ago . ' 

 Widdowson , start with surprise , turn to examine the speaker . he see a woman of something less than middle age , unfashionably attire , good - look , with an air of high spirit ; only when she offer her hand to he do he remember have meet she at Miss Barfoot 's . to be graceful in a high wind be difficult for any man ; the ungainliness with which he return Mrs. Cosgrove 's greeting could not have be surpass , and probably would have be much the same even have he not , of necessity , stand clutch at his feel hat . 

 the three talk for a few minute . with Mrs. Cosgrove be two person , a young woman and a man of about thirty the latter a comely and vivacious fellow , with rather long hair of the orange - tawny hue . these look at Monica , but Mrs. Cosgrove make no introduction . 

 ' come and see I , will you ? ' she say , mention her address . ' one can not   get much in the evening ; I shall be nearly always at home after dinner , and we have music of a kind . ' 

 Monica boldly accept the invitation , say she would be glad to come . then Mrs. Cosgrove take leave of they , and walk landward with her companion . 

 Widdowson stand gaze at the sea . there be no misreading his countenance . when Monica have remark it , she press her lip together , and wait for what he would say or do . he say nothing , but presently turn his back upon the wave and begin to walk on . neither speak until they be in the shelter of the street ; then Widdowson ask suddenly , 

 ' who be that person ? ' 

 ' I only know her name , and that she go to Miss Barfoot 's . ' 

 ' it be a most extraordinary thing , ' he exclaim in high irritation . ' there be no get out of the way of those people . ' 

 Monica also be angry ; her cheek , redden by the wind , grow hotter . 

 ' it be still more extraordinary that you should object so to they . ' 

 ' whether or no I do object , and I have rather you do not   go to see that woman . ' 

 ' you be unreasonable , ' Monica answer sharply . ' certainly I shall go and see she . ' 

 ' I forbid you to do so ! if you go , it will be in defiance of my wish . ' 

 ' then I be oblige to defy your wish . I shall certainly go . ' 

 his face be frightfully distort . have they be in a lonely spot , Monica would have feel afraid of he . she move hurriedly away in the direction of their lodging , and for a few pace he follow ; then he check himself , turn round about , take an opposite way . 

 with stride of rage he go along by the quay , past the hotel and the small house that follow , on to St. Sampson . the wind , again prepare for a tempestuous night , beat and shake and at moment all but stop he ; he set his tooth like a madman , and rag on . past the granite quarry at Bordeaux Harbour , then towards the wild north extremity of the island , the sandy waste of L'Ancresse . when darkness begin to fall , no human being be in his range of sight . he stand on one spot for nearly a quarter of an hour , watching , or appear to watch , the black , low - fly scud . 

 their time for dining be seven . shortly before this Widdowson enter the house and go to the sitting - room ; Monica be not there . he find she in the bed - chamber , before the look - glass . at the sight of his reflected face she turn instantly . 

 ' Monica ! ' he put his hand on her shoulder , whisper hoarsely , ' Monica ! do not   you love I ? ' 

 she look away , not reply . 

 ' Monica ! ' 

 and of a sudden he fall on his knee before she , clasp she about the waist , burst into choke sob . 

 ' have you no love for I ? my darling ! my dear , beautiful wife ! have you begin to hate I ? ' 

 tear come to her eye . she implore he to rise and command himself . 

 ' I be so violent , so brutal with you . I speak without think ' 

 ' but why should you speak like that ? why be you so unreasonable ? if you forbid I to do simple thing , with not the least harm in they , you can not   expect I to take it like a child . I shall resist ; I can not   help it . ' 

 he have rise and be crush she in his arm , his hot breath on her neck , when he begin to whisper , 

 ' I want to keep you all to myself . I do not   like these people they think so differently they put such hateful idea into your mind they be not the right kind of friend for you ' 

 ' you misunderstand they , and you do not   in the least understand I . oh , you hurt I , edmund ! ' 

 he release her body , and take her head between his hand . 

 ' I have rather you be dead than that you should cease to love I ! you shall go to see she ; I will not   say a word against it . but , Monica , be faithful , be faithful to I ! ' 

 ' faithful to you ? ' she echo in astonishment . ' what have I say or do to put you in such a state ? because I wish to make a few friend as all woman do ' 

 ' it be because I have live so much alone . I have never have more than one or two friend , and I be absurdly jealous when you want to get away from I and amuse yourself with stranger . I can not   talk to such people . I be not suit for society . if I have not   meet you in that strange way , by miracle , I should never have be able to marry . if I allow you to have these friend ' 

 ' I do not   like to hear that word . why should you say allow ? do you think of I as your servant , edmund ? ' 

 ' you know how I think of you . it be I who be your servant , your slave . ' 

 ' oh , I can not   believe that ! ' she press her handkerchief to her cheek , and laugh unnaturally . ' such word do not   mean anything . it be you who forbid and allow and command , and ' 

 ' I will never again use such word . only convince I that you love I as much as ever . ' 

 ' it be so miserable to begin quarrel ' 

 ' never again ! say you love I ! put your arm round my neck press close to I ' 

 she kiss his cheek , but do not utter a word . 

 ' you can not   say that you love I ? ' 

 ' I think I be always show it . do get ready for dinner now ; it be past seven . oh , how foolish you have be ! ' 

 of course their talk last half through the night . Monica hold with remarkable firmness to the position she have take ; a much old woman might have envy her steadfast yet quite rational assertion of the right to live a life of her Own apart from that impose upon she by the duty of wedlock . a great deal of this spirit and the utterance it find be traceable to her association with the woman whom Widdowson so deeply suspect ; prior to her sojourn in Rutland Street she could not even have make clear to herself the demand which she now very clearly formulate . believe that she have learn nothing from they , and till of late instinctively oppose the doctrine hold by Miss Barfoot and Rhoda Nunn , Monica in truth owe the sole bit of real education she have ever receive to those few week of attendance in Great Portland Street . circumstance be now prove how apt a pupil she have be , even against her will . marriage , as be always the case with woman capable of development , make for she a new heaven and a new earth ; perhaps on no single subject do she now think as on the morning of her wedding - day . 

 ' you must either trust I completely , ' she say , ' or not at all . if you can not   and will not   trust I , how can I possibly love you ? ' 

 ' be I never to advise ? ' ask her husband , baffle , and even awe , by this extraordinary revelation of a woman he have suppose himself to know thoroughly . 

 ' oh , that be a very different thing from forbid and commanding ! ' she laugh . ' there be that novel this morning . of course I know as well as you do that " Guy Mannering " be well ; but that do not   say I be not to form my opinion of other book . you must not   be afraid to leave I the same freedom you have yourself . ' 

 the result of it all be that Widdowson feel his passionate love glow with new fire . for a moment he think himself capable of accept this change in their relation . the marvellous thought of equality between man and wife , that gospel which in far - off day will refashion the world , for an instant smite his imagination and exalt he above his native level . 

 Monica pay for the energy she have put forth by a day of suffering . her head ache intolerably ; she have feverish symptom , and could hardly raise herself from the bed . it pass , and she be once more eager to go forth under the blue sky that follow the temp . 

 ' will you go with I to Mrs. Cosgrove 's this evening ? ' she ask of her husband . 

 he consent , and after dinner they seek the hotel where their acquaintance be stay . Widdowson be in extreme discomfort , partly due to the fact that he have no dress clothe to put on ; for far from anticipate or desire any such intercourse in Guernsey , he have never think of pack an evening suit . have he know Mrs. Cosgrave this uneasiness would have be spar he . that lady be in revolt against far graver institution than the swallow - tail ; she care not a button in what garb her visitor come to she . on their arrival , they find , to Widdowson 's horror , a room full of woman . with the hostess be that young lady they have see on the quay , Mrs. Cosgrove 's unmarried sister ; Miss Knott 's health have demand this retreat from the London winter . the guest be four a Mrs. Bevis and her three daughter all invalidish person , the mother somewhat lackadaisical , the girl with a look of unwilling spinsterhood . 

 Monica , noteworthy among the gathering for her sweet , bright prettiness , and the finish of her dress , soon make herself at home ; she chat gaily with the girl wonder indeed at her own air of maturity , which come to she for the first time . Mrs. Cosgrove , an easy woman of the world when circumstance require it , do she good to get something out of Widdowson who presently thaw a little . 

 then Miss Knott sit down to the piano , and play more than tolerably well ; and the young Miss Bevis sing a song of Schubert , with passable voice but in very distressing German the sole person distress by it be the hostess . 

 meanwhile Monica have be capture by Mrs. Bevis , who discourse to she on a subject painfully familiar to all the old lady 's friend . 

 ' do you know my son , Mrs. Widdowson ? oh , I think you have perhaps meet he . you will do so this evening , I hope . he be over here on a fortnight 's holiday . ' 

 ' do you live in Guernsey ? ' Monica inquire . 

 ' I practically live here , and one of my daughter be always with I . the other two live with their brother in a flat in bayswater . do you care for flat , Mrs. Widdowson ? ' 

 Monica could only say that she have no experience of that institution . 

 ' I do think they such a boon , ' pursue Mrs. Bevis . ' they be expensive but the advantage and comfort be so many . my son would not   on any consideration give up his flat . as I be say , he always have two of his sister to keep house for he . he be quite a young man , not yet thirty , but would you believe it ? we be all dependent upon he ! my son have support the whole of the family for the last six or seven year , and that by his own work . it sound incredible , do not   it ? but for he we should be quite unable to live . the dear girl have very delicate health ; simply impossible for they to exert themselves in any way . my son have make extraordinary sacrifice on our account . his desire be to be a professional musician , and every one think he would have become eminent ; myself , I be convinced of it perhaps that be only natural . but when our circumstance begin to grow very doubtful , and we really do not   know what be before we , my son consent to follow a business career that of wine merchant , with which his father be connect . and he exert himself so nobly , and give proof of such ability , that very soon all our fear be at an end ; and now , before he be thirty , his position be quite assured . we have no long a care . I live here very economically really sweet lodging on the road to St. Martin 's ; I do hope you will come and see I . and the girl go backwards and forwards . you see we be all here at present . when my son return to London he will take the eld and the young with he . the middle girl , dear Grace she be think very clever in water - colour , and I be quite sure , if it be necessary , she could pursue the art in a professional spirit . ' 

 Mr. Bevis enter the room , and Monica recognize the sprightly young man whom she have see on the quay . the hostess present he to her new friend , and he get into talk with Widdowson . request to make music for the company , he sing a gay little piece , which , to Monica at all event , seem one of the most delightful thing she have ever hear . 

 ' his own composition , ' whisper Miss Grace Bevis , then sit by Mrs. Widdowson . 

 that increase her delight . foolish as Mrs. Bevis undoubtedly be , she perchance have not praise her son beyond his merit . he look the good of good fellow ; so kind and merry and spirit ; such a capable man , too . it strike Monica as a very hard fate that he should have this family on his hand . what they must cost he ! probably he could not think of marry , just on their account . 

 Mr. Bevis come and take a place by her side . 

 ' thank you so very much , ' she say , ' for that charming song . be it publish ? ' 

 ' oh dear , no ! ' he laugh and shake his thick hair about . ' it be one of two or three that I somehow strike out when I be study in Germany , age ago . you play , I hope ? ' 

 Monica give a sad negative . 

 ' oh , what do it matter ? there be host of people who will always be overjoy to play when you ask they . it would be a capital thing if only those child be allow to learn an instrument who show genuine talent for music . ' 

 ' in that case , ' say Monica , ' there certainly would not   be host of people ready to play for I . ' 

 ' no . ' his merry laugh be repeat . ' you must not   mind when I contradict myself ; it be one of my habit . be you here for the whole winter ? ' 

 ' only a few week , unfortunately . ' 

 ' and do you dread the voyage back ? ' 

 ' to tell the truth , I do . I have a very unpleasant time come . ' 

 ' as for myself , how I ever undertake the thing I really do not   know . one of these time I shall die ; there be not a shadow of doubt of that . the girl always have to carry I ashore , one hold I by the hair and one by the boot . happily , I be so emancipated that my weight do not   distress they . I pick up flesh in a day or two , and then my health be stupendous as at present . you see how marvellously fit I look . ' 

 ' yes , you look very well , ' reply Monica , glance at the fair , comely face . 

 ' it be deceptive . all our family have wretche constitution . if I go to work regularly for a couple of month without a holiday , I sink into absolute decrepitude . an office - chair have be specially make for I , to hold I up at the desk . I beg your pardon for this clowning , Mrs. Widdowson , ' he suddenly add in another voice . ' the air put I in such spirit . what air it be ! speak quite seriously , my mother be save by come to live here . we believe she to be die , and now I have hope that she will live ever so many year long . ' 

 he speak of his mother with evident affection , glance kindly towards she with his blue eye . 

 only once or twice have Monica venture to exchange a glance with her husband . it satisfy she that he manage to converse ; what his mood really be could not be determine until afterwards . when they be about to leave she see he , to her surprise , speak quite pleasantly with Mr. Bevis . a carriage be procure to convey they home , and as soon as they have start , Monica ask her husband , with a merry look , how he have enjoy himself . 

 ' there be not much harm in it , ' he reply dryly . 

 ' Harm ? how like you , Edmund , to put it that way ! now confess you will be glad to go again . ' 

 ' I shall go if you wish . ' 

 ' unsatisfactory man ! you can not   bring yourself to admit that it be pleasant to be among new people . I believe , in your heart , you think all enjoyment be wrong . the music be nice , be not   it ? ' 

 ' I do not   think much of the girl 's singing , but that fellow Bevis be not   bad . ' 

 Monica examine he as he speak , and seem to suppress a laugh . 

 ' no , he be not   at all bad . I see you talk with Mrs. Bevis . do she tell you anything about her wonderful son ? ' 

 ' nothing particular . ' 

 ' oh , then I must tell you the whole story . ' 

 and she do so , in a tone half of jest , half of serious approval . 

 ' I do not   see that he have do anything more than his duty , ' remark Widdowson at the end . ' but he be not   a bad fellow . ' 

 for private reason , Monica contrast this attitude towards Bevis with the disfavour her husband have show to Mr. Barfoot , and be secretly much amused . 

 two or three day after they go to spend the morning at Petit Bot Bay , and there encounter with Bevis and his three sister . the result be an invitation to go back and have lunch at Mrs. Bevis 's lodging ; they accept it , and remain with their acquaintance till dusk . the young man 's holiday be at an end ; next morning he would face the voyage which he have depict so grotesquely . 

 ' and alone ! ' he lament to Monica . ' only think of it . the girl be all rather below par just now ; they have well stay here for the present . ' 

 ' and in London you will be alone too ? ' 

 ' yes . it be very sad . I must bear up under it . the bad of it be , I be naturally subject to depression . in solitude I sink , sink . but the subject be too painful . do not   let we darken the last hour with such reflection . ' 

 Widdowson retain his indulgent opinion of the facetious young wine merchant . he even laugh now and then in recall some phrase or other that Bevis have use to he . 

 subsequently , Monica have several long conversation with the old lady . impel to gossipy frankness about all her affair , Mrs. Bevis allow it to be understand that the chief reason for two of the girl always be with their brother be the possibility thus afford of their ' meet people ' that be to say , of their have a chance of marriage . Mrs. Cosgrove and one or two other lady do they social service . 

 ' they never will marry ! ' say Monica to her husband , rather thoughtfully than with commiseration . 

 ' why not ? they be nice enough girl . ' 

 ' yes , but they have no money ; and ' she smile ' people see that they want to find husband . ' 

 ' I do not   see that the first matter ; and the second be only natural . ' 

 Monica attempt no rejoinder , but say presently 

 ' now they be just the kind of woman who ought to find something to do . ' 

 ' something to do ? why , they attend to their mother and their brother . what could be more proper ? ' 

 ' very proper , perhaps . but they be miserable , and always will be . ' 

 ' then they have no right to be miserable . they be do their duty , and that ought to keep they cheerful . ' 

 Monica could have say many thing , but she overcome the desire , and laugh the subject aside . 




 CHAPTER XVII 

 the TRIUMPH 

 nor till mid - winter do Barfoot again see his friend the Micklethwaites . by invitation he go to South Tottenham on New Year 's Eve , and din with they at seven o'clock . he be the first guest that have enter the house since their marriage . 

 from the very doorstep Everard become conscious of a domestic atmosphere that tell soothingly upon his nerve . the little servant who open to he exhibit a gentle , noiseless demeanour which be no doubt the result of careful discipline . Micklethwaite himself , who at once come out into the passage , give proof of a like influence ; his hearty greeting be speak in soft tone ; a placid happiness beam from his face . in the sit - room   Micklethwaite 's study , use for reception because the other have to serve as dining - room   temper lamplight and the glow of a hospitable fire show the hostess and her blind sister stand in expectation ; to Everard 's eye both of they look far well in health than a few month ago . Mrs. Micklethwaite be no long so distressingly old ; an expression that resemble girlish pleasure light up her countenance as she step forward ; nay , if he mistake not , there come a gentle warmth to her cheek , and the momentary downward glance be as graceful and modest as in a youthful bride . never have Barfoot approach a woman with more finished courtesy , the sincere expression of his feeling . the blind sister he regard in like spirit ; his voice touch its soft note as he hold her hand for a moment and reply to her pleasant word . 

 no undue indication of poverty disturb he . he see that the house have be improve in many way since Mrs. Micklethwaite have take possession of it ; picture , ornament , piece of furniture be add , all in simple taste , but serve to heighten the effect of refined comfort . where the average woman would have display pretentious emptiness , Mrs. Micklethwaite have make a home which in its way be beautiful . the dinner , which she herself have cook , and which she assist in serve , aim at be no more than a simple ; decorous meal , but the guest unfeignedly enjoy it ; even the vegetable and the bread seem to he to have a dainty flavour than at many a rich table . he could not help notice and admire the skill with which Miss Wheatley eat without see what be before she ; have he not know her misfortune , he would hardly have become aware of it by any peculiarity as she sit opposite to he . 

 the mathematician have learn to sit upon a chair like ordinary mortal . for the first week or two it must have cost he severe restraint ; now he betray no temptation to roll and jerk and twist himself . when the lady retire , he reach from the sideboard a box which Barfoot view with uneasiness . 

 ' do you smoke here in this room ? ' 

 ' oh , why not ? ' 

 Everard glance at the pretty curtain before the window . 

 ' no , my boy , you do not smoke here . and , in fact , I like your claret ; I will not   spoil the flavour of it . ' 

 ' as you please ; but I think Fanny will be distress . ' 

 ' you shall say that I have abandon the weed . ' 

 emotion be at conflict in Micklethwaite 's mind , but finally he beam with gratitude . 

 ' Barfoot ' he bend forward and touch his friend 's arm ' there be angel walk the earth in this our day . science have not   abolish they , my dear fellow , and I do not   think it ever will . ' 

 ' it fall to the lot of but few man to encounter they , and of few still to entertain they permanently in a cottage at South Tottenham . ' 

 ' you be right . ' Micklethwaite laugh in a new way , with scarcely any sound ; a change Everard have already notice . ' these two sister but I have well not speak about they . in my old age I have become a worshipper , a mystic , a man of dream and vision . ' 

 ' how about worship in a parochial sense ? ' inquire Barfoot , smile . ' any difficulty of that point ? ' 

 ' I conform , in moderation . nothing would be ask of I . there be no fanaticism , no intolerance . it would be brutal if I decline to go to church on a Sunday morning . you see , my strictly scientific attitude help in avoid offence . Fanny can not   understand it , but my lack of dogmatism vastly relieve she . I have be try to explain to she that the scientific mind can have nothing to do with materialism . the new order of idea be of course very difficult for she to grasp ; but in time , in time . ' 

 ' for heaven 's sake , do not   attempt conversion ! ' 

 ' on no account whatever . but I should like she to see what be mean by perception and conception , by the relativity of time and space and a few simple thing of that kind ! ' 

 Barfoot laugh heartily . 

 ' by - the - bye , ' he say , shift to safe ground , ' my brother Tom be in London , and in wretched health . his angel be from the wrong quarter , from the nethermost pit . I seriously believe that she have a plan for kill her husband . you remember my mentioning in a letter his horse - accident ? he have never recover from that , and as likely as not never will . his wife bring he away from Madeira just when he ought to have stop there to get well . he settle himself at Torquay , whilst that woman run about to pay visit . it be understand that she should go back to he at Torquay , but this she at length refuse to do . the place be too dull ; it do not   suit her extremely delicate health ; she must live in London , her pure native air . if Tom have take any advice , he would have let she live just where she please , thank Heaven that she be at a distance from he . but the poor fellow can not   be away from she . he have come up , and here I feel convinced he will die . it be a very monstrous thing , but uncommonly like woman in general who have get a man into their power . ' 

 Micklethwaite shake his head . 

 ' you be too hard upon they . you have be unlucky . you know my view of your duty . ' 

 ' I begin to think that marriage be not   impossible for I , ' say Barfoot , with a grave smile . 

 ' ha ! Capital ! ' 

 ' but as likely as not it will be marriage without form imply a free union . ' 

 the mathematician be downcast . 

 ' I be sorry to hear that . it will not   do . we must conform . besides , in that case the person decidedly be not   suitable to you . you of all man must marry a lady . ' 

 ' I should never think of any one that be not   a lady . ' 

 ' be emancipation get as far as that ? do lady enter into that kind of union ? ' 

 ' I do not   know of any example . that be just why the idea tempt I . ' Barfoot would go no far in explanation . 

 ' how about your new algebra ? ' 

 ' alas ! my dear boy , the temptation be so frightful when I get back home . remember that I have never know what it be to sit and talk through the evening with ordinary friend , let alone it be too much for I just yet . and , you know , I do not   venture to work on Sundays . that will come ; all in good time . I must grant myself half a year of luxury after such a life as mine have be . ' 

 ' of course you must . let algebra wait . ' 

 ' I think it over , of course , at odd moment . church on Sunday morning be a good opportunity . ' 

 Barfoot could not stay to see the old year out , but good wish be none the less heartily exchange before he go . Micklethwaite walk with he to the railway station ; at a few pace ' distance from his house he stand and point back to it . 

 ' that little place , Barfoot , be one of the sacred spot of the earth . strange to think that the house have be wait for I there through all the year of my hopelessness . I feel that a mysterious light ought to shine about it . it ought not   to look just like common house . ' 

 on his way home Everard think over what he have see and hear , smile good - naturedly . well , that be one ideal of marriage . not his ideal ; but very beautiful amid the vulgarity and vileness of ordinary experience . it be the old fashion in its pure presentment ; the consecrated form of domestic happiness , remove beyond reach of satire , only to be touch , if touch at all , with the very gentle irony . 

 a life by no mean for he . if he try it , even with a woman so perfect , he would perish of ennui . for he marriage must not mean repose , inevitably tend to drowsiness , but the mutual incitement of vigorous mind . passion yes , there must be passion , at all event to begin with ; passion not impossible of revival in day subsequent to its first indulgence . beauty in the academic sense he no long demand ; enough that the face speak eloquently , that the limb be vigorous . let beauty perish if it can not ally itself with mind ; be a woman what else she may , let she have brain and the power of use they ! in that demand the maturity of his manhood express itself . for casual amour the odalisque could still prevail with he ; but for the life of wedlock , the durable companionship of man and woman , intellect be his first requirement . 

 a woman with man 's capability of understanding and reasoning ; free from superstition , religious or social ; far above the ignoble weakness which man have be base enough to idealize in her sex . a woman who would scorn the vulgarism of jealousy , and yet know what it be to love . this be ask much of nature and civilization ; do he grossly deceive himself in think he have find the paragon ? 

 for thus far have he advance in his thought of Rhoda Nunn . if the phrase have any meaning , he be in love with she ; yet , strange complex of emotion , he be still only half serious in his desire to take she for a wife , wish rather to amuse and flatter himself by merely inspire she with passion . therefore he refuse to entertain a thought of formal marriage . to obtain her consent to marriage would mean nothing at all ; it would afford he no satisfaction . but so to play upon her emotion that the proud , intellectual , earnest woman be willing to defy society for his sake ah ! that would be an end worth achieve . 

 ever since the dialogue in which he frankly explain his position , and all but declare love , he have not once see Rhoda in private . she shun he purposely beyond a doubt , and do not that denote a fear of he justify by her inclination ? the postponement of what must necessarily come to pass between they begin to try his patience , as assuredly it inflame his ardour . if no other resource offer , he would be oblige to make his cousin an accomplice by request she beforehand to leave he alone with Rhoda some evening when he have call upon they . 

 but it be time that chance favour he , and his interview with Miss Nunn come about in a way he could not have foresee . 

 at the end of the first week of January he be invite to dine at Miss Barfoot 's . the afternoon have be foggy , and when he set forth there seem to be some likelihood of a plague of choke darkness such as would obstruct traffic . as usual , he go by train to Sloane Square , purpose   for it be dry under foot , and he could not disregard small economy   to walk the short distance from there to Queen 's Road . on come out from the station he find the fog so dense that it be doubtful whether he could reach his journey 's end . cab be not to be have ; he must either explore the gloom , with risk of get nowhere at all , or give it up and take a train back . but he long too ardently for the sight of Rhoda to abandon his evening without an effort . have with difficulty make his way into King 's Road , he find progress easy on account of the shop illumination ; the fog , however , be grow every moment more fearsome , and when he have to turn out of the highway his case appear desperate . literally he grope along , feel the front of the house . as under ordinary circumstance he would have have only just time enough to reach his cousin 's punctually , he must be very late : perhaps they would conclude that he have not venture out on such a night , and be already din without he . no matter ; as well go one way as another now . after abandon hope several time , and all but asphyxiate , he find by inquiry of a man with whom he collide that he be actually within a few door of his destination . another effort and he ring a joyous peal at the bell . 

 a mistake . it be the wrong house , and he have to go two door far on . 

 this time he procure admittance to the familiar little hall . the servant smile at he , but say nothing . he be lead to the drawing - room , and there find Rhoda Nunn alone . this fact do not so much surprise he as Rhoda 's appearance . for the first time since he have know she , her dress be not uniform black ; she wear a red silk blouse with a black skirt , and so admirable be the effect of this costume that he scarcely refrain from a delighted exclamation . 

 some concern be visible in her face . 

 ' I be sorry to say , ' be her first word , ' that Miss Barfoot will not be here in time for dinner . she go to Faversham this morning , and ought to have be back about half - past seven . but a telegram come some time ago . a thick fog cause she to miss the train , and the next do not   reach Victoria till ten minute past ten . ' 

 it be now half - past eight ; dinner have be appoint for the hour . Barfoot explain his lateness in arrive . 

 ' be it so bad as that ? I do not   know . ' 

 the situation embarrass both of they . Barfoot suspect a hope on Miss Nunn 's part that he would relieve she of his company , but , even have there be no external hindrance , he could not have relinquish the happy occasion . to use frankness be good . 

 ' out of the question for I to leave the house , ' he say , meet her eye and smile . ' you will not   be hard upon a starve man ? ' 

 at once Rhoda make a pretence of have feel no hesitation . 

 ' oh , of course we will dine immediately . ' she ring the bell . ' Miss Barfoot take it for grant that I would represent she . look , the fog be penetrate even to our fireside . ' 

 ' cheerful , very . what be Mary do at Faversham ? ' 

 ' some one she have be correspond with for some time beg she to go down and give an address to a number of lady on a certain subject . ' 

 ' ah ! Mary be on the way to become a celebrity . ' 

 ' quite against her will , as you know . ' 

 they go to dinner , and Barfoot , thoroughly enjoy the abnormal state of thing , continue to talk of his cousin . 

 ' it seem to I that she can not   logically refuse to put herself forward . work of her kind can not   be do in a corner . it be not   a case of " oh teach the orphan girl to sew . " ' 

 ' I have use the same argument to she , ' say Rhoda . 

 her place at the head of the table have its full effect upon Everard 's imagination . why should he hold by a resolve of which he do not absolutely approve the motive ? why not ask she simply to be his wife , and so remove one element of difficulty from his pursuit ? true , he be wretchedly poor . marry on such an income , he would at once find his freedom restrict in every direction . but then , more likely than not , Rhoda have determine against marriage , and of he , especially , never think for a moment as a possible husband . well , that be what he want to ascertain . 

 they converse naturally enough till the meal be over . then their embarrassment revive , but this time it be Rhoda who take the initiative . 

 ' shall I leave you to your meditation ? ' she ask , move a few inch from the table . 

 ' I should much prefer your society , if you will grant it I for a little long . ' 

 without speak , she rise and lead the way to the drawingroom . there , sit at a formal distance from each other , they talk of the fog . would Miss Barfoot be able to get back at all ? 

 ' a propos , ' say Everard , ' do you ever read " the City of Dreadful Night " ? ' 

 ' yes , I have read it . ' 

 ' without sympathy , of course ? ' 

 ' why " of course " ? do I seem to you a shallow optimist ? ' 

 ' no . a vigorous and rational optimist such as I myself aim at be . ' 

 ' do you ? but optimism of that kind must be prove by some effort on behalf of society . ' 

 ' precisely the effort I be make . if a man work at develop and fortify the good thing in his own character , he be surely do society a service . ' 

 she smile sceptically . 

 ' yes , no doubt . but how do you develop and fortify yourself ? ' 

 she be meet he half - way , think Everard . foresee the inevitable , she wish to have it over and do with . or else 

 ' I live very quietly , ' be his reply , ' thinking of grave problem most of my time . you know I be a great deal alone . ' 

 ' naturally . ' 

 ' no ; anything but naturally . ' 

 Rhoda say nothing . he wait a moment , then move to a seat much near her . her face harden , and he see her finger lock together . 

 ' where a man be in love , solitude seem to he the most unnatural of condition . ' 

 ' please do not   make I your confidante , Mr. Barfoot , ' Rhoda with well - assume pleasantry . ' I have no taste for that kind of thing . ' 

 ' but I can not   help do so . it be you that I be in love with . ' 

 ' I be very sorry to hear it . happily , the sentiment will not long trouble you . ' 

 he read in her eye and on her lip a profound agitation . she glance about the room , and , before he could again speak , have rise to ring the bell . 

 ' you always take coffee , I think ? ' 

 without troubling to give any assent , he move apart and turn over some book on the table . for full five minute there be silence . the coffee be bring ; he taste it and put his cup down . see that Rhoda have , as it be , entrench herself behind the beverage , and would continue to sip at be as long as might be necessary , he go and stand in front of she . 

 ' Miss Nunn , I be more serious than you will give I credit for be . the sentiment , as you call it , have trouble I for some time , and will last . ' 

 her refuge fail she . the cup she be hold begin to shake a little . 

 ' please let I put it aside for you . ' 

 Rhoda allow he to do so , and then lock her finger . 

 ' I be so much in love with you that I can not   keep away from this house more than a few day at a time . of course you have know it ; I have not   try to disguise why I come here so often . it be so seldom that I see you alone ; and now that fortune be kind to I I must speak as well I can . I will not   make myself ridiculous in your eye if I can help it . you despise the love - making of ballroom and garden party ; so do I , most heartily . let I speak like a man who have few illusion to overcome . I want you for the companion of my life ; I do not   see very well how I be to do without you . you know , I think , that I have only a moderate competence ; it be enough to live upon without misery , that be all one can say . probably I shall never be rich , for I can not   promise to exert myself to earn money ; I wish to live for other thing . you can picture the kind of life I want you to share . you know I well enough to understand that my wife if we use the old word would be as free to live in her own way as I to live in mine . all the same , it be love that I be ask for . think how you may about man and woman , you know that there be such a thing as love between they , and that the love of a man and a woman who can think intelligently may be the good thing life have to offer they . ' 

 he could not see her eye , but she be smile in a force way , with her lip close set . 

 ' as you insist on speak , ' she say at length , ' I have no choice but to listen . it be usual , I think if one may trust the novel for a woman to return thank when an offer of this kind have be make to she . so thank you very much , Mr. Barfoot . ' 

 Everard seize a little chair that be close by , plant it beside Rhoda 's , there seat himself and take possession of one of her hand . it be do so rapidly and vehemently that Rhoda start back , her expression change from sportive mockery to all but alarm . 

 ' I will have no such thank , ' he utter in a low voice , much move , a smile make he look strangely stern . ' you shall understand what it mean when a man say that he love you . I have come to think your face so beautiful that I be in torment with the desire to press my lip upon your . do not   be afraid that I shall be brutal enough to do it without your consent ; my respect for you be strong even than my passion . when I first see you , I think you interesting because of your evident intelligence nothing more ; indeed you be not a woman to I . now you be the one woman in the world ; no other can draw my eye from you . touch I with your finger and I shall tremble that be what my love mean . ' 

 she be colourless ; her lip , just part , quiver as the breath pant between they . she do not try to withdraw her hand . 

 ' can you love I in return ? ' Everard go on , his face still nearer . ' be I anything like this to you ? have the courage you boast of . speak to I as one human be to another , plain , honest word . ' 

 ' I do not   love you in the least . and if I do I would never share your life . ' 

 the voice be very unlike her familiar tone . it seem to hurt she to speak . 

 ' the reason . because you have no faith in I ? ' 

 ' I can not   say whether I have or not . I know absolutely nothing of your life . but I have my work , and no one shall ever persuade I to abandon it . ' 

 ' your work ? how do you understand it ? what be its importance to you ? ' 

 ' oh , and you pretend to know I so well that you wish I to be your companion at every moment ! ' 

 she laugh mockingly , and try to draw away her hand , for it be burn by the heat of his . Barfoot hold she firmly . 

 ' what be your work ? copy with a type - machine , and teach other to do the same be not   that it ? ' 

 ' the work by which I earn money , yes . but if it be no more than that ' 

 ' explain , then . ' 

 passion be overmaster he as he watch the fine scorn in her eye . he raise her hand to his lip . 

 ' no ! ' Rhoda exclaim with sudden wrath . ' your respect oh , I appreciate your respect ! ' 

 she wrench herself from his grasp , and go apart . barfoot rise , gaze at she with admiration . 

 ' it be well I should be at a distance from you , ' he say . ' I want to know your mind , and not to be make insensate . ' 

 ' would not   it be well still if you leave I ? ' Rhoda suggest , mistress of herself again . 

 ' if you really wish it . ' he remember the circumstance and speak submissively . ' yet the fog give I such a good excuse for beg your indulgence . the chance be I should only lose myself in an inferno . ' 

 ' do not   it strike you that you take an advantage of I , as you do once before ? I make no pretence of equal you in muscular strength , yet you try to hold I by force . ' 

 he divine in her pleasure akin to his own , the delight of conflict . otherwise , she would never have speak thus . 

 ' yes , it be true . love revive the barbarian ; it would not   mean much if it do not . in this one respect I suppose no man , however civilized , would wish the woman he love to be his equal . marriage by capture can not   quite be do away with . you say you have not the least love for I ; if you have , should I like you to confess it instantly ? a man must plead and woo ; but there be different way . I can not   kneel before you and exclaim about my miserable unworthiness for I be not unworthy of you . I shall never call you queen and goddess unless in delirium , and I think I should soon weary of the woman who put her head under my foot . just because I be strong than you , and have strong passion , I take that advantage try to overcome , as I may , the womanly resistance which be one of your charm . 

 ' how useless , then , for we to talk . if you be determined to remind I again and again that your strength put I at your mercy ' 

 ' oh , not that ! I will come no nearer to you . sit down , and tell I what I ask . ' 

 Rhoda hesitate , but at length take the chair by which she be stand . 

 ' you be resolve never to marry ? ' 

 ' I never shall , ' Rhoda reply firmly . 

 ' but suppose marriage in no way interfere with your work ? ' 

 ' it would interfere hopelessly with the good part of my life . I think you understand this . what would become of the encouragement I be able to offer our girl ? ' 

 ' encouragement to refuse marriage ? ' 

 ' to scorn the old idea that a woman 's life be waste if she do not marry . my work be to help those woman who , by sheer necessity , must live alone woman whom vulgar opinion ridicule . how can I help they so effectually as by live among they , one of they , and show that my life be anything but weariness and lamentation ? I be fit for this . it give I a sense of power and usefulness which I enjoy . your cousin be do the same work admirably . if I desert I should despise myself . ' 

 ' magnificent ! if I could bear the thought of live without you , I should bid you persevere and be great . ' 

 ' I need no such bidding to persevere . ' 

 ' and for that very reason , because you be capable of such thing , I love you only the more . ' 

 there be triumph in her look , though she endeavour to disguise it . 

 ' then , for your own peace , ' she say , ' I must hope that you will avoid I . it be so easily do . we have nothing in common , Mr. Barfoot . ' 

 ' I can not   agree with that . for one thing , there be perhaps not half a dozen woman live with whom I could talk as I have talk with you . it be not   likely that I shall ever meet one . be I to make my bow , and abandon in resignation the one chance of perfect my life ? ' 

 ' you do not   know I . we differ profoundly on a thousand essential point . ' 

 ' you think so because you have a very wrong idea of I . ' 

 Rhoda glance at the clock on the mantelpiece . 

 ' Mr. Barfoot , ' she say in a change voice , ' you will forgive I if I remind you that it be past ten o'clock . ' 

 he sigh and rise . 

 ' the fog certainly can not be so thick now . shall I ask they to try and get you a cab ? ' 

 ' I shall walk to the station . ' 

 ' only one more word . ' she assume a quiet dignity which he could not disregard . ' we have speak in this way for the last time . you will not oblige I to take all sort of trouble merely to avoid useless and painful conversation ? ' 

 ' I love you , and I can not   abandon hope . ' 

 ' then I must take that trouble . ' her face darken , and she stand in expectation of his departure . 

 ' I must not   offer to shake hand , ' say Everard , draw a step nearer . 

 ' I hope you can remember that I have no choice but to be your hostess . ' 

 the face and tone affect he with a brief shame . bend his head , he approach she , and hold she offer hand , without pressure , only for an instant . 

 then he leave the room . 

 there be a little improvement in the night ; he could make his way along the pavement without actual groping , and no unpleasant adventure check he before he reach the station . Rhoda 's face and figure go before he . he be not downcast ; for all that she have say , this woman , soon or late , would yield herself ; he have a strange , unreasoning assurance of it . perhaps the obstinacy of his temper supply he with that confident expectation . he no long care on what term he obtain her legal marriage or free union it be indifferent to he . but her life should be link with his if fierce energy of will mean anything . 

 Miss Barfoot arrive at half - past eleven , after many delay on her journey . she be pierce with cold , choke with the poisonous air , and have derive very little satisfaction from her visit to Faversham . 

 ' what happen ? ' be her first question , as Rhoda come out into the hall with sympathy and solicitude . ' do the fog keep our guest away ? ' 

 ' no ; he din here . ' 

 ' it be just as well . you have not   be lonely . ' 

 they speak no more on the subject until Miss Barfoot recover from her discomfort , and be enjoy a much need supper . 

 ' do he offer to go away ? ' 

 ' it be really impossible . it take he more than half an hour to get here from Sloane Square . ' 

 ' foolish fellow ! why do not   he take a train back at once ? ' 

 there be a peculiar brightness in Rhoda 's countenance , and Miss Barfoot have observe it from the first . 

 ' do you quarrel much ? ' 

 ' not more than be to be expect . ' 

 ' he do not   think of stay for my return ? ' 

 ' he leave about ten o'clock . ' 

 ' of course . quite late enough , under the circumstance . it be very unfortunate , but I do not   suppose Everard care much . he would enjoy the opportunity of tease you . ' 

 a glance tell she that Everard be not alone in his enjoyment of the evening . Rhoda lead the talk into other channel , but Miss Barfoot continue to reflect on what she have perceive . 

 a few evening after , when Miss Barfoot have be sit alone for an hour or two , Rhoda come to the library and take a place near she . the eld woman glance up from her book , and see that her friend have something special to say . 

 ' what be it , dear ? ' 

 ' I be go to tax your good - nature , to ask you about unpleasant thing . ' 

 Miss Barfoot know immediately what this mean . she profess readiness to answer , but have an uneasy look . 

 ' will you tell I in plain term what it be that your cousin do when he disgrace himself ? ' 

 ' must you really know ? ' 

 ' I wish to know . ' 

 there be a pause . Miss Barfoot keep her eye on the page open before she . 

 ' then I shall take the liberty of an old friend , Rhoda . why do you wish to know ? ' 

 ' Mr. Barfoot , ' answer the other dryly , ' have be good enough to say that he be in love with I . ' 

 their eye meet . 

 ' I suspect it . I feel sure it be come . he ask you to marry he ? ' 

 ' no , he do not , ' reply Rhoda in purposely ambiguous phrase . 

 ' you would not   allow he to ? ' 

 ' at all event , it do not   come to that . I should be glad if you would let I know what I ask . ' 

 Miss Barfoot deliberate , but finally tell the story of Amy Drake . her hand support one knee , her head bent , Rhoda listen without comment , and , to judge from her feature , without any emotion of any kind . 

 ' that , ' say her friend at the close , ' be the story as it be understand at the time disgraceful to he in every particular . he know what be say of he , and offer not a word of contradiction . but not very long ago he ask I one evening if you have be inform of this scandal . I tell he that you know he have do something which I think very base . Everard be hurt , and thereupon he declare that neither I nor any other of his acquaintance know the truth that he have be malign . he refuse to say more , and what be I to believe ? ' 

 Rhoda be listen with lively attention . 

 ' he declare that he be not   to blame ? ' 

 ' I suppose he mean that . but it be difficult to see ' 

 ' of course the truth can never be know , ' say Rhoda , with sudden indifference . ' and it do not   matter . thank you for satisfy my curiosity . ' 

 Miss Barfoot wait a moment , then laugh . 

 ' some day , Rhoda , you shall satisfy mine . ' 

 ' yes if we live long enough . ' 

 what degree of blame might have attach to Barfoot , Rhoda do not care to ask herself ; she think no more of the story . of course there must have be other such incident in his career ; morally he be neither well nor bad than man in general . she view with contempt the woman who furnish such opportunity ; in her judgment of the male offender she be more lenient , more philosophical , than formerly . 

 she have gain her wish , have enjoy her triumph . a raising of the finger and Everard Barfoot would marry she . assured of that , she feel a new contentment in life ; at time when she be occupy with thing as far as possible from this experience , a rush of joy would suddenly fill her heart , and make her cheek glow . she move among people with a conscious dignity quite unlike that which have only satisfy her need of distinction . she speak more softly , exercise more patience , smile where she have be will not to scoff . Miss Nunn be altogether a more amiable person . 

 yet , she convince herself , essentially quite unchanged . she pursue the aim of her life with less bitterness , in a large spirit , that be all . but pursue it , and without fear of be divert from the generous path . 




 CHAPTER xviii 

 a reinforcement 

 throughout January , Barfoot be endeavour to persuade his brother Tom to leave London , where the invalid 's health perceptibly grow bad . doctor be urgent to the same end , but ineffectually ; for Mrs. Thomas , though she profess to be amazed at her husband 's folly in remain where he could not hope for recovery , herself refuse to accompany he any whither . this pair have no child . the lady always speak of herself as a sad sufferer from mysterious infirmity , and have , in fact , a tendency to hysteria , which confuse itself inextricably with the result of evil nurture and the impulse of a disposition originally base ; nevertheless she make a figure in a certain sphere of vulgar wealth , and even give opportunity to scandalous tongue . her husband , whatever his secret thought , would hear nothing against she ; his temper , like Everard 's , be mark with stubbornness , and after a good deal of wrangling he forbid his brother to address he again on the subject of their disagreement . 

 ' Tom be die , ' write Everard , early in February , to his cousin in Queen 's Road . ' Dr. Swain assure I that unless he be remove he can not last more than a month or two . this morning I see the woman ' it be thus he always refer to his sister - in - law ' and talk to she in what be probably the plainest language she ever have the privilege of hearing . it be a tremendous scene , bring to a close only by her fling herself on the sofa with shriek which terrify the whole household . my idea be that we must carry the poor fellow away by force . his infatuation make I rage and curse , but I be bent on try to save his life . will you come and give your help ? ' 

 a week later they succeed in carry the invalid back to Torquay . Mrs. Barfoot have abandon he to his doctor , nurse , and angry relative ; she declare herself drive out of the house , and go to live at a fashionable hotel . Everard remain in Devon for more than a month , devote himself with affection , which the trial of his temper seem only to increase , to his brother 's welfare . Thomas improve a little ; once more there be hope . then on a sudden frantic impulse , after write fifty letter which elicit no reply , he travel in pursuit of his wife ; and three day after his arrival in London he be dead . 

 by a will , execute at Torquay , he bequeath to Everard about a quarter of his wealth . all the rest go to Mrs. Barfoot , who have declare herself too ill to attend the funeral , but in a fortnight be sufficiently recover to visit one of her friend in the country . 

 Everard could now count upon an income of not much less than fifteen hundred a year . that his brother 's death would enrich he he have always foresee , but no man could have exert himself with more ardent energy to postpone that advantage . the widow charge he , wherever she happen to be , with deliberate fratricide ; she vilify his reputation , by word of mouth or by letter , to all who know he , and protest that his furious wrath at not have profit more largely by the will put she in fear of her life . this last remarkable statement be make in a long and violent epistle to Miss Barfoot , which the recipient show to her cousin on the first opportunity . Everard have call one Sunday morning it be the end of March to say good - bye on his departure for a few week ' travel . have read the letter , he laugh with a peculiar fierceness . 

 ' this kind of thing , ' say Miss Barfoot , ' may necessitate your prosecute she . there be a limit , you know , even to a woman 's licence . ' 

 ' I be far more likely , ' he reply , ' to purchase a very nice little cane , and give she an exemplary thrashing . ' 

 ' oh ! oh ! ' 

 ' upon my word , I see no reason against it ! that be how I should deal with a man who talk about I in this way , and none the less if he be a puny creature quite unable to protect himself . in that furious scene before we get Tom away I feel most terribly tempt to beat she . there be a great deal to be say for woman - beating . I be quite sure that many a labour man who pommel his wife be do exactly the right thing ; no other measure would have the least result . you see what come of impunity . if this woman see the possibility that I should give she a public can she would be far more careful how she behave herself . let we ask Miss Nunn 's opinion . ' 

 Rhoda have that moment enter the room . she offer her hand frankly , and ask what the subject be . 

 ' glance over this letter , ' say Barfoot . ' oh , you have see it . I propose to get a light , supple , dandyish cane , and to give Mrs. Thomas Barfoot half a dozen smart cut across the back in her own drawing - room , some afternoon when people be present . what have you to say to it ? ' 

 he speak with such show of angry seriousness that Rhoda pause before reply . 

 ' I sympathize with you , ' she say at length , ' but I do not   think I would go to that extremity . ' 

 Everard repeat the argument he have use to his cousin . 

 ' you be quite right , ' Rhoda assent . ' I think many woman deserve to be beat , and ought to be beat . but public opinion would be so much against you . ' 

 ' what do I care ? so be public opinion against you . ' 

 ' very well . do as you like . Miss Barfoot and I will come to the police court and give strong evidence in your favour . ' 

 ' now there be a woman ! ' exclaim Everard , not all in jest , for Rhoda 's appearance have make his nerve thrill and his pulse beat . ' look at she , Mary . do you wonder that I would walk the diameter of the globe to win her love ? ' 

 Rhoda flush scarlet , and Miss Barfoot be much embarrassed . neither could have anticipate such an utterance as this . ' that be the simple truth , ' go on Everard recklessly , ' and she know it , and yet will not   listen to I . well , good - bye to you both ! now that I have so grossly misbehave myself , she have a good excuse for refuse even to enter the room when I be here . but do speak a word for I whilst I be away , Mary . ' 

 he shake hand with they , scarcely look at their face , and abruptly depart . 

 the woman stand for a moment at a distance from each other . then Miss Barfoot glance at her friend and laugh . 

 ' really my poor cousin be not very discreet . ' 

 ' anything but , ' Rhoda answer , rest on the back of a chair , her eye cast down . ' do you think he will really cane his sister - in - law ? ' 

 ' how can you ask such a question ? ' 

 ' it would be amusing . I should think well of he for it . ' 

 ' well , make it a condition . we know the story of the lady and her glove . I can see you sympathize with she . ' 

 Rhoda laugh and go away , leave Miss Barfoot with the impression that she have reveal a genuine impulse . it seem not impossible that Rhoda might wish to say to her lover : ' face this monstrous scandal and I be your . 

 a week pass and there arrive a letter , with a foreign stamp , address to Miss Nunn . happen to receive it before Miss Barfoot have come down to breakfast , she put in away in a drawer till evening leisure , and make no mention of its arrival . exhilaration appear in her behaviour through the day . after dinner she disappear , shut herself up to read the letter . 

 ' DEAR MISS NUNN , I be sit at a little marble table outside a cafe on the Cannibiere . do that name convey anything to you ? the Cannibiere be the principal street of Marseilles , street of gorgeous cafe 's and restaurant , just now blaze with electric light . you , no doubt , be shiver by the fireside ; here it be like an evening of summer . I have din luxuriously , and I be take my coffee whilst I write . at a table near to I sit two girl , engage in the lively possible conversation , of which I catch a few word now and then , pretty french phrase that caress the ear . one of they be so strikingly beautiful that I can not take my eye from she when they have be tempt to that quarter . she speak with indescribable grace and animation , have the sweetest eye and lip 

 ' and all the time I be think of some one else . ah , if you be here ! how we would enjoy ourselves among these southern scene ! alone , it be delightful ; but with you for a companion , with you to talk about everything in your splendidly frank way ! this french girl 's talk be of course only silly chatter ; it make I long to hear a few word from your lip strong , brave , intelligent . 

 ' I dream of the ideal possibility . suppose I be to look up and see you stand just in front of I , there on the pavement . you have come in a few hour straight from London . your eye glow with delight . to - morrow we shall travel on to Genoa , you and I , more than friend , and infinitely more than the common husband and wife ! we have bid the world go round for our amusement ; henceforth it be our occupation to observe and discuss and make merry . 

 ' be it all in vain ? Rhoda , if you never love I , my life will be poor to what it might have be ; and you , you also , will lose something . in imagination I kiss your hand and your lip . 

 EVERARD BARFOOT . ' 

 there be an address at the head of this letter , but certainly Barfoot expect no reply , and Rhoda have no thought of send one . every night , however , she unfold the sheet of thin foreign paper , and read , more than once , what be write upon it . read it with external calm , with a brow of meditation , and afterwards sit for some time in absent mood . 

 would he write again ? her daily question be answer in rather more than a fortnight . this time the letter come from Italy ; it be lie on the hall table when Rhoda return from Great Portland Street , and Miss Barfoot be the first to read the address . they exchange no remark . on break the envelope she do so at once Rhoda find a little bunch of violet crush but fragrant . 

 ' these in return for your Cheddar pink , ' begin the informal note accompany the flower . ' I have they an hour ago from a pretty girl in the street of Parma . I do not   care to buy , and walk on , but the pretty girl run by I , and with gentle force fix the flower in my button - hole , so that I have no choice but to stroke her velvety cheek and give she a lira . how hungry I be for the sight of your face ! think of I sometimes , dear friend . ' 

 she laugh , and lay the letter and its violet away with the other . 

 ' I must depend on you , it seem , for news of Everard , ' say Miss Barfoot after dinner . 

 ' I can only tell you , ' Rhoda answer lightly , ' that he have travel from the south of France to the north of Italy , with much observation of female countenance . ' 

 ' he inform you of that ? ' 

 ' very naturally . it be his chief interest . one like people to tell the truth . ' 

 Barfoot be away until the end of April , but after that note from Parma he do not write . one bright afternoon in May , a Saturday , he present himself at his cousin 's house , and find two or three caller in the drawing - room , lady as usual ; one of they be Miss Winifred Haven , another be Mrs. Widdowson . Mary receive he without effusiveness , and after a few minute ' talk with she he take a place by Mrs. Widdowson , who , it strike he , look by no mean in such good spirit as during the early day of her marriage . as soon as she begin to converse , his impression of a change in she be confirm ; the girlishness so pleasantly noticeable when first he know she have disappear , and the gravity substitute for it be suggestive of disillusion , of trouble . 

 she ask he if he know some people name Bevis , who occupy a flat just above his own . 

 ' Bevis ? I have see the name on the index at the foot of the stair ; but I do not   know they personally . ' 

 ' that be how I come to know that you live there , ' say Monica . ' my husband take I to call upon the Bevises , and there we see your name . at least , we suppose it be you , and Miss Barfoot tell I we be right . ' 

 ' oh yes ; I live there all alone , a gloomy bachelor . how delightful if you knock at my door some day , when you and Mr. Widdowson be again call on your friend . ' 

 Monica smile , and her eye wander restlessly . 

 ' you have be away out of England ? ' she next say . 

 ' yes ; in Italy . ' 

 ' I envy you . ' 

 ' you have never be there ? ' 

 ' no not yet . ' 

 he talk a little of the agreeable and disagreeable of life in that country . but Mrs. Widdowson have become irresponsive ; he doubt at length whether she be listen to he , so , as Miss Haven step this way , he take an opportunity of a word aside with his cousin . 

 ' Miss Nunn not at home ? ' 

 ' no . will not   be till dinner - time . ' 

 ' quite well ? ' 

 ' never be well . would you care to come back and dine with we at half - past seven ? ' 

 ' of course I should . ' 

 with this pleasant prospect he take his leave . the afternoon be sunny , instead of walk straight to the station , to return home , he go out on to the Embankment , and saunter round by Chelsea Bridge Road . as he enter Sloane Square he see Mrs. Widdowson , who be come towards the railway ; she walk rather wearily , with her eye on the ground , and do not become aware of he until he address she . 

 ' be we travel the same way ? ' he ask . ' westward ? ' 

 ' yes . I be go all the way round to Portland Road . ' 

 they enter the station , Barfoot chat humorously . and , so intent be he on the expression of his companion 's downcast face , that he allow an acquaintance to pass close by he unobserve . it be Rhoda Nunn , return soon than Miss Barfoot have expect . she see the pair , regard they with a moment 's keen attentiveness , and go on , out into the street . 

 in the first - class carriage which they enter there be no other passenger as far as Barfoot 's station . he could not resist the temptation to use rather an intimate tone , though one that be quite conventional , in the hope that he might discover something of Mrs. Widdowson 's mind . he begin by ask whether she think it a good Academy this year . she have not yet visit it , but hop to do so on Monday . do she herself do any kind of artistic work ? oh , nothing whatever ; she be a very useless and idle person . he believe she have be a pupil of Miss Barfoot 's at one time ? yes , for a very short time indeed , just before her marriage . be she not an intimate friend of Miss Nunn ? hardly intimate . they know each other a few year ago , but Miss Nunn do not care much about she now . 

 ' probably because I marry , ' she add with a smile . 

 ' be Miss Nunn really such a determined enemy of marriage ? ' 

 ' she think it pardonable in very weak people . in my case she be indulgent enough to come to the wedding . ' 

 this piece of news surprise Barfoot . 

 ' she come to your wedding ? and wear a wedding garment ? ' 

 ' oh yes . and look very nice . ' 

 ' do describe it to I . can you remember ? ' 

 see that no woman ever forget the detail of another 's dress , on however trivial an occasion , and at whatever distance of time , Monica be of course able to satisfy the inquirer . her curiosity excite , she venture in turn upon one or two insidious question . 

 ' you could not   imagine Miss Nunn in such a costume ? ' 

 ' I should very much like to have see she . ' 

 ' she have a very striking face do not   you think so ? ' 

 ' indeed I do . a wonderful face . ' 

 their eye meet . Barfoot bend forward from his place opposite Monica . 

 ' to I the most interesting of all face , ' he say softly . 

 his companion blush with surprise and pleasure . 

 ' do it seem strange to you , Mrs. Widdowson ? ' 

 ' oh why ? not at all . ' 

 all at once she have brighten astonishingly . this subject be not pursue , but for the rest of the time they talk with a new appearance of mutual confidence and interest , Monica retain her pretty , half - bashful smile . and when Barfoot alight at bayswater they shake hand with an especial friendliness , both seem to suggest a wish that they might soon meet again . 

 they do so not later than the follow Monday . remember what Mrs. Widdowson have say of her intention to visit Burlington House , Barfoot go there in the afternoon . if he chance to encounter the pretty little woman it would not be disagreeable . perhaps her husband might be with she , and in that case he could judge of the term on which they stand . a surly fellow , Widdowson ; very likely to play the tyrant , he think . if he be not mistaken , she have weary of he and regret her bondage the old story . think thus , and stroll through the room with casual glance at a picture , he discover his acquaintance , catalogue in hand , alone for the present . her pensive face again answer to his smile . they draw back from the picture and sit down . 

 ' I din with our friend at Chelsea on Saturday evening , ' say Barfoot . 

 ' on Saturday ? you do not   tell I you be go back again . ' 

 ' I be not   think of it just at the time . ' 

 Monica hint an amuse surprise . 

 ' you see , ' he go on , ' I expect nothing , and happy for I that it be so . Miss Nunn be in her severe mood ; I think she do not   smile once through the evening . I will confess to you I write she a letter whilst I be abroad , and it offend she , I suppose . ' 

 ' I do not   think you can always judge of her thought by her face . ' 

 ' perhaps not . but I have study her face so often and so closely . for all that , she be more a mystery to I than any woman I have ever know . that , of course , be partly the reason of her power over I . I feel that if ever if ever she should disclose herself to I , it would be the strange revelation . every woman wear a mask , except to one man ; but Rhoda 's Miss Nunn 's be , I fancy , a far completer disguise than I ever try to pierce . ' 

 Monica have a sense of something perilous in this conversation . it arise from a secret trouble in her own heart , which she might , involuntarily , be lead to betray . she have never talk thus confidentially with any man ; not , in truth , with her husband . there be no fear whatever of she conceive an undue interest in Barfoot ; certain reason assure she of that ; but talk that be at all sentimental gravely threaten her peace what little remain to she . it would have be well to discourage this man 's confidence ; yet they flatter she so pleasantly , and afford such a fruitful subject for speculation , that she could not obey the prompting of prudence . 

 ' do you mean , ' she say , ' that Miss Nunn seem to disguise her feeling ? ' 

 ' it be suppose to be wrong be not   it ? for a man to ask one woman her opinion of another . ' 

 ' I can not   be treacherous if I wish , ' Monica reply . ' I do not   feel that I understand she . ' 

 Barfoot wonder how much intelligence he might attribute to Mrs. Widdowson . obviously her level be much below that of Rhoda . yet she seem to possess delicate sensibility , and a refinement of thought not often meet with in woman of her position . seriously desire her aid , he look at she with a grave smile , and ask , 

 ' do you believe she capable of fall in love ? ' 

 Monica show a painful confusion . she overcome it , however , and soon answer . 

 ' she would perhaps try not not to acknowledge it to herself . ' 

 ' when , in fact , it have happen ? ' 

 ' she think it so much nobler to disregard such feeling . ' 

 ' I know . she be to be an inspiring example to the woman who can not hope to marry . ' he laugh silently . ' and I suppose it be quite possible that mere shame would withhold she from take the opposite course . ' 

 ' I think she be very strong . but ' 

 ' but ? ' 

 he look eagerly into her face . 

 ' I can not   tell . I do not   really know she . a woman may be as much a mystery to another woman as she be to a man . ' 

 ' on the whole , I be glad to hear you say that . I believe it . it be only the vulgar that hold a different opinion . ' 

 ' shall we look at the picture , Mr. Barfoot ? ' 

 ' oh , I be so sorry . I have be waste your time ' 

 nervously disclaim any such thought , Monica , rise and draw near to the canvas . they walk on together for some ten minute , until Barfoot , who have turn to look at a pass figure , say in his ordinary voice 

 ' I think that be Mr. Widdowson on the other side of the room . ' 

 Monica look quickly round , and see her husband , as if occupy with the picture , glance in her direction . 




 CHAPTER XIX 

 the clank of the chain 

 since Saturday evening Monica and her husband have not be on speak term . a visit she pay to Mildred Vesper , after her call at Miss Barfoot 's , prolong itself so that she do not reach home until the dinner - hour be long past . on arrive , she be meet with an outburst of tremendous wrath , to which she oppose a resolute and haughty silence ; and since then the two have keep as much apart as possible . 

 Widdowson know that Monica be go to the Academy . he allow she to set forth alone , and even try to persuade himself that he be indifferent as to the hour of her return ; but she have not long be go before he follow . insufferable misery possess he . his married life threaten to terminate in utter wreck , and he have the anguish of recognize that to a great extent this catastrophe would be his own fault . resolve as he might , he find it impossible to repress the impulse of jealousy which , as soon as peace have be declare between they , bring about a new misunderstanding . terrible thought smoulder in his mind ; he feel himself to be one of those man who be drive by passion into crime . deliberately he have brood over a tragic close to the wretchedness of his existence ; he would kill himself , and Monica should perish with he . but an hour of contentment suffice to banish such vision as sheer frenzy . he see once more how harmless , how natural , be Monica 's demand , and how peacefully he might live with she but for the curse of suspicion from which he could not free himself . any other man would deem she a model wifely virtue . her care of the house be all that reason could desire . in her behaviour he have never detect the slight impropriety . he believe her chaste as any woman live she ask only to be trust , and that , in spite of all , be beyond his power . 

 in no woman on earth could he have put perfect confidence . he regard they as bear to perpetual pupilage . not that their inclination be necessarily wanton ; they be simply incapable of attain maturity , remain throughout their life imperfect being , at the mercy of craft , ever liable to be mislead by childish misconception . of course he be right ; he himself represent the guardian male , the wife - proprietor , who from the dawn of civilization have take abundant care that woman shall not outgrow her nonage . the bitterness of his situation lie in the fact that he have wed a woman who irresistibly prove to he her claim as a human being . reason and tradition contend in he , to his ceaseless torment . 

 and again , he fear that Monica do not love he . have she ever love he ? there be too much ground for suspect that she have only yield to the persistence of his entreaty , with just like enough to permit a semblance of tenderness , and glad to exchange her prospect of distasteful work for a comfortable married life . her like he might have foster ; during those first happy week , assuredly he have do so , for no woman could be insensible to the passionate worship manifest in his every look , his every word . later , he take the wrong path , seek to oppose her instinct , to reform her mind , eventually to become her lord and master . could he not even now retrace his step ? suppose she incapable of bow before he , of kiss his foot , could he not be content to make of she a loyal friend , a delightful companion ? 

 in that mood he hasten towards Burlington House . seek Monica through the gallery , he see she at length sit side by side with that man Barfoot . they be in close colloquy . barfoot bent towards she as if speak in an undertone , a smile on his face . Monica look at once pleased and troubled . 

 the blood boil in his vein . his first impulse be to walk straight up to Monica and bid she follow he . but the ecstasy of jealous suffering keep he an observer . he watch the pair until he be descry . 

 there be no help for it . though his brain whirl , and his flesh be stab , he have no choice but to take the hand Barfoot offer he . smile he could not , nor speak a word . 

 ' so you have come after all ? ' Monica be say to he . 

 he nod . on her countenance there be obvious embarrassment , but this need no explanation save the history of the last day or two . look into her eye , he know not whether consciousness of wrong might be read there . how to get at the secret of this woman 's heart ? 

 Barfoot be talk , point at this picture and that , do his good to smooth what he see be an awkward situation . the gloomy husband , more like a tyrant than ever , mutter incoherent phrase . in a minute or two Everard free himself and move out of sight . 

 Monica turn from her husband and affect interest in the picture . they reach the end of the room before Widdowson speak . 

 ' how long do you want to stay here ? ' 

 ' I will go whenever you like , ' she answer , without look at he . 

 ' I have no wish to spoil your pleasure . ' 

 ' really , I have very little pleasure in anything . do you come to keep I in sight ? ' 

 ' I think we will go home now , and you can come another day . ' 

 Monica assent by close her catalogue and walk on . 

 without a word , they make the journey back to Herne Hill . Widdowson shut himself in the library , and do not appear till dinner - time . the meal be a pretence for both of they , and as soon as they could rise from the table they again part . 

 about ten o'clock Monica be join by her husband in the drawing - room . 

 ' I have almost make up my mind , ' he say , stand near she , ' to take a serious step . as you have always speak with pleasure of your old home , Clevedon , suppose we give up this house and go and live there ? ' 

 ' it be for you to decide . ' 

 ' I want to know whether you would have any objection . ' 

 ' I shall do as you wish . ' 

 ' no , that be not   enough . the plan I have in mind be this . I should take a good large house no doubt rent be low in the neighbourhood and ask your sister to come and live with we . I think it would be a good thing both for they and for you . ' 

 ' you can not   be sure that they would agree to it . you see that Virginia prefer her lodging to live here . ' 

 oddly enough , this be the case . on their return from Guernsey they have invite Virginia to make a permanent home with they , and she refuse . her reason Monica could not understand ; those which she allege vague argument as to its be well for a wife 's relative not to burden the husband hardly seem genuine . it be possible that Virginia have a distaste for Widdowson 's society . 

 ' I think they both would be glad to live at Clevedon , ' he urge , ' judge from your sister ' talk . it be plain that they have quite give up the idea of the school , and Alice , you tell I , be get dissatisfied with her work at Yatton . but I must know whether you will enter seriously into this scheme . ' 

 Monica keep silence . 

 ' please answer I . ' 

 ' why have you think of it ? ' 

 ' I do not   think I need explain . we have have too many unpleasant conversation , and I wish to act for the good without say thing you would misunderstand . ' 

 ' there be no fear of my misunderstanding . you have no confidence in I , and you want to get I away into a quiet country place where I shall be under your eye every moment . it be much well to say that plainly . ' 

 ' that mean you would consider it go to prison . ' 

 ' how could I help ? what other motive have you ? ' 

 he be prompt to make brutal declaration of authority , and so cut the knot . Monica 's unanswerable argument merely anger he . but he make an effort over himself . 

 ' do not   you think it well that we should take some step before our happiness be irretrievably ruin ? ' 

 ' I see no need for its ruin . as I have tell you before , in talk like that you degrade yourself and insult I . ' 

 ' I have my fault ; I know they only too well . one of they be that I can not bear you to make friend with people who be not of my kind . I shall never be able to endure that . ' 

 ' of course you be speak of Mr. Barfoot . ' 

 ' yes , ' he avow sullenly . ' it be a very unfortunate thing that I happen to come up just as he be in your company . ' 

 ' you be so very unreasonable , ' exclaim Monica tartly . ' what possible harm be there in Mr. Barfoot , when he meet I by chance in a public place , have a conversation with I ? I wish I know twenty such man . such conversation give I a new interest in life . I have every reason to think well of Mr. Barfoot . ' 

 Widdowson be in anguish . 

 ' and I , ' he reply , in a voice shake with angry feeling , ' feel that I have every reason to dislike and suspect he . he be not an honest man ; his face tell I that . I know his life would not   bear inspection . you can not   possibly be as good a judge as I be in such a case . contrast he with Bevis . no , Bevis be a man one can trust ; one talk with he produce a last favourable impression . ' 

 Monica , silent for a brief space , look fixedly before she , her feature all but expressionless . 

 ' yet even with Mr. Bevis , ' she say at length , ' you do not   make friend . that be the fault in you which cause all this trouble . you have not   a sociable spirit . your dislike of Mr. Barfoot only mean that you do not   know he , and do not   wish to . and you be completely wrong in your judgment of he . I have every reason for be sure that you be wrong . ' 

 ' of course you think so . in your ignorance of the world ' 

 ' which you think very proper in a woman , ' she interpose caustically . 

 ' yes , I do ! that kind of knowledge be harmful to a woman . ' 

 ' then , please , how be she to judge her acquaintance ? ' 

 ' a married woman must accept her husband 's opinion , at all event about man . ' he plunge on into the ancient quagmire . ' a man may know with impunity what be injurious if it enter a woman 's mind . ' 

 ' I do not   believe that . I can not   and will not   believe it . ' 

 he make a gesture of despair . 

 ' we differ hopelessly . it be all very well to discuss these thing when you could do so in a friendly spirit . now you say whatever you know will irritate I , and you say it on purpose to irritate I . ' 

 ' no ; indeed I do not . but you be quite right that I find it hard to be friendly with you . most earnestly I wish to be your friend your true and faithful friend . but you will not   let I . ' 

 ' friend ! ' he cry scornfully . ' the woman who have become my wife ought to be something more than a friend , I should think . you have lose all love for I there be the misery . ' 

 Monica could not reply . that word ' love ' have grow a weariness to she upon his lip . she do not love he ; could not pretend to love he . every day the distance between they widen , and when he take she in his arm she have to struggle with a sense of shrinking , of disgust . the union be unnatural ; she feel herself constrain by a hateful force when he call upon she for the show of wifely tenderness . yet how be she to utter this ? the moment such a truth have pass her lip she must leave he . to declare that no trace of love remain in her heart , and still to live with he that be impossible ! the dark foresight of a necessity of parting from he correspond in she to those lurid vision which at time shake Widdowson with a horrible temptation . 

 ' you do not   love I , ' he continue in harsh , choke tone . ' you wish to be my friend . that be how you try to compensate I for the loss of your love . ' 

 he laugh with bitterness . 

 ' when you say that , ' Monica answer , ' do you ever ask yourself whether you try to make I love you ? scene like this be ruin my health . I have come to dread your talk . I have almost forget the sound of your voice when it be not   either angry or complain . ' 

 Widdowson walk about the room , and a deep moan escape he . 

 ' that be why I have ask you to go away from here , Monica . we must have a new home if our life be to begin anew . ' 

 ' I have no faith in mere change of place . you would be the same man . if you can not command your senseless jealousy here , you never would anywhere else . ' 

 he make an effort to say something ; seem to abandon it ; again try , and speak in a thick , unnatural voice . 

 ' can you honestly repeat to I what Barfoot be say to - day , when you be on the seat together ? ' 

 Monica 's eye flash . 

 ' I could ; every word . but I shall not try to do so . ' 

 ' not if I beseech you to , Monica ? to put my mind at rest ' 

 ' no . when I tell you that you might have hear every syllable , I have say all that I shall . ' 

 it mortify he profoundly that he should have be drive to make so humiliating a request . he throw himself into a chair and hide his face , sit thus for a long time in the hope that Monica would be move to compassion . but when she rise it be only to retire for the night . and with wretchedness in her heart , because she must need go to the same chamber in which her husband would sleep . she wish so to be alone . the poor bed in a servant 's garret would have be thrice welcome to she ; liberty to lie awake , to think without a disturbing presence , to shed tear of need be that seem to she a precious boon . she think with envy of the shop - girl in Walworth Road ; wish herself back there . what unspeakable folly she have commit ! and how true be everything she have hear from Rhoda Nunn on the subject of marriage ! the next day Widdowson resort to an expedient which he have once before try in like circumstance . he write his wife a long letter , eight close page , review the cause of their trouble , confess his own error , insist gently on those chargeable to she , and finally implore she to cooperate with he in a sincere endeavour to restore their happiness . this he lay on the table after lunch , and then leave Monica alone that she might read it . know beforehand all that the letter contain , Monica glance over it carelessly . an answer be expect , and she write one as briefly as possible . 

 ' your behaviour seem to I very weak , very unmanly . you make we both miserable , and quite without cause . I can only say as I have say before , that thing will never be well until you come to think of I as your free companion , not as your bond - woman . if you can not   do this , you will make I wish that I have never meet you , and in the end I be sure it will not   be possible for we to go on live together . ' 

 she leave this note , in a blank envelope , on the hall table , and go out to walk for an hour . 

 it be the end of one more acute stage in their progressive discord . by keep at home for a fortnight . Monica soothe her husband and obtain some repose for her own nerve . but she could no long affect a cordial reconciliation ; caress leave she cold , and Widdowson see that his company be never so agreeable to she as solitude . when they sit together , both be read . Monica find more attraction in book as her life grow more unhappy . though with reluctance Widdowson have consent to a subscription at Mudie 's , and from the new catalogue she either choose for herself , necessarily at random , or by the advice of well - read people , such as she meet at Mrs. Cosgrove 's . what modern teaching be to be get from these volume her mind readily absorb . she seek for opinion and argument which be congenial to her mood of discontent , all but of revolt . 

 sometimes the perusal of a love - story embitter her lot to the last point of endurance . before marriage , her love - ideal have be very vague , elusive ; it find scarcely more than negative expression , as a shrinking from the vulgar or gross desire of her companion in the shop . now that she have a clear understanding of her own nature , the type of man correspondent to her natural sympathy also become clear . in every particular he be unlike her husband . she find a suggestion of he in book ; and in actual life , already , perhaps something more than a suggestion . Widdowson 's jealousy , in so far as it direct itself against her longing for freedom , be fully justify ; this consciousness often make her sullen when she desire to express a nobler indignation ; but his special prejudice lead he altogether astray , and in free resistance on this point she find the relief which enable she to bear a secret self - reproach . her refusal to repeat the substance of Barfoot 's conversation be , in some degree , prompt by a wish for the continuance of his groundless fear . by persevere in suspicion of Barfoot , he afford she a firm foothold in their ever - renew quarrel . 

 a husband 's misdirect jealousy excite in the wife derision and a sense of superiority ; more often than not , it foster an unsuspected attachment , prompt to a perverse pleasure in misleading . Monica become aware of this ; in her hour of misery she now and then give a harsh laugh , the result of thought not seriously entertain , but tempt the fancy to recklessness . what , she ask herself again , would be the end of it all ? ten year hence , would she have subdue her soul to a life of weary insignificance , if not of dishonour ? for it be dishonour to live with a man she could not love , whether her heart cherish another image or be merely vacant . a dishonour to which innumerable woman submit , a dishonour glorify by social precept , enforce under dread penalty . 

 but she be so young , and life abound in unexpected change . 




 CHAPTER XX 

 the first LIE 

 Mrs. Cosgrove be a childless widow , with sufficient mean and a very mixed multitude of acquaintance . in the general belief her marriage have be a happy one ; when she speak of her deceased husband it be with respect , and not seldom with affection . yet her view on the matrimonial relation be know to be of singular audacity . she reveal they only to a small circle of intimate ; most of the people who frequent her house have no startling theory to maintain , and regard their hostess as a good - nature , rather eccentric woman , who love society and understand how to amuse her guest . 

 Wealth and position be rarely represent in her drawing - room ; nor , on the other hand , be Bohemianism . Mrs. Cosgrove belong by birth and marriage to the staid middle class , and it seem as if she make it her object to provide with social entertainment the kind of person who , in an ordinary way , would enjoy very little of it . lonely and impecunious girl or woman be frequently about she ; she try to keep they in good spirit , try to marry they if marriage seem possible , and , it be whisper , use a good deal of her income for the practical benefit of those who need assistance . a sprinkling of maiden who be neither lonely nor impecunious serve to attract young man , generally struggler in some profession or other , on the lookout for a wife . intercourse go on with a minimum of formality . chaperonage save for that represent by the hostess herself be as often as not dispense with . 

 ' we want to get rid of a lot of sham propriety ' so she urge to her close friend . ' girl must learn to trust themselves , and look out for danger . if a girl can only be keep straight by incessant watchfulness , why , let she go where she will , and learn by experience . in fact , I want to see experience substitute for precept . ' 

 between this lady and Miss Barfoot there be considerable divergence of opinion , yet they agree on a sufficient number of point to like each other very well . occasionally one of Mrs. Cosgrove 's protegee pass into Miss Barfoot 's hand , abandon the thought of matrimony for study in Great Portland Street . Rhoda Nunn , also , have a liking for Mrs. Cosgrove , though she make no secret of her opinion that Mrs. Cosgrove 's influence be on the whole decidedly harmful . 

 ' that house , ' she once say to Miss Barfoot , ' be nothing more than a matrimonial agency . ' 

 ' but so be every house where many people be entertain . ' 

 ' not in the same way . Mrs. Cosgrove be speak to I of some girl who have just accept an offer of marriage . " I do not   think they will suit each other , " she say , " but there be no harm in try . " ' 

 Miss Barfoot could not restrain a laugh . 

 ' who know ? perhaps she be right in that view of thing . after all , you know , it be only put into plain word what everybody think on all but every such occasion . ' 

 ' the first part of her remark yes , ' say Rhoda caustically . ' but as for the " no harm in try , " well , let we ask the wife 's opinion in a year 's time . ' 

 midway in the London season on Sunday afternoon , about a score of visitor be assemble in Mrs. Cosgrove 's drawing - room there be two of they , with a landing between . as usual , some one sit at the piano , but a hum of talk go on as undercurrent to the music . downstair , in the library , half a dozen people find the quietness they prefer , and among these be Mrs. Widdowson . she have an album of portrait on her lap ; whilst turn they over , she listen to a chat go on between the sprightly Mr. Bevis and a young married woman who laugh ceaselessly at his joke . it be only a few minute since she have come down from the drawing - room . presently her eye encounter a glance from Bevis , and at once he step over to a seat beside she . 

 ' your sister be not here to - day ? ' she say . 

 ' no . they have guest of their own . and when be you come to see they again ? ' 

 ' before long , I hope . ' 

 Bevis look away and seem to reflect . 

 ' do come next Saturday could you ? ' 

 ' I have well not promise . ' 

 ' do try , and ' he lower his voice ' come alone . forgive I for say that . the girl be rather afraid of Mr. Widdowson , that be the truth . they would so like a free gossip with you . let I tell they to expect you about half - past three or four . they will rise up and call I bless . ' 

 Laughing , Monica at length agree to come if circumstance be favourable . her talk with Bevis continue for a long time , until people have begin to leave . some other acquaintance then claim she , but she be now dull and monosyllabic , as if conversation have exhaust her energy . at six o'clock she steal away unobserved , and go home . 

 Widdowson have resign himself , in appearance at all event , to these absence . it be several week since he have accompany his wife to call upon any one ; a sluggishness be creep over he , strengthen his disinclination for society . the futile endeavour to act with decision , to carry Monica away into Somerset , result , as futile effort of that kind be will not to do , in increase feebleness of the will ; he be less capable than ever of exert the authority which he still believe himself to keep for the last resort . occasionally some day go by without his leave the house . instead of the one daily newspaper he have be use to take he now receive three ; after breakfast he sometimes spend a couple of hour over the Times , and the evening paper often occupy he from dinner to bedtime . Monica notice , with a painful conflict of emotion , that his hair have begin to lose its uniform colour , and to show streak that match with his grizzle beard . be she responsible for this ? 

 on the Saturday when she be to visit the Bevises she fear lest he should propose to go with she . she wish even to avoid the necessity of tell he where she be go . as she rise from luncheon Widdowson glance at she . 

 ' I have   order the trap , Monica . will you come for a drive ? ' 

 ' I have promise to go into the town . I be very sorry . ' 

 ' it do not   matter . ' 

 this be his late mode of appeal to she with an air of pained resignation . 

 ' for a day or two I have not   feel at all well , ' he continue gloomily . ' I think a drive might do I good . ' 

 ' certainly . I hope it will . when would you like to have dinner ? ' 

 ' I never care to alter the hour . of course I shall be back at the usual time . shall you be ? ' 

 ' oh yes long before dinner . ' 

 so she get away without any explanation . at a quarter to four she reach the block of flat in which the Bevises   and Everard Barfoot   reside . with a fluttering of the heart , she go very quietly upstairs , as if anxious that her footstep should not be hear ; her knock at the door be timid . 

 Bevis in person open to she . 

 ' delighted ! I think it might be ' 

 she enter , and walk into the first room , where she have be once before . but to her surprise it be vacant . she look round and see Bevis 's countenance gleam with satisfaction . 

 ' my sister will be here in a few minute , ' he say . ' a few minute at most . will you take this chair , Mrs. Widdowson ? how delighted I be that you be able to come ! ' 

 so perfectly natural be his manner , that Monica , after the first moment of consternation , try to forget that there be anything irregular in her presence here under these circumstance . as regard social propriety , a flat differ in many respect from a house . in an ordinary drawing - room , it could scarcely have matter if Bevis entertain she for a short space until his sister ' arrival ; but in this little set of room it be doubtfully permissible for she to sit tete - a - tete with a young man , under any excuse . and the fact of his opening the front door himself seem to suggest that not even a servant be in the flat . a tremor grow upon she as she talk , due in part to the consciousness that she be glad to be thus alone with Bevis . 

 ' a place like this must seem to you to be very unhomelike , ' he be say , as he lounge on a low chair not very far from she . ' the girl do not   like it at all at first . I suppose it be a retrograde step in civilization . servant be decidedly of that opinion ; we have a great difficulty in get they to stay here . the reason seem to I that they miss the congenial gossip of the area door . at this moment we be without a domestic . I find she compensate herself for disadvantage by steal my tobacco and cigar . she go to work with such a lack of discretion abstract half a pound of honeydew at a time that I could not   find any sympathy for she . moreover , when charge with the delinquency , she become abusive , so very abusive that we be oblige to insist upon her immediate departure . ' 

 ' do you think she smoke ? ' ask Monica laughingly . 

 ' we have debate that point with much interest . she be a person of advanced idea , as you see ; practically a communist . but I doubt whether honeydew have any charm for she personally . it seem more probable that some milkman , or baker 's assistant , or even metropolitan policeman , benefit by her communism . ' 

 Indifferent to the progress of time , Bevis talk on with his usual jocoseness , now and then shake his tawny hair in a fit of laughter the most contagious . 

 ' but I have something to tell you , ' he say at length more seriously . ' I be go to leave England . they want I to live at Bordeaux for a tune , two or three year perhaps . it be a great bore , but I shall have to go . I be not my own master . ' 

 ' then your sister will go to Guernsey ? ' 

 ' yes . I dare say I shall leave about the end of July . ' 

 he become silent , look at Monica with humorous sadness . 

 ' do you think your sister will soon be here , Mr. Bevis ? ' Monica ask , with a glance round the room . 

 ' I think so . do you know , I do a very silly thing . I want your visit   if you come   to be a surprise for they , and so in fact , I say nothing about it . when I get here from business , a little before three , they be just go out . I ask they if they be sure they would be back in less than an hour . oh , they be quite sure not a doubt about it . I do hope they have not   alter their mind , and go to call somewhere . but , Mrs. Widdowson , I be go to make you a cup of tea with my own fair hand , as the novelist say . ' 

 Monica beg that he would not trouble . under the circumstance she have well not stay . she would come again very soon . 

 ' no , I can not , I can not   let you go ! ' Bevis exclaim , soften his gay tone as he stand before she . ' how shall I entreat you ? if you know what an unforgettable delight it will be to I to make you a cup of tea ! I shall think of it at Bordeaux every Saturday . ' 

 she have rise , but exhibit no immutable resolve . 

 ' I really must go , Mr. Bevis ! ' 

 ' do not   drive I to despair . I be capable of turn my poor sister out of house and home flat and home , I mean in anger at their delay . on their account , in pity for their youth , do stay , Mrs. Widdowson ! besides , I have a new song that I want you to bear word and music my own . one little quarter of an hour ! and I know the girl will be here directly . ' 

 his will , and her inclination , prevail . Monica sit down again , and Bevis disappear to make the tea . water must have be already boil , for in less than five minute the young man return with a tray , on which all the necessary be neatly arrange . with merry homage he wait upon his guest . Monica 's cheek be warm . after the vain attempt to release herself from what be now distinctly a compromise situation , she sit down in an easy attitude than before , as though resolve to enjoy her liberty whilst she might . there be a suspicion in her mind that Bevis have arrange this interview ; she doubt the truth of his explanation . and indeed she hop that his sister would not return until after her departure ; it would be very embarrassing to meet they . 

 Whilst talk and listen , she silently defend herself against the charge of impropriety . what wrong be she commit ? what matter that they be alone ? their talk be precisely what it might have be in other people 's presence . and Bevis , such a frank , good - hearted fellow , could not by any possibility fail in respect to she . the objection be all can not , and can not of the bad kind . she would not be a slave of such ignoble prejudice . 

 ' you have not   make Mr. Barfoot 's acquaintance yet ? ' she ask . 

 ' no , I have not . there seem to have be no opportunity . do you seriously wish I to know he ? ' 

 ' oh , I have no wish in the matter at all . ' 

 ' you like Mr. Barfoot ? ' 

 ' I think he very pleasant . ' 

 ' how delightful to be praise by you , Mrs. Widdowson ! now if any one speak to you about I , when I have leave England , will you find some nice word ? do not   think I foolish . I do so desire the good opinion of my friend . to know that you speak of I as you do for Mr. Barfoot would give I a whole day of happiness . ' 

 ' how enviable ! to be so easily make happy . ' 

 ' now let I sing you this song of mine . it be not   very good ; I have not   compose for year . but ' 

 he sit down and rattle over the key . Monica be expect a lively air and spirited word , as in the song she have hear at Guernsey ; but this composition tell of sadness and longing and the burden of a lonely heart . she think it very beautiful , very touching . Bevis look round to see the effect it produce upon she , and she could not meet his eye . 

 ' quite a new sort of thing for I , Mrs. Widdowson . do it strike you as so very bad ? ' 

 ' no not at all . ' 

 ' but you can not   honestly praise it ? ' he sigh , in dejection . ' I mean to give you a copy . I make this one specially for you , and if you will forgive I I have take the liberty of dedicate it to you . songwriter do that , you know . of course it be altogether unworthy of your acceptance ' 

 ' no no indeed I be very grateful to you , Mr. Bevis . do give it to I as you mean to . ' 

 ' you will have it ? ' he cry delightedly . ' now for a triumphal march ! ' 

 whilst he play , with look correspond to the exultant strain , Monica rise from her chair . she stand with eye downcast and lip press together . when the last chord have sound , 

 ' now I must say good - bye , Mr. Bevis . I be so sorry your sister have not   come . ' 

 ' so be I and yet I be not . I have enjoy the happy half - hour of my life . ' 

 ' will you give I the piece of music ? ' 

 ' let I roll it up . there ; it will not   be very awkward to carry . but of course I shall see you again before the end of July ? you will come some other afternoon ? ' 

 ' if Miss Bevis will let I know when she be quite sure ' 

 ' yes , she shall . do you know , I do not   think I shall say a word about what have happen this afternoon . will you allow I to keep silence about your call , Mrs. Widdowson ? they would be so annoyed and really it be a silly thing not to tell they ' 

 Monica give no verbal reply . she look towards the door . Bevis step forward , and hold it open . 

 ' good - bye , then . you know what I tell you about my tendency to low spirit . I be go to have a terrible turn down , down , down ! ' 

 she laugh , and offer her hand . he hold it very lightly , look at she with his blue eye , which indeed express a profound melancholy . 

 ' thank you , ' he murmur . ' thank you for your great kindness . ' 

 and thereupon he open the front door for she . without another look Monica go quickly down the stair ; she appreciate his motive for not accompany she to the exit . 

 before enter the house she have manage to conceal the sheet of music which she be carry . but , happily , Widdowson be still absent . half an hour pass half an hour of brood and reverie before she hear his footstep ascend the stair . on the landing she meet he with a pleasant smile . 

 ' have you enjoy your drive ? ' 

 ' pretty well . ' 

 ' and do you feel well ? ' 

 ' not much , dear . but it be not   worth talk about . ' 

 later , he inquire where she have be . 

 ' I have an appointment with Milly Vesper . ' 

 the first falsehood she have ever tell he , and yet utter with such perfect assumption of sincerity as would have deceive the acute observer . he nod , discontent as usual , but entertain no doubt . 

 and from that moment she hat he . if he have ply she with interrogation , if he have seem to suspect anything , the burden of untruth would have be more endurable . his simple acceptance of her word be the stern rebuke she could have receive . she despise herself , and hat he for the degradation which result from his lordship over she . 




 CHAPTER XXI 

 toward the DECISIVE 

 Mary Barfoot have never suffer from lack of interest in life . many a vivid moment dwelt in her memory ; joy and sorrow , personal or of large scope , affect she the more deeply because of that rule intelligence which enable she to transmute they into principle . no long anticipate or desire any great change in her own environment , in the mode and motif of her activity , she find it a sufficient happiness to watch , and when possible to direct , the tendency of young life . so kindly have nature temper her disposition , that already she have be able to outlive those fervour of instinct which often make the middle life of an unwedded woman one long repining ; but her womanly sympathy remain . and at present there be go forward under her own roof , within her daily observation , a comedy , a drama , which have power to excite all her disinterested emotion . it have be in progress for twelve month , and now , unless she be strangely mistake , the denouement draw very near . 

 for all her self - study , her unflinche recognition of physical and psychical fact which the average woman blink over , Mary deceive herself as to the date of that final triumph which permit she to observe Rhoda Nunn with perfect equanimity . her outbreak of angry feeling on the occasion of Bella Royston 's death mean something more than she would acknowledge before the inquisition of her own mind . it be just then that she have become aware of Rhoda 's change attitude towards Everard Barfoot ; trifle such as only a woman would detect have convince she that Everard 's interest in Rhoda be awaken a serious response ; and this discovery , though it could not surprise she , cause an obscure pang which she attribute to impersonal regret , to mere natural misgiving . for some day she think of Rhoda in an ironic , half - mock spirit . then come Bella 's suicide , and the conversation in which Rhoda exhibit a seem heartlessness , the result , undoubtedly , of grave emotional disturbance . to her own astonishment , Mary be overcome with an impulse of wrathful hostility , and speak word which she regret as soon as they have pass her lip . 

 Poor Bella have very little to do with this moment of discord between two woman who sincerely like and admire each other . she only offer the occasion for an outburst of secret feeling which probably could not have be avoid . Mary Barfoot have love her cousin Everard ; it begin when he be one - and - twenty ; she , so much old , have never allow Everard or any one else to suspect her passion , which make she for two or three year more unhappy than she have ever be , or be ever to be when once her strong reason have prevail . the scandal of Amy Drake , happen long after , revive her misery , which now take the form of truly feminine intolerance ; she try to believe that Everard be henceforth of less than no account to she , that she detest he for his vice . Amy Drake , however , she detest much more . 

 when her friendship with Rhoda Nunn have progress to intimacy , she could not refrain from speak of her cousin Everard , absent at the end of the earth , and perchance lose to her sight for ever . her mention of he be severe , yet of a severity so obviously blend with other feeling , that Rhoda could not but surmise the truth . sentimental confession never enter Miss Barfoot 's mind ; she have conquer her desire , and be by no mean incline to make herself ridiculous ; Rhoda Nunn , of all woman , seem the least likely to make remark , or put question , such as would endanger a betrayal of the bury past . yet , at a later time , when press the inquiry whether Rhoda have ever be in love , Mary do not scruple to suggest that her own knowledge in that direction be complete . she do it in lightness of heart , secure under the protection of her forty year . Rhoda , of course , understand she as refer to Everard . 

 so the quarrel be one of jealousy . but no soon have it take place when Mary Barfoot experience a shame , a distress , which in truth signify the completion of self - conquest . she think herself ashamed of be angry where anger be uncalled for ; in reality , she chastise herself for the last revival of a conflict practically over and do with so many year ago . and on this very account , precisely because she be deceive herself as to her state of mind , she prolong the painful situation . she say to herself that Rhoda have behave so wrongly that displeasure be justify , that to make up the quarrel at once would be unwise , for Miss Nunn need a little discipline . this insistence upon the side issue help she to disregard the main one , and when at length she offer Rhoda the kiss of reconcilement , that also signify something other than be profess . it mean a hope that Rhoda might know the happiness which to her friend have be deny . 

 Everard 's announcement of his passion for Miss Nunn seem to Mary a well - calculate piece of boldness . if he seriously seek Rhoda for his wife , this frank avowal of the desire before a third person might remove some of the peculiar difficulty of the case . whether willing or not to be woo , Rhoda , in mere consistency with her pronounced opinion , must need maintain a scornful silence on the subject of Everard 's love - making ; by assail this proud reserve , this dignity which perchance have begin to burden its supporter , Everard make possible , if not inevitable , a discussion of his suit between the two woman . she who talk of her lover will be lead to think of he . 

 Miss Barfoot know not whether to hope for the marriage of this strange pair . she be distrustful of her cousin , find it hard to imagine he a loyal husband , and could not be sure whether Rhoda 's quality be such as would ultimately retain or repel he . she incline to think this woo a mere caprice . but Rhoda give ear to he , of that there could be little doubt ; and since his inheritance of ample mean the affair begin to have a new aspect . that Everard persevere , though the world of woman be now open to he for , on a moderate computation , any man with Barfoot 's personal advantage , and arm with fifteen hundred a year , may choose among fifty possible maiden seem to argue that he be really in love . but what it would cost Rhoda to appear before her friend in the character of a bride ! what a humbling of her glory ! 

 be she capable of the love which defy all humiliation ? or , love ardently , would she renounce a desire happiness from dread of female smile and whisper ? or would it be her sufficient satisfaction to reject a wealthy suitor , and thus pose more grandly than ever before the circle who see in she an example of woman 's independence ? powerful be the incitement to curiosity in a situation which , however it end , would afford such matter for emotional hypothesis . 

 they do not talk of Everard . whether Rhoda reply to his letter from abroad Miss Barfoot have no mean of ascertaining . but after his return he have a very cold reception due , perhaps , to some audacity he have allow himself in his correspondence . Rhoda again avoid meeting with he , and , as Miss Barfoot notice , throw herself with increase energy into all her old pursuit . 

 ' what about your holiday this year ? ' Mary ask one evening in June . ' shall you go first , or shall I ? ' 

 ' please make whatever arrangement you like . ' 

 Miss Barfoot have a reason for wish to postpone her holiday until late in August . she say so , and propose that Rhoda should take any three week she like prior to that . 

 ' Miss Vesper , ' she add , ' can manage your room very well . we shall be much more at ease in that respect than last year . ' 

 ' yes . Miss Vesper be get to be very useful and trustworthy . ' 

 Rhoda muse when she have make this remark . 

 ' do you know , ' she ask presently , ' whether she see much of Mrs. Widdowson ? ' 

 ' I have no idea . ' 

 they decide that Rhoda should go away at the close of July . where be her holiday to be spend ? Miss Barfoot suggest the lake country . 

 ' I be think of it myself , ' say Rhoda . ' I should like to have some sea - bathing , though . a week by the shore , and then the rest of the time spend in vagabondage among the mountain , would suit I very well . Mrs. Cosgrove be at home in Cumberland ; I must ask her advice . ' 

 this be do , and there result a scheme which seem to excite Rhoda with joyous anticipation . on the coast of Cumberland , a few mile south of St. Bees , be a little place call Seascale , unknown to the ordinary tourist , but with a good hotel and a few scatter house where lodging can be obtain . not far away rise the mountain barrier of lake - land , Wastdale clearly discernible . at Seascale , then , Rhoda would spend she first week , the quiet shore with its fine stretch of sand afford she just the retreat that she desire . 

 ' there be one or two bathing - machine , Mrs. Cosgrove say , but I hope to avoid such abomination . how delicious it be in one 's childhood , when one run into the sea naked ! I will enjoy that sensation once more , if I have to get up at three in the morning . ' 

 about this time Barfoot make one of his evening call . he have no hope of see Rhoda , and be agreeably surprised by her presence in the drawing - room . just as happen a year ago , the subject of Miss Barfoot make a direct inquiry . with lively interest , Mary wait for the reply , and be careful not to smile when Rhoda make known her intention . 

 ' have you plan a route after your stay at Seascale ? ' Barfoot ask . 

 ' no . I shall do that when I be there . ' 

 whether or not he intend a contrast to these homely project , Barfoot presently begin to talk of travel on a grander scale . when he next leave England , he should go by the Orient Express right away to Constantinople . his cousin ask question about the Orient Express , and he supply she with detail very exciting to the imagination of any one who long to see the kingdom of the earth as undoubtedly Rhoda do . the very name , Orient Express , have a certain sublimity , such as attache , more or less , to all the familiar nomenclature of world - transit . he talk himself into fervour , and keep a watch on Rhoda 's countenance . as also do Miss Barfoot . Rhoda try to appear unaffected , but her coldness betray its insincerity . 

 the next day , when work at Great Portland Street be just finish , she fall into conversation with Mildred Vesper . Miss Barfoot have an engagement to dine out that evening , and Rhoda end by invite Milly to come home with she to Chelsea . to Milly this be a great honour ; she hesitate because of her very plain dress , but easily allow herself to be persuade when she see that Miss Nunn really desire her company . 

 before dinner they have a walk in Battersea Park . Rhoda have never be so frank and friendly ; she induce the quiet , unpretende girl to talk of her early day , her school , her family . remarkable be Milly 's quiet contentedness ; not long ago she have receive an increase of payment from Miss Barfoot , and one would have judge that scarcely a wish now trouble she , unless it be that she might see her scatter brother and sister , all of whom , happily , be do pretty well in the struggle for existence . 

 ' you must feel rather lonely in your lodging sometimes ? ' say Rhoda . 

 ' very rarely . in future I shall have music in the evening . our good room have be let to a young man who have a violin , and he play " the Blue Bells of Scotland " not badly . ' 

 Rhoda do not miss the humorous intention , veil , as usual , under a manner of extreme sedateness . 

 ' do Mrs. Widdowson come to see you ? ' 

 ' not often . she come a few day ago . ' 

 ' you go to her house sometimes ? ' 

 ' I have not   be there for several month . at first I use to go rather frequently , but it be a long way . ' 

 to this subject Rhoda return after dinner , when they be cosily settle in the drawing - room . 

 ' Mrs. Widdowson come here now and then , and we be always very glad to see she . but I can not   help think she look rather unhappy . ' 

 ' I be afraid she do , ' assent the other gravely . 

 ' you and I be both at her wedding . it be not   very cheerful , be it ? I have a disagreeable sense of bad omen all the time . do you think she be sorry ? ' 

 ' I be really afraid she be . ' 

 Rhoda observe the look that accompany this admission . 

 ' foolish girl ! why could not   she stay with we , and keep her liberty ? she do not   seem to have make any new friend . have she speak to you of any ? ' 

 ' only of people she have meet here . ' 

 Rhoda yield or seem to yield to an impulse of frankness . bend slightly forward , with an anxious expression , she say in confidential tone 

 ' can you help to put my mind at rest about Monica ? you see she a week ago . do she say anything , or give any sign , that might make one really uneasy on her account ? ' 

 there be a struggle in Milly before she answer . Rhoda add 

 ' perhaps you have rather not ' 

 ' yes , I have rather tell you . she say a good many strange thing , and I have be uneasy about she . I wish I could speak to some one ' 

 ' how strange that I should feel urge to ask you about this , ' say Rhoda , her eye , peculiarly bright and keen , fix on the girl 's face . ' the poor thing be very miserable , I be sure . her husband seem to leave she entirely to herself . ' 

 milly look surprised . 

 ' Monica make quite the opposite complaint to I . she say that be a prisoner . ' 

 ' that be very odd . she certainly go about a good deal and alone . ' 

 ' I do not   know that , ' say Milly . ' she have very often talk to I about a woman 's right to the same freedom as a man , and I always understand that Mr. Widdowson object to she go anywhere without he , except just to call here , or at my lodging . ' 

 ' do you think she have any acquaintance that he dislike ? ' 

 the direct answer be delay , but it come at length . 

 ' there be some one . she have not   tell I who it be . ' 

 ' in plain word , Mr. Widdowson think he have cause for jealousy ? ' 

 ' yes , I understand Monica to mean that . ' 

 Rhoda 's face have grow very dark . she move her hand nervously . 

 ' but you do not   think she could deceive he ? ' 

 ' oh , I can not   think that ! ' reply Miss Vesper , with much earnestness . ' but what I could not   help fear , after I see she last , be that she might almost be tempt to leave her husband . she speak so much of freedom and of a woman 's right to release herself if she find her marriage be a mistake . ' 

 ' I be so grateful to you for tell I all this . we must try to help she . of course I will make no mention of you , Miss Vesper . then you be really under the impression that there be some one she prefer to her husband ? ' 

 ' I can not   help think there be , ' admit the other very solemnly . ' I be so sorry for she , and feel so powerless . she cry a little . all I could do be to entreat she not to behave rashly . I think her sister ought to know ' 

 ' oh , Miss Madden be useless . Monica can not look to she for advice or support . ' 

 after this conversation Rhoda pass a very unquiet night , and gloom appear in her countenance for the next few day . 

 she wish to have a private interview with Monica , but doubt whether it would in any degree serve her purpose that of discover whether certain suspicion she entertain have actual ground . confidence between she and Mrs. Widdowson have never exist , and in the present state of thing she could not hope to probe Monica 's secret feeling . whilst she still brood over the difficulty there come a letter for she from Everard Barfoot . he write formally ; it have occur to he that he might be of some slight service , in view of her approach holiday , if he look through the guide - book , and jot down the outline of such a walking - tour as she have in mind . this he have do , and the result be write out on an enclose sheet of paper . Rhoda allow a day to intervene , then send a reply . she thank Mr. Barfoot sincerely for the trouble he have so kindly take . ' I see you limit I to ten mile a day . in such scenery of course one do not   hurry on , but I can not   help inform you that twenty mile would not   alarm I . I think it very likely that I shall follow your itinerary , after my week of bathing and idle . I leave on Monday week . ' 

 Barfoot do not call again . every evening she sit in expectation of his coming . twice Miss Barfoot be away until a late hour , and on those occasion , after dinner , Rhoda sit in complete idleness , her face declare the troubled nature of ' her thought . on the Sunday before her departure she take a sudden resolve and go to call upon Monica at Herne Hill . 

 Mrs. Widdowson , she learn from the servant , have leave home about an hour since . 

 ' be Mr. Widdowson at home ? ' 

 yes , he be . and Rhoda wait for some time in the drawing - room until he make his appearance . of late Widdowson have grow so careless in the matter of toilet , that an unexpected visit oblige he to hurry through a change of apparel before he could present himself . look upon he for the first time for several month , Rhoda see that misery be undermine the man 's health . word could not have declare his trouble more plainly than the haggard feature and stiff , depressed , self - conscious manner . he fix his sunken eye upon the visitor , and smile , as be plain , only for civility 's sake . Rhoda do she good to seem at ease ; she explain   standing , for he forget to ask she to be seat   that she be go away on the morrow , and have hop to see Mrs. Widdowson , who , she be tell , have not be very well of late . 

 ' no , she be not in very good health , ' say Widdowson vaguely . ' she have go this afternoon to Mrs. Cosgrove 's I think you know she . ' 

 Less encouragement to remain could not have be offer , but Rhoda conceive a hope of hear something significant if she persevere in conversation . the awkwardness of do so be indifferent to she . 

 ' shall you be leave town shortly , Mr. Widdowson ? ' 

 ' we be not quite sure but pray sit down , Miss Nunn . you have not   see my wife lately ? ' 

 he take a chair , and rest his hand upon his knee , gaze at the visitor 's skirt . 

 ' Mrs. Widdowson have not   be to see we for more than a month if I remember rightly . ' 

 his look express both surprise and doubt . 

 ' a month ? but I think I have an idea that she go only a few day ago . ' 

 ' in the day time ? ' 

 ' to Great Portland Street , I mean to hear a lecture , or something of that kind , by Miss Barfoot . ' 

 Rhoda keep silence for a moment . then she reply hastily 

 ' oh yes very likely I be not   there that afternoon . ' 

 ' I see . that would explain ' 

 he seem relieve , but only for the instant ; then his eye glance hither and thither , with painful restlessness . Rhoda observe he closely . after fidget with his foot , he suddenly take a stiff position , and say in a loud voice 

 ' we be go to leave London altogether . I have decide to take a house at my wife 's native place , Clevedon . her sister will come and live with we . ' 

 ' that be a recent decision , Mr. Widdowson ? ' 

 ' I have think about it for some time . London do not   suit Monica 's health ; I be sure it do not . she will be much well in the country . ' 

 ' yes , I think that very likely . ' 

 ' as you say that you have notice her change look , I shall lose no time in get away . ' he make a great show of determined energy . ' a few week . we will go down to Clevedon at once and find a house . yes , we will go to - morrow , or the day after . Miss Madden , also , be very far from well . I wish I have not   delay so long . ' 

 ' you be do very wisely , I think . I have mean to suggest something of this kind to Mrs. Widdowson . perhaps , if I go at once to Mrs. Cosgrove 's , I might be fortunate enough to find she still there ? ' 

 ' you might . do I understand you to say that you go away tomorrow ? for three week . ah , then we may be get ready to remove when you come back . ' 

 the change that have come over he be remarkable . he could not keep his seat , and begin to pace the end of the room . see no possibility of prolong the talk for her own purpose , Rhoda accept this dismissal , and with the brief leave - taking go her way to Mrs. Cosgrove 's . 

 she be deeply agitated . Monica have not attend that lecture of Miss Barfoot 's , and so , it be evident , have purposely deceive her husband . to what end ? where be those hour spend ? Mildred Vesper 's report supply ground for sombre conjecture , and the incident at Sloane Square Station , the recollection of Monica and Barfoot absorb in talk , seem to have a possible significance which fire Rhoda with resentment . 

 her arrival at Mrs. Cosgrove 's be too late . Monica have be there say the hostess , but have leave nearly half an hour ago . 

 Rhoda 's instant desire be to go on to bayswater , and somehow keep watch near the flat where Barfoot live . Monica might be there . her come forth from the building might be detect . 

 but the difficulty of the understanding , and , still more , a dread of be see hover about that quarter , check her purpose as soon as it be form . she return home , and for an hour or two keep in solitude . 

 ' what have happen ? ' ask Miss Barfoot , when they at length meet . 

 ' happen ? nothing that I know of . ' 

 ' you look very strange . ' 

 ' your imagination . I have be pack ; perhaps it be from stoop over the trunk . ' 

 this by no mean satisfy Mary , who feel that thing mysterious be go on about she . but she could only wait , repeat to herself that the grand denouement decidedly be not far off . 

 at nine o'clock sound the visitor 's bell . if , as she think likely , the caller be Everard , Miss Barfoot decide that she would disregard everything but the dramatic pressure of the moment , and leave those two alone together for half an hour . Everard it be ; he enter the drawing - room with an unusual air of gaiety . 

 ' I have be in the country all day , ' be his first word ; and he go on to talk of trivial thing the doing of a Cockney excursion party that have come under his notice . 

 in a few minute Mary make an excuse for absent herself . when she be go , Rhoda look steadily at Barfoot , and ask 

 ' have you really be out of town ? ' 

 ' why should you doubt it ? ' 

 ' as I tell you . 

 she avert her look . after examine she curiously , Everard come and stand before she . 

 ' I want to ask your leave to meet you somewhere during these next three week . at any point on your route . we could have a day 's ramble together , and then say good - bye . ' 

 ' the lake country be free to you , Mr. Barfoot . ' 

 ' but I must not   miss you . you will leave Seascale to - morrow week ? ' 

 ' at present I think so . but I can not   restrict myself by any agreement . holiday must be a time of liberty . ' 

 they look at each other she with a carelessness which be all but defiance , he with a significant smile . 

 ' to - morrow week , then , perhaps we may meet again . ' 

 Rhoda make no reply , beyond a movement of her eyebrow , as if to express indifference . 

 ' I will not   stay long this evening . a pleasant journey to you ! ' 

 he shake hand , and leave the room . in the hall Miss Barfoot come to meet he ; they exchange a few word , unimportant and without reference to what have pass between he and Rhoda . nor do Rhoda speak of the matter when join by her friend . she retire early , have settle all the arrangement for her departure by the ten o'clock express from Euston next morning . 

 her luggage be to consist of one trunk and a wallet with a strap , which would serve the purpose of a man 's knapsack . save the indispensable umbrella , she carry no impeding trifle . a new costume , suitable for shore and mountain , be pack away in the trunk ; Miss Barfoot have judge of its effect , and be of opinion that it become the wearer admirably . 

 but Rhoda , have adjust everything that she be go to take with she , still have an occupation which keep she up for several hour . from a locked drawer she bring forth packet of letter , the storage of many year , and out of these select carefully perhaps a tithe , which she bind together and deposit in a box ; the remainder she burn in the empty fireplace . moreover , she collect from about the room a number of little object , ornament and thing of use , which also find a place in the same big box . all her personal property which have any value for she , except book , be finally under lock and key , and in portable repository . but still she keep move , as if in search of trifle that might have escape her notice ; silently , in her soft slipper , she stray hither and thither , till the short summer night have all but give place to dawn ; and when at length weariness compel she to go to bed , she be not able to sleep . 

 nor do Mary Barfoot enjoy much sleep that night . she lie thinking , and forecast strange possibility . 

 on Monday evening , return from Great Portland Street , the first thing she do be to visit Rhoda 's chamber . the ash of burn paper have be clear away , but a glance inform she of the needless and unprecedented care with which Miss Nunn have collect and pack most of the thing that belong to she . again Mary have a troubled night . 




 CHAPTER XXII 

 HONOUR in difficulty 

 at Mrs. Cosgrove 's , this Sunday afternoon , Monica have eye and thought for one person only . her come at all be practically an appointment to meet Bevis , whom she have see twice since her visit to the flat . a day or two after that occasion , she receive a call from the Bevis girl , who tell she of their brother 's approach departure for Bordeaux , and thereupon she invite the trio to dine with she . a fortnight subsequently to the dinner she have a chance encounter with Bevis in Oxford Street ; constraint of business do not allow he to walk beside she for more than a minute or two , but they speak of Mrs. Cosgrove 's on the following Sunday , and there , accordingly , find each other . 

 tremor of self - consciousness keep Monica in dread of be watch and suspect . few people be present to - day , and after exchange formal word with Bevis , she move away to talk with the hostess . not till half an hour have pass do she venture to obey the glance which she all but avow lover cast towards she in conversation . he be so much at ease , so like what she have always know he , that Monica ask herself whether she have not mistaken the meaning of his homage . one moment she hop it might be so ; the next , she long for some sign of passionate devotion , and think with anguish of the day , now so near , when he would be go for ever . this , she ardently believe , be the man who should have be her husband . he she could love with heart and soul , could make his will her absolute law , could live on his smile , could devote herself to his interest . the independence she have be struggle to assert ever since her marriage mean only freedom to love . if she have understand herself as she now do , her life would never have be thus cast into bondage . 

 ' the girl , ' Bevis be say , ' leave on Thursday . the rest of the week I shall be alone . on Monday the furniture will be stow away at the Pantechnicon , and on Tuesday off I go . ' 

 a casual listener could have suppose that the prospect please he . Monica , with a fix smile , look at the other group converse in the room ; no one be pay any attention to she . in the same moment she hear a murmur from her companion 's lip ; he be speak still , but in a voice only just audible . 

 ' come on Friday afternoon about four o'clock . ' 

 her heart begin to throb painfully , and she know that a treacherous colour have rise to her check . 

 ' do come once more for the last time . it shall be just as before just as before . an hour 's talk , and we will say good - bye to each other . ' 

 she be powerless to breathe a word . Bevis , notice that Mrs. Cosgrove have throw a look in their direction , suddenly laugh as if at some jest between they , and resume his lively strain of talk . Monica also laugh . an interval of make - believe , and again the soft murmur fall upon her ear . 

 ' I shall expect you . I know you will not   refuse I this one last kindness . some day , ' his voice be all but extinguish , ' some day who know ? ' 

 dreadful hope strike through she . a stranger 's eye turn their way , and again she laugh . 

 ' on Friday , at four . I shall expect you . ' 

 she rise , look for an instant about the room , then offer he her hand , utter some commonplace word of leave - taking . their eye do not meet . she go up to Mrs. Cosgrove , and as soon as possible leave the house . 

 Widdowson meet she as she cross the threshold of home . his face tell she that something extraordinary have happen , and she tremble before he . 

 ' back already ? ' he exclaim , with a grim smile . ' be quick , and take your thing off , and come to the library . ' 

 if he have discover anything   the lie , for instance , that she tell he a month ago , or that more recent falsehood when she pretend , without serious reason , to have be at Miss Barfoot 's lecture , he would not look and speak thus . hurrying , pant , she make a change of dress , and obey his summon . 

 ' Miss Nunn have be here , ' be his first word . 

 she turn pale as death . of course he observe it ; she be now prepare for anything . 

 ' she want to see you because she be go away on Monday . what be the matter ? ' 

 ' nothing . you speak so strangely ' 

 ' do I ? and you look very strangely . I do not   understand you . Miss Nunn say that everybody have notice how ill you seem . it be time we do something . to - morrow morning we be go down into Somerset , to Clevedon , to find a house . ' 

 ' I think you have give up that idea . ' 

 ' whether I have or not do not   matter . ' 

 in the determination to appear , and be , energetic , he speak with a rough obstinacy , a doggedness that now and then become violence . ' I be decide on it now . there be a train to Bristol at ten - twenty . you will pack just a few thing ; we shall not   be away for more than a day or two . ' 

 Tuesday , Wednesday , Thursday by Friday they might be back . till now , in an anguish of uncertainty , Monica have make up her mind . she would keep the appointment on Friday , come of it what might . if she could not be back in time , she would write a letter . 

 ' why be you talk in this tone ? ' she say coldly . 

 ' what tone ? I be tell you what I have decide to do , that be all . I shall easily find a house down there , no doubt . know the place , you will be able to suggest the likely locality . ' 

 she sit down , for strength be fail she . 

 ' it be quite true , ' Widdowson go on , star at she with inflame eye . ' you be begin to look like a ghost . oh , we will have an end of this ! ' he cackle in angry laughter . ' not a day 's unnecessary delay ! write to both your sister this evening and tell they . I wish they both to come and live with we . ' 

 ' very well . ' 

 ' now , will not   you be glad ? will not   it be well in every way ? ' 

 he come so near that she feel his feverish breath . 

 ' I tell you before , ' she answer , ' to do just as you like . ' 

 ' and you will not   talk about be keep a prisoner ? ' 

 Monica laugh . 

 ' oh no , I will not   say anything at all . ' 

 she scarcely know what word fall from her lip . let he propose , let he do what he like ; to she it be indifferent . she see something before her something she durst not , even an hour ago , have steadily contemplate ; it draw she with the force of fate . 

 ' you know we could not   go on live like this do not   you , Monica ? ' 

 ' no , we could not . ' 

 ' you see ! ' he almost shout in triumph , mislead by the smile on her face . ' all that be need be resolution on my part . I have be absurdly weak , and weakness in the husband mean unhappiness in the wife . from today you look to I for guidance . I be no tyrant , but I shall rule you for your own good . ' 

 still she smile . 

 ' so there be an end of our misery be not   it , darling ? what misery ! good God , how I have suffer ! have not   you know it ? ' 

 ' I have know it too well . ' 

 ' and now you will make up to I for it , Monica ? ' 

 again prompt by the irresistible force , she answer mechanically , 

 ' I will do the good for both . ' 

 he throw himself on the ground beside she and clasp she in his arm . 

 ' no , that be my own dear wife once more ! your face have altogether change . see how right it be that a husband should take the law into his own hand ! our second year of marriage shall be very different from the first . and yet we be happy , be not   we , my beautiful ? it be only this curse London that have come between we . at Clevedon we shall begin our life over again like we do at Guernsey . all our trouble , I be convince , have come of your ill - health . this air have never suit you ; you have feel miserable , and could not   be at peace in your home . poor little girl ! my poor darling ! ' 

 through the evening he be in a state of transport , due partly to the belief that Monica really welcome his decision , partly to the sense of have behave at length like a resolute man . his eye be severely bloodshot , and before bedtime headache rack he intolerably . 

 everything be carry out as he have plan it . they journey down into Somerset , put up at a Clevedon hotel , and begin house - hunting . on Wednesday the suitable abode be discover a house of modest pretension , but roomy and well situate . it could be make ready for occupation in a fortnight . bent on continue his exhibition of vigorous promptitude , Widdowson sign a lease that same evening . 

 ' to - morrow we will go straight home and make our preparation for removal . when all be ready , you shall come down here and live at the hotel until the house be furnish . go to your sister Virginia and simply bid she do as you wish . imitate I ! ' he laugh fatuously . ' do not   listen to any objection . when you have once get she away she will thank you . ' 

 by Thursday afternoon they be back at Herne Hill . Widdowson still keep up the show of extravagant spirit , but he be wear out . he speak so hoarsely that one would have think he have contract a severe sore throat ; it result merely from nervous strain . after a pretence of dinner , he seat himself as if to read ; glance at he a few minute later , Monica find that he be fast asleep . 

 she could not bear to gaze at he , yet her eye turn thither again and again . his face be repulsive to she ; the deep furrow , the red eyelid , the mottled skin move she to loathing . and yet she pity he . his frantic exultation be the cruel irony . what would he do ? what would become of he ? she turn away , and presently leave the room , for the sound of his uneasy breathing make she suffer too much . 

 when he wake up , he come in search of she , and laugh over his involuntary nap . 

 ' well , now , you will go and see your sister to - morrow morning . ' 

 ' in the afternoon , I think . ' 

 ' why ? do not   let we have any procrastination . the morning , the morning ! ' 

 ' please do let I have my way in such a trifle as that , ' Monica exclaim nervously . ' I have all sort of thing to see to here before I can go out . ' 

 he caress she . 

 ' you shall not   say that I be unreasonable . in the afternoon , then . and do not   listen to any objection . ' 

 ' no , no . ' 

 it be Friday . all the morning Widdowson have business with house agent and furniture remover , for he would not let a day go by without some practical step towards release from the life he detest . Monica seem to be equally active in her own department ; she be turn out drawer and wardrobe , and make selection of thing on some principle understand by herself . a flush remain upon her cheek , in marked contrast to the pallor which for a long time have give she an appearance of waste away . that and her singularly bright eye endow she with beauty suggestive of what she might have gain in happy marriage . 

 they have luncheon at one o'clock , and at a quarter to two Monica start by train for Clapham Junction . it be her purpose to have a short conversation with Virginia , who know of the trip to Clevedon , and to speak as though she be quite reconcile to the thought of removal ; after that , she would pursue her journey so as to reach bayswater by four o'clock . but Virginia be not at home . Mrs. Conisbee say she have go out at eleven in the morning , and with the intention of return by teatime . after a brief hesitation Monica request the landlady to deliver a message . 

 ' please ask she not to come to Herne Hill until she hear from I , as I be not likely to be at home for a day or two . ' 

 this leave more time at her disposal than she know how to employ . she return to the railway station , and travel on to Victoria ; there , in the corner of a waiting - room , she sit , feverishly impatient , until her watch tell she that she might take the next train westward . 

 a possible danger be before she though perhaps she need not trouble herself with the thought of such danger . what if Mr. Barfoot happen to encounter she as she ascend the stair ? but most likely he have no idea that her female friend , who dwelt on the floor above he , be go away . do it matter what he might think ? in a day or two 

 she come to the street , approach the block of flat , involuntarily cast anxious glance about she . and when she be within twenty yard of the door , it open , and forth come Barfoot . her first sensation be unreasone terror ; her next , thankfulness that she have not be a few minute soon , when the very meeting she have fear , within the building itself , would have come to pass . he walk this way ; he see she ; and the pleasant smile of recognition light up his face . 

 ' Mrs. Widdowson ! not a minute ago you be in my thought . I wish I could see you . ' 

 ' I be go to make a call in this neighbourhood ' 

 she could not command herself . the shock have leave her trembling , and the necessity of feign calmness be a new trial of her nerve . Barfoot , she feel certain , be read her face like a print page ; he see guilt there ; his quickly - avert eye , his peculiar smile , seem to express the facile tolerance of a man of the world . 

 ' allow I to accompany you to the end of the street . ' 

 his word buzz in her ear . she walk on without conscious effort , like an automaton obedient to a touch . 

 ' you know that Miss Nunn have go down into Cumberland ? ' Barfoot be say , his look bent upon she . 

 ' yes . I know . ' 

 she try to glance at he with a smile . 

 ' to - morrow , ' he pursue , ' I be go there myself . ' 

 ' to Cumberland ? ' 

 ' I shall see she , I hope . perhaps she will only be angry with I . ' 

 ' perhaps . but perhaps not . ' 

 her confusion would not be overcome . she feel a burning in her ear , on her neck . it be an agony of shame . the word she speak sound imbecile muttering , which must confirm Barfoot in his bad opinion of she . 

 ' if it be all in vain , ' he continue , ' then I shall say good - bye , and there be an end . ' 

 ' I hope not I should think ' 

 useless . she set her lip and become mute . if only he would leave she ! and almost immediately he do so , with a few word of kind tone . she feel the pressure of his hand , and see he walk rapidly away ; doubtless he know this be what she desire . 

 until he have pass out of sight , Monica keep the same direction . then she turn round and hurry back , fearful lest the detention might make she late , and Bevis might lose hope of she come . there could be no one in the building now whom she need fear to meet . she open the big entrance door and go up . 

 Bevis must have be wait for the sound of her light footstep ; his door fly open before she could knock . without speak , a silent laugh of joy upon his lip , he draw back to make room for her entrance , and then press both her hand . 

 in the sitting - room be beginning of disorder . picture have be take down from the wall and light ornament remove . 

 ' I shall not   sleep here after to - night , ' Bevis begin , his agitation scarcely less obvious than Monica 's . ' to - morrow I shall be pack what be to go with I . how I hate it all ! ' 

 Monica drop into a chair near the door . 

 ' oh , not there ! ' he exclaim . ' here , where you sit before . we be go to have tea together again . ' 

 his utterance be force , and the laugh that come between they betray the quivering of his nerve . 

 ' tell I what you have be do . I have think of you day and night . ' 

 he bring a chair close to she , and when he have seat himself he take one of her hand . Monica , scarcely repress a sob , the result of reaction from her fear and misery , draw the hand away . but again he take it . 

 ' there be the glove on it , ' he say in a shake voice . ' what harm in my hold your glove ? do not   think of it , and talk to I . I love music , but no music be like your voice . ' 

 ' you go on Monday ? ' 

 it be her lip speak the sentence , not she . 

 ' no , on Tuesday I think . ' 

 ' my Mr. Widdowson be go to take I away from London . ' 

 ' away ? ' 

 she tell he the circumstance . Bevis keep his eye upon her face , with a look of rapt adoration which turn at length to pain and woeful perplexity . 

 ' you have be marry a year , ' he murmur . ' oh , if I have meet you before that ! what a cruel fate that we should know each other only when there be no hope ! ' 

 the man reveal himself in this dolorous sentimentality . his wonted blitheness and facetiousness , his healthy feature , his supple , well - build frame , suggest that when love awake within he he would express it with virile force . but he tremble and blush like a young girl , and his accent fall at last into a melodious whining . 

 he raise the gloved finger to his lip . Monica bend her face away , deadly pale , with closed eye . 

 ' be we to part to - day , and never again see each other ? ' he go on . ' say that you love I ! only say that you love I ! ' 

 ' you despise I for come to you like this . ' 

 ' despise you ? ' 

 in a sudden rapture he fold his arm about she . 

 ' say that you love I ! ' 

 he kiss away the last syllable of her whisper reply . 

 ' Monica ! what be there before we ? how can I leave you ? ' 

 yield herself for the moment in a faintness that threaten to subdue she , she be yet able , when his caress grow wild with passion , to put back his arm and move suddenly away . he spring up , and they stand speechless . again he draw near . 

 ' take I away with you ! ' Monica then cry , clasp her hand together . ' I can not   live with he . let I go with you to France . ' 

 Bevis 's blue eye widen with consternation . 

 ' dare you dare you do that ? ' he stammer . 

 ' dare I ? what courage be need ? how dare I remain with a man I hate ? ' 

 ' you must leave he . of course you must leave he . ' 

 ' oh , before another day have pass ! ' sob Monica . ' it be wrong even to go back to - day . I love you , and in that there be nothing to be ashamed of ; but what bitter shame to be live with he , practise hypocrisy . he make I hate myself as much as I hate he . ' 

 ' has he behave brutally to you , dearest ? ' 

 ' I have nothing to accuse he of , except that he persuade I to marry he make I think that I could love he when I do not   know what love mean . and now he wish to get I away from all the people I know because he be jealous of every one . and how can I blame he ? have not   he cause for jealousy ? I be deceive he I have deceive he for a long time , pretend to be a faithful wife when I have often wish that he might die and release I . it be I who be to blame . I ought to have leave he . every woman who think of her husband as I do ought to go away from he . it be base and wicked to stay there pretend deceive ' 

 Bevis come towards she and take she in his arm . 

 ' you love I ? ' she pant under his hot kiss . ' you will take I away with you ? ' 

 ' yes , you shall come . we must not   travel together , but you shall come when I be settle there ' 

 ' why can not   I go with you ? ' 

 ' my own darling , think what it would mean if our secret be discover ' 

 ' discover ? but how can we think of that ? how can I go back there , with your kiss on my lip ? oh , I must live somewhere in secret until you go , and then I have put aside the few thing that I want to take . I could never have continue to live with he even if you have not   say you love I . I be oblige to pretend that I agree to everything , but I will beg and starve rather than bear that misery any long . do not   you love I enough to face whatever may happen ? ' 

 ' I love you with all my soul , Monica ! sit down again , dear ; let we talk about it , and see what we can do . ' 

 he half lead , half carry , her to a couch , and there , hold she embrace , give way to such amorous frenzy that again Monica break from he . 

 ' if you love I , ' she say in tone of bitter distress , ' you will respect I as much as before I come to you . help I I be suffer so dreadfully . say at once that I shall go away with you , even if we travel as stranger . if you be afraid of it become know I will do everything to prevent it . I will go back and live there until Tuesday , and come away only at the last hour , so that no one will ever suspect where I do not   care how humbly I live when we be abroad . I can have lodging somewhere in the same town , or near , and you will come ' 

 his hair disorder , his eye wild , quiver throughout with excitement , he stand as if ponder possibility . 

 ' shall I be a burden to you ? ' she ask in a faint voice . ' be the expense more than you ' 

 ' no , no , no ! how can you think of such a thing ? but it would be so much well if you could wait here until I oh , what a wretched thing to have to seem so cowardly to you ! but the difficulty be so great , darling . I shall be a perfect stranger in Bordeaux . I do not   even speak the language at all well . when I reach there I shall be meet at the station by one of our people , and just think , how could we manage ? you know , if it be discover that I have run away with you , it would damage my position terribly . I can not   say what might happen . my darling , we shall have to be very careful . in a few week it might all be manage very easily . I would write to you to some address , and as soon as ever I have make arrangement ' 

 Monica break down . the unmanliness of his tone be so dreadful a disillusion . she have expect something so entirely different swift , virile passion , eagerness even to anticipate her desire of flight , a strength , a courage to which she could abandon herself , body and soul . she break down utterly , and weep with her hand upon her face . 

 Bevis , in sympathetic distraction , throw himself on his knee before , clutch at her waist . 

 ' do not , do not ! ' he wail . ' I can not   bear that ! I will do as you wish , Monica . tell I some place where I can write to you . do not   cry , darling do not   ' 

 she go to the couch again , and rest her face against the back , sob . for a time they exchange mere incoherence . then passion seize upon both , and they clung together , mute , motionless . 

 ' to - morrow I shall leave he , ' whisper Monica , when at length their eye meet . ' he will be away in the morning , and I can take what I need . tell I where I shall go to , dear to wait until you be ready . no one will ever suspect that we have go together . he know I be miserable with he ; he will believe that I have find some way of support myself in London . where shall I live till Tuesday ? ' 

 Bevis scarcely listen to her word . the temptation of the natural man , basely selfish , be strengthen its hold upon he . 

 ' do you love I ? do you really love I ? ' he reply to she , with thick , agitated utterance . 

 ' why should you ask that ? how can you doubt it ? ' 

 ' if you really love I - ' 

 his face and tone frighten she . 

 ' do not   make I doubt your love ! if I have not perfect trust in you what will become of I ? ' 

 yet once more she draw resolutely away from he . he pursue , and hold her arm with violence . 

 ' oh , I be mistaken in you ! ' Monica cry in fear and bitterness . ' you do not   know what love mean , as I feel it . you will not   speak , you will not   think , of our future life together ' 

 ' I have promise ' 

 ' leave loose of I ! it be because I have come here . you think I a worthless woman , without sense of honour , with no self - respect ' 

 he protest vehemently . the anguished look in her eye have its effect upon his sens ; by degree it subjugate he , and make he ashamed of his ignoble impulse . 

 ' shall I find a lodging for you till Tuesday ? ' he ask , after move away arid return . 

 ' will you ? ' 

 ' you be sure you can leave home to - morrow without be suspect ? ' 

 ' yes , I be sure I can . he be go to the City in the morning . appoint some place where I can meet you . I will come in a cab , and then you can take I on to the ' 

 ' but you be forget the risk . if you take a cab from Herne Hill , with your luggage , he will be able to find out the driver afterwards , and learn where you go . ' 

 ' then I will drive only as far as the station , and come to Victoria , and you shall meet I there . ' 

 the necessity of these paltry arrangement fill her soul with shame . on the detail of her escape she have hardly reflect . all such consideration be , she deem , naturally the care of her lover , who would act with promptitude , and so as to spare she a moment 's perplexity . she have imagine everything in readiness within a few hour ; on her no responsibility save that of break the hat bond . inevitably she turn to the wretched thought that Bevis regard she as a burden . yes , he have already his mother and his sister to support ; she ought to have remember that . 

 ' what time would it be ? ' he be ask . 

 unable to reply , she pursue her reflection . she have money , but how to obtain possession of it ? afterwards , when her flight be accomplish , secrecy , it appear , would be no less needful than now . that necessity have never occur to she ; declaration of the love that have free she seem inevitable nay , desirable . her self - respect demand it ; only thus could she justify herself before his sister and other people who know she . they , perhaps , would not see it in the light of justification , but that matter little ; her own conscience would approve what she have do . but to steal away , and live henceforth in hiding , like a woman dishonour even in her own eye from that she shrink with repugnance . rather than that , would it not be preferable to break with her husband , and openly live apart from he , alone ? 

 ' be honest with I , ' she suddenly exclaim . ' have you rather I do not   come ? ' 

 ' no , no ! I can not   live without you ' 

 ' but , if that be true , why have not   you the courage to let every one know it ? in your heart you must think that we be act wrongly . ' 

 ' I do not ! I believe , as you do , that love be the only true marriage . very well ! ' he make a desperate gesture . ' let we defy all consequence . for your sake ' 

 his exaggerated vehemence could not deceive Monica . 

 ' what be it , ' she ask , ' that you most fear ? ' 

 he begin to babble protestation , but she would not listen to they . 

 ' tell I I have every right to ask what you most fear ? ' 

 ' I fear nothing if you be with I . let my relative say and think what they like . I have make great sacrifice for they ; to give up you would be too much . ' 

 yet his distress be evident . it strain the corner of his mouth , wrinkle his forehead . 

 ' the disgrace would be more than you could bear . you would never see your mother and your sister again . ' 

 ' if they be so prejudiced , so unreasonable , I can not   help it . they must ' 

 he be interrupt by a loud rat - tat at the outer door . blanched herself , Monica see that her lover 's face turn to ghastly pallor . 

 ' who can that be ? ' he whisper hoarsely . ' I expect no one . ' 

 ' need you answer ? ' 

 ' can it be ? have you be follow ? do any one suspect ? ' 

 they star at each other , still half - paralyse , and stand wait thus until the knock be repeat impatiently . 

 ' I dare not   open , ' Bevis whisper , come close to she , as if on the impulse of seek protection for to offer it be assuredly not in his mind . ' it might be ' 

 ' no ! that be impossible . ' 

 ' I dare not   go to the door . the risk be too frightful . he will go away , whoever it be , if no one answer . ' 

 both be shake in the second stage of terror . Bevis put his arm about Monica , and feel her heart give great throb against his own . their passion for the moment be effectually quench . 

 ' listen ! that be the clink of the letter - box . a card or something have be put in . then it be all right . I will wait a moment . ' 

 he step to the door of the room , open it without sound , and at once hear footstep descend the stair . in the look which he cast back at she , a grin rather than a smile , Monica see something that give she a pang of shame on his behalf . on go to the letter - box he find a card , with a few word scribble upon it . 

 ' only one of our partner ! ' he exclaim gleefully . ' want to see I to - night . of course he take it for grant I be out . ' 

 Monica be look at her watch . past five o'clock . 

 ' I think I must go , ' she say timidly . 

 ' but what be our arrangement ? do you still intend ' 

 ' intend ? be not   it for you to decide ? ' 

 there be a coldness in the word of both , partly the result of the great shock they have undergo , in part due to their impatience with each other . 

 ' darling do what I propose at first . stay for a few day , until I be settle at Bordeaux . ' 

 ' stay with my my husband ? ' 

 she use the word purposely , significantly , to see how it would affect he . the bitterness of her grow disillusion allow she to think and speak as if no ardent feeling be concern . 

 ' for both our sake , dearest , dearest love ! a few day long , until I have write to you , and tell you exactly what to do . the journey will not   be very difficult for you ; and think how much well , dear Monica , if we can escape discovery , and live for each other without any shame or fear to disturb we . you will be my own dear true wife . I will love and guard you as long as I live . ' 

 he embrace she with placid tenderness , lay his cheek against her , kiss her hand . 

 ' we must see each other again , ' he continue . ' come on Sunday , will you ? and in the meantime find out some place where I could address letter to you . you can always find a stationer 's shop where they will receive letter . be guide by I , dear little girl . only a week or two to save the happiness of our whole life . ' 

 Monica listen , but with half - attention , her look fix on the floor . encourage by her silence , the lover go on in a strain of heighten enthusiasm , depict the rapture of their retirement from the world in some suburb of Bordeaux . how this retreat be to escape the notice of his business companion , through whom the scandal might get wind , he do not suggest . the truth be , Bevis find himself in an extremely awkward position , with issue he have not contemplate , and all he care for be to avert the immediate peril of public discovery . the easy - go , kindly fellow have never consider all the responsibility involve in make mild love timorously selfish from the first to a married woman who take his advance with desperate seriousness . he have not in he the stuff of vigorous rascality , still less the only other quality which can support a man in such a situation as this heroism of moral revolt . so he cut a very poor figure , and be dolefully aware of it . he talk , talk ; try to disguise his feebleness in tinsel phrase ; and Monica still keep her eye cast down . 

 when another half - hour have pass , she sigh deeply and rise from her seat . she would write to he , she say , and let he know where a reply would reach she . no , she must not come here again ; all he have to tell she would be communicate by letter . the subdued tone , the simple sadness of her word , distressed Bevis , and yet he secretly congratulate himself . he have do nothing for which this woman could justly reproach he ; marvellous so he consider have be his self - restraint ; absolutely , he have behave ' like a gentleman . ' to be sure , he be miserably in love , and , if circumstance by any mean allow of it , would send for Monica to join he in France . should the thing prove impossible , he have nothing whatever on his conscience . 

 he hold out his arm to she . Monica shake her head and look away . 

 ' say once more that you love I , darling , ' he plead . ' I shall not rest for an hour until I be able to write and say , " come to I . " ' 

 she permit he to hold she once more in his soft embrace . 

 ' kiss I , Monica ! ' 

 she put her lip to his cheek , and withdraw they , still shun his look . 

 ' oh , not that kind of kiss . like you kiss I before . ' 

 ' I can not , ' she reply , with choke voice , the tear again start forth . 

 ' but what have I do that you should love I less , dearest ? ' 

 he kiss the fall drop , murmur assurance , encouragement . 

 ' you shall not   leave I until I have hear you say that your love be unchanged . whisper it to I , sweetest ! ' 

 ' when we meet again not now . ' 

 ' you frighten I . Monica , we be not say good - bye for ever ? ' 

 ' if you send for I I will come . ' 

 ' you promise faithfully ? you will come ? ' 

 ' if you send for I I will come . ' 

 that be her last word . he open the door for she , and listen as she depart . 




 CHAPTER XXIII 

 in ambush 

 Hitherto , Widdowson have entertain no grave mistrust of his wife . the principle she have avow , directly traceable as it seem to her friendship with the militant woman in Chelsea , he dislike and fear ; but her conduct he fully believe to be above reproach . his jealously of Barfoot do not glance at Monica 's attitude towards the man ; merely at the man himself , whom he credit with native scoundreldom . Barfoot represent to his mind a type of licentious bachelor ; why , he could not have make perfectly clear to his own understanding . possibly the ease of Everard 's bearing , the something aristocratic in his countenance and his speech , the polish of his manner , especially in formal converse with woman , from the first grave offence to Widdowson 's essentially middle - class sensibility . if Monica be in danger at all , it be , he feel convince , from that quarter . the subject of his wife 's intimate dialogue with Barfoot at the Academy still remain a mystery to he . he put faith in her rebellious declaration that every word might have be safely repeat in his hearing , but , be the matter what it might , the manner of Barfoot 's talk mean evil . of that conviction he could not get rid . 

 he have read somewhere that a persistently jealous husband may not improbably end by irritate an innocent wife into afford real ground for jealousy . a man with small knowledge of the world be much impress by dicta such as there ; they get into the cranny of his mind , and thence direct the course of his thinking . Widdowson , before his marriage , have never suspect the difficulty of understand a woman ; have he speak his serious belief on that subject , it would have be find to represent the most primitive male conception of the feminine being . woman be very like child ; it be rather a task to amuse they and to keep they out of mischief . therefore the blessedness of household toil , in especial the blessedness of child - bearing and all that follow . intimacy with Monica have greatly affect his view , yet chiefly by disturb they ; no firm ground offer itself to his threading when he perforce admit that his former standpoint be every day assail by some incontestable piece of evidence . woman have individual character ; that discovery , though not a very profound one , impress he with the force of something arrive at by independent observation . Monica often puzzle he gravely ; he could not find the key to her satisfaction and discontent . to regard she simply as a human being be beyond the reach of his intelligence . he cast the blame of his difficulty upon sex , and pay more attention to the hint on such afford he by his reading . he would endeavour to keep his jealousy out of sight , lest the mysterious tendency of the female nature might prompt Monica to deliberate wrongdoing . 

 to - day for the first time there flash across he the thought that already he might have be deceive . it originate in a peculiarity of Monica 's behaviour at luncheon . she eat scarcely anything ; she seem hurried , frequently glance at the clock ; and she lose herself in reverie . discover that his eye be upon she , she betray uneasiness , and begin to talk without consider what she mean to say . all this might mean nothing more than her barely - conceal regret at be oblige to leave London ; but Widdowson remark it with a vivacity of feel perhaps due to the excitement in which he have live for the past week . perhaps the activity , the resolution to which he have urge himself , cause a sharpening of his perception . and the very thought , never out of his mind , that only a few day have to elapse before he carry off his wife from the scene of peril , tend to make he more vividly conscious of that peril . certain it be that a moment 's clairvoyance assail his peace , and leave behind it all manner of ugly conjecture . woman so say the book be adept at dissimulation . be it conceivable that Monica have take advantage of the liberty he have of late allow she ? if a woman could not endure a direct , search gaze , must it not imply some enormous wickedness ? see that nature have arm they for this very trial . 

 in her set forth for the railway station hurry be again evident , and disinclination to exchange parting word . if the eagerness be simple and honest , would she not have accept his suggestion and have go in the morning ? 

 for five minute after her departure he stand in the hall , star before he . a new jealousy , a horrible constriction of the heart , have begin to torture he . he go and walk about in the library , but could not dispel his suffering . vain to keep repeat that Monica be incapable of baseness . of that he be persuade , but none the less a hideous image return upon his mental vision a horror a pollution of thought . 

 one thing he could do to restore his sanity . he would walk over to Lavender Hill , and accompany his wife on her return home . indeed , the mere difficulty of get through the afternoon advise this project . he could not employ himself , and know that his imagination , once inflame , would leave he not a moment 's rest . yes , he would walk to Lavender Hill , and ramble about that region until Monica have have reasonable time for talk with her sister . 

 about three o'clock there fall a heavy shower of rain . strangely against his habit , Widdowson turn into a quiet public - house , and sit for a quarter of an hour at the bar , drink a glass of whisky . during the past week he have take considerably more wine than usual at meal ; he seem to need the support . whilst sip at his glass of spirit , he oddly enough fall into talk with the barmaid , a young woman of some charm , and what appear to be unaffected modesty . not for twenty year have Widdowson converse with a member of this sisterhood . their dialogue be make up of the most trifling of triviality weather , a railway accident , the desirability of holiday at this season . and when at length he rise and put an end to the chat it be with appreciable reluctance . 

 ' a good , nice sort of girl , ' he go away say to himself . ' pity she should be serve at a bar hear doubtful talk , and see very often vile sight . a nice , soft - spoken little girl . ' 

 and he muse upon her remembered face with a complacency which soothe his feeling . 

 of a sudden he be check by the conversion of his sentiment into thought . would he not have be a much happy man if he have marry a girl distinctly his inferior in mind and station ? provide she be sweet , lovable , docile such a wife would have spar he all the misery he have know with Monica . from the first he have understand that Monica be no representative shopgirl , and on that very account he have strive so eagerly to win she . but it be a mistake . he have love she , still love she , with all the emotion of which he be capable . how many hour ' genuine happiness of soul have that love afford he ? the minute fraction of the twelve month for which she have be his wife . and of suffering , often amount to frantic misery , he could count many week . could such a marriage as this be judge a marriage at all , in any true sense of the word ? 

 ' let I ask myself a question . if Monica be absolutely free to choose between continue to live with I and resume her perfect liberty , can I persuade myself that she would remain my wife ? she would not . not for a day , not for an hour . of that I be morally convinced . and I acknowledge the ground of her dissatisfaction . we be unsuited to each other . we do not understand each other . our marriage be physical and nothing more . my love what be my love ? I do not love her mind , her intellectual part . if I do , this frightful jealousy from which I suffer would be impossible . my ideal of the wife perfectly suit to I be far liker that girl at the public - house bar than Monica . Monica 's independence of thought be a perpetual irritation to I . I do not   know what her thought really be , what her intellectual life signifie . and yet I hold she to I with the stern grasp . if she endeavour to release herself I should feel capable of kill she . be not this a strange , a brutal thing ? ' 

 Widdowson have never before reach this height of speculation . in the moment , by the very fact , of admit that Monica and he ought not to be live together , he become more worthy of his wife 's companionship than ever hitherto . 

 well , he would exercise great forebearance . he would endeavour to win her respect by respect the freedom she claim . his recent suspicion of she be monstrous . if she know they , how her soul would revolt from he ! what if she take an interest in other man , perchance more her equal than he ? why , have he not just be think of another woman , reflect that she , or one like she , would have make he a more suitable wife than Monica ? yet this could not reasonably be call unfaithfulness . 

 they be bind together for life , and their wisdom lie in mutual toleration , the constant endeavour to understand each other aright not in fierce restraint of each other 's mental liberty . how many marriage be anything more than mutual forbearance ? perhaps there ought not to be such a thing as enforce permanence of marriage . this be dare speculation ; he could not have endure to hear it from Monica 's lip . but perhaps , some day , marriage would be dissoluble at the will of either party to it . perhaps the man who seek to hold a woman when she no long love he would be regard with contempt and condemnation . 

 what a simple thing marriage have always seem to he , and how far from simple he have find it ! why , it lead he to musing which overset the order of the world , and fling all idea of religion and morality into wildest confusion . it would not do to think like this . he be a man wed to a woman very difficult to manage there be the practical upshot of the matter . his duty be to manage she . he be responsible for her right conduct . with intention perfectly harmless , she might run into unknown jeopardy above all , just at this time when she be take reluctant leave of her friend . the danger justify he in exceptional vigilance . 

 so , from his excursion into the realm of reason do he return to the safe sphere of the commonplace . and now he might venture to press on towards Mrs. Conisbee 's house , for it be half - past four , and already Monica must have be talk with her sister for a couple of hour . 

 his knock at the door be answer by the landlady herself . she tell of Mrs. Widdowson 's arrival and departure . ah , then Monica have no doubt go straight home again . but , as Miss Madden have return , he would speak with she . 

 ' the poor lady be not   very well , sir , ' say Mrs. Conisbee , finger the hem of her apron . 

 ' not very well ? but could not   I see she for a moment ? ' 

 Virginia answer this question by appear on the staircase . 

 ' some one for I , Mrs. Conisbee ? ' she call from above . ' oh , be it you , edmund ? so very glad ! I be sure Mrs. Conisbee will have the kindness to let you come into her sitting - room . what a pity I be away when Monica call ! I have   have business to see to in town ; and I have   walk and walk , until I be really hardly able ' 

 she sink upon a chair in the room , and look fixedly at the visitor with a broad , benevolent smile , her head move up and down . Widdowson be for a moment in perplexity . if the evidence of his eye could be trust , Miss Madden 's indisposition point to a cause so strange that it seem incredible . he turn to look for Mrs. Conisbee , but the landlady have hurriedly withdraw , close the door behind she . 

 ' it be so foolish of I , Edmund , ' Virginia ramble on , address he with a familiarity she have never yet use . ' when I be away from home I forget all about my meal really forget and then all at once I find that I be quite exhausted quite exhausted as you see . and the bad of it be I have altogether lose my appetite by the time I get back . I could not   eat a mouthful of food not a mouthful I assure you I could not . and it do so distress good Mrs. Conisbee . she be exceedingly kind to I exceedingly careful about my health . oh , and in Battersea Park Road I see such a shocking sight ; a great cart run over a poor little dog , and it be kill on the spot . it unnerve I dreadfully . I do think , Edmund , those driver ought to be more careful . I be say to Mrs. Conisbee only the other day and that remind I , I do so want to know all about your visit to Clevedon . dear , dear Clevedon ! and have you really take a house there , edmund ? oh , if we could all end our day at Clevedon ! you know that our dear father and mother be bury in the old churchyard . you remember Tennyson 's line about the old church at Clevedon ? oh , and what do Monica decide about about really , what be I go to ask ? it be so foolish of I to forget that dinner - time have come and go . I get so exhausted , and even my memory fail I . ' 

 he could doubt no long . this poor woman have yield to one of the temptation that beset a life of idleness and solitude . his pity be mingle with disgust . 

 ' I only wish to tell you , ' he say gravely , ' that we have take a house at Clevedon ' 

 ' you really have ! ' she clasp her hand together . ' whereabout ? ' 

 ' Near Dial Hill . ' 

 Virginia begin a rhapsody which her brother - in - law have no inclination to hear . he rise abruptly . 

 ' perhaps you have well come and see we to - morrow . ' 

 ' but Monica leave a message that she would not   be at home for the next few day , and that I be not   to come till I hear from she . ' 

 ' not at home ? I think there be a mistake . ' 

 ' oh , impossible ! we will ask Mrs. Conisbee . ' 

 she go to the door and call . from the landlady Widdowson learn exactly what Monica have say . he reflect for a moment . 

 ' she shall write to you then . do not   come just yet . I must not   stay any long now . ' 

 and with a mere pretence of shake hand he abruptly leave the house . 

 suspicion thicken about he . he would have think it utterly impossible for Miss Madden to disgrace herself in this vulgar way , and the appalling discovery affect his view of Monica . they be sister ; they have characteristic in common , family trait , weakness . if the eld woman could fall into this degradation , might there not be possibility in Monica 's character such as he have refuse to contemplate ? be there not terrible reason for mistrust she ? what do she mean by her message to Virginia . 

 black and haggard , he go home as fast as a hansom could take he . it be half - past five when he reach the house . his wife be not here , and have not be here . 

 at this moment Monica be start by train from bayswater , after her part with Bevis . arrive at Victoria , she cross to the main station , and go to the lady ' waiting - room for the purpose of bath her face . she have red , swollen eye , and her hair be in slight disorder . this do , she inquire as to the next train for Herne Hill . one have just go ; another would leave in about a quarter of an hour . 

 a dreadful indecision be harass she . ought she , do she dare , to return home at all ? even if her strength suffice for simulate a natural manner , could she consent to play so base a part ? 

 there be but one possible alternative . she might go to Virginia 's lodging , and there remain , write to her husband that she have leave he . the true cause need not be confess . she would merely declare that life with he have become intolerable to she , that she demand a release . their approach removal to Clevedon offer the occasion . she would say that her endurance fail before that prospect of solitude , and that , feel as she do , it be dishonourable to make long pretence of do her duty as a wife . then , if Bevis write to she in such a way as to revive her love , if he seriously tell she to come to he , all difficulty could be solve by her disappearance . 

 be such revival of disheartened love a likely or a possible thing ? at this moment she feel that to flee in secret , and live with Bevis as he propose , would be no less dishonour than abide with the man who have a legal claim upon her companionship . her lover , as she have think of he for the past two or three month , be only a figment of her imagination ; Bevis have prove himself a complete stranger to her mind ; she must reshape her knowledge of he . his face be all that she could still dwell upon with the old desire ; nay , even that have suffer a change . 

 insensibly the minute go by . whilst she sit in the waiting - room her train start ; and when she have become aware of that , her irresolution grow more tormenting . 

 suddenly there come upon she a feeling of illness , of nausea . perspiration break out on her forehead ; her eye dazzle ; she have to let her head fall back . it pass , but in a minute or two the fit again seize she , and with a moan she lose consciousness . 

 two or three woman who be in the room render assistance . the remark they exchange , though express uncertainty and discreetly ambiguous , would have be significant to Monica . on her recovery , which take place in a few moment , she at once start up , and with hurried thank to those about she , listen to nothing that be say and answer no inquiry , go out on to the platform . there be just time to catch the train now depart for Herne Hill . 

 she explain her fainting fit by the hour of agitation through which she have pass . there be no room for surprise . she have suffer indescribably , and still suffer . her wish be to get back into the quietness of home , to rest and to lose herself in sleep . 

 on enter , she see nothing of her husband . his hat hang on the hall - tree , and he be perhaps sit in the library ; the more genial temper would account for his not come forth at once to meet she , as have be his custom when she return from an absence alone . 

 she change her dress , and disguise as far as be possible the trace of suffer on her feature . weakness and tremor urge she to lie down , but she could not venture to do this until she have speak to her husband . support herself by the banister , she slowly descend , and open the library door . Widdowson be read a newspaper . he do not look round , but say carelessly , 

 ' so you be back ? ' 

 ' yes . I hope you do not   expect I soon . ' 

 ' oh , it be all right . ' he throw a rapid glance at she over his shoulder . ' have a long talk with Virginia , I suppose ? ' 

 ' yes . I could not   get away before . ' 

 Widdowson seem to be much interested in some paragraph . he put his face close to the paper , and be silent for two or three second . then he again look round , this time observe his wife steadily , but with a face that give no intimation of unusual thought . 

 ' do she consent to go ? ' 

 Monica reply that it be still uncertain ; she think , however , that Virginia 's objection would be overcome . 

 ' you look very tired , ' remark the other . 

 ' I be , very . ' 

 and thereupon she withdraw , unable to command her countenance , scarce able to remain stand for another moment . 




 CHAPTER XXIV 

 TRACKED 

 when Widdowson go up to the bedroom that night , Monica be already asleep . he discover this on turn up the gas . the light fall upon her face , and he be draw to the bedside to look at she . the feature signify nothing but repose ; her lip be just apart , her eyelid lie softly with their black fringe of exquisite pencilling , and her hair be arrange as she always prepare it for the pillow . he watch she for full five minute , and detect not the slight movement , so profound be her sleep . then he turn away , mutter savagely under his breath , ' hypocrite ! liar ! ' 

 but for a purpose in his thought he would not have lain down beside she . on get into bed he keep as far away as possible , and all through the wakeful night his limb shrink from the touch of her . 

 he rise an hour early than usual . Monica have long be awake , but she move so seldom that he could not be sure of this ; her face be turn from he . when he come back to the room after his bath . Monica prop herself on her elbow and ask why he be move so early . 

 ' I want to be in the City at nine , ' he reply , with a show of cheerfulness . ' there be a money affair I must see after . ' 

 ' something that be go wrong ? ' 

 ' I be afraid so . I must lose no time in look to it . what plan have you for to - day ? ' 

 ' none whatever . ' 

 ' it be Saturday , you know . I promise to see Newdick this afternoon . perhaps I may bring he to dinner . ' 

 about twelve o'clock he return from his business . at two he go away again , say that he should not be back before seven , it might be a little later . in Monica these movement excite no special remark ; they be merely a continuance of his restlessness . but no soon have he depart , after luncheon , than she go to her dressing - room , and begin to make slow , uncertain preparation for leave home herself . 

 this morning she have try to write a letter for Bevis , but vainly . she know not what to say to he , uncertain of her own desire and of what lie before she . yet , if she be to communicate with he henceforth at all , it be necessary , this very afternoon , to find an address where letter could be receive for she , and to let he know of it . to - morrow , Sunday , be useless for the purpose , and on Monday it might be impossible for she to go out alone . besides that , she could not be sure of the safety of a letter deliver at the flat on Monday night or Tuesday morning . 

 she dress at length and go out . her wise course , probably , be to seek for some oblige shopkeeper near Lavender Hill . then she could call on Virginia , transact the business she have pretend to discharge yesterday , and there pen a note to Bevis . 

 her mood alternate with distract rapidity . a hundred time she have resolve that Bevis could be nothing more to she , and again have think of he with impulse of yearning , try to persuade herself that he have act well and wisely . a hundred time she determine to carry out her idea of yesterday to quit her husband and resist all his effort to recall she and again have all but resign herself to live with he , accept degradation as so many wife perforce do . her mind be in confusion , and physically she feel far from well . a heaviness weigh upon her limb , make it hardship to walk however short a distance . 

 arrive at Clapham Junction , she begin to search wearily , indifferently , for the kind of shop that might answer her purpose . the receiving of letter which , for one reason or another , must be dispatch to a secret address , be a very ordinary complaisance on the part of small London stationer ; hundred of such letter be send and call for every week within the metropolitan postal area . it do not take Monica long to find an obliging shopkeeper ; the first to whom she apply a decent woman behind a counter which display newspaper , tobacco , and fancy article willingly accept the commission . 

 she come out of the shop with flushed cheek . another step in shameful descent yet it have the result of strengthen once more her emotion favourable to Bevis . on his account she have brave this ignominy , and it draw she towards he , instead of produce the effect which would have seem more natural . perhaps the reason be that she feel herself more hopelessly an outcast from the world of honourable woman , and therefore long in her desolation for the support of a man 's love . do he not love she ? it be her fault if she expect he to act with a boldness that do not lie in his nature . perhaps his discretion , which she have so bitterly condemn as weakness , mean a wise regard for her interest as well as his own . the public scandal of divorce be a hideous thing . if it damage his prospect and sunder he from his relative , how could she hope that his love of she , the cause of it all , would long endure ? 

 the need of love overcome she . she would submit to any condition rather than lose this lover whose kiss be upon her lip , and whose arm have hold she so passionately . she be too young to accept a life of resignation , too ardent . why have she leave he in despondency , in doubt whether he would ever again see she ? 

 she turn back on her way to Virginia 's lodging , re - enter the station , and journey townward . it be an odd incident , by Monica unperceive , that when she be take her ticket there stand close by she a man , seemingly a mechanic , who have also stand within hear when she book at Herne Hill . this same man , though he have not travel in the compartment with she , follow she when she alight at bayswater . she do not once observe he . 

 instead of write , she have resolve to see Bevis again if it be possible . perhaps he would not be at the flat ; yet his wish might suggest the bare hope of she come to - day . the risk of meet Barfoot probably need not be consider , for he have tell she that he be travel to - day into Cumberland , and for so long a journey he would be sure to set forth in the morning . at bad she would suffer a disappointment . indulgence of her fervid feeling have make she as eager to see Bevis as she be yesterday . word of tenderness rush to her lip for utterance . when she reach the building all but delirium possess she . 

 she have hurry up to the first landing , when a footstep behind draw her attention . it be a man in mechanic 's dress , come up with head bent , doubtless for some task or other in one of the flat . perhaps he be go to Bevis 's . she go forward more slowly , and on the next landing allow the man to pass she . yes , more likely than not he be engage in pack her lover 's furniture . she stand still . at that moment a door close above , and another step , light and quick , that of a woman , come downstairs . as far as her ear could judge , this person might have leave Bevis 's flat . a conflict of emotion excite she to panic . she be afraid either to advance or to retreat , and in equal dread of stand without purpose . she step up to the near door , and give a summon with the knocker . 

 this door be Barfoot 's . she know that ; in the first instant of fear occasion by the workman 's approach , she have glance at the door and remind herself that here Mr. Barfoot dwelt , immediately beneath Bevis . but for the wild alarm due to her conscience - stricken state she could not have risk the possibility of the tenant be still at home ; and yet it seem to she that she be do the only thing possible under the circumstance . for this woman whom she hear just above might perchance be one of Bevis 's sister , return to London for some purpose or other , and in that case she prefer be see at Barfoot 's door to detection as she make for her lover 's . 

 uncertainty on this point last but a few second . dread to look at the woman , Monica yet do so , just as she pass , and behold the face of a perfect stranger . a young and good - look face , however . her mind , sufficiently tumultuous , receive a new impulse of disturbance . have this woman come forth from Bevis 's fiat or from the one opposite ? for on each floor there be two dwelling . 

 in the meantime no one answer her knock . Mr. Barfoot have go ; she breathe thankfully . now she might venture to ascend to the next floor . but then sound a knock from above . that , she feel convinced , be at Bevis 's door , and if so her conjecture about the workman be correct . she stand wait for certainty , as if still expect a reply to her own signal at Mr. Barfoot 's door . the mechanic look down at she over the banister , but of this she be unaware . 

 the knock above be repeat . yes , this time there could be no mistake ; it be on this side of the landing that be to say , at her lover 's door . but the door do not open ; thus , without go up herself , she receive assurance that Bevis be not at home . he might come later . she still have an hour or two to spare . so , as if disappoint in a call at Mr. Barfoot 's , she descend the stair and issue into the street . 

 Agitation have exhaust she , and a dazzling of her eye threaten a recurrence of yesterday 's faintness . she find a shop where refreshment be sell , and sit for half an hour over a cup of tea , try to amuse herself with illustrate paper . the mechanic who have knock at Bevis 's door pass once or twice along the pavement , and , as long as she remain here , keep the shop within sight . 

 at length she ask for write material , and pen a few line . if on her second attempt she fail to see Bevis , she would drop this note into his letter - box . it acquaint he with the address to which he might direct letter , assure he passionately of her love , and implore he to be true to she , to send for she as soon as circumstance make it possible . 

 self - torment of every kind be natural to her position . though the relief of escape from several distinct danger have put her mind comparatively at ease for a short time , she have now begin to suffer a fresh uneasiness with reference to the young and handsome woman who come downstairs . the fact that no one answer the workman 's knock have seem to she a sufficient proof that Bevis be not at home , and that the stranger must have come forth from the flat opposite his . but she recollect the incident which have so alarmingly disturb she and her lover yesterday . Bevis do not then go to the door , and suppose oh , it be folly ! but suppose that woman have be with he ; suppose he do not care to open to a visitor whose signal sound only a minute or two after that person 's departure ? 

 have she not anguish enough to endure without the addition of frantic jealousy ? she would not give another thought to such absurd suggestion . the woman have of course come from the dwelling opposite . yet why might she not have be in Bevis 's flat when he himself be absent ? suppose she an intimate to whom he have entrust a latch - key . if any such connection exist , might it not help to explain Bevis 's half - heartedness ? 

 to think thus be court madness . unable to sit still any long , Monica leave the shop , and stray for some ten minute about the neighbouring street , draw nearer and near to her goal . finally she enter the building and go upstairs . on this occasion no one meet she , and no one enter in her rear . she knock at her lover 's door , and stand long , pray , that it might open . but it do not . tear start to her eye ; she utter a moan of bitter disappointment , and slip the envelope she be carry into the letter - box . 

 the mechanic have see she go in , and he wait outside , a few yard away . either she would soon reappear , or she not do so would show that she have obtain admittance somewhere . in the latter case , this workman of much curiosity and leisure have only to lurk about the staircase until she come forth again . but this trial of patience be spar he . he find that he have simply to follow the lady back to Herne Hill . act on very suggestive instruction , it never occur to the worthy man that the lady 's second visit be not to the same flat as in the former instance . 

 Monica be home again long before dinner - time . when that hour arrive her husband have not yet come ; the delay , no doubt , be somehow connect with his visit to Mr. Newdick . but this go on . at nine o'clock Monica still sit alone , hungry , yet scarce conscious of hunger owe to her misery . Widdowson have never behave thus . another quarter of an hour and she hear the front door open . 

 he come to the drawing - room , where she sit wait . 

 ' how late you be ! be you alone ? ' 

 ' yes , alone . ' 

 ' you have not   have dinner ? ' 

 ' no . ' 

 he seem to be in rather a gloomy mood , but Monica notice nothing that alarm she . he be draw nearer , his eye on the ground . 

 ' have you have bad news in the City ? ' 

 ' yes , I have . ' 

 still he come nearer , and at length , when a yard or two away , raise his look to her face . 

 ' have you be out this afternoon ? ' 

 she be prompt to a falsehood , but durst not utter it , so keenly be he regard she . 

 ' yes , I go to see Miss Barfoot . ' 

 ' liar ! ' 

 as the word burst from his lip , he spring at she , clutch her dress at the throat , and fling she violently upon her knee . a short cry of terror escape she ; then she be stricken dumb , with eye start and mouth open . it be well that he hold she by the garment and not by the neck , for his hand close with murderous convulsion , and the desire of crush out her life be for an instant all his consciousness . 

 ' liar ! ' again burst from he . ' day after day you have lie to I . liar ! adultress ! ' 

 ' I be not ! I be not that ! ' 

 she clung upon his arm and strove to raise herself . the bloodless lip , the choke voice , mean dread of he , but the distortion of her feature be hatred and the will to resist . 

 ' not that ? what be your word worth ? the prostitute in the street be soon to be believe . she have the honesty to say what she be , but you where be you yesterday when you be not at your sister 's ? where be you this afternoon ? ' 

 she have nearly struggle to her foot ; he thrust she down again , crush she backwards until her head all but touch the floor . 

 ' where be you ? tell the truth , or you shall never speak again ! ' 

 ' oh help ! help ! he will kill I ! ' 

 her cry ring through the room . 

 ' call they up let they come and look at you and hear what you be . soon enough every one will know . where be you this afternoon ? you be watch every step of the way from here to that place where you have make yourself a base , vile , unclean creature . ' 

 ' I be not that ! your spy have mislead you . ' 

 ' mislead ? do not   you go to that man Barfoot 's door and knock there ? and because you be disappoint , do not   you wait about , and go there a second time ? ' 

 ' what if I do ? it do not   mean what you think . ' 

 ' what ? you go time after time to the private chamber of an unmarried man a man such as that and it mean no harm ? ' 

 ' I have never be there before . ' 

 ' you expect I to believe you ? ' Widdowson cry with savage contumely . he have just loose his hold of she , and she be upright again before he , her eye flash defiance , though every muscle in her frame quiver . ' when do your lie begin ? be it when you tell I you have be to hear Miss Barfoot 's lecture , and never go there at all ? ' 

 he aim the charge at a venture , and her face tell he that his suspicion have be ground . 

 ' for how many week , for how many month , have you be dishonour I and yourself ? ' 

 ' I be not guilty of what you believe , but I shall not   try to defend myself . thank Heaven , this be the end of everything between we ! charge I with what you like . I be go away from you , and I hope we may never meet again . ' 

 ' yes , you be go no doubt of that . but not before you have answer my question . whether with lie or not do not   matter much . you shall give your own account of what you have be do . ' 

 both pant as if after some supreme effort of their physical force , they stand and look at each other . each to the other 's eye be incredibly transform . Monica could not have imagine such brutal ferocity in her husband 's face , and she herself have a wild recklessness in her eye , a scorn and abhorrence in all the line of her countenance , which make Widdowson feel as if a stranger be before he . 

 ' I shall answer no question whatever , ' Monica reply . ' all I want be to leave your house , and never see you again . ' 

 he regret what he have do . the result of the first day 's espionage be a piece of evidence so incomplete , he have hop to command himself until more solid proof of his wife 's guilt be forthcoming . but jealousy be too strong for such prudence , and the sight of Monica as she utter her falsehood make a mere madman of he . predispose to believe a story of this kind , he could not reason as he might have do if fear of Barfoot have never enter his thought . the whole course of dishonour seem so clear ; he trace it from Monica 's early meeting with Barfoot at Chelsea . waver between the impulse to cast off his wife with every circumstance of public shame , and the piteous desire to arrest she on her path of destruction , he rush into a middle course , compatible with neither of these intention . if at this stage he choose to tell Monica what have come to his knowledge , it should have be do with the stern calm , with dignity capable of sham her guilt . as it be , he have spoil his chance in every direction . perhaps Monica understand this ; he have begin to esteem she a mistress in craft and intrigue . 

 ' you say you be never at that man 's room before to - day ? ' he ask in a low voice . 

 ' what I have say you must take the trouble to recollect . I shall answer no question . ' 

 again the impulse assail he to wring confession from she by terror . he take a step forward , the demon in his face . Monica in that moment leapt past he , and reach the door of the room before he could stop she . 

 ' stay where you be ! ' she cry , ' if your hand touch I again I shall call for help until someone come up . I will not   endure your touch ! ' 

 ' do you pretend you be innocent of any crime against I ? ' 

 ' I be not what you call I . explain everything as you like . I will explain nothing . I want only to be free from you . ' 

 she open the door , rapidly cross the landing , and go upstairs . feel it be useless to follow , Widdowson allow the door to remain wide , and wait . five minute pass and Monica come down again , dress for leave the house . 

 ' where be you go ? ' he ask , step out of the room to intercept she . 

 ' it be nothing to you . I be go away . ' 

 they subdue their voice , which might else have be audible to the servant below . 

 ' no , that you shall not ! ' 

 he step forward to block the head of the stair , but again Monica be too quick for he . she flee down , and across the hall , and to the house - door . only there , as she be arrest by the difficulty of draw back the two latch , do Widdowson overtake she . 

 ' make what scandal you like , you do not   leave this house . ' 

 his tone be violent rather than resolute . what could he do ? if Monica persist , what mean have he of confine she to the house short of carry she by main force to an upper room and there lock she in ? he know that his courage would not sustain he through such a task as this . 

 ' for scandal I care nothing , ' be her reply . ' one way or another I will leave the house . ' 

 ' where be you go ? ' 

 ' to my sister 's . ' 

 his hand on the door , Widdowson stand as if determine in opposition . but she will be strong than his . only by homicide can a man maintain his dignity in a situation of this kind ; Widdowson could not kill his wife , and every moment that he stand there make he more ridiculous , more contemptible . 

 he turn back into the hall and reach his hat . whilst he be do so Monica open the door . heavy rain be fall , but she pay no heed to it . in a moment Widdowson hasten after she , careless , he too , of the descend flood . her way be towards the railway station , but the driver of a cab chance to attract her notice , she accept the man 's offer , and bid he drive to Lavender Hill . 

 on the first opportunity Widdowson take like refuge from the rain , and be drive in the same direction . he alight not far from Mrs. Conisbee 's house . that Monica have come hither he feel no doubt , but he would presently make sure of it . as it still rain he seek shelter in a public - house , where he quench a painful thirst , and then satisfy his hunger with such primitive food as a licensed victualler be disposed to vend . it be near eleven o'clock , and he have neither eat nor drunk since luncheon . 

 after that he walk to Mrs. Conisbee 's , and knock at the door . the landlady come . 

 ' will you please to tell I , ' he ask ' whether Mrs. Widdowson be here ? ' 

 the sly curiosity of the woman 's face inform he at once that she see something unusual in these circumstance . 

 ' yes , sir . Mrs. Widdowson be with her sister , ' 

 ' thank you . ' 

 without another word he depart . but go only a short distance , and until midnight keep Mrs. Conisbee 's door in view . the rain fall , the air be raw ; shelterless , and often shiver with fever , Widdowson walk the pavement with a constable 's regularity . he could not but remember the many night when he thus keep watch in Walworth Road and in Rutland Street , with jealousy , then too , burn in his heart , but also with amorous ardour , never again to be revive . a little more than twelve month ago ! and he have wait , long for marriage through half a lifetime . 




 CHAPTER XXV 

 the fate of the IDEAL 

 Rhoda 's week at the seashore be spoil by uncertain weather . only two day of abide sunshine ; for the rest , mere fitful gleam across a sky heap with stormcloud . over Wastdale hang a black canopy ; from Scawfell come muttering of thunder ; and on the last night of the week when Monica flee from her home in pelt rain tempest break upon the mountain and the sea . wakeful until early morning , and at time watch the sky from her inland - look window , Rhoda see the rocky height that frown upon Wastwater illuminate by lightning - flare of such intensity and duration that mile of distance be annihilate , and it seem but a step to these stern crag and precipice . 

 Sunday begin with rain , but also with promise of well thing ; far over the sea be a broad expanse of blue , and before long the foam of the fallen tide glisten in strong , hopeful ray . Rhoda wander about the shore towards St. Bees Head . a broad stream flow into the sea stop her progress before she have go very far ; the only way of cross it be to go up on to the line of railway , which here run along the edge of the sand . but she have little inclination to walk far . no house , no person within sight , she sit down to gaze at the gull fish by the little river - mouth , their scream the only sound that blend with that of the subdue breaker . 

 on the horizon lie a long , low shape that might have be mistake for cloud , though it resemble land . it be the Isle of Man . in an hour or two the outline have grow much clear ; the height and hollow be no long doubtful . in the north become visible another remote and hilly tract , it be the coast of Scotland beyond Solway Firth . 

 these distant object act as incentive to Rhoda 's imagination . she hear Everard Barfoot 's voice as he talk of travel of the Orient Express . that joy of freedom he have offer she . perhaps he be now very near she , anxious to repeat his offer . if he carry out the project suggest at their last interview , she would see he to - day or to - morrow morning then she must make her choice . to have a day 's walk with he among the mountain would be practically decide . but for what ? if she reject his proposal of a free union , be he prepare to marry she in legal form ? yes ; she have enough power over he for that . but how would it affect his thought of she ? constrain he to legal marriage , would she not lower herself in his estimation , and make the endurance of his love less probable ? Barfoot be not a man to accept with genuine satisfaction even the appearance of bondage , and more likely than not his love of she depend upon the belief that in she he have find a woman capable of regard life from his own point of view a woman who , when she once , love , would be scornful of the formality clung to by feeble mind . he would yield to she if she demand form , but afterwards when passion have subside . 

 a week have be none too long to ponder these consideration by themselves ; but they be complicated with doubt of a more disturbing nature . her mind could not free itself from the thought of Monica . that Mrs. Widdowson be not always truthful with her husband she have absolute proof ; whether that support her fear of an intimacy between Monica and Everard she be unable to determine . the ground of suspicion seem to her very grave ; so grave , that during her first day or two in Cumberland she have all but renounce the hope long secretly foster . she know herself well enough to understand how jealousy might wreck her life even if it be only retrospective . if she marry Barfoot   form or none that question in no way touch this other , she would demand of he a flawless faith . her pride revolt against the thought of possess only a share in his devotion ; the moment that any faithlessness come to her knowledge she would leave he , perforce , inevitably and what misery be then before she ! 

 be flawless faith possible to Everard Barfoot ? his cousin would ridicule the hope of any such thing or so Rhoda believe . a conventional woman would of course see the complete evidence of his untrustworthiness in his dislike of legal marriage ; but Rhoda know the idleness of this argument . if love do not hold he , assuredly the form of marriage could be no restraint upon Everard ; marry ten time over , he would still deem himself absolutely free from any obligation save that of love . yet how do he think of that obligation ? he might hold it perfectly compatible with the indulgence of casual impulse . and this   which she suspect to be the view of every man   Rhoda have no power of tolerating . it must be all or nothing , whole faith or none whatever . 

 in the afternoon she suffer from impatient expectancy . if Barfoot come to - day she imagine he somewhere in the neighbourhood , approach Seascale as the time of his appointment draw near would he call at her lodging ? the address she have not give he , but doubtless he have obtain it from his cousin . perhaps he would prefer to meet she unexpectedly not a difficult thing in this little place , with its handful of resident and visitor . certain it be she desire his arrival . her heart leap with joy in the thought that this very evening might bring he . she wish to study he under new condition , and possibly to talk with he even more frankly than ever yet , for there would be opportunity enough . 

 about six o'clock a train come from the south stop at the station , which be visible from Rhoda 's sit - room window . she have be wait for this moment . she could not go to the station , and do not venture even to wait anywhere in sight of the exit . whether any passenger have alight must remain uncertain . if Everard have arrive by this train , doubtless he would go to the hotel , which stand only a few yard from the line . he would take a meal and presently come forth . 

 have allow half an hour to elapse , she dress and walk shoreward . Seascale have no street , no shop ; only two or three short row of house irregularly place on the rise ground above the beach . to cross the intervene railway , Rhoda could either pass through the little station , in which case she would also pass the hotel and be observable from its chief window , or descend by a long road which lead under a bridge , and in this way avoid the hotel altogether . she take the former route . on the sand be a few scattered people , and some child subdue to Sunday decorum . the tide be rise . she go down to the near tract of hard sand , and stand there for a long time , a soft western breeze playing upon her face . 

 if Barfoot be here he would now be come out to look for she . from a distance he might not recognize her figure , clothe as she be in a costume such as he have never see she wear . she might venture now to walk up towards the dry , white sandheap , where the little convolvulus grow in abundance , and other flower of which she neither know nor care to learn the name . Scarcely have she turn when she see Everard approach , still far off , but unmistakable . he signal by take off his hat , and quickly be beside she . 

 ' do you know I before I happen to look round ? ' she ask laughingly . 

 ' of course I do . up there by the station I catch sight of you . who else bear herself as you do with splendid disdain of common mortal ? ' 

 ' please do not   make I think that my movement be ridiculous . ' 

 ' they be superb . the sea have already touch your cheek . but I be afraid you have have abominable weather . ' 

 ' yes , rather bad ; but there be hope to - day . where do you come from ? ' 

 ' by train , only from Carnforth . I leave London yesterday morning , and stop at Morecambe some people I know be there . as train be awkward to - day , I drive from Morecambe to Carnforth . do you expect I ? ' 

 ' I think you might come , as you speak of it . ' 

 ' how I have get through the week I could not   tell you . I should have be here day ago , but I be afraid . let we go near to the sea . I be afraid of make you angry . ' 

 ' it be well to keep one 's word . ' 

 ' of course it be . and I be all the more delighted to be with you for the miserable week of wait . have you bath ? ' 

 ' once or twice . ' 

 ' I have a swim this morning before breakfast , in pour rain . now you can not   swim . ' 

 ' no . I can not . but why be you sure about it ? ' 

 ' only because it be so rare for any girl to learn swimming . a man who can not   swim be only half the man he might be , and to a woman I should think it must be of even more benefit . as in everything else , woman be trammelle by their clothe ; to be able to get rid of they , and to move about with free and brave exertion of all the body , must tend to every kind of health , physical , mental , and mortal . ' 

 ' yes , I quite believe that , ' say Rhoda , gaze at the sea . 

 ' I speak rather exultantly , do not   I ? I like to feel myself superior to you in some thing . you have so often point out to I what a paltry , ineffectual creature I be . ' 

 ' I do not   remember ever use those word , or imply they . ' 

 ' how do the day stand with you ? ' ask Everard in the tone of perfect comradeship . ' have you still to dine ? ' 

 ' my dining be a very simple matter ; it happen at one o'clock . about nine I shall have supper . ' 

 ' let we walk a little then . and may I smoke ? ' 

 ' why not ? ' 

 Everard light a cigar , and , as the tide drive they back , they move eventually to the high ground , whence there be a fine view of the mountain , rich in evening colour . 

 ' to - morrow you leave here ? ' 

 ' yes , ' Rhoda answer . ' I shall go by railway to Coniston , and walk from there towards Helvellyn , as you suggest . ' 

 ' I have something else to propose . a man I talk to in the train tell I of a fine walk in this neighbourhood . from Ravenglass , just below here , there be a little line run up Eskdale to a terminus at the foot of Scawfell , a place call Boot . from Boot one can walk either over the top of Scawfell or by a low track to Wastdale Head . it be very grand , wild country , especially the last part , the go down to Wastwater , and not many mile in all . suppose we have that walk to - morrow ? from Wastdale we could drive back to Seascale in the evening , and then the next day just as you like . ' 

 ' be you quite sure about the distance ? ' 

 ' quite . I have the Ordnance map in my pocket . let I show you . ' 

 he spread the map on the top of a wall , and they stand side by side inspect it . 

 ' we must take something to eat ; I will provide for that . and at the Wastdale Head hotel we can have dinner about three or four , probably . it would be enjoyable , would not   it ? ' 

 ' if it do not   rain . ' 

 ' we will hope it will not . as we go back we can look out the train at the station . no doubt there be one soon after breakfast . ' 

 their rambling , with talk in a strain of easy friendliness , bring they back to Seascale half an hour after sunset , which be of a kind that seem to promise well for the morrow . 

 ' will not   you come out again after supper ? ' Barfoot ask . 

 ' not again to - night . ' 

 ' for a quarter of an hour , ' he urge . ' just down to the sea and back . ' 

 ' I have be walk all day . I shall be glad to rest and read . ' 

 ' very well . to - morrow morning . ' 

 have discover the train which would take they to Ravenglass , and connect with one on the Eskdale line , they agree to meet at the station . Barfoot be to bring with he such refreshment as would be necessary . 

 their hope for the weather have complete fulfilment . the only fear be lest the sun 's heat might be oppressive , but this anxiety could be cheerfully bear . Slung over his shoulder Barfoot have a small forage - bag , which give he matter for talk on the railway journey ; it have be his companion in many part of the world , and have hold strange kind of food . 

 the journey up Eskdale , from Ravenglass to Boot , be by a miniature railway , with the oddest little engine and a carriage or two of primitive simplicity . at each station on the upward wind track station represent only by a wooden shed like a tool - house the guard jump down and act as booking - clerk , if passenger there be desirous of booking . in a few mile the scenery change from beauty to grandeur , and at the terminus no further steaming would be possible , for the great flank of Scawfell bar the way . 

 Everard and his companion begin their climb through the pretty straggling village of Boot . a mountain torrent roar by the wayside , and the course they have mark upon the map show that they must follow this stream for some mile up to the tarn where it originate . house , human being , and even trodden path they soon leave behind , come out on to a vast moorland , with hill summit near and far . Scawfell they could not hope to ascend ; with the walk that lie before they it be enough to make a way over one of his huge shoulder . 

 ' if your strength fail , ' say Everard merrily , when for an hour they have be plod through grey solitude , ' there be no human help . I should have to choose between carry you back to Boot or on to Wastdale . ' 

 ' my strength be not likely to fail soon than your , ' be the laugh reply . 

 ' I have chicken sandwich , and wine that maketh glad the heart of man . tell I when hunger overcome you . I should think we have well make our halt at Burmoor Tarn . ' 

 that , indeed , prove to be the convenient resting - place . a wild spot , a hollow amid the rolling expanse of moorland , its little lake of black water glistening under the midday sun . and here stand a shepherd 's cottage , the only habitation they have see since leave Boot . somewhat uncertain about the course to be henceforth follow , they make inquiry at this cottage , and a woman who appear to be quite alone give they the needful direction . thus at ease in mind they cross the bridge at the foot of the tarn , and just beyond it find a spot suitable for repose . Everard bring forth his sandwich and his flask of wine , moreover a wine - glass , which be for Rhoda 's use . they eat and drink festively . 

 ' now this be just what I have enjoy in imagination for a year or more , ' say Barfoot , when the luncheon be over , and he lie prop upon his elbow , gaze at Rhoda 's fine eye and her sun - warm cheek . ' an ideal realize , for once in one 's life . a perfect moment . ' 

 ' do not   you like the scent of burn peat from that cottage ? ' 

 ' yes . I like everything about we , in heaven and earth , and most of all I like your companionship , Rhoda . ' 

 she could not resent this first use of her christian name ; it be so natural , so inevitable ; yet she move her head as if with a slight annoyance . 

 ' be mine as agreeable to you ? ' he add , stroke the back of her hand with a spray of heather . ' or do you just tolerate I out of good - nature ? ' 

 ' I have like your companionship all the way from Seascale . do not   disturb my enjoyment of it for the rest of the way . ' 

 ' that would be a misfortune indeed . the whole day shall be perfect . not a note of discord . but I must have liberty to say what come into my mind , and when you do not   choose to answer I shall respect your silence . ' 

 ' would not   you like to smoke a cigar before we start again ? ' 

 ' yes . but I like still well not to . the scent of peat be pleasanter to you than that of tobacco . ' 

 ' oblige I by light the cigar . ' 

 ' if you command ' he do her bidding . ' the whole day shall be perfect . a delightful dinner at the inn , a drive to Seascale , an hour or two of rest , and then one more quiet talk by the sea at nightfall . ' 

 ' all but the last . I shall be too tired . ' 

 ' no . I must have that hour of talk by the sea . you be free to answer I or not , but your presence you must grant I . we be in an ideal world remember . we care nothing for all the son and daughter of man . you and I will spend this one day together between cloudless heaven and silent earth a memory for lifetime . at nightfall you will come out again , and meet I down by the sea , where you stand when I first see you yesterday . ' 

 Rhoda make no reply . she look away from he at the black , deep water . 

 ' what an opportunity , ' he go on , raise his hand to point at the cottage , ' for say the silly of conceivable thing ! ' 

 ' what might that be , I wonder ? ' 

 ' why , that to dwell there together for the rest of our life would be supreme felicity . you know the kind of man that would say that . ' 

 ' not personally , thank goodness ! ' 

 ' a week a month , even with weather such as this . Nay , with a storm for variety ; cloud from the top of Scawfell fall thick about we ; a fierce wind shriek across the tarn ; sheet and torrent and flood of rain beat upon our roof ; and you and I by the peat - fire . with a good supply of book , old and new , I can picture it for three month , for half a year ! ' 

 ' be on your guard . remember " that kind of man " . ' 

 ' I be in no danger . there be a vast difference between six month and all one 's life . when the half - year be over we would leave England . ' 

 ' by the Orient Express ? ' 

 they laugh together , Rhoda colouring , for the word that have escape she mean too much for mere jest . 

 ' by the Orient Express . we would have a house by the Bosphorus for the next half - year , and contrast our emotion with those we have know by Burmoor Tarn . think what a rich year of life that would make ! how much we should have learn from nature and from each other ! ' 

 ' and how dreadfully tired of each other we should be ! ' 

 Barfoot look keenly at she . he could not with certainty read her countenance . 

 ' you mean that ? ' he ask . 

 ' you know it be true . ' 

 ' hush ! the day be to be perfect . I will not   admit that we could ever tire of each other with reasonable variety of circumstance . you to I be infinitely interesting , and I believe that I might become so to you . ' 

 he do not allow himself to vary from this tone of fanciful speculation , suit to the idle hour . Rhoda say very little ; her remark be generally a purposed interruption of Everard 's theme . when the cigar be smoke out they rise and set forward again . this latter half of their walk prove the most interesting , for they be expectant of the view down upon Wastdale . a bold summit come in sight , dark , desolate , which they judge to be Great Gabel ; and when they have press on eagerly for another mile , the valley open beneath they with such strike suddenness that they stop on the instant and glance at each other in silence . from a noble height they look down upon Wastwater , sternest and black of the lake , on the field and copse of the valley head with its winding stream , and the rugged gorge which lie beyond in mountain shadow . 

 the descent be by a path which in winter become the bed of a torrent , steep and stony , zigzag through a thick wood . here , and when they have reach the level road lead into the village , their talk be in the same natural , light - hearted strain as before they rest . so at the inn where they din , and during their drive homeward by the dark lake with its wood and precipice , out into the country of green hill , and thence through Gosforth on the long road descend seaward . since their early departure scarcely a cloud have pass over the sun a perfect day . 

 they alight before reach Seascale . Barfoot discharge his debt to the driver who go on to bait at the hotel and walk with Rhoda for the last quarter of a mile . this be his own idea ; Rhoda make no remark , but approve his discretion . 

 ' it be six o'clock , ' say Everard , after a short silence . ' you remember your arrangement . at eight , down on the shore . ' 

 ' I should be much more comfortable in the armchair with a book . ' 

 ' oh , you have have enough of book . it be time to live . ' 

 ' it be time to rest . ' 

 ' be you so very tired ? poor girl ! the day have be rather too much for you . ' 

 Rhoda laugh . 

 ' I could walk back again to Wastwater if it be necessary . ' 

 ' of course ; I know that . you be magnificent . at eight o'clock then ' 

 nothing more be say on the subject . when in sight of Rhoda 's lodging they part without hand - shake . 

 before eight Everard be stray about the beach , watch the sun go down in splendour . he smile to himself frequently . the hour have come for his last trial of Rhoda , and he feel some confidence as to the result . if her mettle endure his test , if she declare herself willing not only to abandon her avow ideal of life , but to defy the world 's opinion by become his wife without form of mutual bondage she be the woman he have imagine , and by her side he would go cheerfully on his way as a married man . legally marry ; the proposal of free union be to be a test only . love she as he have never think to love , there still remain with he so much of the temper in which he first woo she that he could be satisfied with nothing short of unconditional surrender . delight in her independence of mind , he still desire to see she in complete subjugation to he , to inspire she with unreflecte passion . tame consent to matrimony be an everyday experience . Agnes Brissenden , he feel sure , would marry he whenever he choose to ask she and would make one of the good wife conceivable . but of Rhoda Nunn he expect and demand more than this . she must rise far above the level of ordinary intelligent woman . she must manifest an absolute confidence in he that be the true significance of his present motif . the censure and suspicion which she have not scruple to confess in plain word must linger in no corner of her mind . 

 his heart throb with impatience for she come . come she would ; it be not in Rhoda 's nature to play trick ; if she have not mean to meet he she would have say so resolutely , as last night . 

 at a few minute past the hour he look landward , and see her figure against the golden sky . she come down from the sandbank very slowly , with careless , loitering step . he move but a little way to meet she , and then stand still . he have do his part ; it be now her to forego female privilege , to obey the constraint of love . the western afterglow touch her feature , heighten the beauty Everard have learn to see in they . still she loiter , stoop to pick up a piece of seaweed ; but still he keep his place , motionless , and she come nearer . 

 ' do you see the light of sunset on the mountain ? ' 

 ' yes , ' he reply . 

 ' there have be no such evening since I come . ' 

 ' and you want to sit at home with a book . that be no close for a perfect day . ' 

 ' I find a letter from your cousin . she be with her friend the Goodalls yesterday . ' 

 ' the Goodalls I use to know they . ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 the word be utter with significance . Everard understand the allusion , but do not care to show that he do . 

 ' how do Mary get on without you ? ' 

 ' there be no difficulty . ' 

 ' has she any one capable of take your place ? ' 

 ' yes . Miss Vesper can do all that be necessary . ' 

 ' even to inspire the girl with zeal for an independent life ? ' 

 ' perhaps even that . ' 

 they go along by the wave , in the warm - coloured twilight , until the house of Seascale be hide . then Everard stop . 

 ' to - morrow we go to Coniston ? ' he say , smile as he stand before she . 

 ' you be go ? ' 

 ' do you think I can leave you ? ' 

 Rhoda 's eye fall . she hold the long strip of seaweed with both hand and tighten it . 

 ' do you wish I to leave you ? ' he add . 

 ' you mean that we be to go through the lake together as we have be to - day ? ' 

 ' no . I do not   mean that . ' 

 Rhoda take a few step onward , so that he remain stand behind . another moment and his arm have fold about she , his lip be on her . she do not resist . his embrace grow strong , and he press kiss after kiss upon her mouth . with exquisite delight he see the deep crimson flush that transfigure her countenance ; see she look for one instant into his eye , and be conscious of the triumphant gleam she meet there . 

 ' do you remember my saying in the letter how I hunger to taste your lip ? I do not   know how I have refrain so long ' 

 ' what be your love worth ? ' ask Rhoda , speak with a great effort . she have drop the seaweed , and one of her hand rest upon his shoulder , with a slight repelling pressure . 

 ' worth your whole life ! ' he answer , with a low , glad laugh . 

 ' that be what I doubt . convince I of that . ' 

 ' convince you ? with more kiss ? but what be your love worth ? ' 

 ' perhaps more than you yet understand . perhaps more than you can understand . ' 

 ' I will believe that , Rhoda . I know , at all event , that it be something of inestimable price . the knowledge have grow in I for a year and more . ' 

 ' let I stand away from you again . there be something more to be say before no , let I be quite apart from you . ' 

 he release she after one more kiss . 

 ' will you answer I a question with perfect truthfulness ? ' 

 her voice be not quite steady , but she succeed in look at he with unflinche eye . 

 ' yes . I will answer you any question . ' 

 ' that be speak like a man . tell I then be there at this moment any woman live who have a claim upon you a moral claim ? ' 

 ' no such woman exist . ' 

 ' but do we speak the same language ? ' 

 ' surely , ' he answer with great earnestness . ' there be no woman to whom I be bind by any kind of obligation . ' 

 a long wave roll up , break , and retreat , whilst Rhoda stand in silent uncertainty . 

 ' I must put the question in another way . during the past month the past three month have you make profession of love have you even pretend love to any woman ? ' 

 ' to no woman whatever , ' he answer firmly . 

 ' that satisfy I . ' 

 ' if I know what be in your mind ! ' exclaim Everard , laugh . ' what sort of life have you imagine for I ? be this the result of Mary 's talk ? ' 

 ' not immediately . ' 

 ' still , she plant the suspicion . believe I , you have be altogether mistaken . I never be the kind of man Mary think I . some day you shall understand more about it in the meantime my word must be enough . I have no thought of love for any woman but you . do I frighten you with those joke confession in my letter ? I write they purposely as you must have see . the mean , paltry jealousy of woman such as one meet every day be so hateful to I . they argue such a lack of brain . if I be so unfortunate as to love a woman who look sour when I praise a beautiful face . I would snap the bond between we like a bit of thread . but you be not one of those poor creature . ' 

 he look at she with some gravity . 

 ' should you think I a poor creature if I resent any kind of unfaithfulness ? whether love , in any noble sense , have part in it or not ? ' 

 ' no . that be the reasonable understanding between man and wife . if I exact fidelity from you , and certainly I should , I must consider myself under the same obligation . ' 

 ' you say " man or wife . " do you say it with the ordinary meaning ? ' 

 ' not as it apply to we . you know what I mean when I ask you to be my wife . if we can not trust each other without legal bond , any union between we would be unjustified . ' 

 suppress the agitation which he feel , he await her answer . they could still read each other 's face perfectly in a pale yellow light from across the sea . Rhoda 's manifest an intense conflict . 

 ' after all , you doubt of your love for I ? ' say Barfoot quietly . 

 that be not her doubt . she love with passion , allow herself to indulge the luxurious emotion as never yet . she long once more to feel his arm about she . but even thus she could consider the vast issue of the step to which she be urge . the temptation to yield be very strong , for it seem to she an easy and a nobler thing to proclaim her emancipation from social statute than to announce before her friend the simple news that she be about to marry . that announcement would excite something more than surprise . Mary Barfoot could not but smile with gentle irony ; other woman would laugh among themselves ; the girl would feel a shock , as at the fall of one who have make heroic pretence . a sure way of avert this ridicule be by furnish occasion for much graver astonishment . if it become know that she have take a step such as few woman would have dare to take deliberately set an example of new liberty her position in the eye of all who know she remain one of proud independence . Rhoda 's character be specially expose to the temptation of such a motive . for month this argument have be in her mind , again and again she decide that the sensational step be preferable to a commonplace renunciation of all she have so vehemently preach . and now that the moment of actual choice have come she feel able to dare everything as far as the danger concern herself ; but she perceive more strongly than hitherto that not only her own future be involve . how would such practical heresy affect Everard 's position ? 

 she utter this thought . 

 ' be you willing , for the sake of this idea , to abandon all society but that of the very few people who would approve or tolerate what you have do ? ' 

 ' I look upon the thing in this way . we be not call upon to declare our principle wherever we go . if we regard each other as marry , why , we be married . I be no Quixote , hop to convert the world . it be between you and I our own sense of what be reasonable and dignified . ' 

 ' but you would not make it a mere deception ? ' 

 ' Mary would of course be tell , and any one else you like . ' 

 she believe he entirely serious . another woman might have suspect that he be merely try her courage , either to assure himself of her love or to gratify his vanity . but Rhoda 's idealism enable she to take he literally . she herself have for year maintain an exaggerated standard of duty and merit ; desirous of see Everard in a nobler light than hitherto , she endeavour to regard his scruple against formal wedlock as worthy of all respect . 

 ' I can not   answer you at once , ' she say , half turn away . 

 ' you must . here and at once . ' 

 the one word of assent would have satisfy he . this he obstinately require . he believe that it would confirm his love beyond any other satisfaction she could render he . he must be able to regard she as magnanimous , a woman who have prove herself worth live or die for . and he must have the joy of subdue she to his will . 

 ' no , ' say Rhoda firmly . ' I can not   answer you tonight . I can not   decide so suddenly . ' 

 this be disingenuous , and she feel humiliate by her subterfuge . anything but a sudden decision be ask of she . before leave Chelsea she have ' foresee this moment , and have make preparation for the possibility of never return to Miss Barfoot 's house know the nature of the proposal that would be offer to she . but the practical resolve need a great effort than she have imagine . above all , she fear an ignominious failure of purpose after her word be give ; that would belittle she in Everard 's eye , and so shame she in her own that all hope of happiness in marriage must be at an end . 

 ' you be still doubtful of I , Rhoda ? ' 

 he take her hand , and again draw her close . but she refuse her lip . 

 ' or be you doubtful of your own love ? ' 

 ' no . if I understand what love mean , I love you . ' 

 ' then give I the kiss I be wait for . you have not kiss I yet . ' 

 ' I can not   until I be sure of myself of my readiness ' 

 her broken word betray the passion with which she be struggle . Everard feel her tremble against his side . 

 ' give I your hand , ' he whisper . ' the left hand . ' 

 before she could guess his purpose he have slip a ring upon her finger , a marriage ring . Rhoda start away from he , and at once draw off the perilous symbol . 

 ' no that prove to I I can not ! what should we gain ? you see , you dare not be quite consistent . it be only deceive the people who do not   know we . ' 

 ' but I have explain to you . the consistency be in ourselves , our own mind ' 

 ' take it back . custom be too strong for we . we should only play at defy it . take it back or I shall drop it on the sand . ' 

 profoundly mortify , Everard restore the gold circlet to its hiding - place and stand gaze at the dim horizon . some moment pass , then he hear his name murmur . he do not look round . 

 ' Everard , dearest ' 

 be that Rhoda 's voice , so low , tender , caressing ? it thrill he , and with a silent laugh of scorn at his own folly , he turn to she , every thought burn up in passion . 

 ' will you kiss I ? ' 

 for an answer she lay her hand on his shoulder and gaze at he . Barfoot understand . he smile constrainedly , and say in a low voice , 

 ' you wish for that old , idle form ? ' 

 ' not the religious form , which have no meaning for either of we , but ' 

 ' you have be live here seven or eight day . stay till the fifteenth , then we can get a licence from the registrar of the district . do that please you ? ' 

 her eye make reply . 

 ' do you love I any the less , Everard ? ' 

 ' kiss I . ' 

 she do , and consciousness be lose for they as their mouth clung together and their heart throb like one . 

 ' be not   it well ? ' Rhoda ask , as they walk back in the darkness . ' will not   it make our life so much simple and happy ? ' 

 ' perhaps . ' 

 ' you know it will . ' she laugh joyously , try to meet his look . 

 ' perhaps you be right . ' 

 ' I shall let no one hear of it until . then let we go abroad . ' 

 ' you dare not face Mary ? ' 

 ' I dare , if you wish it . of course she will laugh at I . they will all laugh at I . ' 

 ' why , you may laugh as well . ' 

 ' but you have spoil my life , you know . such a grand life it might have be . why do you come and interfere with I ? and you have be so terribly obstinate . ' 

 ' of course ; that be my nature . but after all I have be weak . ' 

 ' yield in one point that do not   matter to you at all ? it be the only way of make sure that you love I . ' 

 Barfoot laugh slightingly . 

 ' and what if I need the other proof that you love I . ' 




 CHAPTER XXVI 

 the unideal test 

 and neither be content . 

 Barfoot , over his cigar and glass of whisky at the hotel , fall into a mood of chagrin . the woman he love would be his , and there be matter enough for ardent imagination in the indulgence of that thought ; but his temper disturb he . after all , he have not triumph . as usual the woman have her way . she play upon his sens , and make he her obedient slave . to prolong the conflict would have avail nothing ; Rhoda , doubtless , be in part actuate by the desire to conquer , and she know her power over he . so it be a mere repetition of the old story a marriage like any other . and how would it result ? 

 she have great quality ; but be there not much in she that he must subdue , reform , if they be really to spend their life together ? her energy of domination perhaps excel his . such a woman might be unable to concede he the liberty in marriage which theoretically she grant to be just . perhaps she would torment he with restless jealousy , suspect on every trivial occasion an infringement of her right . from that point of view it would have be far wise to persist in reject legal marriage , that her dependence upon he might be more complete . later , if all go well , the concession could have be make if , for instance , she become a mother . but then return the exasperating thought that Rhoda have overcome his will . be not that a beginning of evil augury ? 

 to be sure , after marriage their relation would be different . he would not then be at the mercy of his sens . but how miserable to anticipate a long , perhaps bitter , struggle for predominance . after all , that could hardly come about . the commencement of any such discord would be the signal for separation . his wealth assure his freedom . he be not like the poor devil who must perforce live with an intolerable woman because they can not support themselves and their family in different place . need he entertain that bad of fear the dread that his independence might fail he , subdue by his wife 's will ? 

 free as he boast himself from lover 's silliness , he have magnify Rhoda 's image . she be not the glorious rebel he have picture . like any other woman , she mistrust her love without the sanction of society . well , that be something relinquish , lost . marriage would after all be a compromise . he have not find his ideal though in these day it assuredly exist . 

 and Rhoda , sit late in the little lodge - house parlour , visit her soul with questioning no less troublesome . Everard be not satisfied with she . he have yield , perhaps more than half contemptuously , to what he think a feminine weakness . in go with she to the registrar 's office he would feel himself to be act an ignoble part . be it not a bad beginning to rule he against his conscience ? 

 she have triumph splendidly . in the world 's eye this marriage of hers be far well than any she could reasonably have hop , and her heart approve it with rapture . at a stage in life when she have sternly reconcile herself never to know a man 's love , this love have seek she with passionate persistency of which even a beautiful young girl might feel proud . she have no beauty ; she be love for her mind , her very self . but must not Everard 's conception of she have suffer ? in win she have he obtain the woman of his desire ? 

 why be she not more politic ? would it not have be possible to gratify he , and yet to gain his consent to legal marriage ? by first of all comply she would have seem to confirm all he believe of she ; and then , his ardour at height , how simple to point out to he without entreaty , without show of much concern that by neglect formality they gain absolutely nothing . artifice of that kind be perhaps demand by the mere circumstance . possibly he himself would have welcome it after the grateful sense of inspire such complete devotion . it be the woman 's part to exercise tact ; she have prove herself lamentably deficient in that quality . 

 to - morrow she must study his manner . if she discern any serious change , any grave indication of disappointment 

 what be her life to be ? at first they would travel together ; but before long it might be necessary to have a settle home , and what then would be her social position , her duty and pleasure ? housekeeping , mere domesticity , could never occupy she for more than the small possible part of each day . have lose one purpose in life , dignified , absorbing , likely to extend its sphere as time go on , what other could she hope to substitute for it ? 

 love of husband perhaps of child . there must be more than that . Rhoda do not deceive herself as to the requirement of her nature . practical activity in some intellectual undertaking ; a share nay , leadership in some " movement ; " contact with the revolutionary life of her time the impulse of her heart once satisfy , these thing would again claim she . but how if Everard resist such tendency ? be he in truth capable of respect her individuality ? or would his strong instinct of lordship urge he to direct his wife as a dependent , to impose upon she his own view of thing ? she doubt whether he have much genuine sympathy with woman 's emancipation as she understand it . yet in no particular have her conviction change ; nor would they change . she herself be no long one of the ' odd woman ' ; fortune have or seem to have be kind to she ; none the less her sense of a mission remain . no long an example of perfect female independence , and unable therefore to use the same language as before , she might illustrate woman 's claim of equality in marriage . if her experience prove no obstacle . 

 next morning , as have be agree , they meet at some distance from Seascale , and spend two or three hour together . there be little danger in observation unless by a casual peasant ; for the most part their privacy could not have be more secure in a locked chamber . lest curiosity should be excite by his make inquiry at the hotel , Barfoot propose to walk over to Gosforth , the near town , this afternoon , and learn where the registrar for the locality of Seascale might be find . by neither be allusion make to their difference of last evening , but Rhoda distress herself by imagine a diminished fervour in her companion ; he seem unusually silent and meditative , and be content to hold her hand now and then . 

 ' shall you stay here all the week ? ' she inquire . 

 ' if you wish I to . ' 

 ' you will find it wearisome . ' 

 ' impossible , with you here . but if I run up to London for a day or two it might be well . there be preparation . we shall go first of all to my room ' 

 ' I would rather not have stay in London . ' 

 ' I think you might wish to make purchase . ' 

 ' let we go to some other town , and spend a few day there before leave England . ' 

 ' very well . Manchester or Birmingham . ' 

 ' you speak rather impatiently , ' say Rhoda , look at he with an uneasy smile . ' let it be London if you prefer ' 

 ' on no account . it be all indifferent to I so long as we get safely away together . every man be impatient of these preliminary . yes , in that case I must of course go up to London . to - morrow , and back on Saturday ? ' 

 a shower of rain cause they some discomfort . through the afternoon it still rain at interval whilst Barfoot be discharge his business at Gosforth . he be to see Rhoda again at eight o'clock , and as the time threaten to hang heavily on his hand he return by a long detour , reach the seascale hotel about half - past six . no soon have he enter than there be deliver to he a letter , bring by messenger an hour or two ago . it surprise he to recognize Rhoda 's writing on the envelope , which seem to contain at least two sheet of notepaper . what now ? some whimsey ? Agitated and annoy by the anticipation of trouble , he go apart and break the letter open . 

 first appear an enclosure a letter in his cousin Mary 's writing . he turn to the other sheet and read these line , 

 ' I send you something that have come by post this afternoon . please to bring it with you when you meet I at eight o'clock if you still care to do so . ' 

 his face flush with anger . what contemptible woman 's folly be this ? ' if you still care to do so ' and write in a hand that shake . if this be to be his experience of matrimonial engagement what rubbish have Mary be communicate ? 

 ' my DEAR RHODA , I have just go through a very painful scene , and I feel bound to let you know of it without delay , as it may concern you . this evening   Monday , when I come home from Great Portland Street , Emma tell I that Mr. Widdowson have call , that he wish to see I as soon as possible , and would be here again at six o'clock . he come , and his appearance alarm I , he be look so dreadfully ill . without preface , he say , " my wife have leave I ; she have go to her sister , and refuse to return . " this be astonishing in itself , and I wonder still more why he should come and tell I about it in so strange a way . the explanation follow very promptly , and you may judge how I hear it . Mr. Widdowson say that his wife have be behave very badly of late ; that he have discover several falsehood she have tell he as to her employment during absence from home , in daytime and evening . have cause for suspect the bad , he last Saturday engage a private detective to follow Mrs. Widdowson wherever she go . this man see she go to the flat in bayswater where Everard live and knock at his door . as no one reply , she go away for a time and return , but again find no one at home . this be at once report to Mr. Widdowson he ask his wife where she have be that afternoon . the answer be false ; she say she have be here , with I . thereupon he lose command of himself , and charge she with infidelity . she refuse to offer any kind of explanation , but deny that she be guilty and at once leave the house . since , she have utterly refuse to see he . her sister can only report that Monica be very ill , and that she charge her husband with accuse she falsely . 

 ' he have come to I , he say , in unspeakable anguish and helplessness , to ask I whether I have see anything suspicious in the relation between Monica and my cousin when they meet at this house or elsewhere . a nice question ! of course I could only reply that it have never even occur to I to observe they that to my knowledge they have meet so rarely and that I should never have dream of suspect Monica . " yet you see she must be guilty , " he keep on repeat . I say no , that I think her visit might have an innocent significance , though I could not   suggest why she have tell falsehood . then he inquire what I know about Everard 's present movement . I answer that I have every reason to think that he be out of town , but do not   know when he go , or when he might be expect to return . the poor man be grievously dissatisfy ; he look at I as if I be in a base plot against he . it be an immense relief when he go away , after beg I to respect his confidence . 

 ' I write very hurriedly , as you see . that I ought to write be , I think , clear though I may be do lamentable mischief . I can not credit this charge against Mrs. Widdowson ; there must surely be some explanation . if you have already leave Seascale , no doubt this letter will be forward . ever your , dear Rhoda , 

 MARY BARFOOT . ' 

 Everard laugh bitterly . the completeness of the case against he in Rhoda 's eye must be so overwhelming , and his absolute innocence make it exasperate to have to defend himself . how , indeed , be he to defend himself ? 

 the story be strange enough . could he be right in the interpretation which at once suggest itself to his mind or perhaps to his vanity ? he remember the meeting with Mrs. Widdowson near his abode on Friday . he recollect , moreover , the sign of interest in himself which , as he now think , she have show on previous occasion . have the poor little woman doubtless miserable with her husband actually let herself fall in love with he ? but , even in that case , what a reckless thing to do to come to his room ! why , she must have be drive by a despair that blind she to all sense of delicacy ! perhaps , have he be at home , she would have make a pretence of wish to speak about Rhoda Nunn . that be imprudent behaviour of his , make such a person his confidante . but he be tempt by his liking for she . 

 ' by Jove ! ' he mutter , overcome by the thought . ' I be glad I be not at home ! ' 

 but then he have tell she that he be go away on Saturday . how could she expect to find he ? the hour of her visit be not state ; probably she hop to catch he before he leave . and be her appearance in the neighbourhood on Friday her troubled aspect to be explain as an abortive attempt to have a private interview with he ? 

 the queer affair and madden in its issue ! Rhoda be rag with jealousy . well , he too would rage . and without affectation . it be strange that he feel almost glad of a ground of quarrel with Rhoda . all day he have be in an irritable temper , and so far as he could understand himself it be due to resentment of his last night 's defeat . he though of Rhoda as ardently as ever , but an element that be very like brutality have intrude into his emotion ; that be his reason from refrain from caress this morning ; he could not trust himself . 

 he would endure no absurdity . if Rhoda do not choose to accept his simple assurance let she take the consequence . even now , perhaps , he would bring she to her knee before he . let she wrong he by baseless accusation ! then it would no long be he who sue for favour . he would whistle she down the wind , and await her penitent reappearance . soon or later his pride and her , the obstinacy in their nature , must battle it out ; well that it should be now , before the irrevocable step have be take . 

 he eat his dinner with savage appetite , and drink a good deal more wine than of will not . then he smoke until the last minute of delay that his engagement allow . of course she have send the letter to the hotel because he might be unable to read it in twilight . wise precaution . and he be glad to have be able to think the matter over , to work himself into reasonable wrath . if ever man do well to be angry ! 

 there she be , down by the edge of the wave . she would not turn to see if he be come ; he feel sure of that . whether she hear his footstep he could not tell . when quite close to she , he exclaim , 

 ' well , Rhoda ? ' she must have know of his approach , for she give no start . 

 she face slowly to he . no trace of tear on her countenance ; no , Rhoda be above that . gravity of the stern that be all . 

 ' well , ' he continue , ' what have you to say to I ? ' 

 ' I ? nothing . ' 

 ' you mean that it be my business to explain what Mary have tell you . I can not , so there be an end of it . ' 

 ' what do you mean by that ? ' she ask in clear , distant tone . 

 ' precisely what I say , Rhoda . and I be oblige to ask what you mean by this odd way of speak to I . what have happen since we part this morning ? ' 

 Rhoda could not suppress her astonishment ; she gaze fixedly at he . 

 ' if you can not   explain this letter , who can ? ' 

 ' I suppose Mrs. Widdowson would be able to account for her doing . I certainly be not able to . and it seem to I that you be strangely forgetful of something that pass between we yesterday . ' 

 ' of what ? ' she ask coldly , her face , which be hold proudly up , turn towards the sea . 

 ' evidently you accuse I of conceal something from you . please to remember a certain plain question you ask I , and the equally plain answer I give . ' 

 he detect the beginning of a smile about her rigid lip . 

 ' I remember , ' she say . 

 ' and you can still behave to I with indignation ? surely the indignation should be on my side . you be tell I that I deceive you . ' 

 for a moment Rhoda lose her self - control . 

 ' how can I help think so ? ' she exclaim , with a gesture of misery . ' what can this letter mean ? why should she go to your room ? ' 

 ' I simply do not   know , Rhoda . ' 

 he preserve the show of calmness just because he see that it provoke she to anger . 

 ' she have never be there before ? ' 

 ' never to my knowledge . ' 

 Rhoda watch his face with greedy attention . she seem to find there a confirmation of her doubt . indeed , it be impossible for she to credit his denial after what she have observe in London , and the circumstance which , even before Mary 's letter , have make she suspicious . 

 ' when do you last see Mrs. Widdowson ? ' 

 ' no , I shall not   consent to be cross - examine , ' reply Everard , with a disdainful smile . ' as soon as you refuse to accept my word it be folly to ask further question . you do not   believe I . say it honestly and let we understand each other . ' 

 ' I have good reason for think that you could explain Mrs. Widdowson 's behaviour if you choose . ' 

 ' exactly . there be no misunderstanding that . and if I get angry I be an unpardonable brute . come now , you can not   be offend if I treat you as simply my equal , Rhoda . let I test your sincerity . suppose I have see you talk somewhere with some man who seem to interest you very much , and then to - day , let we say I hear that he have call upon you when you be alone . I turn with a savage face and accuse you of grossly deceive I in the bad sense . what would your answer be ? ' 

 ' these be idle supposition , ' she exclaim scornfully . 

 ' but the case be possible , you must admit . I want you to realize what I be feel . in such a case as that , you could only turn from I with contempt . how else can I behave to you conscious of my innocence , yet in the nature of thing unable to prove it ? ' 

 ' appearance be very strongly against you . ' 

 ' that be an accident to I quite unaccountable . if I charge you with dishonour you would only have your word to offer in reply . so it be with I . and my word be bluntly reject . you try I rather severely . ' 

 Rhoda keep silence . 

 ' I know what you be think . my character be previously none of the good . there be a prejudice against I in such a matter for your good . my record be not immaculate ; nor , I believe , be any as this . well , you shall hear some more plain speech , altogether man 's . I have go here and there , and have have my adventure like other man . one of they you have hear about the story of that girl Amy Drake the subject of Mrs. Goodall 's righteous wrath . you shall know the truth , and if it offend your ear I can not   help it . the girl simply throw herself into my arm , on a railway journey , when we meet by pure chance . ' 

 ' I do not   care to hear that , ' say Rhoda , turn away . 

 ' but you shall hear it . that story have predispose you to believe the bad thing of I . if I hold you by force , you shall hear every word of it . Mary seem to have give you mere dark hint ' 

 ' no ; she have tell I the detail . I know it all . ' 

 ' from their point of view . very well ; that save I a lot of narrative . what those good people do not   understand be the girl 's character . they think she a helpless innocent ; she be a I will spare you the word . she simply plan to get I into her power think I should be force to marry she . it be the kind of thing that happen far oftener than you would suppose ; that be the reason why man so often smile in what you would call a brutal way when certain story be tell to other man 's discredit . you will have to take this into account , Rhoda , before you reach satisfactory result on the question that have occupy you so much . I be not in the least responsible for Amy Drake 's desertion of creditable path . at the bad I behave foolishly ; and know I have do so , know how thankless it be to try and clear myself at her expense , I let people say what they would ; it do not   matter . and you do not   believe I ; I can see you do not . sexual pride will not   let you believe I . in such a case the man must necessarily be the villain . ' 

 ' what you mean by say you only behave " foolishly , " I can not   understand . ' 

 ' perhaps not , and I can not   explain as I once do in tell the story to a man , a friend of mine . but however strict your moral idea , you will admit that a girl of thoroughly bad character be not   a subject for the outcry that be raise about Miss Amy Drake . by take a little trouble I could have bring thing to light which would have give worthy Mrs. Goodall and cousin Mary a great shock . well , that be enough . I have never pretend to sanctity ; but , on the other hand , I have never behave like a scoundrel . you charge I , deliberately , with be a scoundrel , and I defend myself as well I can . you argue that the man who would mislead an innocent girl and then cast she off be more likely than not to be guilty in a case like this of Mrs. Widdowson , when appearance be decidedly against he . there be only my word in each instance . the question be will you accept my word ? ' 

 for a wonder , their privacy be threaten by the approach of two man who be walk this way from Seascale . voice in conversation cause Rhoda to look round ; Barfoot have already observe the stranger . 

 ' let we go up on to the high sand , ' he say . 

 without reply Rhoda accompany he , and for several minute they exchange no word . the man , talk and laugh loudly , go by ; they seem to be tourist of a kind that do not often trouble this quiet spot on the coast ; their cigar glow in the dusk . 

 ' after all this , what have you to say to I , Rhoda ? ' 

 ' will you please to give I your cousin 's letter ? ' she say coldly . 

 ' here it be . now you will go back to your lodging , and sit with that letter open before you half through the night . you will make yourself unutterably wretche , and all for what ? ' 

 he feel himself once more in danger of weakness . Rhoda , in her haughty , resentful mood , be very attractive to he . he be tempt to take she in his arm , and kiss she until she soften , plead with he . he wish to see her shed tear . but the voice in which she now speak to he be far enough from tearfulness . 

 ' you must prove to I that you have be wrongly suspect . ' 

 ah , that be to be her line of conduct . she believe her power over he be absolute . she stand on her dignity , would bring he to supplication , would give he all the trouble she could before she profess herself satisfied . 

 ' how be I to prove it ? ' he ask bluntly . 

 ' if there be nothing wrong between you and Mrs. Widdowson , there must be some very simple explanation of she come to your room and be so anxious to see you . ' 

 ' and be it my business to discover that explanation ? ' 

 ' can it be mine ? ' 

 ' it must either be your , Rhoda , or no one 's . I shall take no single step in the matter . ' 

 the battle be declare . each stand at full height , pertinacious , resolve on victory . 

 ' you be put yourself wildly in the wrong , ' Everard continue . ' by refuse to take my word you make it impossible for I to hope that we could live together as we imagine . ' 

 the word fall upon her heart like a crush weight . but she could not yield . last night she have suffer in his opinion by urge what he think a weak , womanly scruple ; she have condescend to plead tenderly with he , and have win her cause . now she would prevail in another way . if he be tell the truth , he should acknowledge that natural suspicion make it incumbent upon he to clear so strange a case of its difficulty . if he be guilty of deception , as she still believe , though willing to admit to herself that Monica might be most at fault , that there might have be no actual wrongdoing between they he should confess with humblest penitence , and beseech pardon . impossible to take any other attitude . impossible to marry he with this doubt in her mind equally out of the question to seek Monica , and humiliate herself by make inquiry on such a subject . guilty or not , Monica would regard she with secret disdain , with woman 's malice . be she able to believe he , that indeed would be a grand consummation of their love , an ideal union of heart and soul . listen to he , she have try to put faith in his indignant word . but it be useless . the incredulity she could not help must either part they for ever , or be to she an occasion of new triumph . 

 ' I do not   refuse to take your word , ' she say , with conscious quibbling . ' I only say that your name must be clear from suspicion . Mr. Widdowson be sure to tell his story to other people . why have his wife leave he ? ' 

 ' I neither know nor care . ' 

 ' you must prove to I that you be not the cause of it . ' 

 ' I shall not make the slight effort to do so . ' 

 Rhoda begin to move away from he . as he keep silence , she walk on in the seascale direction . he follow at a distance of a few yard , watch her movement . when they have go so far that five minute more must bring they within sight of the hotel , Everard speak . 

 ' Rhoda ! ' 

 she pause and await he . 

 ' you remember that I be go to London to - morrow . it seem that I have well go and not trouble to return . ' 

 ' that be for you to decide . ' 

 ' for you rather . ' 

 ' I have say all that I can say . ' 

 ' and so have I. but surely you must be unconscious how grossly you be insult I . ' 

 ' I want only to understand what purpose Mrs. Widdowson have in go to your room . ' 

 ' then why not ask she ? you be friend . she would doubtless tell you the truth . ' 

 ' if she come to I voluntarily to make an explanation , I will hear it . but I shall not ask she . ' 

 ' your view of the fitness of thing be that I should request she to wait upon you for that purpose ? ' 

 ' there be other who can act for you . ' 

 ' very well . then we be at a deadlock . it seem to I that we have well shake hand like sensible people , and say good - bye . ' 

 ' much well if it seem so to you . ' 

 the time for emotional help be past . in very truth they have nothing more to say to each other , be now harden in obstinacy . each suffer from the other 's coldness , each feel angry with the other 's stubborn refusal to concede a point of dignity . Everard put out his hand . 

 ' when you be ready to say that you have use I very ill , I shall remember only yesterday . till then good - bye , Rhoda . ' 

 she make a show of take his hand , but say nothing . and so they part . 

 at eight o'clock next morning Barfoot be seat in the southward train . he rejoice that his strength of will have thus far assert itself . of final farewell to Rhoda he have no thought whatever . her curiosity would , of course , compel she to see Monica ; one way or another she would learn that he be blameless . his part be to keep aloof from she , and to wait for her inevitable submission . 

 violent rain be beat upon the carriage window ; it drive from the mountain , themselves invisible , though dense low cloud mark their position . poor Rhoda ! she would not have a very cheerful day at Seascale . perhaps she would follow he by a later train . certain it be that she must be suffer intensely and that certainly rejoice he . the keener she suffer the soon her submission . oh , but the submission should be perfect ! he have see she in many mood , but not yet in the anguish of broken pride . she must shed tear before he , declare her spirit wear and subjugate by torment of jealousy and fear . then he would raise she , and seat she in the place of honour , and fall down at her foot , and fill her soul with rapture . 

 many time between Seascale and London he smile in anticipation of that hour . 




 CHAPTER XXVII 

 the reascent 

 Whilst the rain pelt , and it do so until afternoon , Rhoda sit in her little parlour , no whit less miserable than Barfoot imagine . she could not be sure whether Everard have go to London ; at the last moment reflection or emotion might have detain he . early in the morning she have send to post a letter for Miss Barfoot , write last night a letter which make no revelation of her feeling , but merely express a cold curiosity to hear anything that might become know as to the course of Mr. Widdowson 's domestic trouble . ' you may still write to this address ; if I leave , letter shall be forward . ' 

 when the sky clear she go out . in the evening she again ramble about the shore . evidently Barfoot have go ; if still here , he would have watch and join she . 

 her solitude now grow insufferable , yet she could not decide whither to betake herself . the temptation to return to London be very strong , but pride prevail against it . Everard might perhaps go to see his cousin , and relate all that have happen at Seascale , justify himself as he have here do . whether Miss Barfoot become aware of the story or not , Rhoda could not reconcile it with her self - respect to curtail the stipulate three week of holiday . rather she would strain her nerve to the last point of endurance and if she be not suffer , then never do woman suffer . 

 another cheerless day help she to make up her mind . she care nothing now for lake and mountain ; human companionship be her supreme need . by the early train next day she start , not for London , but for her brother 's home in Somerset , and there she remain until it be time to return to work . Miss Barfoot write twice in the interval , say that she have hear nothing more of Monica . of Everard she make no mention . 

 Rhoda get back again to Chelsea on the appoint Saturday afternoon . Miss Barfoot know when she would arrive , but be not at home to meet she , and do not return till a couple of hour have pass . they meet at length as if nothing remarkable have occur during the three week . Mary , if she feel any solicitude , effectually conceal it ; Rhoda talk as if very glad to be at home again , explain her desertion of the lake country by the bad weather that prevail there . it be not till after dinner that the inevitable subject come up between they . 

 ' have you see Everard since you go away ? ' Miss Barfoot begin by ask . 

 so he have not be here to tell his story and plead his cause or it seem not . 

 ' yes , I see he at Seascale , ' Rhoda reply , without sign of emotion . 

 ' before or after that news come ? ' 

 ' both before and after . I show he your letter , and all he have to say be that he know nothing of the affair . ' 

 ' that be all he have to say to I . I have not   see he . a letter I send to his address be answer , after a week , from a place I never hear of Arromanches , in Normandy . the short and rudest letter I ever have from he . practically he tell I to mind my own business . and there thing stand . ' 

 Rhoda smile a little , conscious of the extreme curiosity her friend must be feel , and determine not to gratify it . for by this time , though her sink cheek be hard to reconcile with the enjoyment of a summer holiday , she have mature a resolve to betray nothing of what she have go through . her state of mind resemble that of the ascetic who have arrive at a morbid delight in self - torture . she regard the world with an intense bitterness , and persuade herself not only that the thought of Everard Barfoot be hateful to her soul , but that sexual love have become , and would ever be , to she an impure idea , a vice of blood . 

 ' I suppose , ' she say carelessly , ' Mr. Widdowson will try to divorce his wife . ' 

 ' I be in dread of that . but they may have make it up . ' 

 ' of course you have no doubt of her guilt ? ' 

 Mary try to understand the hard , austere face , with its touch of cynicism . conjecture as to its meaning be not difficult , but , in the utter absence of information , certainty there could be none . under any circumstance , it be to be expect that Rhoda would think and speak of Mrs. Widdowson no less severely than of the errant Bella Royston . 

 ' I have some doubt , ' be Miss Barfoot 's answer . ' but I should be glad of some one else 's favourable opinion to help my charity . ' 

 ' Miss Madden have not   be here , you see . she certainly would have come if she have feel convince that her sister be wrong . ' 

 ' unless a day or two see the end of the trouble when naturally none of they would say any more about it . ' 

 this be the possibility which occupy Rhoda 's reflection as long as she lie awake that night . 

 her feeling on enter the familiar bedroom be very strange . even before start for her holiday she have bid it good - bye , and at Seascale , that night follow upon the " perfect day , " she have think of it as a part of her past life , a place abandon for ever , already infinitely remote . her first sensation when she look upon the white bed be one of disgust ; she think it would be impossible to use this room henceforth , and that she must ask Miss Barfoot to let she change to another . tonight she do not restore any of the ornament which be lie pack up . the scent of the room revive so many hour of conflict , of hope , that it cause she a sick faintness . in frenzy of detestation she curse the man who have so disturb and sully the swift , pure stream of her life . 

 Arromanches , in Normandy ? on Sunday she seek the name on a map , but it be not mark , be doubtless too insignificant . improbable that he have go to such a place alone ; he be enjoy himself with friend , careless what become of she . have allow all this time to go by he would never seek she again . he find that her will be the equal of his own , and , as he could not rule she , she be number among the woman who have afford he interesting experience , to be think of seriously no more . 

 during the next week she throw herself with energy upon her work , stifle the repugnance with which at first it affect she , and seem at length to recover the old enthusiasm . this be the only way of salvation . idleness and absence of purpose would soon degrade she in a sense she have never dream of . she make a plan of daily occupation , which by leave not a vacant moment from early morning to late at night , should give she the sleep of utter weariness . new study be begin in the hour or two before breakfast . she even restrict her diet , and eat only just enough to support life , reject wine and everything that be most agreeable to her palate . 

 she desire to speak privately with Mildred Vesper , and opportunity might have be make , but , as part of her scheme of self - subdual , this conversation be postpone until the second week . it take place one evening when work be over . 

 ' I have be want to ask you , ' Rhoda begin , ' whether you have any news of Mrs. Widdowson . ' 

 ' I write to she not long ago , and she answer from a new address . she say she have leave her husband and would never go back to he . ' 

 Rhoda nod gravely . 

 ' then what I have hear be true . you have not   see she ? ' 

 ' she ask I not to come . she be live with her sister . ' 

 ' do she give you any reason for the separation from her husband ? ' 

 ' none , ' answer Mildred . ' but she say it be no secret ; that every one know . that be why I have not   speak to you about it as I should have do otherwise after our last conversation . ' 

 ' the fact be no secret , ' say Rhoda coldly . ' but why will she offer no explanation ? ' 

 Mildred shake her head , signify inability to make any satisfactory reply , and there the dialogue end ; for Rhoda could not proceed in it without appear to encourage scandal . the hope of elicit some suggestive information have fail ; but whether Mildred have really disclose all she know seem doubtful . 

 at the end of the week Miss Barfoot leave home for her own holiday ; she be go to Scotland , and would be away for nearly the whole of September . at this time of the year the work in Great Portland Street be very light ; not much employment offer for the typewriter , and the pupil number only about half a dozen . nevertheless , it please Rhoda to have the establishment under her sole direction ; she desire authority , and by magnify the importance of that which now fall into her hand , she endeavour to sustain herself under the secret misery which , for all her effort , weigh no less upon she as time go on . it be a dreary make - believe . on the first night of solitude at Chelsea she shed bitter tear ; and not only wept , but agonize in mute frenzy , the passion of her flesh torture she until she think of death as a refuge . now she whisper the name of her lover with every word and phrase of endearment that her heart could suggest ; the next moment she curse he with the fury of deadly hatred . in the half - delirium of sleeplessness , she revolve wild , impossible scheme for revenge herself , or , as the mood change , all but resolve to sacrifice everything to her love , to accuse herself of ignoble jealousy and entreat forgiveness . of many woeful night this be the bad she have yet suffer . 

 it recall to she with much vividness a memory of girlhood , or indeed of childhood . she think of that figure in the dim past , that rugged , harsh - feature man , who have give she the first suggestion of independence ; thrice her own age , yet the inspirer of such tumultuous emotion in her ignorant heart ; her friend at Clevedon Mr. Smithson . a question from Mary Barfoot have cause she to glance back at he across the year , but only for an instant , and with self - mockery . what she now endure be the ripe intensity of a woe that fall upon she , at fifteen , when Mr. Smithson pass from her sight and away for ever . childish folly ! but the misery of it , the tossing at night , the blank outlook ! how contemptible to revive such sensation , with mature intellect , after so long and stern a discipline ! 

 dread the Sunday , so terrible in its depressing effect upon the lonely and unhappy , she breakfast as soon as possible , and leave home simply to walk , to exert herself physically , that fatigue and sleep might follow . there be a dull sky , but no immediate fear of rain ; the weather brighten a little towards noon . careless of the direction , she walk on and on until the last madden church bell have cease its clangour ; she be far out in the western suburb , and weariness begin to check her quick pace . then she turn back . without intend it , she pass by Mrs. Cosgrove 's house , or rather would have pass , when she see Mrs. Cosgrove at the dining - room window make sign to she . in a moment the door open and she go in . she be glad of this accident , for the social lady might have something to tell about Mrs. Widdowson , who often visit she . 

 ' in mercy , come and talk to I ! ' exclaim Mrs. Cosgrove . ' I be quite alone , and feel as if I could hang myself . be you oblige to go anywhere ? ' 

 ' no . I be have a walk . ' 

 ' a walk ? what astonishing energy ! it never occur to I to take a walk in London . I come from the country last night and expect to find my sister here , but she will not   arrive till Tuesday . I have be stand at the window for an hour , get crazy with ennui . ' 

 they go to the drawing - room . it be not long before Mrs. Cosgrove make an allusion which enable Rhoda to speak of Mrs. Widdowson . for a month or more Mrs. Cosgrove have see and hear nothing of she ; she have be out of town all the time . Rhoda hesitate , but could not keep silence on the subject that have become a morbid preoccupation of her mind . she tell as much as she know except the suspicion against Everard Barfoot . 

 ' it do not   in the least surprise I , ' say the listener , with interest . ' I see they would not   be able to live together very well . without child the thing be impossible . of course she have tell you all about it ? ' 

 ' I have not   see she since it happen . ' 

 ' do you know , I always have a distinct feeling of pleasure when I hear of married people part . how horrible that would seem to some of our good friend ! but it be not   a malicious pleasure ; there be nothing personal in it . as I have tell you before , I think , I lead a very contented life with my husband . but marriage in general be such a humbug you forgive the word . ' 

 ' of course it be , ' assent Rhoda , laugh with forced gaiety . 

 ' I be glad of anything that seem to threaten it as an institution in its present form . a scandalous divorce case be a delight to I anything that make it evident how much misery would be spar if we could civilize ourselves in this respect . there be woman whose conduct I think personally detestable , and whom yet I can not   help thank for their assault upon social law . we shall have to go through a stage of anarchy , you know , before reconstruction begin . yes , in that sense I be an anarchist . seriously , I believe if a few man and woman in prominent position would contract marriage of the free kind , without priest or lawyer , open and defiantly , they would do more benefit to their kind than in any other possible way . I do not   declare this opinion to every one , but only because I be a coward . whatever one believe with heart and soul one ought to make know . ' 

 Rhoda wear a look of anxious reflection . 

 ' it need a great deal of courage , ' she say . ' to take that step , I mean . ' 

 ' of course . we need martyr . and yet I doubt whether the martyrdom would be very long , or very try , to intellectual people . a woman of brain who boldly act upon her conviction would have no lack of congenial society . the good people be get more liberal than they care to confess to each other . wait until some one put the matter to the test and you will see . ' 

 Rhoda become so busy with her tumultuous thought that she speak only a word now and then , allow Mrs. Cosgrove to talk at large on this engrossing theme . 

 ' where be Mrs. Widdowson live ? ' the revolutionist at length inquire . 

 ' I do not   know . but I can get you her address . ' 

 ' pray do . I shall go and see she . we be quite friendly enough for I to do so without impertinence . ' 

 have lunch with her acquaintance , Rhoda go in the afternoon to Mildred Vesper 's lodging . Miss Vesper be at home , read , in her usual placid mood . she give Rhoda the address that be on Mrs. Widdowson 's last brief note , and that evening Rhoda send it to Mrs. Cosgrove by letter . 

 in two day she receive a reply . Mrs. Cosgrove have call upon Mrs. Widdowson at her lodging at Clapham . ' she be ill , wretched , and unwilling to talk . I could only stay about a quarter of an hour , and to ask question be impossible . she mention your name , and appear very anxious to hear about you ; but when I ask whether she would like you to call she grow timid all at once , and say she hop you would not   unless you really desire to see she . poor thing ! of course I do not   know what it all mean , but I come away with malediction on marriage in my heart one be always safe in indulge that feeling . ' 

 a week or so after this there arrive for Miss Barfoot a letter from Everard . the postmark be ostend . 

 never before have Rhoda be tempt to commit a break of confidence such as in any one else she would have scorn beyond measure . she have hear , of course , of people secretly open letter with the help of steam ; whether it could be do with absolute security from detection she do not feel sure , but her thought dwelt on the subject for several hour . it be terrible to hold this letter of Everard 's writing , and yet be oblige to send it away without knowledge of the content , which perhaps gravely concern she . she could not ask Miss Barfoot to let she know what Everard have write . the information might perhaps be voluntarily grant ; but perhaps not . 

 to steam the back of the envelope would it not leave mark , a rumpling or discoloration ? even to be suspect of such dishonour would be more bitter to she than death . could she even think of it ? how she be degrade by this hateful passion , which work in she like a disease ! 

 with two other which that day have arrive she put the letter into a large envelope , and so dispatch it . but no satisfaction reward she ; her heart rag against the world , against every law of life . 

 when , in a few day , a letter come to she from Miss Barfoot , she tear it open , and there yes , there be Everard 's handwriting . Mary have send the communication for she to read . 

 ' DEAR COUSIN MARY , after all I be rather too grumpy in my last note to you . but my patience have be desperately try . I have go through a good deal ; now at last I be recover sanity , and can admit that you have no choice but to ask those question . I know and care nothing about Mrs. Widdowson . by her eccentric behaviour she either do I a great injury or a great service , I be not quite sure which , but I incline to the latter view . here be a conundrum not very difficult to solve , I dare say . 

 ' do you know anything about Arromanches ? a very quiet little spot on the Normandy coast . you get to it by an hour 's coach from Bayeux . not infest by English . I go there on an invitation from the Brissendens ; who discover the place last year . excellent people these . I like they well the more I know of they . a great deal of quiet liberality even extreme liberality in the two girl . they would suit you , I be sure . well instruct . Agnes , the young , read half a dozen language , and sham I by her knowledge of all sort of thing . and yet delightfully feminine . 

 ' as they be go to Ostend I think I might as well follow they , and we continue to see each other pretty frequently . 

 ' by - the - bye , I shall have to find new quarter if I come back to London . the engineer , back from Italy after a long absence than he anticipate , want his flat , and of course must have it . but then I may not come back at all , except to gather my trap . I shall not call on you , unless I have hear that you do not   doubt the assurance I have now twice give . your profligate relative , 

 E. B. ' 

 ' I think , ' write Mary , ' that we may safely believe he . such a lie would be too bad ; he be incapable of it . remember , I have never charge he with falsehood . I shall write and tell he that I accept his word . have it , or have it not , occur to you to see Mrs. Widdowson herself ? or , if there be insuperable objection , why not see Miss Madden ? we talk to each other in a sort of cypher , dear Rhoda . well , I desire nothing but your good , as I think you know , and you must decide for yourself where that good lie . ' 

 Everard 's letter put Rhoda beside herself with wrath . in write it he know it would come into her hand ; he hop to ste she with jealousy . so Mrs. Widdowson have do he a service . he be free to devote himself to Agnes Brissenden , with her six language , her extreme liberality , her feminine charm . 

 if she could not crush out her love for this man she would poison herself as she have so often decide she would do if ever some hopeless malady , such as cancer , take hold upon she 

 and be content to feed his vanity ? to give he the lifelong reflection that , for love of he , a woman excel by few in quality of brain and heart have die like a rat ? 

 she walk about the room , here and there , upstairs and downstair , in a fever of unrest . after all , be he not behave in the very way she ought to desire ? be he not help she to hate he ? he strike at she with unmanly blow , think , no doubt , to quell her pride , and bring she to he in prostrate humility . never ! even if it be prove in the clear way that she ought to have believe he she would make no submission . if he love she he must woo once more . 

 but the suggestion in Mary 's letter be not fruitless . when she have think over it for a day or two she write to Virginia Madden , ask she as a favour to come to Queen 's Road on Saturday afternoon . Virginia quickly reply with a promise to call , and punctually keep the engagement . though she be much well dressed than in the day previous to Monica 's marriage , she have lose something for which costume could not compensate : her face have no long that unmistakable refinement which have be will not to make her attire a secondary consideration . a disagreeable redness ting her eyelid and the low part of her nose ; her mouth be grow coarse and lax , the under - lip hang a little ; she smile with a shrink , apologetic shyness only see in people who have do something to be ashamed of smile even when she be endeavour to look sorrowful ; and her glance be furtive . she sit down on the edge of a chair , like an anxious applicant for work or charity , and a moistness of the eye , which oblige she to use her handkerchief frequently , strengthen this resemblance . 

 Rhoda could not play at smooth phrase with this poor , dispirit woman , whose change during the last few year , and especially during the last twelve month , have often occupy her thought in a very unpleasant way . she come almost at once to the subject of their interview . 

 ' why have you not be to see I before this ? ' 

 ' I really could not . the circumstance everything be so very painful . you know of course you know what have happen ? ' 

 ' of course I do . ' 

 ' how , ' ask Virginia timidly , ' do the news first of all reach you ? ' 

 ' Mr. Widdowson come here and tell Miss Barfoot everything . ' 

 ' he come ? we do not   know that . then you have hear the accusation he make ? ' 

 ' everything . ' 

 ' it be quite unfounded , I do assure you . Monica be not guilty . the poor child have do nothing it be an indiscretion nothing more than indiscretion ' 

 ' I be very anxious to believe it . can you give I certainty ? can you explain Monica 's behaviour not only on that one occasion , but the deceit she practise at other time ? her husband tell Miss Barfoot that she have frequently tell he untruth such as say that she call here when she certainly do not . ' 

 ' I can not   explain that , ' lament Virginia . ' Monica will not   tell I why she conceal her movement . ' 

 ' then how can you ask I to believe your assurance that she be not   guilty ? ' 

 the sternness of this question cause Virginia to redden and become utterly disconcert . she drop her handkerchief , fumble for it , breathe hard . 

 ' oh , Miss Nunn ! how can you think Monica ? you know she well ; I be sure you do ! ' 

 ' any human being may commit a crime , ' say the other impatiently , exasperate by what seem to be merely new evidence against Barfoot . ' who know any one well enough to say that a charge must be unfounded ? ' 

 Miss Madden begin to sob . 

 ' I be afraid that be true . but my sister my dear sister ' 

 ' I do not   want to distress you . do command yourself , and let we talk about it calmly . ' 

 ' yes I will I shall be so glad to talk about it with you . oh , if I could persuade she to return to her husband ! he be willing to receive she . I meet he very often on Clapham Common , and we be live at his expense . when Monica have be with I in my old lodging for about a week he take these new room for we , and Monica consent to remove . but she will not   hear of go back to live with he . he have offer to let we have the house to ourselves , but it be no use . he write to she , but she will not   reply . do you know that he have take a house at Clevedon a beautiful house ? they be to go to it in a week or two , and Alice and I would have go to share it with they then this dreadful thing happen . and Mr. Widdowson do not   even insist on she tell he what she keep secret . he be willing to take she back under any circumstance . and she be so ill ' 

 Virginia break off , as if there be something more that she do not venture to impart . her cheek colour , and she look distressfully about the room . 

 ' seriously ill , do you mean ? ' inquire Rhoda , with difficulty soften her voice . 

 ' she get up each day , but I be often afraid that she have have fainting fit ' 

 Rhoda gaze at the speaker with pitiless scrutiny . 

 ' what can have cause this ? be it the result of she be falsely accuse ? ' 

 ' partly that . but ' 

 suddenly Virginia rise , step to Rhoda 's side , and whisper a word or two . Rhoda turn pale ; her eye glare fiercely . 

 ' and still you believe her innocent ? ' 

 ' she have swear to I that she be innocent . she say that she have a proof of it which I shall see some day and her husband also . a presentiment have fix itself in her mind that she can not   live , and before the end she will tell everything . ' 

 ' her husband know of this , of course of what you have tell I ? ' 

 ' no . she have forbid I to say anything and how could I , Miss Nunn ? she have make I promise solemnly that he shall not be tell . I have not   even tell Alice . but she will know very soon . at the end of September she leave her place , and will come to London to be with we for a time at all event . we do so hope that we shall succeed in persuade Monica to go to the house at Clevedon . Mr. Widdowson be keep it , and will move the furniture from Herne Hill at any moment . could not   you help we , dear Miss Nunn ? Monica would listen to you ; I be sure she would . ' 

 ' I be afraid I can be of no use , ' Rhoda answer coldly . 

 ' she have be hop to see you . ' 

 ' she have say so ? ' 

 ' not in so many word but I be sure she wish to see you . she have ask about you several time , and when your note come she be very pleased . it would be a great kindness to we ' 

 ' do she declare that she will never return to her husband ? ' 

 ' yes I be sorry to say she do . but the poor child believe that she have only a short time to live . nothing will shake her presentiment . " I shall die , and give no more trouble " that be what she always say to I . and a conviction of that kind be so likely to fulfil itself . she never leave the house , and of course that be very wrong ; she ought to go out every day . she will not   see a medical man . ' 

 ' have Mr. Widdowson give she any cause for dislike he ? ' Rhoda inquire . 

 ' he be dreadfully violent when he discover I be afraid it be natural he think the bad of she , and he have always be so devoted to Monica . she say he seem on the point of kill she . he be a man of very severe nature , I have always think . he never could bear that Monica should go anywhere alone . they be very , very unhappy , I be afraid so ill - match in almost every respect . still , under the circumstance surely she ought to return to he ? ' 

 ' I can not   say . I do not   know . ' 

 Rhoda 's voice signify a conflict of feeling . have she be disintereste her opinion would not have waver for a moment ; she would have declare that the wife 's inclination must be the only law in such a case . as it be , she could only regard Monica with profound mistrust and repugnance . the story of decisive evidence keep back seem to she only a weak woman 's falsehood a fiction due to shame and despair . undoubtedly it would give some vague relief to her mind if Monica be persuade to go to Clevedon , but she could not bring herself to think of visit the suffer woman . whatever the end might be , she would have not part in bring it about . her dignity , her pride , should remain unsullied by such hateful contact . 

 ' I must not   stay long , ' say Virginia , rise after a painful silence . ' I be always afraid to be away from she even for an hour ; the fear of dreadful thing that might happen haunt I day and night . how glad I shall be when Alice come ! ' 

 Rhoda have no word of sympathy . her commiseration for Virginia be only such as she might have feel for any stranger involve in sordid trouble ; all the old friendliness have vanish . nor would she have be greatly shock or astonish have she follow Miss Madden on the way to the railway station and see she , after a glance up and down the street , turn quickly into a public - house , and come forth again hold her handkerchief to her lip . a feeble , purposeless , hopeless woman ; type of a whole class ; live only to deteriorate 

 will ! purpose ! be she not in danger of forget these watchword , which have guide her life out of youth into maturity ? that poor creature 's unhappiness be doubtless in great measure due to the conviction that in miss love and marriage she have miss everything . so think the average woman , and in her dark hour she too have fall among those poor of spirit , the flesh prevailing . but the soul in she have not finally succumb . passion have a new significance ; her conception of life be large , more liberal ; she make no vow to crush the natural instinct . but her conscience , her sincerity should not suffer . wherever destiny might lead , she would still be the same proud and independent woman , responsible only to herself , fulfil the nobler law of her existence . 

 a day or two after this she have guest to dine with her Mildred Vesper and Winifred Haven . among the girl whom she have help to educate , these two seem by far the most self - reliant , the most courageous and hopeful . in minor detail of character they differ widely , and intellectually Miss Haven be far in advance . Rhoda have a strong desire to observe they as they talk about the most various subject ; she know they well , but hop to find in they some new suggestion of womanly force which would be of help to she in her own struggle for redemption . 

 it be seldom that either of they ail anything . Mildred still show trace of her country breeding ; she be the more robust , walk with a heavy step , have less polish of manner . under strain of any kind Winifred 's health would soon give way , but her natural vivacity promise long resistance to oppress influence . Mildred have work hard , and amid privation of which the other girl know nothing . she would never distinguish herself , but it be difficult indeed to imagine she repine so long as she have her strength and her congenial friend . twenty year hence , in all probability , she would keep the same clear , steady eye , the same honest smile , and the same dry humour in her talk . Winifred be more likely to traverse a latitude of storm . for one thing , her social position bring she in the way of man who might fall in love with she , whereas Mildred live absolutely apart from the male world ; doubtless , too , her passion be strong . she love literature , spend as much time as possible in study , and have set her mind upon help to establish that ideal woman 's paper of which there be often talk at Miss Barfoot 's . 

 in this company Rhoda feel her old ambition regain their power over she . to these girl she be an exemplar ; it make her smile to think how little they could dream of what she have experience during the last few week ; if ever a moment of discontent assail they , they must naturally think of she , of the brave , encourage word she have so often speak . for a moment she have desert they , abandon a course which her reason steadily approve for one that be beset with peril of indignity . it would shame she if they know the whole truth and yet she wish it be possible for they to learn that she have be passionately woo . a contemptible impulse of vanity ; away with it ! 

 there be a chance , it seem to she , that during Miss Barfoot 's absence Everard might come to the house . Mary have write to he ; he would know that she be away . what well opportunity , if he have not dismiss her memory from his thought ? 

 every evening she make herself ready to receive a possible visitor . she take thought for her appearance . but the week pass by , Miss Barfoot return , and Everard have give no sign . 

 she would set a date , a limit . if before Christmas he neither come nor write all be at an end ; after that she would not see he , whatever his plea . and have persuade herself that this decision be irrevocable , she think it as well to gratify Miss Barfoot 's curiosity , for by now she feel able to relate what have happen in Cumberland with a certain satisfaction the feeling she have foresee when , in the beginning of her acquaintance with Everard , it flatter she to observe his grow interest . her narrative , to which Mary listen with downcast eye , present the outline of the story veraciously ; she tell of Everard 's wish to dispense with the legal bond , of her own indecision , and of the issue . 

 ' when your letter come , could I very well have act otherwise than I do ? it be not a flat refusal to believe he ; all I ask be that thing should be clear up before our marriage . for his own sake he ought to have willingly agree to that . he prefer to take my request as an insult . his unreasonable anger make I angry too . and now I do not   think we shall ever meet again unless as mere acquaintance . ' 

 ' I think , ' comment the listener , ' that he behave with extraordinary impudence . ' 

 ' in the first proposal ? but I myself attach no importance to the marriage ceremony . ' 

 ' then why do you insist upon it ? ' ask Mary , with a smile that might have become sarcastic but that her eye meet Rhoda 's . 

 ' would you have receive we ? ' 

 ' in the one case as readily as in the other . ' 

 Rhoda be silent and darkly thoughtful . 

 ' perhaps I never feel entire confidence in he . ' 

 Mary smile and sigh . 




 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 the BURDEN of FUTILE soul 

 ' my own dearest love , if I could but describe to you all I have suffer before sit down to write this letter ! since our last meeting I have not know one hour of quietness . to think that I miss you when you call and leave that note for it be you yourself , be it not ? the journey be horrible , and the week that I have spend here I assure you I have not sleep for more than a few minute at a time , and I be utterly break down by misery . my darling ' etc . ' I regard myself as a criminal ; if you have suffer a thousandth part of what I have , I deserve any punishment that could be devise . for it have all be my fault . know as I do that our love could never end in happiness , it be my duty to hide what I feel . I ought never to have contrive that first meeting alone for it be contrive ; I send my sister away on purpose . I ought never ' etc . ' the only reflection that can ever bring I comfort be that our love have be pure . we can always think of each other without shame . and why should this love ever have an end ? we be separate , and perhaps shall never see each other again , but may not our heart remain for ever true ? may we not think ' etc . ' if I be to bid you leave your home and come to I , I should be once more act with base selfishness . I should ruin your life , and load my own with endless self - reproach . I find that even mere outward circumstance would not allow of what for a moment we dream might be possible , and of that I be glad , since it help I to overcome the terrible temptation . oh , if you know how that temptation ' etc . ' time will be a friend to both of we , dearest Monica . forget each other we never can , we never will . but our unsullied love ' etc . 

 Monica read it through again , the long rigmarole . since the day that she receive it address to ' Mrs. Williamson ' at the little stationer 's by Lavender Hill the day before she consent to accompany her sister into new lodging the letter have lain in its hiding - place . alone this afternoon , for Virginia be go to call on Miss Nunn , alone and miserable , every print page a weariness to her sight , she take out the french - stamp envelope and try to think that its content interested she . but not a word have power of attraction or of repulsion . the tender phrase affect she no more than if they have be address to a stranger . love be become a meaningless word . she could not understand how she have ever drift into such relation with the writer . fear and anger be the sole passion survive in her memory from those day which have violently transform her life , and it be not with Bevis , but her husband , that these emotion be connect . Bevis 's image stand in that already distant past like a lay figure , the mere semblance of a man . and with such conception of he his letter correspond ; it be artificial , lifeless , as if extract from some vapid novel . 

 but she must not destroy it . its use be still to come . letter and envelope must go back again into hiding , and await the day which would give they power over human life . 

 suffering , as always , from headache and lassitude , she sit by the window and watch the people who pass along her daily occupation . this sitting - room be on the ground floor . in a room above some one be receive a music lesson ; every now and then the teacher 's voice become audible , raise in sharp impatience , and generally accompany by a clash upon the key of the piano . at the area gate of the house opposite a servant be talk angrily with a tradesman 's errand boy , who at length put his thumb to his nose with insult significance and scamper off . then , at the house next to that one , there stop a cab , from which three busy - look man alight . cab full of people be always stop at that door . Monica wonder what it mean , who might live there . she think of ask the landlady . 

 Virginia 's return arouse she . she go upstairs with her sister into the double - bedded room which they occupy . 

 ' what have you hear ? ' 

 ' he go there . he tell they everything . ' 

 ' how do Miss Nunn look ? how do she speak ? ' 

 ' oh , she be very , very distant , ' lamented Virginia . ' I do not   quite know why she send for I . she say there would be no use in she come to see you and I do not   think she ever will . I tell she that there be no truth in ' 

 ' but how do she look ? ' ask Monica impatiently . 

 ' not at all well , I think . she have be away for her holiday , but it do not   seem to have do she much good . ' 

 ' he go there and tell they everything ? ' 

 ' yes just after it happen . but he have not   see they since that . I could see they believe he . it be no use all that I say . she look so stern and ' 

 ' do you ask anything about Mr. Barfoot ? ' 

 ' my dear , I do not   venture to . it be impossible . but I feel quite sure that they must have break off all intercourse with he . whatever he may have say , they evidently do not   believe it . Miss Barfoot be away now . 

 ' and what do you tell she about I ? ' 

 ' everything that you say I might , dear . ' 

 ' nothing else you be sure ? ' 

 Virginia colour , but make asseveration that nothing else have pass her lip . 

 ' it would not   have matter if you have , ' say Monica indifferently . ' I do not   care . ' 

 the sister , struggle with shame , be irritate by the needlessness of her falsehood . 

 ' then why be you so particular to forbid I , Monica ? ' 

 ' it be well but I do not   care . I do not   care for anything . let they believe and say what they like ' 

 ' Monica , if I find out at last that you have deceive I ' 

 ' oh , do , do , do be quiet ! ' cry the other wretchedly . ' I shall go somewhere and live alone or die alone . you worry I I be tired of it . ' 

 ' you be not very grateful , Monica . ' 

 ' I can not   be grateful ! you must expect nothing from I . if you keep talk and question I shall go away . I do not   care what become of I . the soon I die the well . ' 

 scene such as this have be frequent lately . the sister be a great trial to each other 's nerve . tedium and pain drive Monica to the relief of altercation , and Virginia , through her secret vice , be lose all self - control . they wrangle , wail , talk of parting , and only become quiet when their emotion have exhaust they . yet no ill - feeling result from these dispute . Virginia have a rooted faith in her sister 's innocence ; when angry , she only try to provoke Monica into a full explanation of the mystery , so insoluble by unaided conjecture . and Monica , say what she might , repay this confidence with profound gratitude . strangely , she have come to view herself as not only innocent of the specific charge bring against she , but as a woman in every sense malign . so utterly void of significance , from her present point of view , be all that have pass between she and Bevis . one reason for this lie in the circumstance that , when exchange declaration with her lover , she be ignorant of a fact which , have she know it , would have make their meeting impossible . her husband she could never regard but as a cruel enemy ; none the less , nature have set a seal upon their marriage against which the revolt of her heart be powerless . if she live to bear a child , that child would be his . Widdowson , when he hear of her condition , would declare it the final proof of infidelity ; and this injustice it be that exclusively occupy her mind . on this account she could think only of the accusation which connect her name with Barfoot 's all else be triviality . have there be no slight ground for imputation upon her conduct , she could not have resent more vigorously her husband 's refusal to acquit she of dishonour . 

 on the follow day , after their early dinner , Monica unexpectedly declare that she must go out . 

 ' come with I . we will go into the town . ' 

 ' but you refuse to go out this morning when it be fine , ' complain Virginia . ' and now you can see it will rain . ' 

 ' then I shall go alone . ' 

 the sister at once start up . 

 ' no , no ; I be quite ready . where do you wish ' 

 ' anywhere out of this dead place . we will go by train , and walk from Victoria anywhere . to the Abbey , if you like . ' 

 ' you must be very careful not to catch cold . after all this time that you have not   leave the house ' 

 Monica cut short the admonition and dress herself with feverish impatience . as they set forth , drop of rain have begin to fall , but Monica would not hear of wait . the journey by train make she nervous , but affect her spirit favourably . at Victoria it rain so heavily that they could not go out into the street . 

 ' it do not   matter . there be plenty to see here . let we walk about and look at thing . we will buy something at the bookstall to take back . ' 

 as they turn again towards the platform , Monica be confront by a face which she at once recognize , though it have change noticeably in the eighteen month since she last see it . the person be Miss Eade , her old acquaintance at the shop . but the girl no long dress as in those day ; cheap finery of the ' loud ' description array her form , and it need little scrutiny to perceive that her thin cheek be artificially redden . the surprise of the meeting be not Monica 's only reason for evince embarrassment . see that Miss Eade be uncertain whether to make a sign of acquaintance , she feel it would be wise to go by . but this be not permit . as they be pass each other the girl bend her head and whisper 

 ' I want to speak to you just a minute . ' 

 Virginia perceive the communication , and look in surprise at her sister . 

 ' it be one of the girl from Walworth Road , ' say Monica . ' just walk on ; I will meet you at the bookstall . ' 

 ' but , my dear , she do not   look respectable ' 

 ' go on ; I will not   be a minute . ' 

 Monica motion to Miss Eade , who follow she towards a more retire spot . 

 ' you have leave the shop ? ' 

 ' left I should think so . nearly a year ago . I tell you I should not   stand it much long . be you married ? ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 Monica do not understand why the girl should eye she so suspiciously . 

 ' you be ? ' say Miss Eade . ' nobody that I know , I suppose ? ' 

 ' quite a stranger to you . ' 

 the other make an unpleasant click with her tongue , and look vaguely about she . then she remark inconsequently that she be wait the arrival of her brother by train . 

 ' he be a traveller for a west - end shop ; make five hundred a year . I keep house for he , because of course he be a widower . ' 

 the ' of course ' puzzle Monica for a moment , but she remember that it be an unmeaning expletive much use by people of Miss Eade 's education . however , the story do not win her credence ; by this time her disagreeable surmise have too much support . 

 ' be there anything you wish particularly to speak about ? ' 

 ' you have not   see nothing of Mr. Bullivant ? ' 

 to what a remote period of her life this name seem to recall Monica ! she glance quickly at the speaker , and again detect suspicion in her eye . 

 ' I have neither see nor hear of he since I leave Walworth Road . be not   he still there ? ' 

 ' not he . he go about the same time you do , and nobody know where he hide himself . ' 

 ' Hid ? why should he hide ? ' 

 ' I only mean he get out of sight somewhere . I think perhaps you might have come across he . ' 

 ' no , I have not . now I must say good - bye . that lady be wait for I . ' 

 Miss Eade nod , but immediately alter her mind and check Monica as she be turn away . 

 ' you would not   mind tell I what your married name may be ? ' 

 ' that really do not   concern you , Miss Eade , ' reply the other stiffly . ' I must go ' 

 ' if you do not   tell I , I will follow you till I find out , and chance it ! ' 

 the change from tolerable civility to coarse insolence be so sudden that Monica stand in astonishment . there be unconcealed malignity in the gaze fix upon she . 

 ' what do you mean ? what interest have you in learn my name ? ' 

 the girl bring her face near , and snarl in the true voice of the pavement 

 ' be it a name as you be ashamed to let out ? ' 

 Monica walk away to the bookstall . when she have join her sister , she become aware that Miss Eade be keep she in sight . 

 ' let we buy a book , ' she say , ' and go home again . the rain will not   stop . ' 

 they select a cheap volume , and , have their return ticket , move towards the departure platform . before she could reach the gate Monica hear Miss Eade 's voice just behind she ; it have change again , and the appeal note remind she of many conversation in Walworth Road . 

 ' do tell I ! I beg your pardon for bein ' rude . do not   go without tell I . ' 

 the meaning of this importunity have already flash upon Monica , and now she feel a slight pity for the tawdry , abandon creature , in whom there seem to survive that hopeless passion of old day . 

 ' my name , ' she say abruptly , ' be Mrs. Widdowson . ' 

 ' be you tell I the truth ? ' 

 ' I have tell you what you wish to know . I can not   talk ' 

 ' and you do not   really know nothing about he ? ' 

 ' nothing whatever . ' 

 Miss Eade move sullenly away , not more than half convince . long after Monica 's disappearance she stray about the platform and the approach to the station . her brother be slow in arrive . once or twice she hold casual colloquy with man who also stand wait perchance for their sister ; and ultimately one of these be kind enough to offer her refreshment , which she graciously accept . Rhoda Nunn would have class she and muse about she : a not unimportant type of the odd woman . 

 after this Monica frequently go out , always accompany by her sister . it happen more than once that they see Widdowson , who walk past the house at least every other day ; he do not   approach they , and have he do so Monica would have keep an obstinate silence . 

 for more than a fortnight he have not write to she . at length there come a letter , merely a repetition of his former appeal . 

 ' I hear , ' he write , ' that your eld sister be come to London . why should she live here in lodging , when a comfortable house be at the disposal of you all ? let I again entreat you to go to Clevedon . the furniture shall be move any moment you wish . I solemnly promise not to molest you in any way , not even by write . it shall be understand that business make it necessary for I to live in London . for your sister 's sake do accept this offer . if I could see you in private , I should be able to give you a very good reason why your sister Virginia would benefit by the change ; perhaps you yourself know of it . do answer I , Monica . never again will I refer by word or look to what have pass . I be anxious only to put an end to the wretched life that you be lead . do go to the house at Clevedon , I implore you . ' 

 it be not the first time he have hint darkly at a benefit that might accrue to Virginia if she leave London . Monica have no inkling of what he mean . she show her sister this communication , and ask if she could understand the passage which concern she . 

 ' I have not   the least idea , ' Virginia reply , her hand tremble as she hold the paper . ' I can only suppose that he think that I be not look well . ' 

 the letter be burn , as all the other have be , no answer vouchsafed . Virginia 's mind seem to waver with regard to the propose settlement at Clevedon . occasionally she have urge Monica , with extreme persistence , to accept what be offer ; at other time , as now , for instance , she say nothing . yet Alice have write beseech she to use all mean for Monica 's persuasion . Miss Madden infinitely prefer the thought of dwell at Clevedon however humble the circumstance have be to that of come back into London lodging whilst she seek for a new engagement . the situation she be about to quit have prove more laborious than any in her experience . at first merely a governess , she have gradually become child 's nurse as well , and for the past three month have be expect to add the tendance of a chronic invalid to her other duty . not a day 's holiday since she come . she be break down and utterly woebegone . 

 but Monica could not be move . she refuse to go again under her husband 's roof until he have state that his charge against she be absolutely unfounded . this concession go beyond Widdowson 's power ; he would forgive , but still decline to stultify himself by a statement that could have no meaning . to what extent his wife have deceive he might be uncertain , but the deception be a proved fact . of course it never occur to he that Monica 's demand have a significance which emphasize the name of Barfoot . have he say , ' I be convinced that your relation with Barfoot be innocent , ' he would have seem to himself to be acquit she of all criminality ; whereas Monica , from her point of view , illogically suppose that he might credit she on this one issue without overthrow all the evidence that declare she untrustworthy . in short , she expect he to read a riddle which there be scarcely a possibility of his understanding . 

 Alice be in correspondence with the gloomy husband . she promise he to use every effort to gain Monica 's confidence . perhaps as the eld sister she might succeed where Virginia have fail . her faith in Monica 's protestation have be much shake by the item of intelligence which Virginia secretly communicate ; she think it too likely that her unhappy sister see no refuge from disgrace but in stubborn denial of guilt . and in the undertaking that be before she she have no hope save through the influence of religion with she a much strong force than with either of the other . 

 her arrival be expect on the last day of September . the evening before , Monica go to bed soon after eight o'clock ; for a day or two she have suffer greatly , and at length have allow a doctor to be call . whenever her sister retire very early , Virginia also go to her own bedroom , say that she prefer to sit there . 

 the room much surpass in comfort that which she have occupy at Mrs. Conisbee 's ; it be spacious , and provide with a couple of very soft armchair . have lock her door , Virginia make certain preparation which have nothing to do with natural repose . from the cupboard she bring out a little spirit - kettle , and put water to boil . then from a more private repository be produce a bottle of gin and a sugar - basin , which , together with a tumbler and spoon , find a place on a little table draw up within reach of the chair where she be go to sit . on the same table lie a novel procure this afternoon from the library . whilst the water be boil , Virginia make a slight change of dress , conducive to bodily ease . finally , have mix a glass of gin and water one - third only of the diluent she sit down with one of her frequent sigh and begin to enjoy the evening . 

 the last , the very last , of such enjoyment ; so she assure herself . Alice 's presence in the house would render impossible what she have hitherto succeed in disguise from Monica . her conscience welcome the restraint , which be come none too soon , for she will could no long be depend upon . if she abstain from strong liquor for three or four day it be now a great triumph ; yet worthless , for even in abstain she know that the hour of indulgence have only be postpone . a fit of unendurable depression soon drive she to the only resource which have immediate efficacy . the relief , she know , be another downward step ; but presently she would find courage to climb back again up to the sure ground . save for her trouble on Monica 's account the temptation would already have be conquer . and now Alice 's arrival make courage a mere necessity . 

 her bottle be all but empty ; she would finish it to - night , and in the morning , as her custom be , take it back to the grocer 's in her little hand - bag . how convenient that this kind of thing could be purchase at the grocer 's ! in the beginning she have chiefly make use of railway refreshment room . only on rare occasion do she enter a public - house , and always with the bitter sense of degradation . to sit comfortably at home , the bottle beside she , and a novel on her lap , be an avoidance of the bad shame attach to this vice ; she go to bed , and in the morning ah , the morning bring its punishment , but she incur no risk of be detect . 

 Brandy have first of all be her drink , as be generally the case with woman of the educate class . there be so many plausible excuse for take a drop of brandy . but it cost too much . Whisky she have try , and do not like . finally she have recourse to gin , which be palatable and very cheap . the name , debase by such foul association , still confuse she when she utter it ; as a rule , she write it down in a list of grocery which she hand over the counter . 

 to - night she drink her first glass quickly ; a consume thirst be upon she . by half - past eight the second be gently steam at her elbow . at nine she have mix the third ; it must last a long time , for the bottle be now empty . 

 the novel entertain she , but she often let her thought stray from it ; she reflect with exultation that to - night 's indulgence be she very last . on the morrow she would be a new woman . Alice and she would devote themselves to their poor sister , and never rest till they have restore she to a life of dignity . this be a worthy , a noble task ; success in it must need minister to her own peace . before long they would all be live at Clevedon a life of ideal contentment . it be no long necessary to think of the school , but she would exert herself for the moral instruction of young woman on the principle inculcate by Rhoda Nunn . 

 the page before she be no long legible ; the book drop from her lap . why this excite her laughter she could not understand ; but she laugh for a long time , until her eye be dim with tear . it might be well to go to bed . what be the hour ? she try vainly to read her watch , and again laugh at such absurd incapacity . then 

 surely that be a knock at her door ? yes ; it be repeat , with a distinct calling of her name . she endeavour to stand up . 

 ' Miss Madden ! ' it be the landlady 's voice . ' Miss Madden ! be you in bed yet ? ' 

 Virginia succeed in reach the door . 

 ' what be it ? ' 

 another voice speak . 

 ' it be I , Virginia . I have come this evening instead of to - morrow . please let I come in . ' 

 ' Alice ? you can not   I will come wait downstairs . ' 

 she be still able to understand the situation , and able , she think , to speak coherently , to disguise her condition . the thing on the table must be put out of sight . in try to do this , she upset her glass and knock the empty bottle on to the floor . but in a few minute bottle , glass , and spirit - kettle be hide away . the sugar - basin she lose sight of ; it still remain in its former place . 

 then she open the door , and with uncertain step go out into the passage . 

 ' Alice ! ' she call aloud . 

 at once both her sister appear , come out of Monica 's chamber . Monica have partly dress herself . 

 ' why have you come to - night ? ' Virginia exclaim , in a voice which seem to her own ear perfectly natural . 

 she totter , and be oblige to support herself against the wall . the light from her room fall full upon she , and Alice , who have step forward to give she a kiss , not only see , but smell , that something very strange be the matter . the odour proceeding from the bedroom , and that of Virginia 's breath , leave small doubt as to the cause of delay in give admittance . 

 Whilst Alice stand bewilder , Monica receive an illumination which instantly make clear to her many thing in Virginia 's daily life . at the same moment she understand those mysterious hint concern her sister in Widdowson 's letter . 

 ' come into the room , ' she say abruptly . ' come , Virgie . ' 

 ' I do not   understand why have Alice come to - night ? what be the time ? ' 

 Monica take hold of the totter woman 's arm and draw she out of the passage . the cold air have produce its natural effect upon Virginia , who now with difficulty support herself . 

 ' o virgie ! ' cry the eld sister , when the door be close . ' what be the matter ? what do it mean ? ' 

 already she have be shed tear at the meeting with Monica , and now distress overcome she ; she sob and lament . 

 ' what have you be do , Virgie ? ' ask Monica with severity . 

 ' do ? I feel a little faint surprise do not   expect ' 

 ' sit down at once . you be disgusting ! look , Alice . ' she point to the sugar - basin on the table ; then , after a rapid glance round the room , she go to the cupboard and throw the door open . ' I think so . look , Alice . and to think I never suspect this ! it have be go on a long time oh , a long time . she be do it at Mrs. Conisbee 's before I be marry . I remember smell spirit ' 

 Virginia be make effort to rise . 

 ' what be you talk about ? ' she exclaim in a thick voice , and with a countenance which be change from daze astonishment to anger . ' it be only when I feel faint . do you suppose I drink ? where 's Alice ? be not   Alice here ? ' 

 ' o virgie ! what do it mean ? how could you ? ' 

 ' go to bed at once , Virginia , ' say Monica . ' we be ashamed of you . go back into my room Alice , and I will get she to bed . ' 

 ultimately this be do . with no slight trouble , Monica persuade her sister to undress , and get she into a recumbent position , Virginia all the time protest that she have perfect command of her faculty , that she need no help whatever , and be utterly at a loss to comprehend the insult direct against she . 

 ' lie quiet and go to sleep , ' be Monica 's last word , utter contemptuously . 

 she extinguish the lamp and return to her own room , where Alice be still weep . the unexpected arrival have already be explain to Monica . sudden necessity for housing a visitor have lead to the proposition that Miss Madden , for her last night , should occupy a servant 's bedroom . glad to get away , Alice choose the alternative of leave the house at once . it have be arrange that she should share Virginia 's room , but to - night this do not seem advisable . 

 ' to - morrow , ' say Monica , ' we must talk to she very seriously . I believe she have be drink like that night after night . it explain the look she always have the first thing in the morning . could you have imagine anything so disgraceful ? ' 

 but Alice have soften towards the err woman . 

 ' you must remember what her life have be , dear . I be afraid loneliness be very often a cause ' 

 ' she need not   have be lonely . she refuse to come and live at Herne Hill , and now of course I understand why . Mrs. Conisbee must have know about it , and it be her duty to tell I . Mr. Widdowson have find out somehow , I feel sure . ' 

 she explain the reason of this belief . 

 ' you know what it all point to , ' say Miss Madden , dry her sallow , pimpled cheek . ' you must do as your husband wish , dearest . we must go to Clevedon . there the poor girl will be out of temptation . ' 

 ' you and Virgie may go . ' 

 ' you too , Monica . my dear sister , it be your duty . ' 

 ' do not   use that word to I ! ' exclaim the other angrily . ' it be not my duty . it can be no woman 's duty to live with a man she hat - or even to make a pretence of live with he . ' 

 ' but , dearest ' 

 ' you must not   begin this to - night , Alice . I have be ill all day , and now my head be ache terribly . go downstairs and eat the supper they have lay for you . ' 

 ' I could not   touch a morsel , ' sob Miss Madden . ' oh , everything be too dreadful ! life be too hard ! ' 

 Monica have return to bed , and lie there with her face half hide against the pillow . 

 ' if you do not   want any supper , ' she say in a moment , ' please go and tell they , so that they need not   sit up for you . ' 

 Alice obey . when she come up again , her sister be , or pretend to be , asleep ; even the noise make by bring luggage into the room do not cause she to move . have sit in despondency for a while , Miss Madden open one of her box , and seek in it for the Bible which it be her custom to make use of every night . she read in the book for about half an hour , then cover her face with her hand and pray silently . this be her refuge from the barrenness and bitterness of life . 




 CHAPTER XXIX 

 CONFESSION and counsel 

 the sister do not exchange a word until morning , but both of they lie long awake . Monica be the first to lose consciousness ; she sleep for about an hour , then the pain of a horrid dream disturb she , and again she take up the burden of thought . such wake after brief , broken sleep , when mind and body be beset by weariness , yet can not rest , when night with its awful hush and its mysterious movement make a strange , dread habitation for the spirit such wake be a grim trial of human fortitude . the blood flow sluggishly , yet subject to sudden tremor that chill the vein and for an instant choke the heart . purpose be idle , the will impure ; over the past hang a shadow of remorse , and life that must yet be live show lurid , a steep pathway to the hopeless grave . of this cup Monica drink deeply . 

 a fear of death compass she about . night after night it have thus haunt she . in the daytime she could think of death with resignation , as a refuge from misery of which she see no other end ; but this hour of silent darkness shake she with terror . reason avail nothing ; its exercise seem criminal . the old faith , never abandon , though modify by the breath of intellectual freedom that have just touch she , reassert all their power . she see herself as a wicked woman , in the eye of truth not less wicked than her husband declare she . a sinner stubborn in impenitence , defend herself by a paltry ambiguity that have all the evil of a direct lie . her soul tremble in its nakedness . 

 what redemption could there be for she ? what path of spiritual health be discoverable ? she could not command herself to love the father of her child ; the repugnance with which she regard he seem to she a sin against nature , yet how be she responsible for it ? would it profit she to make confession and be humble before he ? the confession must some day be make , if only for her child 's sake ; but she foresaw in it no relief of mind . of all human being her husband be the one least fit to console and strengthen she . she care nothing for his pardon ; from his love she shrink . but if there be some one to whom she could utter her thought with the certainty of be understand 

 her sister have not the sympathetic intelligence necessary for aid she ; Virginia be weak than she herself , and Alice deal only in sorrowful commonplace , profitable perhaps to her own heart , but powerless over the trouble of another 's . among the few people she have call her friend there be one strong woman strong of brain , and capable , it might be , of speak the word that go from soul to soul ; this woman she have deeply offend , yet owe to mere mischance . whether or no Rhoda Nunn have lend ear to Barfoot 's wooing she must be gravely offend ; she have give proof of it in the interview report by Virginia . the scandal spread abroad by Widdowson might even have be fatal to a happiness of which she have dream . to Rhoda Nunn some form of reparation be owe . and might not an avowal of the whole truth elicit from her counsel of gratitude some solace , some guidance ? 

 amid the tremor of night Monica feel able to take this step , for the mere chance of comfort that it offer . but when day come the resolution have vanish ; shame and pride again compel she to silence . 

 and this morning she have new trouble to think about . Virginia be keep her room ; would admit no one ; answer every whisper of appeal with brief , vague word that signify anything or nothing . the other breakfast in gloom that harmonize only too well with the heavy , dripping sky visible from their window . only at midday do Alice succeed in obtain speech with her remorseful sister . they be closet together for more than an hour , and the eld woman come forth at last with red , tear - swollen eye . 

 ' we must leave she alone today , ' she say to Monica . ' she will not   take any meal . oh , the wretched state she be in ! if only I could have know of this before ! ' 

 ' has it be go on for very long ? ' 

 ' it begin soon after she go to live at Mrs. Conisbee 's . she have tell I all about it poor girl , poor thing ! whether she can ever break herself of it , who know ? she say that she will take the pledge of total abstinence , and I encourage she to do so ; it may be some use , do not   you think ? ' 

 ' perhaps I do not   know ' 

 ' but I have no faith in her reforming unless she go away from London . she think herself that only a new life in a new place will give she the strength . my dear , at Mrs. Conisbee 's she starve herself to have money to buy spirit ; she go without any food but dry bread day after day . ' 

 ' of course that make it bad . she must have crave for support . ' 

 ' of course . and your husband know about it . he come once when she be in that state when you be away ' 

 Monica nod sullenly , her eye avert . 

 ' her life have be so dreadfully unhealthy . she seem to have become weak - minded . all her old interest have go ; she read nothing but novel , day after day . ' 

 ' I have notice that . ' 

 ' how can we help she , Monica ? will not   you make a sacrifice for the poor girl 's sake ? can not I persuade you , dear ? your position have a bad influence on she ; I can see it have . she worry so about you , and then try to forget the trouble you know how . ' 

 not that day , nor the next , could Monica listen to these entreaty . but her sister at length prevail . it be late in the evening ; Virginia have go to bed , and the other sit silently , without occupation . Miss Madden , after several vain effort to speak , bend forward and say in a low , grave voice , 

 ' Monica you be deceive we all . you be guilty . ' 

 ' why do you say that ? ' 

 ' I know it . I have watch you . you betray yourself when you be think . ' 

 the other sit with brow knit , with hard , defiant lip . 

 ' all your natural affection be dead , and only guilt could have cause that . you do not   care what become of your sister . only the fear , or the evil pride , that come of guilt could make you refuse what we ask of you . you be afraid to let your husband know of your condition . ' 

 Alice could not have speak thus have she not believe what she say . the conviction have become irresistible to her mind . her voice quiver with intensity of painful emotion . 

 ' that last be true , ' say her sister , when there have be silence for a minute . 

 ' you confess it ? o Monica ' 

 ' I do not   confess what you think , ' go on the young , with more calmness than she have yet command in these discussion . 

 ' of that I be not guilty . I be afraid of his knowing , because he will never believe I . I have a proof which would convince anyone else ; but , even if I produce it , it would be no use . I do not   think it be possible to persuade he - when once he know ' 

 ' if you be innocent you would disregard that . ' 

 ' listen to I , Alice . if I be guilty I should not be live here at his expense . I only consent to do that when I know what my condition be . but for this thing I should have refuse to accept another penny from he . I should have draw upon my own money until I be able to earn my own living again . if you will not   believe this it show you know nothing of I . your reading of my face be all foolishness . ' 

 ' I would to God I be sure of what you say ! ' moan Miss Madden , with vehemence which seem extraordinary in such a feeble , flabby person . 

 ' you know that I tell my husband lie , ' exclaim Monica , ' so you think I be never to be trust . I do tell he lie ; I can not   deny it , and I be ashamed of it . but I be not a deceitful woman I can say that boldly . I love the truth well than falsehood . if it be not   for that I should never have leave home . a deceitful woman , in my circumstance you do not   understand they would have cheat her husband into forgive she such a husband as mine . she would have calculate the most profitable course . I leave my husband because it be hateful to I to be with a man for whom I have lose every trace of affection . in keep away from he I be act honestly . but I have tell you that I be also afraid of his make a discovery . I want he to believe when the time come ' 

 she break off . 

 ' then , Monica , you ought to make known to he what you have be conceal . if you be tell the truth , that confession can not   be anything very dreadful . ' 

 ' Alice , I be willing to make an agreement . if my husband will promise never to come near Clevedon until I send for he I will go and live there with you and Virgie . ' 

 ' he have promise that , darling , ' cry Miss Madden delightedly . 

 ' not to I . he have only say that he will make his home in London for a time : that mean he would come whenever he wish , if it be only to speak to you and Virgie . but he must undertake never to come near until I give he permission . if he will promise this , and keep his word , I pledge myself to let he know the whole truth in less than a year . whether I live or die , he shall be tell the truth in less than a year . ' 

 before go to bed Alice write and dispatch a few line to Widdowson , request an interview with he as soon as possible . she would come to his house at any hour he like to appoint . the next afternoon bring a reply , and that same evening Miss Madden go to Herne Hill . as a result of what pass there , a day or two see the beginning of the long - contemplate removal to Clevedon . Widdowson find a lodging in the neighbourhood of his old home ; he have engage never to cross the bound of Somerset until he receive his wife 's permission . 

 as soon as this compact be establish Monica write to Miss Nunn . a short submissive letter . ' I be about to leave London , and before I go I very much wish to see you . will you allow I to call at some hour when I could speak to you in private ? there be something I must make known to you , and I can not write it . ' after a day 's interval come the reply , which be still briefer . Miss Nunn would be at home at half - past eight this or the next evening . 

 Monica 's announcement that she must go out alone after nightfall alarm her sister . when tell that her visit be to Rhoda Nunn they be somewhat relieved , but Alice beg to be permit to accompany she . 

 ' it will be lose trouble , ' Monica declare . ' more likely than not there be a spy wait to follow I wherever I go . your assurance that I really go to Miss Barfoot 's will not   be need . ' 

 when the other still oppose her purpose she pass from irony into anger . 

 ' have you undertake to save he the expense of private detective ? have you promise never to let I go out of your sight ? ' 

 ' certainly I have not , ' say Alice . 

 ' nor I , dear , ' protest Virginia . ' he have never ask anything of the kind . ' 

 ' then you may be sure that the spy be still watch I . let they have something to do , poor creature . I shall go alone , so you need not   say any more . ' 

 she take train to York Road Station , and thence , as the night be fine , walk to Chelsea . this semblance of freedom , together with the sense of have take a courageous resolve , raise her spirit . she hop that a detective might be track she ; the futility of such measure afford she a contemptuous satisfaction . not to arrive before the appoint hour she loiter on Chelsea Embankment , and it give her pleasure to reflect that in do this she be outrage the propriety . her mind be in a strange tumult of rebellious and distrustful thought . she have determine on make a confession to Rhoda ; but would she benefit by it ? be Rhoda generous enough to appreciate her motif ? it do not matter much . she would have discharge a duty at the expense of such shame , and this fact alone might strengthen she to face the misery beyond . 

 as she stand at Miss Barfoot 's door he heart quail . to the servant who open she could only speak Miss Nunn 's name ; fortunately instruction have be give , and she be straightway lead to the library . here she wait for nearly five minute . be Rhoda do this on purpose ? her face , when at length she enter , make it seem probable ' , a cold dignity , only not offensive haughtiness , appear in her bearing . she do not offer to shake hand , and use no form of civility beyond request her visitor to be seat . 

 ' I be go away , ' Monica begin , when silence compel she to speak . 

 ' yes , so you tell I . ' 

 ' I can see that you can not   understand why I have come . ' 

 ' your note only say that you wish to see I . ' 

 their eye meet , and Monica know in the moment that succeed that she be be examine from head to foot . it seem to she that she have undertake something beyond her strength ; her impulse be to invent a subject of brief conversation and escape into the darkness . but Miss Nunn speak again . 

 ' be it possible that I can be of any service to you ? ' 

 ' yes . you might be . but I find it be very difficult to say what I ' 

 Rhoda wait , offer no help whatever , not even that of a look express interest . 

 ' will you tell I , Miss Nunn , why you behave so coldly to I ? ' 

 ' surely that do not   need any explanation , Mrs. Widdowson ? ' 

 ' you mean that you believe everything Mr. Widdowson have say ? ' 

 ' Mr. Widdowson have say nothing to I . but I have see your sister , and there seem no reason to doubt what she tell I . ' 

 ' she could not   tell you the truth , because she do not   know it . ' 

 ' I presume she at least tell no untruth . ' 

 ' what do Virginia say ? I think I have a right to ask that . ' 

 Rhoda appear to doubt it . she turn her eye to the near bookcase , and for a moment reflect . 

 ' your affair do not   really concern I , Mrs. Widdowson , ' she say at length . ' they have be force upon my attention , and perhaps I regard they from a wrong point of view . unless you have come to defend yourself against a false accusation , be there any profit in our talking of these thing ? ' 

 ' I have come for that . ' 

 ' then I be not so unjust as to refuse to hear you . ' 

 ' my name have be speak of together with Mr. Barfoot 's . this be wrong . it begin from a mistake . ' 

 Monica could not shape her phrase . hasten to utter the statement that would relieve she from Miss Nunn 's personal displeasure , she use the first simple word that rise to her lip . 

 ' when I go to bayswater that day I have no thought of see Mr. Barfoot . I wish to see someone else . ' 

 the listener manifest more attention . she could not mistake the sign of sincerity in Monica 's look and speech . 

 ' some one , ' she ask coldly , ' who be live with Mr. Barfoot ? ' 

 ' no . some one in the same building ; in another flat . when I knock at Mr. Barfoot 's door , I know or I feel sure no one would answer . I know Mr. Barfoot be go away that day go into Cumberland . ' 

 Rhoda 's look be fix on the speaker 's countenance . 

 ' you know he be go to Cumberland ? ' she ask in a slow , careful voice . 

 ' he tell I so . I meet he , quite by chance , the day before . ' 

 ' where do you meet he ? ' 

 ' near the flat , ' Monica answer , colour . ' he have just come out I see he come out . I have an appointment there that afternoon , and I walk a short way with he , so that he should not   ' 

 her voice fail . she see that Rhoda have begin to mistrust she , to think that she be elaborate falsehood . the burdensome silence be break by Miss Nunn 's say repellently , 

 ' I have not   ask for your confidence , remember . ' 

 ' no and if you try to imagine what it mean for I to be speak like this I be not shameless . I have suffer a great deal before I could bring myself to come here and tell you . if you be more human if you try to believe ' 

 the agitation which find utterance in these word have its effect upon Rhoda . in spite of herself she be touch by the note of womanly distress . 

 ' why have you come ? why do you tell I this ? ' 

 ' because it be not   only that I have be falsely accuse . I feel I must tell you that Mr. Barfoot have never - that there be nothing between we . what have he say ? how do he meet the charge Mr. Widdowson make against he ? ' 

 ' simply by deny it . ' 

 ' have not   he wish to appeal to I ? ' 

 ' I do not   know . I have not   hear of his express such a wish . I can not   see that you be call upon to take any trouble about Mr. Barfoot . he ought to be able to protect his own reputation . ' 

 ' has he do so ? ' Monica ask eagerly . ' do you believe he when he deny ' 

 ' but what do it matter whether I believe he or not ? ' 

 ' he would think it matter a great deal . ' 

 ' Mr. Barfoot would think so ? why ? ' 

 ' he tell I how much he wish to have your good opinion that be what we use to talk about . I do not   know why he take I into his confidence . it happen first of all when we be go by train the same train , by chance after we have both be call here . he ask I many question about you , and at last say that he love you or something that mean the same . ' 

 Rhoda 's eye have fall . 

 ' after that , ' pursue Monica , ' we several time speak of you . we do so when we happen to meet near his room as I have tell you . he tell I he be go to Cumberland with the hope of see you ; and I understand he to mean he wish to ask you ' 

 the sudden and great change in Miss Nunn 's expression check the speaker . scornful austerity have give place to a smile , stern indeed , but exultant . there be warmth upon her face ; her lip move and relaxed ; she alter her position in the chair as if incline for more intimate colloquy . 

 ' there be never more than that between we , ' pursue Monica with earnestness . ' my interest in Mr. Barfoot be only on your account . I hop he might be successful . and I have come to you because I fear you would believe my husband as I see you have do . ' 

 Rhoda , though she think it very unlikely that all this should be admirable acting , show that the explanation have by no mean fully satisfied she . unwilling to put the crucial question , she wait , with gravity which have none of the former harshness , for what else Mrs. Widdowson might choose to say . a look of suffering appeal oblige she to break the silence . 

 ' I be very sorry you have lay this task upon yourself ' 

 still Monica look at she , and at length murmur , 

 ' if only I could know that I have do any good ' 

 ' but , ' say Rhoda , with a searching glance , ' you do not   wish I to repeat what you have say ? ' 

 ' it be only for you . I think if you feel able to let Mr. Barfoot know that you have no long any ' 

 a flash of stern intelligence shot from the listener 's eye . 

 ' you have see he then ? ' she ask with abrupt directness . 

 ' not since . ' 

 ' he have write to you ? ' still in the same voice . 

 ' indeed he have not . Mr. Barfoot never write to I . I know nothing whatever about he . no one ask I to come to you do not   think that . no one know of what I have be tell you . ' 

 again Rhoda be oppress by the difficulty of determine how much credit be due to such assertion . Monica understand her look . 

 ' as I have say so much I must tell you all . it would be dreadful after this to go away uncertain whether you believe I or not . ' 

 human feeling prompt the listener to declare that she have no doubt leave . yet she could not give utterance to the word . she know they would sound forced , insincere . shame at inflict shame cause she to bend her head . already she have be silent too long . 

 ' I will tell you everything , ' Monica be say in low , tremulous tone . ' if no one else believe I , you at all event shall . I have not do what ' 

 ' no I can not   hear this , ' Rhoda break in , the speaker 's voice affect she too powerfully . ' I will believe you without this . ' 

 Monica break into sobbing . the strain of this last effort have overtax her strength . 

 ' we will not   talk any more of it , ' say Rhoda , with an endeavour to speak kindly . ' you have do all that could be ask of you . I be grateful to you for come on my account . 

 the other control herself . 

 ' will you hear what I have to say , Miss Nunn ? will you hear it as a friend ? I want to put myself right in your thought . I have tell no one else ; I shall be easy in mind if you will hear I . my husband will know everything before very long but perhaps I shall not be alive ' 

 something in Miss Nunn 's face suggest to Monica that her meaning be understand . perhaps , notwithstanding her denial , Virginia have tell more when she be here than she have permission to make know . 

 ' why should you wish to tell I ? ' ask Rhoda uneasily . 

 ' because you be so strong . you will say something that will help I . I know you think that I have commit a sin which it be a shame to speak of . that be not   true . if it be true I should never consent to go and live in my husband 's house . ' 

 ' you be return to he ? ' 

 ' I forget that I have not   tell you . ' 

 and Monica relate the agreement that have be arrive at . when she speak of the time that must elapse before she would make a confession to her husband , it again seem to she that Miss Nunn understand . 

 ' there be a reason why I consent to be support by he , ' she continue . ' if it be true that I have sin as he suspect I would rather kill myself than pretend still to be his wife . the day before he have I watch I think I have leave he forever . I think that if I go back to the house again it would only be to get a few thing that I need . it be some one who live in the same building as Mr. Barfoot . you have meet he ' 

 she raise her eye for an instant , and they encounter the listener 's . Rhoda be at no loss to supply the omit name ; she see at once how plain thing be become . 

 ' he have leave England , ' pursue Monica in a hurried but clear voice . ' I think then that I should go away with he . but it be impossible . I love he or think I love he ; but I be guiltless of anything more than consent to leave my husband . will you believe I ? ' 

 ' yes , Monica , I do believe you . ' 

 ' if you have any doubt , I can show you a letter he write to I from abroad , which will prove ' 

 ' I believe you absolutely . ' 

 ' but let I tell you more . I must explain how the misunderstanding ' 

 rapidly she recount the incident of that fatal Saturday afternoon . at the conclusion her self - command be again overcome ; she shed tear , and murmur broken entreaty for kindness . 

 ' what shall I do , Miss Nunn ? how can I live until ? I know it be only for a short time . my wretched life will soon be at an end ' 

 ' Monica there be one thing you must remember . ' 

 the voice be so gentle , though firm so unlike what she have expect to hear that the sufferer look up with grateful attention . 

 ' tell I give I what help you can . ' 

 ' life seem so bitter to you that you be in despair . yet be not   it your duty to live as though some hope be before you ? ' 

 Monica gaze in uncertainty . 

 ' you mean ' she falter . 

 ' I think you will understand . I be not speak of your husband . whether you have duty to he or not I can not   say ; that be for your own mind and heart to determine . but be not   it true that your health have a graver importance than if you yourself only be concern ? ' 

 ' yes you have understand I ' 

 ' be not   it your duty to remember at every moment that your thought , your action , may affect another life that by heedlessness , by abandon yourself to despair , you may be the cause of suffer it be in your power to avert ? ' 

 herself strongly move , Rhoda have never speak so impressively , have never give counsel of such earnest significance . she feel her power in quite a new way , without touch of vanity , without pose or any trivial self - consciousness . when she least expect it an opportunity have come for exert the moral influence on which she pride herself , and which she hop to make the ennoble element of her life . all the well that the case be one call for courage , for contempt of vulgar reticence ; the combative soul in she become strong when face by such condition . see that her word be not in vain , she come near to Monica and speak yet more kindly . 

 ' why do you encourage that fear of your life come to an end ? ' 

 ' it be more a hope than a fear at most time . I can see nothing before I . I do not   wish to live . ' 

 ' that be morbid . it be not   yourself that speak , but your trouble . you be young and strong , and in a year 's time very much of this unhappiness will have pass . ' 

 ' I have feel it like a certainty as if it have be foretell to I ever since I know ' 

 ' I think it very likely that young wife have often the same dread . it be physical , Monica , and in your case there be so little relief from dark brooding . but again you must think of your responsibility . you will live , because the poor little life will need your care . ' 

 Monica turn her head away and moan . 

 ' I shall not love my child . ' 

 ' yes , you will . and that love , that duty , be the life to which you must look forward . you have suffer a great deal , but after such sorrow as yours there come quietness and resignation . nature will help you . ' 

 ' oh , if you could give I some of your strength ! I have never be able to look at life as you do . I should never have marry he if I have not   be tempt by the thought of live easily and I fear so that I might always be alone my sister be so miserable ; it terrify I to think of struggle on through life as they do ' 

 ' your mistake be in look only at the weak woman . you have other example before you girl like Miss Vesper and Miss Haven , who live bravely and work hard and be proud of their place in the world . but it be idle to talk of the past , and just as foolish to speak as if you be sorrow without hope . how old be you , Monica ? ' 

 ' two - and - twenty . ' 

 ' well , I be two - and - thirty and I do not   call myself old . when you have reach my age I prophesy you will smile at your despair of ten year ago . at your age one talk so readily of " wrecked life " and " hopeless future , " and all that kind of thing . my dear girl , you may live to be one of the most contented and most useful woman in England . your life be not   wreck at all nonsense ! you have go through a storm , that be true ; but more likely than not you will be all the well for it . do not   talk or think about sin ; simply make up your mind that you will not   be beat by trial and hardship . there can not can there ? be the least doubt as to how you ought to live through these next coming month . your duty be perfectly clear . strengthen yourself in body and mind . you have a mind , which be more than can be say of a great many woman . think bravely and nobly of yourself ! say to yourself : this and that it be in I to do , and I will do it ! ' 

 Monica bend suddenly forward and take one of her friend 's hand , and clung to it . 

 ' I know you could say something that would help I . you have a way of speak . but it be not   only now . I shall be so far away , and so lonely , all through the dark winter . will you write to I ? ' 

 ' gladly . and tell you all we be do . ' 

 Rhoda 's voice sink for a moment ; her eye wander ; but she recover the air of confidence . 

 ' we seem to have lose you ; but before long you will be one of we again . I mean , you will be one of the woman who be fight in woman 's cause . you will prove by your life that we can be responsible human being trustworthy , conscious of purpose . ' 

 ' tell I do you think it right for I to live with my husband when I can not   even regard he as a friend ? ' 

 ' in that I dare not counsel you . if you can think of he as a friend , in time to come , surely it will be well . but here you must guide yourself . you seem to have make a very sensible arrangement , and before long you will see many thing more clearly . try to recover health health ; that be what you need . drink in the air of the Severn Sea ; it will be a cordial to you after this stifle London . next summer I shall I hope I shall be at Cheddar , and then I shall come over to Clevedon and we shall laugh and talk as if we have never know a care . ' 

 ' ah , if that time be come ! but you have do I good . I shall try ' 

 she rise . 

 ' I must not   forget , ' say Rhoda , without look at she , ' that I owe you thank . you have do what you feel be right in spite of all it cost you ; and you have very greatly relieve my mind . of course it be all a secret between we . if I make it understand that a doubt be no long trouble I I shall never say how it be remove . ' 

 ' how I wish I have come before . ' 

 ' for your own sake , if I have really help you , I wish you have . but as for anything else it be much well as it be . ' 

 and Rhoda stand with erect head , smile her smile of liberty . Monica do not dare to ask any question . she move up to her friend , hold out both hand timidly . 

 ' good - bye ! ' 

 ' till next summer . ' 

 they embrace , and kiss each other , Monica , when she have withdraw her hot lip , again murmur word of gratitude . then in silence they go together to the house - door , and in silence part . 




 CHAPTER XXX 

 retreat with HONOUR 

 Alighting , on his return to London , at the Savoy Hotel , Barfoot insensibly prolong his stay there . for the present he have no need of a more private dwelling ; he could not see more than a few day ahead ; his next decisive step be as uncertain as it have be during the first few month after his come back from the East . 

 meantime , he lead a sufficiently agreeable life . the Brissendens be not in town , but his grow intimacy with that family have extend his social outlook , and in a direction correspondent with the change in his own circumstance . he be make friend in the world with which he have a natural affinity ; that of wealthy and cultured people who seek no prominence , who shrink from contact with the circle know as ' smart , ' who possess their soul in quiet freedom . it be a small class , especially distinguish by the charm of its woman . Everard have not adapt himself without difficulty to this new atmosphere ; from the first he recognize its soothe and brace quality , but his experience have accustom he to an air more rudely vigorous ; it be only after those week spend abroad in frequent intercourse with the Brissendens that he come to understand the full extent of his sympathy with the social principle these man and woman represent . 

 in the house where his welcome be now assure he meet some three of four woman among whom it would have be difficult to assign the precedence for grace of manner and of mind . these person be not in declare revolt against the order of thing , religious , ethical , or social ; that be to say , they do not think it worthwhile to identify themselves with any ' movement ' ; they be content with the unopposed right of liberal criticism . they live placidly ; refrain from much that the large world enjoin , but never aggressive . Everard admire they with increase fervour . with one exception they be marry , and suitably marry ; that member of the charming group who keep her maiden freedom be Agnes Brissenden , and it seem to barfoot that , if preference be at all justify , Agnes should receive the palm . his view of she have greatly change since the early day of their acquaintance ; in fact , he perceive that till of late he have not know she at all . his quick assumption that Agnes be at his disposal if he choose to woo she have be mere fatuity ; he misread her perfect simplicity of demeanour , the unconstraint of her intellectual sympathy . what might now be her personal attitude to he he feel altogether uncertain , and the result be a genuine humility such as he have never know . nor be it Agnes only that subdue his masculine self - assertiveness ; her sister in grace have scarcely less dominion over he ; and at time , as he sit converse in one of these drawing - room , he break off to marvel at himself , to appreciate the perfection of his own suavity , the vast advance he have be make in polished humanism . 

 towards the end of November he learn that the Brissendens be at their town house , and a week later he receive an invitation to dine with they . 

 over his luncheon at the hotel Everard reflect with some gravity , for , if he be not mistaken , the hour have come when he must make up his mind on a point too long in suspense . what be Rhoda Nunn do ? he have hear nothing whatever of she . his cousin Mary write to he , whilst he be at Ostend , in a kind and friendly tone , inform he that his simple assurance with regard to a certain disagreeable matter be all she have desire , and hop that he would come and see she as usual when he find himself in London . but he have keep away from the house in Queen 's Road , and it be probable that Mary do not even know his address . as the result of meditation he go to his sitting - room , and with an air of reluctance sit down to write a letter . it be a request that Mary would let he see she somewhere or other not at her house . could not   they have a talk at the place in Great Portland Street , when no one else be there ? 

 Miss Barfoot answer with brief assent . if he like to come to Great Portland Street at three o'clock on Saturday she would be await he . 

 on arrive , he inspect the room with curiosity . 

 ' I have often wish to come here , Mary . show I over the premise , will you ? ' 

 ' that be your purpose ? ' 

 ' no , not altogether . but you know how your work interest I . ' 

 Mary comply , and freely answer his various question . then they sit down on hard chair by the fire , and Everard , lean forward as if to warm his hand , lose no more time in come to the point . 

 ' I want to hear about Miss Nunn . ' 

 ' to hear about she ? pray , what do you wish to hear ? ' 

 ' be she well ? ' 

 ' very well indeed . ' 

 ' I be very glad of that . do she ever speak of I ? ' 

 ' let I see I do not   think she have refer to you lately . ' 

 Everard look up . 

 ' do not   let we play a comedy , Mary . I want to talk very seriously . shall I tell you what happen when I go to Seascale ? ' 

 ' ah , you go to Seascale , do you ? ' 

 ' do not   you know that ? ' he ask , unable to decide the question from his cousin 's face , which be quite friendly , but inscrutable . 

 ' you go when Miss Nunn be there ? ' 

 ' of course . you must have know I be go , when I ask you for her seascale address . ' 

 ' and what do happen ? I shall be glad to hear if you feel at liberty to tell I . ' 

 after a pause , Everard begin the narrative . but he do not see fit to give it with all the detail which Mary have learn from her friend . he speak of the excursion to Wastwater , and of the subsequent meeting on the shore . 

 ' the end of it be that Miss Nunn consent to marry I . ' 

 ' she consent ? ' 

 ' that come as a surprise ? ' 

 ' please go on . ' 

 ' well , we arrange everything . Rhoda be to stay till the fifteen day be over , and the marriage would have be there . but then arrive your letter , and we quarrel about it . I be not   dispose to beg and pray for justice . I tell Rhoda that her wish for evidence be an insult , that I would take no step to understand Mrs. Widdowson 's behaviour . Rhoda be illogical , I think . she do not refuse to take my word , but she would not   marry I until the thing be clear up . I tell she that she must investigate it for herself , and so we part in no very good temper . ' 

 Miss Barfoot smile and muse . her duty , she now feel convince , be to abstain from any sort of meddle . these two people must settle their affair as they choose . to interfere be to incur an enormous responsibility . for what she have already do in that way Mary reprove herself . 

 ' now I want to ask you a plain question , ' Everard resume . ' that letter you write to I at Ostend do it represent Rhoda 's mind as well as your own ? ' 

 ' it be quite impossible for I to say . I do not   know Rhoda 's mind . ' 

 ' well , perhaps that be a satisfactory answer . it imply , no doubt , that she be still resolve not to concede the point on which I insist . but since then ? have she come to a decision ? ' 

 it be necessary to prevaricate . Mary know of the interview between Miss Nunn and Mrs. Widdowson , know its result ; but she would not hint at this . 

 ' I have no mean of judge how she regard you , Everard . ' 

 ' it be possible she even think I a liar ? ' 

 ' I understand you to say that she never refuse to believe you . ' 

 he make a movement of impatience . 

 ' plainly you will tell I nothing ? ' 

 ' I have nothing to tell . ' 

 ' then I suppose I must see Rhoda . perhaps she will refuse to admit I ? ' 

 ' I can not   say . but if she do she meaning would be unmistakable . ' 

 ' Cousin Mary ' he look at she and laugh ' I think you will be very glad if she do refuse . ' 

 she seem about to reply with some pleasantry , but check herself , and speak in a serious voice . 

 ' no . I have no such feeling . whatever you both agree upon will satisfy I . so come by all mean if you wish . I can have nothing to do with it . you have well write and ask she if she will see you , I should think . ' 

 Barfoot rise from his seat , and Mary be glad to be release so quickly from a disagreeable situation . for her own part she have no need to put indiscreet question ; Everard 's manner acquaint she quite sufficiently with what be go on in his thought . however , he have still something to say . 

 ' you think I have behave rather badly let we say , harshly ? ' 

 ' I be not so foolish as to form any judgment in such a case , cousin Everard . ' 

 ' speak as a woman , should you say that Rhoda have reason on her side in the first instance ? ' 

 ' I think , ' Mary reply , with reluctance , but deliberately , ' that she be not unreasonable in wish to postpone her marriage until she know what be to be the result of Mrs. Widdowson 's indiscreet behaviour . ' 

 ' well , perhaps she be not , ' Everard admit thoughtfully . 

 ' and what have be the result ? ' 

 ' I only know that Mrs. Widdowson have leave London and go to live at a house her husband have take somewhere in the country . ' 

 ' I be relieve to hear that . by - the - bye , the little lady 's " indiscreet behaviour " be as much a mystery to I as ever . ' 

 ' and to I , ' Mary reply with an air of indifference . 

 ' well , then , let we take it for grant that I be rather harsh with Rhoda . but suppose she still meet I with the remark that thing be just as they be that nothing have be explain ? ' 

 ' I can not   discuss your relation with Miss Nunn . ' 

 ' however , you defend her original action . be so good as to admit that I can not   go to Mrs. Widdowson and request she to publish a statement that I have never ' 

 ' I shall admit nothing , ' interrupt Miss Barfoot rather tartily . ' I have advise you to see Miss Nunn if she be willing . and there be nothing more to be say . ' 

 ' good . I will write to she . ' 

 he do so , in the few possible word , and receive an answer of equal brevity . in accordance with permission grant , on the Monday evening he find himself once more in his cousin 's drawing - room , sit alone , wait Miss Nunn 's appearance . he wonder how she would present herself , in what costume . her garb prove to be a plain dress of blue serge , certainly not calculate for effect ; but his eye at once distinguish the fact that she have arrange her hair as she wear it when he first know she , a fashion subsequently abandon for one that he think more become . 

 they shake hand . externally Barfoot be the more agitated , and his embarrassment appear in the awkward word with which he begin . 

 ' I have make up my mind never to come until you let I know that I be try and acquit but after all it be well to have reason on one 's side . ' 

 ' much well , ' reply Rhoda , with a smile which emphasize her ambiguity . 

 she sit down , and he follow her example . their relative position call to mind many a conversation they have hold in this room . barfoot he wear evening - dress settle in the comfortable chair as though he be an ordinary guest . 

 ' I suppose you would never have write to I ? ' 

 ' never , ' she answer quietly . 

 ' because you be too proud , or because the mystery be still a mystery ? ' 

 ' there be no long any mystery . ' 

 Everard make a movement of surprise . 

 ' indeed ? you have discover what it all mean ? ' 

 ' yes , I know what it all mean . ' 

 ' can you gratify my not unnatural curiosity ? ' 

 ' I can say nothing about it , except that I know how the misunderstanding arise . ' 

 Rhoda be betray the effort it have cost she to seem so self - possess when she enter . her colour have deepen , and she speak hurriedly , unevenly . 

 ' and it do not   occur to you that it would be a kindness , not inconsistent with your dignity , to make I in some way acquaint with this fact ? ' 

 ' I feel no uneasiness on your account . ' 

 Everard laugh . 

 ' splendidly frank , as of old . you really do not   care in the least how much I suffer ? ' 

 ' you misunderstand I . I feel sure that you do not   suffer at all . ' 

 ' ah , I see . you imagine I calm in the assurance that I should some day be justify . ' 

 ' I have every reason for imagine it , ' rejoin Rhoda . ' other wise , you would have give some sign . ' 

 of course he have deeply offend she by his persistent silence . he have intend to do so first of all ; and afterwards have think it might be as well . now that he have get over the difficulty of the meeting he enjoy his sense of security . how the interview would end he know not ; but on his side there would be nothing hasty , unconsidered , merely emotional . have Rhoda any new revelation of personality within her resource ? that be the question . if so , he would be pleased to observe it . if not why , it be only the end to which he have long ago look forward . 

 ' it be not for I to give any sign , ' he remark . 

 ' yet you have say that it be well to have reason on one 's side . ' 

 perhaps a soft note allow itself to be detect in these word . in any case , they be not plainly ironical . 

 ' Admit , then , that an approach be due from I . I have make it . I be here . ' 

 Rhoda say nothing . yet she have not an air of expectancy . her eye be grave , rather sad , as though for the moment she have forget what be at issue , and have lose herself in remoter think . regard she , Everard feel a nobility in her countenance which amply justify all he have ever feel and say . but be there anything more any new power ? 

 ' so we go back , ' he pursue , ' to our day at Wastwater . the perfect day be not   it ? ' 

 ' I shall never wish to forget it , ' say Rhoda reflectively . 

 ' and we stand as when we quit each other that night do we ? ' 

 she glance at he . 

 ' I think not . ' 

 ' then what be the difference ? ' 

 he wait some second , and repeat the question before Rhoda answer . 

 ' you be conscious of no difference ? ' she say . 

 ' month have lapse . we be different because we be old . but you speak as if you be conscious of some great change . ' 

 ' yes , you be change noticeably . I think I know you ; perhaps I do . now I should have to learn you all over again . it be difficult , you see , for I to keep pace with you . your opportunity be so much wide . ' 

 this be puzzle . do it signify mere jealousy , or a profounder view of thing ? her voice have something even of pathos , as though she utter a simple thought , without caustic intention . 

 ' I try not to waste my life , ' he answer seriously . ' I have make new acquaintance . ' 

 ' will you tell I about they ? ' 

 ' tell I first about yourself . you say you would never have write to I . that mean , I think , that you never love I . when you find that I have be wrongly suspect and you suspect I yourself , say what you will if you have love I , you would have ask forgiveness . ' 

 ' I have a like reason for doubt your love . if you have love I you could never have wait so long without try to remove the obstacle that be between we . ' 

 ' it be you who put the obstacle there , ' say Everard , smile . 

 ' no . an unlucky chance do that . or a lucky one . who know ? ' 

 he begin to think : if this woman have enjoy the social advantage to which Agnes Brissenden and those other be doubtless indebted for so much of their charm , would she not have be their equal , or more ? for the first time he compassionate Rhoda . she be brave , and circumstance have not be kind to she . at this moment , be she not contend with herself ? be not her honesty , her dignity , struggle against the impulse of her heart ? Rhoda 's love have be worth more than his , and it would be her one love in life . a fatuous reflection , perhaps ; yet every moment 's observation seem to confirm it . 

 ' well , now , ' he say , ' there be the question which we must decide . if you incline to think that the chance be fortunate ' 

 she would not speak . 

 ' we must know each other 's mind . ' 

 ' ah , that be so difficult ! ' Rhoda murmur , just raise her hand and let it fall . 

 ' yes , unless we give each other help . let we imagine ourselves back at Seascale , down by the wave .   how cold and grim it must be there to - night !   I repeat what I say then : Rhoda , will you marry I ? ' 

 she look fixedly at he . 

 ' you do not   say that then . ' 

 ' what do the word matter ? ' 

 ' that be not what you say . ' 

 he watch the agitation of her feature , until his gaze seem to compel she to move . she step towards the fireplace , and move a little screen that stand too near the fender . 

 ' why do you want I to repeat exactly what I say ? ' Everard ask , rise and follow she . 

 ' you speak of the " perfect day . " do not   the day 's perfection end before there be any word of marriage ? ' 

 he look at she with surprise . she have speak without turn her face towards he ; it be visible now only by the glow of the fire . yes , what she say be true , but a truth which he have neither expect nor desire to hear . have the new revelation prepare itself ? 

 ' who first use the word , Rhoda ? ' 

 ' yes ; I do . ' 

 there be silence . Rhoda stand unmove , the fire 's glow upon her face , and Barfoot watch she . 

 ' perhaps , ' he say at length , ' I be not quite serious when I ' 

 she turn sharply upon he , a flash of indignation in her eye . 

 ' not quite serious ? yes , I have think that . and be you quite serious in anything you say ? ' 

 ' I love you , ' he answer curtly , answer her steady look . 

 ' yet want to see whether ' 

 she could not finish the sentence ; her throat quiver . 

 ' I love you , that be all . and I believe I still love you . ' 

 Rhoda turn to the fire again . 

 ' will you marry I ? ' he ask , move a step nearer . 

 ' I think you be " not quite serious " . ' 

 ' I have ask you twice . I ask for the third time . ' 

 ' I will not   marry you with the form of marriage , ' Rhoda answer in an abrupt , harsh tone . 

 ' now it be you who play with a serious matter . ' 

 ' you say we have both change . I see now that our " perfect day " be mar by my weakness at the end . if you wish to go back in imagination to that summer night , restore everything , only let I be what I now be . ' 

 Everard shake his head . 

 ' impossible . it must be then or now for both of we . ' 

 ' legal marriage , ' she say , glance at he , ' have acquire some new sanction for you since then ? ' 

 ' on the whole , perhaps it have . ' 

 ' naturally . but I shall never marry , so we will speak no more of it . ' 

 as if finally dismiss the subject she walk to the opposite side of the hearth , and there turn towards her companion with a cold smile . 

 ' in other word , then , you have cease to love I ? ' 

 ' yes , I no long love you . ' 

 ' yet , if I have be willing to revive that fantastic idealism as you think it ' 

 she interrupt he sternly . 

 ' what be it ? ' 

 ' oh , a kind of idealism undoubtedly . I be so bent on make sure that you love I . ' 

 she laugh . 

 ' after all , the perfection of our day be half make - believe . you never love I with entire sincerity . and you will never love any woman even as well as you love I . ' 

 ' upon my soul , I believe it , Rhoda . and even now ' 

 ' and even now it be just possible for we to say goodbye with something like friendliness . but not if you talk long . do not   let we spoil it ; thing be so straight and clear ' 

 a threatened sob make she break off , but she recover herself and offer he her hand . 

 he walk all the way back to his hotel , and the cold , clammy night restore his equanimity . a fortnight later , send a Christmas present , with greeting , to Mr. and Mrs. Micklethwaite , he write thus 

 ' I be about to do my duty as you put it that be , to marry . the name of my future wife be Miss Agnes Brissenden . it will be in March , I think . but I shall see you before then , and give you a full account of myself . ' 




 CHAPTER XXXI 

 a new beginning 

 Widdowson try two or three lodging ; he settle at length in a small house at Hampstead ; occupy two plain room . here , at long interval , his friend Newdick come to see he , but no one else . he have bring with he a selection of solid book from his library , and over these the great part of each day be spend . not that he study with any zeal ; reading , and of a kind that demand close attention , be his only resource against melancholia ; he know not how else to occupy himself . Adam Smith 's classical work , peruse with laborious thoroughness , give he employment for a couple of month ; subsequently he plod through all the volume of Hallam . 

 his landlady , and the neighbour who be at leisure to observe he when he go out for his two hour ' walk in the afternoon , take he for an old gentleman of sixty - five or so . he no long hold himself upright , and when out of door seldom raise his eye from the ground ; grey streak have begin to brindle his hair ; his face grow yellower and more deeply furrowed . of his personal appearance , even of cleanliness , he become neglectful , and occasionally it happen that he lie in bed all through the morning , reading , dozing , or in a state of mental vacuity . 

 it be long since he have see his relative , the sprightly widow ; but he have hear from she . on the point of leave England for her summer holiday , Mrs. Luke send he a few line , urge he , in the language of the world , to live more sensibly , and let his wife ' have her head ' now and then ; it would be well for both of they . then follow the time of woe , and for many week he give no thought to Mrs. Luke . but close upon the end of the year he receive one day a certain society journal , address in a hand he know to the house at Herne Hill . in it be discoverable , mark with a red pencil , the follow paragraph . 

 ' among the English who this year elect to take their repose and recreation at Trouville there be no more brilliant figure than Mrs. Luke Widdowson . this lady be well know in the monde where one never s'ennuie ; where smart people be gather together , there be the charming widow sure to be see . we be able to announce that , before leave Trouville , Mrs. Widdowson have consent to a private engagement with Capt . William Horrocks no other , indeed , than " Captain Bill , " the universal favourite , so beloved by hostess as a sure dancing man . by the lamented death of his father , this good of good fellow have now become Sir William , and we understand that his marriage will be celebrate after the proper delay . our congratulation ! ' 

 subsequently arrive a newspaper with an account of the marriage . Mrs. Luke be now Lady horrock : she have the title desire of her heart . 

 another two month go by , and there come a letter re - address , like the other communication , at the post office in which the baronet 's wife declare herself anxious to hear of her friend . she find they have leave Herne Hill ; if this letter reach he , would not Edmund come and see she at her house in Wimpole Street ? 

 misery of solitude , desire for a woman 's sympathy and counsel , impel he to use this opportunity , little as it seem to promise . he go to Wimpole Street and have a very long private talk with Lady Horrocks , who , in some way he could not understand , have change from her old self . she begin frivolously , but in rather a dull , make - believe way ; and when she hear that Widdowson have part from his wife , when a few vague , miserable word have suggest the domestic drama so familiar to her observation , she at once grow quiet , sober , sympathetic , as if really glad to have something serious to talk about . 

 ' now look here , edmund . tell the whole story from the first . you be the sort of man to make awful blunder in such a case as this . just tell I all about it . I be not a bad sort , you know , and I have trouble of my own I do not   mind tell you so much . woman make fool of themselves well , never mind . just tell I about the little girl , and see if we can not   square thing somehow . ' 

 he have a struggle with himself , but at length narrate everything , often interrupt by shrewd question . 

 ' no one write to you ? ' the listener finally inquire . 

 ' I be expect to hear from they , ' be Widdowson 's answer , as he sit in the usual position , head hang forward and hand clasp between his knee . 

 ' to hear what ? ' 

 ' I think I shall be send for . ' 

 ' send for ? to make it up ? ' 

 ' she be go to give birth to a child . ' 

 Lady Horrocks nod twice thoughtfully , and with a faint smile . 

 ' how do you find this out ? ' 

 ' I have know it long enough . her sister Virginia tell I before they go away . I have a suspicion all at once , and I force she to tell I . ' 

 ' and if you be send for shall you go ? ' 

 Widdowson seem to mutter an affirmative , and add , 

 ' I shall hear what she have to tell I , as she promise . ' 

 ' be it be it possible ? ' 

 the lady 's question remain incomplete . Widdowson , though he understand it , vouchsafe no direct answer . intense suffering be manifest in his face , and at length he speak vehemently . 

 ' whatever she tell I how can I believe it ? when once a woman have lie how can she ever again be believe ? I can not   be sure of anything . ' 

 ' all that fib , ' remark Lady Horrocks , ' have an unpleasant look . no deny it . she get entangle somehow . but I think you have well believe that she pull up just in time . ' 

 ' I have no love for she left , ' he go on in a despairing voice . ' it all perish in those frightful day . I try hard to think that I still love she . I keep write letter but they mean nothing or they only mean that I be drive half crazy by wretchedness . I have rather we live on as we have be do . it be miserable enough for I , God know ; but it would be bad to try and behave to she as if I could forget everything . I know her explanation will not   satisfy I . whatever it be I shall still suspect she . I do not   know that the child be mine . it may be . perhaps as it grow up there will be a likeness to help I to make sure . but what a life ! every paltry trifle will make I uneasy ; and if I discover any fresh deceit I should do something terrible . you do not   know how near I be ' 

 he shudder and hide his face . 

 ' the Othello business will not   do , ' say Lady Horrocks not unkindly . ' you could not   have go on together , of course ; you have to part for a time . well , that be all over ; take it as something that could not   be help . you be behave absurdly , you know ; I tell you plainly ; I guess there would be trouble . you ought not   to have marry at all , that be the fact ; it would be well for most of we if we keep out of it . some marry for a good reason , some for a bad , and mostly it all come to the same in the end . but there , never mind . pull yourself together , dear boy . it be all nonsense about not care for she . of course you be eat your heart out for want of she . and I will tell you what I think : it be very likely Monica be pull up just in time by discover you understand ? that she be more your wife than any one else 's . something tell I that be how it be . just try to look at it in that way . if the child live she will be different . she have sow her wild oat why should not   a woman as well as a man ? go down to Clevedon and forgive she . you be an honest man , and it be not   every woman never mind . I could tell you story about people but you would not   care to hear they . just take thing with a laugh we all have to . Life 's as you take it : all gloom or moderately shiny . ' 

 with much more to the same solacing effect . for the time Widdowson be perchance a trifle comfort ; at all event , he go away with a sense of gratitude to Lady Horrocks . and when he have leave the house he remember that not even a civil formality with regard to Sir William have fall from his lip . but Sir William 's wife , for whatever reason , have also not once mention the baronet 's name . 

 only a few day pass before Widdowson receive the summon he be expect . it come in the form of a telegram , bid he hasten to his wife ; not a word of news add . at the time of its arrival he be take his afternoon walk ; this delay make it doubtful whether he could get to Paddington by six - twenty , the last train which would enable he to reach Clevedon that night . he manage it , with only two or three minute to spare . 

 not till he be seat in the railway carriage could he fix his thought on the end of the journey . an inexpressible repugnance then affect he ; he would have welcome any disaster to the train , any injury which might prevent his go to Monica at such a time . often , in anticipation , the event which be now come to pass have confuse and darken his mind ; he loathe the thought of it . if the child , perhaps already bear , be in truth his , it must be very long before he could regard it with a shadow of paternal interest ; uncertainty , to which he be condemn , would in all likelihood make it an object of aversion to he as long as he live . 

 he be at Bristol by a quarter past nine , and have to change for a slow train , which by ten o'clock bring he to Yatton , the little junction for Clevedon . it be a fine starry night , but extremely cold . for the few minute of detention he walk restlessly about the platform . his chief emotion be now a fear lest all might not go well with Monica . whether he could believe what she have to tell he or not , it would be bad if she be to die before he could hear her exculpation . the anguish of remorse would seize upon he . 

 alone in his compartment , he do not sit down , but stamp backwards and forwards on the floor , and before the train stop he jump out . no cab be procurable ; he leave his bag at the station , and hasten with all speed in the direction that he remember . but very soon the crossway have confuse he . as he meet no one whom he could ask to direct he , he have to knock at a door . stream with perspiration , he come at length within sight of his own house . a church clock be strike eleven . 

 Alice and Virginia be both stand in the hall when the door be open ; they beckon he into a room . 

 ' be it over ? ' he ask , star from one to the other with his dazzled eye . 

 ' at four this afternoon , ' answer Alice , scarce able to articulate . ' a little girl . ' 

 ' she have to have chloroform , ' say Virginia , who look a miserable , lifeless object , and shake like one in an ague . 

 ' and all be well ? ' 

 ' we think so we hope so , ' they stammer together . 

 Alice add that the doctor be to make another call to - night . they have a good nurse . the infant seem healthy , but be a very , very little mite , and have only make its voice hear for a few minute . 

 ' she know you send for I ? ' 

 ' yes . and we have something to give you . you be to have this as soon as you arrive . ' 

 Miss Madden hand he a sealed envelope ; then both the sister draw away , as if fear the result of what they have do . Widdowson just glance at the unaddresse missive and put it into his pocket . 

 ' I must have something to eat , ' he say , wipe his forehead . ' when the doctor come I will see he . ' 

 this visit take place while he be engage on his supper . on come down from the patient the doctor give he an assurance that thing be progress ' fairly well ' ; the morning , probably , would enable he to speak with yet more confidence . Widdowson have another brief conversation with the sister , then bid they good - night , and go to the room that have be prepare for he . as he close the door he hear a thin , faint wail , and stand listen until it cease ; it come from a room on the floor below . 

 have bring himself with an effort to open the envelope he have receive , he find several sheet of notepaper , one of they , remark immediately , in a man 's writing . at this he first glance , and the beginning show he that it be a love - letter write to Monica . he throw it aside and take up the other sheet , which contain a long communication from his wife ; it be date two month ago . in it Monica recount to he , with scrupulous truthfulness , the whole story of her relation with Bevis . 

 ' I only make this confession ' so she conclude ' for the sake of the poor child that will soon be bear . the child be your , and ought not to suffer because of what I do . the enclose letter will prove this to you , if anything can . for myself I ask nothing . I do not   think I shall live . if I do I will consent to anything you propose . I only ask you to behave without any pretence ; if you can not forgive I , do not make a show of it . say what your will be , and that shall be enough ' . 

 he do not go to bed that night . there be a fire in the room , and he keep it alight until daybreak , when he descend softly to the hall and let himself out of the house . 

 in a fierce wind that sweep from the north - west down the foaming Channel , he walk for an hour or two , careless whither the road direct he . all he desire be to be at a distance from that house , with its hideous silence and the faint cry that could scarcely be call a sound . the necessity of return , of spending day there , be an oppression which hold he like a nightmare . 

 Monica 's statement he neither believe nor disbelieve ; he simply could not make up his mind about it . she have lie to he so resolutely before ; be she not capable of elaborate falsehood to save her reputation and protect her child ? the letter from Bevis might have be a result of conspiracy between they . 

 that Bevis be the man against whom his jealousy should have be direct at first astound he . by now he have come to a full perception of his stupidity in never entertain such a thought . the revelation be equivalent to a second offence just discover ; for he find it impossible to ignore his long - cherish suspicion of Barfoot , and he even surmise the possibility of Monica 's have listen to love - making from that quarter previously to her intimacy with Bevis . he loathe the memory of his life since marriage ; and as for pardon his wife , he could as soon pardon and smile upon the author of that accurse letter from Bordeaux . 

 but go back to the house he must . by obey his impulse , and straightway return to London , he might be the cause of a fatal turn in Monica 's illness . constraint of bare humanity would keep he here until his wife be out of danger . but he could not see she , and as soon as possible he must escape from such unendurable circumstance . 

 Re - enter at half - past eight , he be meet by Alice , who seem to have sleep as little as he himself have do . they go into the dining - room . 

 ' she have be inquire about you , ' begin Miss Madden timorously . 

 ' how be she ? ' 

 ' not bad , I believe . but so very weak . she wish I to ask you ' 

 ' what ? ' 

 his manner do not encourage the poor woman . 

 ' I shall be oblige to tell she something . if I have nothing to say she will fret herself into a dangerous state . she want to know if you have read her letter , and if if you will see the child . ' 

 Widdowson turn away and stand irresolute . he feel Miss Madden 's hand upon his arm . 

 ' oh , do not   refuse ! let I give she some comfort . ' 

 ' it be the child she be anxious about ? ' 

 Alice admit it , look into her brother - in - law 's face with woeful appeal . 

 ' say I will see it , ' he answer , ' and have it bring into some room then say I have see it . ' 

 ' may not   I take she a word of forgiveness ? ' 

 ' yes , say I forgive she . she do not   wish I to go to she ? ' 

 Alice shake her head . 

 ' then say I forgive she . ' 

 as he direct so it be do ; and in the course of the morning Miss Madden bring word to he that her sister have experience great relief . she be sleep . 

 but the doctor think it necessary to make two visit before nightfall , and late in the evening he come again . he explain to Widdowson that there be complication , not unlikely to be dangerous , and finally he suggest that , if the morrow bring no decide improvement , a second medical man should be call in to consult . this consultation be hold . in the afternoon Virginia come weep to her brother - in - law , and tell he that Monica be delirious . that night the whole household watch . another day be pass in the grave anxiety , and at dusk the medical attendant no long disguise his opinion that Mrs. Widdowson be sink . she become unconscious soon after , and in the early morning breathe she last . 

 Widdowson be in the room , and at the end sit by the bedside for an hour . but he do not look upon his wife 's face . when it be tell he that she have cease to breathe , he rise and go into his own chamber , death - pale , but tearless . 

 on the day after the funeral Monica be bury in the cemetery , which be hard by the old church Widdowson and the eld sister have a long conversation in private . it relate first of all to the motherless baby . Widdowson 's desire be that Miss Madden should undertake the care of the child . she and Virginia might live wherever they prefer ; their need would be provide for . Alice have hardly dare to hope for such a proposal as it concern the child , that be to say . gladly she accept it . 

 ' but there be something I must tell you , ' she say , with embarrassed appeal in her wet eye . ' Poor Virginia wish to go into an institution . ' 

 Widdowson look at she , not understand ; whereupon she break into tear , and make known that her sister be such a slave to strong drink that they both despair of reformation unless by help of the measure she have indicate . there be people , she have hear , who undertake the care of inebriate . 

 ' you know that we be by no means penniless , ' sob Alice . ' we can very well bear the expense . but will you assist we to find a suitable place ? ' 

 he promise to proceed at once in the matter . 

 ' and when she be cure , ' say Miss Madden , ' she shall come and live with I . and when baby be about two year old we will do what we have be purpose for a long time . we will open a school for young child , either here or at Weston . that will afford my poor sister occupation . indeed , we shall both be well for the exertion of such an undertaking do not   you think so ? ' 

 ' it would be a wise thing , I have no doubt whatever . ' 

 the large house be to be abandon , and as much of the furniture as seem needful transport to a small dwelling in another part of Clevedon . for Alice resolve to stay here in spite of painful association . she love the place , and look forward with quiet joy to the life that be prepare for she . Widdowson 's book would go back to London ; not to the Hampstead lodging , however . fearful of solitude , he propose to his friend Newdick that they should live together , he , as a man of substance , bear the large share of the expense . and this plan also come into execution . 

 three month go by , and on a day of summer , when the woode hill and green lane and rich meadow of Clevedon look their good , when the Channel be still and blue , and the Welsh mountain loom through a sunny haze , Rhoda Nunn come over from the Mendips to see Miss Madden . it could not be a gladsome meeting , but Rhoda be bright and natural , and her talk as inspirit as ever . she take the baby in her arm , and walk about with it for a long time in the garden , often murmur , ' poor little child ! dear little child ! ' there have be doubt whether it would live , but the summer seem to be fortify its health . Alice , it be plain , have find her vocation ; she look well than at any time since Rhoda have know she . her complexion be lose its muddiness and spottiness ; her step have become light and brisk . 

 ' and where be your sister ? ' inquire Miss Nunn . 

 ' stay with friend at present . she will be back before long , I hope . and as soon as baby can walk we be go to think very seriously about the school . you remember ? ' 

 ' the school ? you will really make the attempt ? ' 

 ' it will be so good for we both . why , look , ' she add laughingly , ' here be one pupil grow for we ! ' 

 ' make a brave woman of she , ' say Rhoda kindly . 

 ' we will try ah , we will try ! and be your work as successful as ever ? ' 

 ' More ! ' reply Rhoda . ' we flourish like the green bay - tree . we shall have to take large premise . by - the - bye , you must read the paper we be go to publish ; the first number will be out in a month , though the name be not   quite decide upon yet . Miss Barfoot be never in such health and spirit nor I myself . the world be move ! ' 

 Whilst Miss Madden go into the house to prepare hospitality , Rhoda , still nurse , sit down on a garden bench . she gaze intently at those diminutive feature , which be quite placid and relax in soft drowsiness . the dark , bright eye be Monica 's . and as the baby sink into sleep , Rhoda 's vision grow dim ; a sigh make her lip quiver , and once more she murmur , ' poor little child ! ' 

