SHE and ALLAN 

 by H. Rider Haggard 

 note by the late MR . ALLAN QUATERMAIN 

 my friend , into whose hand I hope that all these manuscript of mine 
 will pass one day , of this one I have something to say to you . 

 a long while ago I jot down in it the history of the event that 
 it detail with more or less completeness . this I do for my own 
 satisfaction . you will have note how memory fail we as we advance 
 in year ; we recollect , with an almost painful exactitude , what we 
 experience and see in our youth , but the happening of our middle 
 life slip away from we or become blur , like a stretch of low - lie 
 landscape overflow by grey and nebulous mist . far off the sun still 
 seem to shine upon the plain and hill of adolescence and early 
 manhood , as yet it shin about we in the fleeting hour of our age , 
 that grind on which we stand to - day , but the valley between be fill 
 with fog . yes , even its prominence , which symbolise the more startling 
 event of that past , often be lose in this confusing fog . 

 it be an appreciation of these truth which lead I to set down the 
 follow detail   though of course much be omit   of my brief 
 intercourse with the strange and splendid creature whom I know under the 
 name of Ayesha , or Híya , or She - who - command ; not indeed with any 
 view to their publication , but before I forget they that , if I wish to 
 do so , I might re - peruse they in the evening of old age to which I hope 
 to attain . 

 indeed , at the time the last thing I intend be that they should be 
 give to the world even after my own death , because they , or many of 
 they , be so unusual that I fear lest they should cause smile and 
 in a way cast a slur upon my memory and truthfulness . also , as you will 
 read , as to this matter I make a promise and I have always try to 
 keep my promise and to guard the secret of other . for these reason I 
 propose , in case I neglect or forget to destroy they myself , to leave 
 a direction that this should be do by my executor . far , I have 
 be careful to make no allusion whatever to they either in casual 
 conversation or in anything else that I may have write , my desire 
 be that this page of my life should be keep quite private , something 
 know only to myself . therefore , too , I never so much as hint of they 
 to anyone , not even to yourself to whom I have tell so much . 

 well , I record the main fact concern this expedition and its 
 issue , simply and with as much exactness as I could , and lay they 
 aside . I do not say that I never think of they again , since amongst 
 they be some which , together with the problem they suggest , prove 
 to be of an unforgettable nature . 

 also , whenever any of Ayesha 's saying or story which be not 
 preserve in these page come back to I , as have happen from time to 
 time , I jot they down and put they away with this manuscript . thus 
 among these note you will find a history of the city of K"r as she tell 
 it to I , which I have omit here . still , many of these remarkable 
 event do more or less fade from my mind , as the image do from 
 an unfixed photograph , till only their outline remain , faint if 
 distinguishable . 

 to tell the truth , I be rather ashamed of the whole story in which 
 I cut so poor a figure . on reflection it be obvious to I , although 
 honesty have compel I to set out all that be essential exactly as it 
 occur , add nothing and take nothing away , that I have be the 
 victim of very gross deceit . this strange woman , whom I have meet in the 
 ruin of a place call K"r , without any doubt have throw a glamour over 
 my sens and at the moment almost cause I to believe much that be 
 quite unbelievable . 

 for instance , she have tell I ridiculous story as to interview 
 between herself and certain heathen goddesse , though it be true that , 
 almost with her next breath , these she qualify or contradict . also , 
 she have suggest that her life have be prolong far beyond our mortal 
 span , for hundred and hundred of year , indeed ; which , as Euclid say , 
 be absurd , and have pretend to supernatural power , which be still more 
 absurd . moreover , by a clever use of some hypnotic or mesmeric power , 
 she have feign to transport I to some place beyond the earth and in 
 the Halls of Hades to show I what be veil from the eye of man , 
 and not only I , but the savage warrior Umhlopekazi , commonly call 
 Umslopogaas of the Axe , who , with Hans , a Hottentot , be my companion 
 upon that adventure . there be like thing equally incredible , such as 
 her appearance , when all seem lost , in the battle with the troll - like 
 rezu . to omit these , the sum of it be that I have be shamefully dupe , 
 and if anyone find himself in that position , as most people have at one 
 time or another in their life , Wisdom suggest that he have well keep 
 the circumstance to himself . 

 well , so the matter stand , or rather lay in the recess of my mind - and 
 in the cupboard where I hide my paper - when one evening someone , as a 
 matter of fact it be Captain Good , an individual of romantic tendency 
 who be fond , sometimes I think too fond , of fiction , bring a book to 
 this house which he insist over and over again really I must peruse . 

 ascertain that it be a novel I decline , for to tell the truth I be 
 not fond of romance in any shape , be a person who have find the hard 
 fact of life of sufficient interest as they stand . 

 read I admit I like , but in this matter , as in everything else , my 
 range be limited . I study the Bible , especially the Old Testament , both 
 because of its sacred lesson and of the majesty of the language of its 
 inspire translator ; whereof that of Ayesha , which I render so poorly 
 from her flowing and melodious Arabic , remind I . for poetry I turn 
 to Shakespeare , and , at the other end of the scale , to the Ingoldsby 
 legend , many of which I know almost by heart , while for current affair 
 I content myself with the newspaper . 

 for the rest I peruse anything to do with ancient Egypt that I happen to 
 come across , because this land and its history have a queer fascination 
 for I , that perhaps have its root in occurrence or dream of which 
 this be not the place to speak . lastly now and again I read one of the 
 Latin or greek author in a translation , since I regret to say that my 
 lack of education do not enable I to do so in the original . but for 
 modern fiction I have no taste , although from time to time I sample it 
 in a railway train and occasionally be amuse by such excursion into 
 the poetic and unreal . 

 so it come about that the more good bother I to read this particular 
 romance , the more I determine that I would do nothing of the sort . 
 be a persistent person , however , when he go away about ten o'clock 
 at night , he deposit it by my side , under my nose indeed , so that it 
 might not be overlook . thus it come about that I could not help see 
 some egyptian hieroglyphic in an oval on the cover , also the title , 
 and underneath it your own name , my friend , all of which excite 
 my curiosity , especially the title , which be brief and enigmatic , 
 consist indeed of one word , " she . " 

 I take up the work and on open it the first thing my eye fall upon 
 be a picture of a veiled woman , the sight of which make my heart stand 
 still , so painfully do it remind I of a certain veil woman whom once 
 it have be my fortune to meet . glance from it to the print page one 
 word seem to leap at I . it be K"r ! now of veiled woman there be 
 plenty in the world , but be there also two K"rs ? 

 then I turn to the beginning and begin to read . this happen in 
 the autumn when the sun do not rise till about six , but it be broad 
 daylight before I cease from reading , or rather rush through that 
 book . 

 oh ! what be I to make of it ? for here in its page   to say nothing of 
 old Billali , who , by the way lie , probably to order , when he tell Mr. 
 Holly that no white man have visit his country for many generation , 
 and those gloomy , man - eat Amahagger scoundrel   once again I 
 find myself face to face with She - who - command , now render as 
  She - who - must - be - obey , which mean much the same thing - in her case 
 at least ; yes , with Ayesha the lovely , the mystic , the changeful and the 
 imperious . 

 moreover the history fill up many gap in my own limited experience 
 of that enigmatical being who be half divine   though , I think , rather 
 wicked or at any rate unmoral in her way   and yet all woman . it be true 
 that it show she in light very different from and high than those 
 in which she have present herself to I . yet the substratum of her 
 character be the same , or rather of her character , for of these she 
 seem to have several in a single body , be , as she say of herself 
 to I , " not one but many and not here but everywhere . " 

 far , I find the story of Kallikrates , which I have set down as a 
 mere falsehood invent for my bewilderment , expand and explain . or 
 rather not explain , since , perhaps that she might deceive , to I 
 she have speak of this murder Kallikrates without enthusiasm , as a 
 handsome person to whom , because of an indiscretion of her youth , she 
 be bind by destiny and whose return - somewhat to her sorrow - she must 
 wait . at least she do so at first , though in the end when she bar her 
 heart at the moment of our farewell , she vow she love he only and 
 be " appoint " to he " by a divine decree . " 

 also I find other thing of which I know nothing , such as the Fire of 
 Life with its fatal gift of indefinite existence , although I remember 
 that like the giant rezu whom Umslopogaas defeat , she do talk of a 
 " Cup of life " of which she have drunk , that might have be offer to my 
 lip , have I be politic , bow the knee and show more faith in she and 
 her supernatural pretension . 

 lastly I see the story of her end , and as I read it I weep , yes , I 
 confes I weep , although I feel sure that she will return again . now I 
 understand why she have quail and even seem to shrivel when , in my 
 last interview with she , sting beyond endurance by her witchery and 
 sarcasm , I have suggest that even for she with all her power , fate 
 might reserve one of its shrewd blow . some prescience have tell she 
 that if the word seem random , Truth speak through my lip , although , 
 and this be the bad of it , she do not know what weapon would deal 
 the stroke or when and where it be doom to fall . 

 I be amazed , I be overcome , but as I close that book I make up my 
 mind , first that I would continue to preserve absolute silence as to 
 Ayesha and my dealing with she , as , during my life , I be bind by 
 oath to do , and secondly that I would not cause my manuscript to be 
 destroy . I do not feel that I have any right to do so in view of what 
 already have be publish to the world . there let it lie to appear one 
 day , or not to appear , as might be fat . meanwhile my lip be seal . 
 I would give Good back his book without comment and - buy another copy ! 

 one more word . it be clear that I do not touch more than the fringe 
 of the real Ayesha . in a thousand way she bewitch and deceive I so 
 that I never plumb her nature 's depth . perhaps this be my own fault 
 because from the first I shew a lack of faith in she and she wish to 
 pay I back in her own fashion , or perhaps she have other private reason 
 for her secrecy . certainly the character she discover to I differ 
 in many way from that which she reveal to Mr. Holly and to Leo 
 Vincey , or Kallikrates , whom , it seem , once she slay in her jealousy 
 and rage . 

 she tell I as much as she think it fit that I should know , and no 
 more ! 

 Allan Quatermain . 

 the Grange , Yorkshire . 





 SHE and ALLAN 



 CHAPTER I 

 the TALISMAN 

 I believe it be the old Egyptians , a very wise people , probably indeed 
 much wise than we know , for in the leisure of their ample century 
 they have time to think out thing , who declare that each individual 
 personality be make up of six or seven different element , although the 
 Bible only allow we three , namely , body , soul , and spirit . the body 
 that the man or woman wear , if I understand their theory aright which 
 perhaps I , an ignorant person , do not , be but a kind of sack or fleshly 
 covering contain these different principle . or mayhap it do not 
 contain they all , but be simply a house as it be , in which they live 
 from time to time and seldom all together , although one or more of they 
 be present continually , as though to keep the place warm and air . 

 this be but a casual illustrative suggestion , for what right have 
 I , Allan Quatermain , out of my little reading and probably erroneous 
 deduction , to form any judgment as to the theory of the old 
 Egyptians ? still these , as I understand they , suffice to furnish I with 
 the text that man be not one , but many , in which connection it may be 
 remember that often in scripture he be speak of as be the home of 
 many demon , seven , I think . also , to come to another far - off example , 
 the zulus talk of their witch - doctor as be inhabit by " a multitude 
 of spirit . " 

 anyhow of one thing I be quite sure , we be not always the same . 
 different personality actuate we at different time . in one hour 
 passion of this sort or the other be our lord ; in another we be reason 
 itself . in one hour we follow the base appetite ; in another we hate 
 they and the spirit arise through our mortal murk shin within or 
 above we like a star . in one hour our desire be to kill and spare not ; 
 in another we be fill with the holy compassion even towards an 
 insect or a snake , and be ready to forgive like a god . everything 
 rule we in turn , to such an extent indeed , that sometimes one begin to 
 wonder whether we really rule anything . 

 now the reason of all this homily be that I , Allan , the most practical 
 and unimaginative of person , just a homely , half - educate hunter and 
 trader who chance to have see a good deal of the particular little 
 world in which his lot be cast , at one period of my life become the 
 victim of spiritual longing . 

 I be a man who have suffer great bereavement in my time such as have 
 sear my soul , since , perhaps because of my rather primitive and simple 
 nature , my affection be very strong . by day or night I can never 
 forget those whom I have love and whom I believe to have love I . 

 for you know , in our vanity some of we be apt to hold that certain 
 people with whom we have be intimate upon the earth , really do 
 care for we and , in our still great vanity - or should it be call 
 madness ? - to imagine that they still care for we after they have leave 
 the earth and enter on some new state of society and surrounding 
 which , if they exist , inferentially be much more congenial than any 
 they can have experience here . at time , however , cold doubt strike we 
 as to this matter , of which we long to know the truth . also behind loom 
 a still blacker doubt , namely whether they live at all . 

 for some year of my lonely existence these problem haunt I day by 
 day , till at length I desire above everything on earth to lay they 
 at rest in one way or another . once , at Durban , I meet a man who be a 
 spiritualist to whom I confide a little of my perplexity . he laugh 
 at I and say that they could be settle with the great ease . all 
 I have to do be to visit a certain local medium who for a fee of one 
 guinea would tell I everything I want to know . although I rather 
 grudge the guinea , be more than usually hard up at the time , I 
 call upon this person , but over the result of that visit , or rather 
 the lack of they , I draw a veil . 

 my queer and perhaps unwholesome longing , however , remain with I and 
 would not be abate . I consult a clergyman of my acquaintance , a good 
 and spiritually - minded man , but he could only shrug his shoulder and 
 refer I to the Bible , say , quite rightly I doubt not , that with what 
 it reveal I ought to be content . then I read certain mystical 
 book which be recommend to I . these be full of fine word , 
 undiscoverable in a pocket dictionary , but really take I no forwarder , 
 since in they I find nothing that I could not have invent myself , 
 although while I be actually study they , they seem to convince 
 I . I even tackle Swedenborg , or rather sample of he , for he be very 
 copious , but without satisfactory result .   ha ! - JB 

 then I give up the business . 



 some month later I be in Zululand and be near the Black Kloof 
 where he dwelt , I pay a visit to my acquaintance of whom I have 
 write elsewhere , the wonderful and ancient dwarf , Zikali , know as 
 " The - thing - that - should - never - have - be - bear , " also more universally 
 among the Zulus as " Opener - of - road . " when we have talk of many thing 
 connect with the state of Zululand and its politic , I rise to leave 
 for my waggon , since I never care for sleep in the Black Kloof if it 
 could be avoid . 

 " be there nothing else that you want to ask I , Macumazahn ? " ask 
 the old dwarf , toss back his long hair and look at - I have almost 
 write through - I . 

 I shake my head . 

 " that be strange , Macumazahn , for I seem to see something write on 
 your mind - something to do with spirit . " 

 then I remember all the problem that have be trouble I , although 
 in truth I have never think of propound they to Zikali . 

 " ah ! it come back , do it ? " he exclaim , read my thought . " out 
 with it , then , Macumazahn , while I be in a mood to answer , and before 
 I grow tired , for you be an old friend of mine and will so remain till 
 the end , many year hence , and if I can serve you , I will . " 

 I fill my pipe and sit down again upon the stool of carve red - wood 
 which have be bring for I . 

 " you be name ' Opener - of - road , ' be you not , Zikali ? " I say . 

 " yes , the Zulus have always call I that , since before the day of 
 chaka . but what of name , which often enough mean nothing at all ? " 

 " only that I want to open a road , Zikali , that which run across the 
 River of Death . " 

 " Oho ! " he laugh , " it be very easy , " and snatch up a little assegai 
 that lie beside he , he proffer it to I , add , " be brave now and 
 fall on that . then before I have count sixty the road will be wide 
 open , but whether you will see anything on it I can not tell you . " 

 again I shake my head and answer , 

 " it be against our law . also while I still live I desire to know whether 
 I shall meet certain other on that road after my time have come to cross 
 the River . perhaps you who deal with spirit , can prove the matter to 
 I , which no one else seem able to do . " 

 " Oho ! " laugh Zikali again . " what do my ear hear ? be I , the poor Zulu 
 cheat , as you will remember once you call I , Macumazahn , ask 
 to show that which be hide from all the wisdom of the great White 
 People ? " 

 " the question be , " I answer with irritation , " not what you be ask 
 to do , but what you can do . " 

 " that I do not know yet , Macumazahn . whose spirit do you desire to see ? 
 if that of a woman call Mameena be one of they , I think that perhaps I 
 whom she love - - "   

      for the history of Mameena see the book call " Child of 
  storm . " - Editor . 

 " she be not one of they , Zikali . moreover , if she love you , you pay 
 back her love with death . " 

 " which perhaps be the kind thing I could do , Macumazahn , for reason 
 that you may be able to guess , and other with which I will not trouble 
 you . but if not her , whose ? let I look , let I look ! why , there seem 
 to be two of they , head - wife , I mean , and I think that white man only 
 take one wife . also a multitude of other ; their face float up in the 
 water of your mind . an old man with grey hair , little child , perhaps 
 they be brother and sister , and some who may be friend . also very 
 clear indeed that Mameena whom you do not wish to see . well , Macumazahn , 
 this be unfortunate , since she be the only one whom I can show you , 
 or rather put you in the way of find . unless indeed there be other 
 Kaffir woman - - " 

 " what do you mean ? " I ask . 

 " I mean , Macumazahn , that only black foot travel on the road which I can 
 open ; over those in which run white blood I have no power . " 

 " then it be finish , " I say , rise again and take a step or two 
 towards the gate . 

 " come back and sit down , Macumazahn . I do not say so . be I the only 
 ruler of magic in Africa , which I be tell be a big country ? " 

 I come back and sit down , for my curiosity , a great failing with I , be 
 excited . 

 " thank you , Zikali , " I say , " but I will have no dealing with more of 
 your witch - doctor . " 

 " no , no , because you be afraid of they ; quite without reason , 
 Macumazahn , see that they be all cheat except myself . I be the last 
 child of wisdom , the rest be stuff with lie , as Chaka find out when 
 he kill every one of they whom he could catch . but perhaps there might 
 be a white doctor who would have rule over white spirit . " 

 " if you mean missionary - - " I begin hastily . 

 " no , Macumazahn , I do not mean your pray man who be cast in one 
 mould and measure with one rule , and say what they be teach to say , 
 not think for themselves . " 

 " some of they think , Zikali . " 

 " yes , and then the other fall on they with big stick . the real priest 
 be he to whom the Spirit come , not he who feed upon its wrapping , and 
 speak through a mask carve by his father 's father . I be a priest like 
 that , which be why all my fellowship have hat I . " 

 " if so , you have pay back their hate , Zikali , but cease to cast round 
 the lion , like a timid hound , and tell I what you mean . of whom do you 
 speak ? " 

 " that be the trouble , Macumazahn . I do not know . this lion , or rather 
 lioness , lie hide in the cave of a very distant mountain and I have 
 never see she - in the flesh . " 

 " then how can you talk of what you have never see ? " 

 " in the same way , Macumazahn , that your priest talk of what they have 
 never see , because they , or a few of they , have knowledge of it . I 
 will tell you a secret . all seer who live at the same time , if they be 
 great , commune with each other because they be akin and their spirit 
 meet in sleep or dream . therefore I know of a mistress of our craft , a 
 very lioness among jackal , who for thousand of year have lain sleep 
 in the northern cave and , humble though I be , she know of I . " 

 " quite so , " I say , yawn , " but perhaps , Zikali , you will come to the 
 point of the spear . what of she ? how be she name , and if she exist 
 will she help I ? " 

 " I will answer your question backwards , Macumazahn . I think that she 
 will help you if you help she , in what way I do not know , because 
 although witch - doctor sometimes work without pay , as I be do now , 
 Macumazahn , witch - doctoresse never do . as for her name , the only one 
 that she have among our company be ' queen , ' because she be the first of 
 all of they and the most beauteous among woman . for the rest I can tell 
 you nothing , except that she have always be and I suppose , in this 
 shape or in that , will always be while the world last , because she have 
 find the secret of life unending . " 

 " you mean that she be immortal , Zikali , " I answer with a smile . 

 " I do not say that , Macumazahn , because my little mind can not shape the 
 thought of immortality . but when I be a babe , which be far ago , she have 
 live so long that scarce would she know the difference between then 
 and now , and already in her breast be all wisdom gather . I know it , 
 because although , as I have say , we have never see each other , at 
 time we walk together in our sleep , for thus she share her loneliness , 
 and I think , though this may be but a dream , that last night she tell I 
 to send you on to she to seek an answer to certain question which you 
 would put to I to - day . also to I she seem to desire that you should 
 do she a service ; I know not what service . " 

 now I grow angry and ask , 

 " why do it please you to fool I , Zikali , with such talk as this ? if 
 there be any truth in it , show I where the woman call Queen life 
 and how I be to come to she . " 

 the old wizard take up the little assegai which he have offer to I and 
 with its blade rake our ash from the fire that always burn in front 
 of he . while he do so , he talk to I , as I think in a random 
 fashion , perhaps to distract my attention , of a certain white man whom 
 he say I should meet upon my journey and of his affair , also of other 
 matter , none of which interest I much at the time . these ash 
 he pat down flat and then on they draw a map with the point of his 
 spear , make groove for stream , certain mark for bush and forest , 
 wavy line for water and swamp and little heap for hill . 

 when he have finish it all he bid I come round the fire and study the 
 picture across which by an after - thought he draw a wandering furrow with 
 the edge of the assegai to represent a river , and gather the ash in 
 a lump at the northern end to signify a large mountain . 

 " look at it well , Macumazahn , " he say , " and forget nothing , since if 
 you make this journey and forget , you die . Nay , no need to copy it in 
 that book of your , for see , I will stamp it on your mind . " 

 then suddenly he gather up the warm ash in a double handful and 
 throw they into my face , mutter something as he do so and add 
 aloud , 

 " there , now you will remember . " 

 " certainly I shall , " I answer , cough , " and I beg that you will not 
 play such a joke upon I again . " 

 as a matter of fact , whatever may have be the reason , I never forget 
 any detail of that extremely intricate map . 

 " that big river must be the Zambesi , " I stutter , " and even then the 
 mountain of your Queen , if it be her mountain , be far away , and how can 
 I come there alone ? " 

 " I do not   know , Macumazahn , though perhaps you might do so in company . at 
 least I believe that in the old day people use to travel to the place , 
 since I have hear a great city stand there once which be the heart of 
 a mighty empire . " 

 now I prick up my ear , for though I believe nothing of Zikali 's 
 story of a wonderful queen , I be always intensely interested in past 
 civilisation and their relic . also I know that the old wizard 's 
 knowledge be extensive and peculiar , however he come by it , and I do 
 not think that he would lie to I in this matter . indeed to tell the 
 truth , then and there I make up my mind that if it be in any way 
 possible , I would attempt this journey . 

 " how do people travel to the city , Zikali ? " 

 " by sea , I suppose , Macumazahn , but I think that you will be wise not to 
 try that road , since I believe that on the sea side the marsh be now 
 impassable and you will be safe on your foot . " 

 " you want I to go on this adventure , Zikali . why ? I know you never do 
 anything without motive . " 

 " Oho ! Macumazahn , you be clever and see deeply into the trunk of a tree 
 than most . yes , I want you to go for three reason . first , that you 
 may satisfy your soul on certain matter and I would help you to do so . 
 secondly , because I want to satisfy mine , and thirdly , because I know 
 that you will come back safe to be a prop to I in thing that will 
 happen in day unborn . otherwise I would have tell you nothing of this 
 story , since it be necessary to I that you should remain live beneath 
 the sun . " 

 " have do , Zikali . what be it that you desire ? " 

 " oh ! a great deal that I shall get , but chiefly two thing , so with 
 the rest I will not trouble you . first I desire to know to know whether 
 these dream of mine of a wonderful white witch - doctoress , or witch , and 
 of my converse with she be indeed more than dream . next I would learn 
 whether certain plot of mine at which I have work for year , will 
 succeed . " 

 " what plot , Zikali , and how can my take a distant journey tell you 
 anything about they ? " 

 " you know they well enough , Macumazahn ; they have to do with the 
 overthrow of a Royal House that have work I bitter wrong . as to how 
 your journey can help I , why , thus . you shall promise to I to ask 
 of this queen whether Zikali , Opener - of - road , shall triumph or be 
 overthrow in that on which he have set his heart . " 

 " as you seem to know this witch so well , why do you not ask she 
 yourself , Zikali ? " 

 " to ask be one thing , Macumazahn . to get an answer be another . I have 
 ask in the watch of the night , and the reply be , ' come hither and 
 perchance I will tell you . ' ' queen , ' I say , ' how can I come save in the 
 spirit , who be an ancient and a crippled dwarf scarcely able to stand 
 upon my foot ? ' 

 " ' then send a messenger , Wizard , and be sure that he be white , for of 
 black savage I have see more than enough . let he bear a token also 
 that he come from you and tell I of it in your sleep . moreover let 
 that token be something of power which will protect he on the journey . ' 

 " such be the answer that come to I in my dream , Macumazahn . " 

 " well , what token will you give I , Zikali ? " 

 he grope about in his robe and produce a piece of ivory of the size 
 of a large chessman , that have a hole in it , through which run a plait 
 cord of the stiff hair from an elephant 's tail . on this article , which 
 be of a rusty brown colour , he breathe , then have whisper to it 
 for a while , hand it to I . 

 I take the talisman , for such I guess it to be , idly enough , hold it 
 to the light to examine it , and start back so violently that almost 
 I let it fall . I do not quite know why I start , but I think it be 
 because some influence seem to leap from it to I . Zikali start also 
 and cry out , 

 " have a care , Macumazahn . be I young that I can bear bring dash to the 
 ground ? " 

 " what do you mean ? " I ask , still star at the thing which I 
 perceive to be a most wonderfully fashioned likeness of the old dwarf 
 himself as he appear before I crouch upon the ground . there be 
 the deepset eye , the great head , the toad - like shape , the long hair , 
 all . 

 " it be a clever carving , be it not , Macumazahn ? I be skilled in that 
 art , you know , and therefore can judge of carve . " 

 " yes , I know , " I answer , bethink I of another statuette of his 
 which he have give to I on the morrow of the death of she from whom it 
 be model . " but what of the thing ? " 

 " Macumazahn , it have come down to I through the age . as you may 
 have hear , all great doctor when they die pass on their wisdom and 
 something of their knowledge to another doctor of spirit who be still 
 live on the earth , that nothing may be lose , or as little as possible . 
 also I have learn that to such likeness as these may be give the 
 strength of he or she from whom they be shape . " 

 now I bethink I of the old Egyptians and their Ka statue of which 
 I have read , and that these statue , magically charm and set in the 
 tomb of the depart , be suppose to be inhabit everlastingly by 
 the double of the dead endue with more power even than ever these 
 possess in life . but of this I say nothing to Zikali , think that 
 it would take too much explanation , though I wonder very much how he 
 have come by the same idea . 

 " when that ivory be hang over your heart , Macumazahn , where you must 
 always wear it , learn that with it go the strength of Zikali ; the 
 thought that would have be his thought and the wisdom that be his 
 wisdom , will be your companion , as much as though he walk at your 
 side and could instruct you in every peril . moreover north and south and 
 east and west this image be know to man who , when they see it , will 
 bow down and obey , open a road to he who wear the medicine of the 
 Opener - of - road . " 

 " indeed , " I say , smile , " and what be this colour on the ivory ? " 

 " I forget , Macumazahn , who have have it a great number of year , ever 
 since it descend to I from a forefather of mine , who be fashion in 
 the same mould as I be . it look like blood , do it not ? it be a pity 
 that Mameena be not still alive , since she whose memory be so excellent 
 might have be able to tell you , " and as he speak , with a motion that 
 be at once sure and swift , he throw the loop of elephant hair over my 
 head . 

 hastily I change the subject , feel that after his will not this old 
 wizard , the most terrible man whom ever I know , who have be so much 
 concern with the tragic death of Mameena , be stab at I in some 
 hide fashion . 

 " you tell I to go on this journey , " I say , " and not alone . yet for 
 companion you give I only an ugly piece of ivory shape as no man ever 
 be , " here I get one back at Zikali , " and from the look of it , steep 
 in blood , which ivory , if I have my way , I would throw into the camp 
 fire . who , then , be I to take with I ? " 

 " do not   do that , Macumazahn - I mean throw the ivory into the fire - since 
 I have no wish to burn before my time , and if you do , you who have wear 
 it might burn with I . at least certainly you would die with the magic 
 thing and go to acquire knowledge more quickly than you desire . no , no , 
 and do not try to take it off your neck , or rather try if you will . " 

 I do try , but something seem to prevent I from accomplish my 
 purpose of give the carving back to Zikali as I wish to do . first 
 my pipe get in the way of my hand , then the elephant hair catch in the 
 collar of my coat ; then a pang of rheumatism to which I be accustom 
 from an old lion - bite , develop of a sudden in my arm , and lastly I 
 grow tired of bother about the thing . 

 Zikali , who have be watch my movement , burst out into one of his 
 terrible laugh that seem to fill the whole kloof and to re - echo from 
 its rocky wall . it die away and he go on , without further reference 
 to the talisman or image . 

 " you ask whom you be to take with you , Macumazahn . well , as to this 
 I must make inquiry of those who know . Man , my medicine ! " 

 from the shadow in the hut behind dart out a tall figure carry 
 a great spear in one hand and in the other a catskin bag which with a 
 salute he lay down at the foot of his master . this salute , by the way , 
 be that of a Zulu word which mean " Lord " or " home " of Ghosts . 

 Zikali grope in the bag and produce from it certain knuckle - bone . 

 " a common method , " he mutter , ' such as every vulgar wizard us , but 
 one that be quick and , as the matter concern be small , will serve my 
 turn . let we see now , whom you shall take with you , Macumazahn . " 

 then he breathe upon the bone , shake they up in his thin hand and 
 with a quick turn of the wrist , throw they into the air . after this 
 he study they carefully , where they lay among the ash which he have 
 rake out of the fire , those that he have use for the making of his map . 

 " do you know a man name Umslopogaas , Macumazahn , the chief of a tribe 
 that be call the People of the Axe , whose title of praise be Bulalio 
 or the Slaughterer , and Woodpecker , the latter from the way he handle 
 his ancient axe ? he be a savage fellow , but one of high blood and 
 high courage , a great captain in his way , though he will never come to 
 anything , save a glorious death - in your company , I think , Macumazahn . " 
  here he study the bone again for a while .   " yes , I be sure , in your 
 company , though not upon this journey . " 

 " I have hear of he , " I answer cautiously . " it be say in the land 
 that he be a son of Chaka , the great king of the Zulus . " 

 " be it , Macumazahn ? and be it say also that he be the slayer of 
 Chaka 's brother , Dingaan , also the lover of the fair woman that the 
 Zulus have ever see , who be call Nada the Lily ? unless indeed a 
 certain Mameena , who , I seem to remember , be a friend of your , may 
 have be even more beautiful ? " 

 " I know nothing of Nada the Lily , " I answer . 

 " no , no , Mameena , ' the Waiting Wind , ' have blow over her fame , so 
 why should you know of one who have be dead a long while ? why also , 
 Macumazahn , do you always bring woman into every business ? I begin to 
 believe that although you be so strict in a white man 's fashion , you 
 must be too fond of they , a weakness which make for ruin to any man . 
 well , now , I think that this wolf - man , this axe - man , this warrior , 
 Umslopogaas should be a good fellow to you on your journey to visit the 
 white witch , queen - another woman by the way , Macumazahn , and 
 therefore one of whom you should be careful . oh ! yes , he will come with 
 you - because of a man call Lousta and a woman name Monazi , a wife of 
 his who hat he and do - not hate Lousta . I be almost sure that he 
 will come with you , so do not stop to ask question about he . " 

 " be there anyone else ? " I inquire . 

 Zikali glance at the bone again , poke they about in the ash with 
 his toe , then reply with a yawn , 

 " you seem to have a little yellow man in your service , a clever snake 
 who know how to creep through grass , and when to strike and when to lie 
 hide . I should take he too , if I be you . " 

 " you know well that I have such a man , Zikali , a Hottentot name Hans , 
 clever in his way but drunken , very faithful too , since he love my 
 father before I . he be cook my supper in the waggon now . be there 
 to be any other ? " 

 " no , I think you three will be enough , with a guard of soldier from the 
 People of the Axe , for you will meet with fighting and a ghost or two . 
 Umslopogaas have always one at his elbow name Nada , and perhaps you have 
 several . for instance , there be a certain Mameena whom I always seem to 
 feel about I when you be near , Macumazahn . 

 " why , the wind be rise again , which be odd on so still an evening . 
 listen to how it wail , yes , and stir your hair , though mine hang 
 straight enough . but why do I talk of ghost , see that you travel to 
 seek other ghost , white ghost , beyond my ken , who can only deal with 
 those who be black ? 

 " good - night , Macumazahn , good - night . when you return from visit the 
 white Queen , that Great one beneath those foot I , Zikali , who be also 
 great in my way , be but a grain of dust , come and tell I her answer to 
 my question . 

 " meanwhile , be careful always to wear that pretty little image which I 
 have give you , as a young lover sometimes wear a lock of hair cut from 
 the head of some fool - girl that he think be fond of he . it will bring 
 you safety and luck , Macumazahn , which , for the most part , be more than 
 the lock of hair do to the lover . oh ! it be a strange world , full of 
 jest to those who can see the string that work it . I be one of they , 
 and perhaps , Macumazahn , you be another , or will be before all be 
 do - or begin . 

 " good - night , and good fortune to you on your journeying , and , 
 Macumazahn , although you be so fond of woman , be careful not to fall in 
 love with that white Queen , because it would make other jealous ; I mean 
 some who you have lose sight of for a while , also I think that be 
 under a curse of her own , she be not one whom you can put into your 
 sack . Oho ! Oho - ho ! slave , bring I my blanket , it grow cold , and my 
 medicine also , that which protect I from the ghost , who be thick 
 to - night . Macumazahn bring they , I think . Oho - ho ! " 

 I turn to depart but when I have go a little way Zikali call I 
 back again and say , speak very low , 

 " when you meet this Umslopogaas , as you will meet he , he who be call 
 the Woodpecker and the Slaughterer , say these word to he , 

 " ' a bat have be twitter round the hut of the Opener - of - road , and 
 to his ear it squeak the name of a certain Lousta and the name of a 
 woman call Monazi . also it twitter another great name that may not 
 be utter , that of an elephant who shake the earth , and say that this 
 elephant sniff the air with his trunk and grow angry , and sharpen his 
 tusk to dig a certain Woodpecker out of his hole in a tree that grow 
 near the Witch Mountain . say , too , that the Opener - of - Roads think that 
 this Woodpecker would be wise to fly north for a while in the company of 
 one who watch by night , lest harm should come to a bird that peck at 
 the foot of the great and chatter of it in his nest . ' " 



 then Zikali wave his hand and I go , wonder into what plot I have 
 stumble . 



 CHAPTER II 

 the messenger 

 I do not rest as I should that night who somehow be never able to 
 sleep well in the neighbourhood of the Black Kloof . I suppose that 
 Zikali 's constant talk about ghost , with his hint and innuendo 
 concern those who be dead , always affect my nerve till , in a 
 subconscious way , I begin to believe that such thing exist and be 
 hang about I . many people be open to the power of suggestion , and I 
 be afraid that I be one of they . 

 however , the sun which have such strength to kill noxious thing , put an 
 end to ghost more quickly even than it do to other evil vapour and 
 emanation , and when I wake up to find it shin brilliantly in a pure 
 heaven , I laugh with much heartiness over the whole affair . 

 go to the spring near which we be outspan , I take off my 
 shirt to have a good wash , still chuckle at the memory of all the 
 hocus - pocus of my old friend , the Opener - of - Roads . 

 while engage in this matutinal operation I strike my hand against 
 something and look , observe that it be the hideous little ivory 
 image of Zikali , which he have set about my neck . the sight of the 
 thing and the memory of his ridiculous talk about it , especially of its 
 assertion that it have come down to he through the age , which it could 
 not have do , see that it be a likeness of himself , irritate I so 
 much that I proceed to take it off with the full intention of throw 
 it into the spring . 

 as I be in the act of do this , from a clump of reed mix with 
 bush , quite close to I , there come a sound of hiss , and suddenly 
 above they appear the head of a great black immamba , perhaps the 
 deadly of all our african snake , and the only one I know which will 
 attack man without provocation . 

 leave go of the image , I spring back in a great hurry towards where my 
 gun lay . then the snake vanish and make sure that it have depart to 
 its hole , which be probably at a distance , I return to the pool , and 
 once more begin to take off the talisman in order to consign it to the 
 bottom of the pool . 

 after all , I reflect , it be a hideous and probably a blood - stain 
 thing which I do not in the least wish to wear about my neck like a 
 lady 's love - token . 

 just as it be come over my head , suddenly from the other side of 
 the bush that infernal snake pop up again , this time , it be 
 clear , really intent on business . it begin to move towards I in the 
 lightning - like way immambas have , hiss and flick its tongue . 

 I be too quick for my friend , however , for snatch up the gun that I 
 have lie down beside I , I let it have a charge of buckshot in the 
 neck which nearly cut it in two , so that it fall down and expire with 
 hideous convulsive writhing . 

 hear the shot Hans come run from the waggon to see what be the 
 matter . han , I should say , be that same Hottentot who have be the 
 companion of most of my journeying since my father 's day . he be with 
 I when as a young fellow I accompany Retief to Dingaan 's kraal , 
 and like myself , escape the massacre .     also we share many other 
 adventure , include the great one in the Land of the Ivory Child where 
 he slay the huge elephant - god , Jana , and himself be slain . but of this 
 journey we do not dream in those day . 

     see the book call " Marie . " - Editor . 

 for the rest Hans be a most entirely unprincipled person , but as the 
 boer say , " as clever as a waggonload of monkey . " also he drink when he 
 get the chance . one good quality he have , however ; no man be ever more 
 faithful , and perhaps it would be true to say that neither man nor woman 
 ever love I , unworthy , quite so well . 

 in appearance he rather resemble an antique and dilapidated baboon ; 
 his face be wrinkle like a dried nut and his quick little eye be 
 bloodshot . I never know what his age be , any more than he do himself , 
 but the year have leave he tough as whipcord and absolutely untiring . 
 lastly he be perhaps the good hand at follow a spoor that ever I 
 know and up to a hundred and fifty yard or so , a very deadly shot 
 with a rifle especially when he use a little single - barrel , 
 muzzle - loading gun of mine make by Purdey which he name Intombi or 
 Maiden . of that gun , however , I have write in " the Holy Flower " and 
 elsewhere . 

 " what be it , Baas ? " he ask . " here there be no lion , nor any game . " 

 " look the other side of the bush , Hans . " 

 he slip round it , make a wide circle with his usual caution , then , 
 see the snake which be , by the way , I think , the big immamba 
 I ever kill , suddenly freeze , as it be , in a stiff attitude that 
 remind I of a pointer when it scent game . have make sure that it 
 be dead , he nod and say , 

 " black ' mamba , or so you would call it , though I know it for something 
 else . " 

 " what else , han ? " 

 " one of the old witch - doctor Zikali 's spirit which he set at the mouth 
 of this kloof to warn he of who come or go . I know it well , and so 
 do other . I see it listen behind a stone when you be up the kloof 
 last evening talk with the Opener - of - road . " 

 " then Zikali will lack a spirit , " I answer , laugh , " which perhaps 
 he will not miss amongst so many . it serve he right for set the 
 brute on I . " 

 " quite so , Baas . he will be angry . I wonder why he do it ? " he add 
 suspiciously , ' see that he be such a friend of your . " 

 " he do not   do it , Hans . these snake be very fierce and give battle , 
 that be all . " 

 Hans pay no attention to my remark , which probably he think only 
 worthy of a white man who do not understand , but roll his yellow , 
 bloodshot eye about , as though in search of explanation . presently 
 they fall upon the ivory that hang about my neck , and he start . 

 " why do you wear that pretty likeness of the Great one yonder over your 
 heart , as I have know you do with thing that belong to woman in 
 past day , Baas ? do you know that it be Zikali 's Great Medicine , nothing 
 less , as everyone do throughout the land ? when Zikali send an order 
 far away , he always send that image with it , for then he who receive 
 the order know that he must obey or die . also the messenger know that 
 he will come to no harm if he do not take it off , because , Baas , the 
 image be Zikali himself , and Zikali be the image . they be one and the 
 same . also it be the image of his father 's father 's father - or so he 
 say . " 

 " that be an odd story , " I say . 

 then I tell Hans as much as I think advisable of how this horrid 
 little talisman come into my possession . 

 Hans nod without show any surprise . 

 " so we be go on a long journey , " he say . " well , I think it be 
 time that we do something more than wander about these tame country 
 sell blanket to stink old woman and so forth , Baas . moreover , 
 Zikali do not wish that you should come to harm , doubtless because he 
 do wish to make use of you afterwards - oh ! it be safe to talk now when 
 that spirit be away look for another snake . what be you do with 
 the Great Medicine , Baas , when the ' mamba attack you ? " 

 " take it off to throw it into the pool , Hans , as I do not like the 
 thing . I try twice and each time the immamba appear . " 

 " of course it appear , Baas , and what be more , if you have take that 
 medicine off and throw it away you would have disappear , since the 
  ' mamba would have kill you . Zikali want to show you that , Baas , 
 and that be why he set the snake at you . " 

 " you be a superstitious old fool , Hans . " 

 " yes , Baas , but my father know all about that Great Medicine before I , 
 for he be a bit of a doctor , and so do every wizard and witch for a 
 thousand mile or more . I tell you , Baas , it be know by all though no 
 one ever talk about it , no , not even the king himself . Baas , speak 
 to you , not with the voice of Hans the old drunkard , but with that of 
 the Predikant , your reverend father , who make so good a Christian of 
 I and who tell I to do so from up in Heaven where the hot fire be 
 which the wood feed of itself , I beg you not to try to throw away the 
 Medicine again , or if you wish to do so , to leave I behind on this 
 journey . for you see , Baas , although I be now so good , almost like one 
 of those angel with the pretty goose 's wing in the picture , I feel 
 that I should like to grow a little well before I go to the Place of 
 fire to make report to your reverend father , the Predikant . " 

 think of how horrify my dear father would be if he could hear all 
 this string of ridiculous nonsense and learn the result of his moral and 
 religious lesson on raw Hottentot material , I burst out laugh . but 
 Hans go on as gravely as a judge , 

 " wear the Great Medicine , Baas , wear it ; part with the liver inside you 
 before you part with that , Baas . it may not be as pretty or smell as 
 sweet as a woman 's hair in a little gold bottle , but it be much more 
 useful . the sight of the woman 's hair will only make you sick in your 
 stomach and cause you to remember a lot of thing which you have much 
 well forget , but the Great Medicine , or rather Zikali who be in it , 
 will keep the assegais and sickness out of you and turn back bad magic 
 on to the head of those who send it , and always bring we plenty to eat 
 and perhaps , if we be lucky , a little to drink too sometimes . " 

 " go away , " I say , " I want to wash . " 

 " yes , Baas , but with the Baas 's leave I will sit on the other side of 
 that bush with the gun - not to look at the Baas without his clothe , 
 because white people be always so ugly that it make I feel ill to see 
 they undressed , also because - the Baas will forgive I - but because they 
 smell . no , not for that , but just to see that no other snake come . " 

 " get out of the road , you dirty little scoundrel , and stop your 
 impudence , " I say , lift my foot suggestively . 

 Thereon he scoot with a subdue grin round the other side of the bush , 
 whence as I know well he keep his eye fix on I to be sure that I make 
 no further attempt to take off the Great Medicine . 



 now of this talisman I may as well say at once that I be no believer 
 in it or its precious influence . therefore , although it be useful 
 sometimes , notably twice when Umslopogaas be concern , I do not know 
 whether personally I should have do well or bad upon that journey 
 if I have throw it into the pool . 

 it be true , however , that until quite the end of this history when 
 it become needful to do so to save another , I never make any further 
 attempt to remove it from my neck , not even when it rub a sore in my 
 skin , because I do not wish to offend the prejudice of Hans . 

 it be true , moreover , that this hideous ivory have a reputation which 
 stretch very far from the place where it be make and be regard 
 with great reverence by all kind of queer people , even by the Amahagger 
 themselves , of whom presently , as they say in pedigree , a fact of which 
 I find sundry proof . indeed , I see a first example of it when a little 
 while later I meet that great warrior , Umslopogaas , Chief of the People 
 of the Axe . 

 for , after determine firmly , for reason which I will set out , that 
 I would not visit this man , in the end I do so , although by then I 
 have give up any idea of journey across the Zambesi to look for a 
 mysterious and non - existent witch - woman , as Zikali have suggest that I 
 should do . to begin with I know that his talk be all rubbish and , 
 even if it be not , that at the bottom of it be some desire of the 
 Opener - of - road that I should make a path for he to travel towards an 
 indefinite but doubtless evil object of his own . far , by this time 
 I have wear through that mood of mine which have cause I to yearn 
 for correspondence with the depart and a certain knowledge of their 
 existence . 

 I wonder whether many people understand , as I do , how entirely distinct 
 and how variable be these mood which sway we , or at any rate some of 
 we , at sundry period of our life . as I think I have already suggest , 
 at one time we be all spiritual ; at another all physical ; at one time 
 we be sure that our life here be as a dream and a shadow and that the 
 real existence lie elsewhere ; at another that these brief day of ours 
 be the only business with which we have to do and that of it we must 
 make the good . at one time we think our love much more immortal than 
 the star ; at another that they be mere shadow cast by the baleful sun 
 of desire upon the shallow and fleeting water we call life which seem 
 to flow out of nowhere into nowhere . at one time we be full of 
 faith , at another all such hope be blot out by a black wall of 
 Nothingness , and so on ad infinitum . only very stupid people , or 
 humbug , be or pretend to be , always consistent and unchanging . 

 to return , I determine not only that I would not travel north to seek 
 that which no live man will ever find , certainty as to the future , 
 but also , to show my independence of Zikali , that I would not visit 
 this chief , Umslopogaas . so , have trade all my good and make a fair 
 profit   on paper , I set myself to return to Natal , propose to rest 
 awhile in my little house at Durban , and tell Hans my mind . 

 " very good , Baas , " he say . " I , too , should like to go to Durban . there 
 be lot of thing there that we can not get here , " and he fix his 
 rove eye upon a square - face gin bottle , which as it happen be 
 fill with nothing strong than water , because all the gin be drunk . 
 " yet , Baas , we shall not see the Berea for a long while . " 

 " why do you say that ? " I ask sharply . 

 " oh ! Baas , I do not   know , but you go to visit the Opener - of - road , 
 do you not , and he tell you to go north and lend you a certain Great 
 Medicine , do he not ? " 

 here Hands proceed to light his corncob pipe with an ash from the 
 fire , all the time keep his beady eye fix upon that part of I 
 where he know the talisman be hung . 

 " quite true , Hans , but now I mean to show Zikali that I be not his 
 messenger , for south or north or east or west . so to - morrow morning we 
 cross the river and trek for Natal . " 

 " yes , Baas , but then why not cross it this evening ? there be still 
 light . " 

 " I have say that we will cross it to - morrow morning , " I answer with 
 that firmness which I have read always indicate a man of character , 
 " and I do not change my word . " 

 " no , Baas , but sometimes other thing change besides word . will the 
 Baas have that buck 's leg for supper , or the stuff out of a tin with a 
 dint in it , which we buy at a store two year ago ? the fly have get 
 at the buck 's leg , but I cut out the bit with the maggot on it and eat 
 they myself . " 



 Hans be right , thing do change , especially the weather . that night , 
 unexpectedly , for when I turn in the sky seem quite serene , there 
 come a terrible rain long before it be due , which last off and on for 
 three whole day and continue intermittently for an indefinite period . 
 needless to say the river , which it would have be so easy to cross 
 on this particular evening , by the morning be a rag torrent , and so 
 remain for several week . 

 in despair at length I trek south to where a ford be report , 
 which , when reach , prove impracticable . 

 I try another , a dozen mile far on , which be very hard to come 
 to over boggy land . it look all right and we be get across 
 finely , when suddenly one of the wheel sink in an unsuspected hole and 
 there we stick . indeed , I believe the waggon , or bit of it , would 
 have remain in the neighbourhood of that ford to this day , have I not 
 manage to borrow some extra oxen belong to a Christian Kaffir , and 
 with their help to drag it back to the bank whence we have start . 

 as it happen I be only just in time , since a new storm which have 
 burst far up the river , bring it down in flood again , a very heavy 
 flood . 

 in this country , England , where I write , there be bridge everywhere 
 and no one seem to appreciate they . if they think of they at all it 
 be to grumble about the cost of their upkeep . I wish they could have 
 experience what a lack of they mean in a wild country during time of 
 excessive rain , and the same remark apply to road . you should 
 think more of your blessing , my friend , as the old woman say to she 
 complain daughter who have twin two year run , add that they 
 might have be triplet . 

 to return - after this I confess myself beat and give up until such 
 time as it should please Providence to turn off the water - tap . trekking 
 out of sight of that infernal river which annoy I with its constant 
 gurgling , I camp on a comparatively dry spot that overlook a 
 beautiful stretch of roll veld . towards sunset the cloud lift 
 and I see a mile or two away a most extraordinary mountain on the low 
 slope of which grow a dense forest . its upper part , which be of bare 
 rock , look exactly like the seat figure of a grotesque person with 
 the chin rest on the breast . there be the head , there be the arm , 
 there be the knee . indeed , the whole mass of it remind I strongly 
 of the effigy of Zikali which be tie about my neck , or rather of 
 Zikali himself . 

 " what be that call ? " I say to Hans , point to this strange hill , 
 now blaze in the angry fire of the set sun that have burst out 
 between the storm cloud , which make it appear more ominous even than 
 before . 

 " that be the Witch Mountain , Baas , where the Chief Umslopogaas and a 
 blood brother of his who carry a great club use to hunt with the 
 wolf . it be haunt and in a cave at the top of it lie the bone of 
 Nada the Lily , the fair woman whose name be a song , she who be the love 
 of Umslopogaas . "   

      for the story of Umslopogaas and Nada see the book 
  call " Nada the Lily . " - Editor . 

 " Rubbish , " I say , though I have hear something of all that story and 
 remember that Zikali have mention this Nada , compare her beauty to 
 that of another whom once I know . 

 " where then live the Chief Umslopogaas ? " 

 " they say that his town be yonder on the plain , Baas . it be call the 
 Place of the Axe and be strongly fortify with a river round most of 
 it , and his people be the People of the Axe . they be a fierce people , 
 and all the country round here be uninhabited because Umslopogaas have 
 clean out the tribe who use to live in it , first with his wolf 
 and afterwards in war . he be so strong a chief and so terrible in battle 
 that even Chaka himself be afraid of he , and they say that he bring 
 Dingaan the King to his end because of a quarrel about this Nada . 
 Cetywayo , the present king , too leave he alone and to he he pay no 
 tribute . " 

 whilst I be about to ask Hans from whom he have collect all this 
 information , suddenly I hear sound , and look up , see three tall man 
 clothe in full herald 's dress rushing towards we at great speed . 

 " here come some chip from the Axe , " say Hans , and promptly bolt into 
 the waggon . 

 I do not bolt because there be no time to do so without loss of 
 dignity , but , although I wish I have my rifle with I , just sit still 
 upon my stool and with great deliberation light my pipe , take not 
 the slight notice of the three savage - look fellow . 

 these , who I note carry axis instead of assegais , rush straight at 
 I with the axis raise in such a fashion that anyone unacquainte with 
 the habit of Zulu warrior of the old school , might have think that 
 they intend nothing short of murder . 

 as I expect , however , within about six foot of I they halt suddenly 
 and stand there still as statue . for my part I go on light my pipe 
 as though I do not see they and when at length I be oblige to lift my 
 head , survey they with an air of mild interest . 

 then I take a little book out of my pocket , it be my favourite copy of 
 the Ingoldsby Legends - and begin to read . 

 the passage which catch my eye , if " axe " be substitute for " knife " be 
 not inappropriate . it be from " the Nurse 's Story , " and run , 

  " but , oh ! what a thing ' tis to see and to know 
  that the bare knife be raise in the hand of the foe , 
  without hope to repel or to ward off the blow ! " 

 this proceeding of mine astonish they a good deal who feel that they 
 have , so to speak , miss fire . at last the soldier in the middle say , 

 " be you blind , White Man ? " 

 " no , Black Fellow , " I answer , " but I be short - sighted . would you be so 
 good as to stand out of my light ? " a remark which puzzle they so much 
 that all three draw back a few pace . 

 when I have read a little far I come to the follow line , 

  " ' tis plain , 
  as anatomist tell we , that never again , 
  shall life revisit the foully slay 
  when once they have   be cut through the jugular vein . " 

 in my circumstance at that moment this statement seem altogether too 
 suggestive , so I shut up the book and remark , 

 " if you be wanderer who want food , as I judge by your be so thin , 
 I be sorry that I have little meat , but my servant will give you what 
 they can . " 

 " Ow ! " say the spokesman , " he call we wanderer ! either he must be a 
 very great man or he be mad . " 

 " you be right . I be a great man , " I answer , yawn , " and if you 
 trouble I too much you will see that I can be mad also . now what do you 
 want ? " 

 " we be messenger from the great Chief Umslopogaas , Captain of the 
 People of the Axe , and we want tribute , " answer the man in a somewhat 
 change tone . 

 " do you ? then you will not   get it . I think that only the King of Zululand 
 have a right to tribute , and your Captain 's name be not Cetywayo , be it ? " 

 " our Captain be King here , " say the man still more uncertainly . 

 " be he indeed ? then away with you back to he and tell this King of whom 
 I have never hear , though I have a message for a certain Umslopogaas , 
 that Macumazahn , Watcher - by - Night , intend to visit he to - morrow , if 
 he will send a guide at the first light to show the good path for the 
 waggon . " 

 " Hearken , " say the man to his companion , " this be Macumazahn himself 
 and no other . well , we think it , for who else would have dare - - " 

 then they salute with their axis , call I " Chief " and other fine 
 name , and depart as they have come , at a run , call out that my 
 message should be deliver and that doubtless Umslopogaas would send 
 the guide . 



 so it come about that , quite contrary to my intention , after all 
 circumstance bring I to the Town of the Axe . even to the last moment 
 I have not mean to go there , but when the tribute be demand I see 
 that it be good to do so , and have once pass my word it could 
 not be alter . indeed , I feel sure that in this event there would be 
 trouble and that my oxen would be steal , or bad . 

 so fate have issue its decree , of which Hans 's version be that 
 Zikali , or his Great Medicine , have so arrange thing , I shrug my 
 shoulder and wait . 



 CHAPTER III 

 UMSLOPOGAAS of the AXE 

 next morning at the dawn guide arrive from the Town of the Axe , 
 bring with they a yoke of spare oxen , which show that its Chief be 
 really anxious to see I . so , in due course we inspan and start , 
 the guide lead we by a rough but practicable road down the steep 
 hillside to the saucer - like plain beneath , where I see many cattle 
 grazing . travel some mile across this plain , we come at last to a 
 river of no great breadth that encircle a considerable Kaffir town 
 on three side , the fourth be protect by a little line of koppie 
 which be join together with wall . also the place be strongly 
 fortify with fence and in every other way know to the native mind . 

 with the help of the spare oxen we cross the river safely at the ford , 
 although it be very full , and on the further side be receive by a 
 guard of man , tall , soldierlike fellow , all of they arm with axis as 
 the messenger have be . they lead we up to the cattle enclosure in the 
 centre of the town , which although it could be use to protect beast in 
 case of emergency , also serve the practical purpose of a public square . 

 here some ceremony be in progress , for soldier stand round the kraal 
 while herald prance and shout . at the head of the place in front 
 of the chief 's big hut be a little group of people , among whom a big , 
 gaunt man sit upon a stool clothe in a warrior 's dress with a great and 
 very long axe hafte with wire - lash rhinoceros horn , lay across his 
 knee . 

 our guide lead I , with Hans sneak after I like a dejected and 
 low - breed dog   for the waggon have stop outside the gate , across the 
 kraal to where the herald shout and the big man sit yawn . at once 
 I note that he be a very remarkable person , broad and tall and spare 
 of frame , with long , tough - look arm and a fierce face which remind 
 I of that of the late King Dingaan . also he have a great hole in his 
 head above the temple where the skull have be drive in by some blow , 
 and keen , royal - look eye . 

 he look up and see I , cry out , 

 " what ! have a white man come to fight I for the chieftainship of the 
 People of the Axe ? well , he be a small one . " 

 " no , " I answer quietly , " but Macumazahn , Watcher - by - Night , have come 
 to visit you in answer to your request , o Umslopogaas ; Macumazahn whose 
 name be know in this land before yours be tell of , O Umslopogaas . " 

 the Chief hear and rise from his seat , lift the big axe in salute . 

 " I greet you , o Macumazahn , " he say , " who although you be small 
 in stature , be very great indeed in fame . have I not hear how you 
 conquer Bangu , although Saduko slay he , and of how you give up the 
 six hundred head of cattle to Tshoza and the man of the Amangwane who 
 fight with you , the cattle that be your own ? have I not hear how you 
 lead the Tulwana against the Usutu and stamp flat three of Cetywayo 's 
 regiment in the day of Panda , although , alas ! because of an oath of 
 mine I lift no steel in that battle , I who will have nothing to do 
 with those that spring from the blood of Senzangacona - perhaps because 
 I smell too strongly of it , Macumazahn . oh ! yes , I have hear these and 
 many other thing concern you , though until now it have never be 
 my fortune to look upon your face , o watcher - by - Night , and therefore I 
 greet you well , Bold one , Cunning one , Upright one , friend of we Black 
 People . " 

 " thank you , " I answer , " but you say something about fight . if 
 there be to be anything of the sort , let we get it over . if you want to 
 fight , I be quite ready , " and I tap the rifle which I carry . 

 the grim Chief break into a laugh and say , 

 " listen . by an ancient law any man on this day in each year may fight I 
 for this Chieftainship , as I fight and conquer he who hold it before 
 I , and take it from I with my life and the axe , though of late none 
 seem to like the business . but that law be make before there be 
 gun , or man like Macumazahn who , it be say , can hit a lizard on a wall 
 at fifty pace . therefore I tell you that if you wish to fight I with a 
 rifle , o Macumazahn , I give in and you may have the chieftainship , " and 
 he laugh again in his fierce fashion . 

 " I think it be too hot for fight either with gun or axis , and 
 Chieftainships be honey that be full of stinging bee , " I answer . 

 then I take my seat on a stool that have be bring for I and place 
 by the side of Umslopogaas , after which the ceremony go on . 

 the herald cry out the challenge to all and sundry to come and fight 
 the Holder of the Axe for the chieftainship of the Axe without the 
 slight result , since nobody seem to desire to do anything of the 
 sort . then , after a pause , Umslopogaas rise , swing his formidable 
 weapon round his head and declare that by right of conquest he be 
 Chief of the Tribe for the ensue year , an announcement that everybody 
 accept without surprise . 

 again the herald summon all and sundry who have grievance , to come 
 forward and to state they and receive redress . 

 after a little pause there appear a very handsome woman with large 
 eye , particularly brilliant eye that roll as though they be in 
 search of someone . she be finely dress and I see by the ornament she 
 wear that she hold the rank of a chief 's wife . 

 " I , Monazi , have a complaint to make , " she say , " as it be the right 
 of the humblest to do on this day . in succession to Zinita whom Dingaan 
 slew with her child , I be your Inkosikaas , your head - wife , O 
 Umslopogaas . " 

 " that I know well enough , " say Umslopogaas , " what of it ? " 

 " this , that you neglect I for other woman , as you neglect Zinita 
 for Nada the Beautiful , Nada the witch . I be childless , as be all your 
 wife because of the curse that this Nada leave behind she . I demand that 
 this curse should be lift from I . for your sake I abandon Lousta 
 the Chief , to whom I be betroth , and this be the end of it , that I be 
 neglect and childless . " 

 " be I the Heavens Above that I can cause you to bear child , woman ? " 
 ask Umslopogaas angrily . " would that you have clung to Lousta , my 
 blood - brother and my friend , whom you lament , and leave I alone . " 

 " that still may chance , if I be not well treat , " answer Monazi 
 with a flash of her eye . " will you dismiss yonder new wife of yours and 
 give I back my place , and will you lift the curse of Nada off I , or 
 will you not ? " 

 " as to the first , " answer Umslopogaas , " learn , Monazi , that I will not 
 dismiss my new wife , who at least be gentler - tongue and truer - hearte 
 than you be . as to the second , you ask that which it be not in my power 
 to give , since child be the gift of Heaven , and barrenness be its 
 bane . moreover , you have do ill to bring into this matter the name of 
 one who be dead , who of all woman be the sweetest and most innocent . 
 lastly , I warn you before the people to cease from your plotting or 
 traffic with Lousta , lest ill come of they to you , or he , even though 
 he be my blood - brother , or to both . " 

 " Plottings ! " cry Monazi in a shrill and furious voice . " do 
 Umslopogaas talk of plotting ? well , I have hear that Chaka the Lion 
 leave a son , and that this son have set a trap for the foot of he who 
 sit on Chaka 's throne . perchance that king have hear it also ; perchance 
 the People of the Axe will soon have another chief . " 

 " be it thus ? " say Umslopogaas quietly . " and if so , will he be name 
 Lousta ? " 

 then his smoulder wrath break out and in a kind of roar voice he 
 go on , 

 " what have I do that the wife of my bosom should be my betrayer , 
 those who would give I to death ? Zinita betray I to Dingaan and 
 in reward be slain , and my child with she . now would you , Monazi , 
 betray I to Cetywayo - though in truth there be naught to betray ? well , 
 if so , bethink you and let Lousta bethink he of what chance to Zinita , 
 and of what chance to those who stand before the axe of Umslopogaas . 
 what have I do , I say , that woman should thus strive to work I ill ? " 

 " this , " answer Monazi with a mocking laugh , " that you have love one 
 of they too well . if he would live in peace , he who have wife should 
 favour all alike . Least of anything should he moan continually over one 
 who be dead , a witch who have leave a curse behind she and thus insult 
 and do wrong to the living . also he would be wise to attend to the 
 matter of his own tribe and household and to cease from ambition that 
 may bring he to the assegai , and they with he . " 

 " I have hear your counsel , Wife , so now begone ! " say Umslopogaas , 
 look at she very strangely , and it seem to I not without fear . 

 " have you wife , Macumazahn ? " he ask of I in a low voice when she be 
 out of hearing . 

 " only among the spirit , " I answer . 

 " well for you then ; moreover , it be a bond between we , for I too have 
 but one true wife and she also be among the spirit . but go rest a 
 while , and later we will talk . " 

 so I go , leave the Chief to his business , think as I walk away 
 of a certain message with which I be charge for he and of how into 
 that message come name that I have just hear , namely that of a man 
 call Lousta and of a woman call Monazi . also I think of the hint 
 which in her jealous anger and disappointment at her lack of child , 
 this woman have drop about a plot against he who sit on the throne of 
 Chaka , which of course must mean King Cetywayo himself . 

 I come to the guest - hut , which prove to be a very good place and clean ; 
 also in it I find plenty of food make ready for I and for my servant . 
 after eat I sleep for a time as it be always my fashion to do when I 
 have nothing else on hand , since who know for how long he may be keep 
 awake at night ? indeed , it be not until the sun have begin to sink 
 that a messenger come , say that the Chief desire to see I if I have 
 rest . so I go to his big hut which stand alone with a strong fence 
 set round it at a distance , so that none could come within hearing of 
 what be say , even at the door of the hut . I observe also that a man 
 arm with an axe keep guard at the gateway in this fence round which he 
 walk from time to time . 

 the Chief Umslopogaas be seat on a stool by the door of his hut with 
 his rhinoceros - horn - handle axe which be fasten to his right wrist 
 by a thong , lean against his thigh , and a wolfskin hang from his 
 broad shoulder . very grim and fierce he look thus , with the red light 
 of the sunset playing on he . he greet I and point to another stool 
 on which I sit myself down . apparently he have be watch my eye , for 
 he say , 

 " I see that like other creature which move at night , such as leopard 
 and hyena , you take note of all , O watcher - by - Night , even of the 
 soldier who guard this place and of where the fence be set and of how 
 its gate be fashion . " 

 " have I not do so I should have be dead long ago , o Chief . " 

 " yes , and because it be not my nature to do so as I should , perchance 
 I shall soon be dead . it be not enough to be fierce and foremost in the 
 battle , Macumazahn . he who would sleep safe and of whom , when he die , 
 folk will say ' he have eat '   i.e. , he have live out his life , must do 
 more than this . he must guard his tongue and even his thought ! he must 
 listen to the stirring of rat in the thatch and look for snake in 
 the grass ; he must trust few , and least of all those who sleep upon his 
 bosom . but those who have the Lion 's blood in they or who be prone to 
 charge like a buffalo , often neglect these matter and therefore in the 
 end they fall into a pit . " 

 " yes , " I answer , " especially those who have the lion 's blood in they , 
 whether that lion be man or beast . " 

 this I say because of the rumour I have hear that this Slaughterer be 
 in truth the son of Chaka . therefore not know whether or no he be 
 play on the word " lion , " which be Chaka 's title , I wish to draw 
 he , especially as I see in his face a great likeness to Chaka 's brother 
 Dingaan , whom , it be whisper , this same Umslopogaas have slay . as it 
 happen I fail , for after a pause he say , 

 " why do you come to visit I , Macumazahn , who have never do so 
 before ? " 

 " I do not come to visit you , Umslopogaas . that be not my intention . you 
 bring I , or rather the flood river and you together bring I , 
 for I be on my way to Natal and could not cross the drift . " 

 " yet I think you have a message for I , White Man , for not long ago a 
 certain wander witch - doctor who come here tell I to expect you and 
 that you have word to say to I . " 

 " do he , Umslopogaas ? well , it be true that I have a message , though it 
 be one that I do not mean to deliver . " 

 " yet be here , perchance you will deliver it , Macumazahn , for those 
 who have message and will not speak they , sometimes come to trouble . " 

 " yes , be here , I will deliver it , see that so it seem to be 
 fat . tell I , do you chance to know a certain Small one who be 
 great , a certain Old one whose brain be young , a doctor who be call 
 Opener - of - road ? " 

 " I have hear of he , as have my forefather for generation . " 

 " indeed , and if it please you to tell I , Umslopogaas , what might be 
 the name of those forefather of your , who have hear of this doctor 
 for generation ? they must have be short - live man and as such I 
 should like to know of they . " 

 " that you can not , " reply Umslopogaas shortly , ' since they be 
  hlonipa   i.e. not to be speak   in this land . " 

 " indeed , " I say again . " I think that rule apply only to the name 
 of king , but of course I be but an ignorant white man who may well be 
 mistaken on such matter of your Zulu custom . " 

 " yes , o Macumazahn , you may be mistaken or - you may not . it matter 
 nothing . but what of this message of your ? " 

 " it come at the end of a long story , o Bulalio . but since you seek to 
 know , these be the word of it , so nearly as I can remember they . " 

 then sentence by sentence I repeat to he all that Zikali have say to 
 I when he call I back after bid I farewell , which doubtless he 
 do because he wish to cut his message more deeply into the tablet of 
 my mind . 

 Umslopogaas listen to every syllable with a curious intentness , and 
 then ask I to repeat it all again , which I do . 

 " Lousta ! Monazi ! " he say slowly . " well , you hear those name to - day , 
 do you not , White Man ? and you hear certain thing from the lip 
 of this Monazi who be angry , that give colour to that talk of the 
 Opener - of - road . it seem to I , " he add , glance about he and 
 speak in a low voice , " that what I suspect be true and that without 
 doubt I be betray . " 

 " I do not understand , " I reply indifferently . " all this talk be dark 
 to I , as be the message of the Opener - of - road , or rather its meaning . 
 by whom and about what be you betray ? " 

 " let that snake sleep . do not kick it with your foot . suffice it you to 
 know that my head hang upon this matter ; that I be a rat in a forked 
 stick , and if the stick be press on by a heavy hand , then where be the 
 rat ? " 

 " where all rat go , I suppose , that is , unless they be wise rat that 
 bite the hand which hold the stick before it be press down . " 

 " what be the rest of this story of your , Macumazahn , which be tell 
 before the Opener - of - road give you that message ? do it please you to 
 repeat it to I that I may judge of it with my ear ? " 

 " certainly , " I answer , " on one condition , that what the ear hear , the 
 heart shall keep to itself alone . " 

 Umslopogaas stoop and lay his hand upon the broad blade of the weapon 
 beside he , say , 

 " by the Axe I swear it . if I break the oath be the Axe my doom . " 

 then I tell he the tale , as I have set it down already , think 
 to myself that of it he would understand little , be but a wild 
 warrior - man . as it chance , however , I be mistaken , for he seem to 
 understand a great deal , perchance because such primitive nature be in 
 close touch with high and secret thing than we imagine ; perchance for 
 other reason with which I become acquainted later . 

 " it stand thus , " he say when I have finish , " or so I think . you , 
 Macumazahn , seek certain woman who be dead to learn whether they still 
 live , or be really dead , but so far have fail to find they . still 
 seek , you ask the counsel of Zikali , Opener - of - road , he who among 
 other title be also call ' home of Spirits . ' he answer that he could 
 not satisfy your heart because this tree be too tall for he to climb , 
 but that far to the north there live a certain white witch who have 
 power great than his , be able to fly to the top of any tree , and 
 to this white witch he bid you go . have I the story right thus far ? " 

 I answer that he have . 

 " good ! then Zikali go on to choose you companion for your journey , 
 but two , leave out the guard or servant . I , Umhlopekazi , call 
 Bulalio the Slaughterer , call the Woodpecker also , be one of these , 
 and that little yellow monkey of a man whom I see with you to - day , 
 call Hansi , be the other . then you make a mock of Zikali by 
 determine not to visit I , Umhlopekazi , and not to go north to find 
 the great white queen of whom he have tell you , but to return to Natal . 
 be that so ? " 

 I say it be . 

 " then the rain fall and the wind blow and the river rise in wrath so 
 that you could not return to Natal , and after all by chance , or by fate , 
 or by the will of Zikali , the wizard of wizard , you drift here to the 
 kraal of I , Umhlopekazi , and tell I this story . " 

 " just so , " I answer . 

 " well , White Man , how be I to know that all this be not but a trap for 
 my foot which already seem to feel cord between the toe of both of 
 they ? what token do you bring , o watcher - by - night ? how be I to know that 
 the Opener - of - road really send I this message which have be deliver 
 so strangely by one who wish to travel on another path ? the wandering 
 witch - doctor tell I that he who come would bear some sign . " 

 " I can not   say , " I answer , " at least in word . but , " I add after 
 reflection , " as you ask for a token , perhaps I might be able to show you 
 something that would bring proof to your heart , if there be any secret 
 place - - " 

 Umslopogaas walk to the gateway of the fence and see that the sentry 
 be at his post . then he walk round the hut cast an eye upon its 
 roof , and mutter to I as he return . 

 " once I be catch thus . there live a certain wife of mine who set she 
 ear to the smoke - hole and so bring about the death of many , and among 
 they of herself and of our child . enter . all be safe . yet if you 
 talk , speak low . " 

 so we go into the hut take the stool with we , and seat ourselves 
 by the fire that burn there on to which Umslopogaas throw chip of 
 resinous wood . 

 " now , " he say . 

 I open my shirt and by the clear light of the flame show he the 
 image of Zikali which hang about my neck . he star at it , though touch 
 it he would not . then he stand up and lift his great axe , he salute 
 the image with the word " Makosi ! " the salute that be give to great 
 wizard because they be suppose to be the home of many spirit . 

 " it be the big Medicine , the Medicine itself , " he say , " that which have 
 be know in the land since the time of Senzangacona , the father of the 
 Zulu Royal House , and as it be say , before he . " 

 " how can that be ? " I ask , ' see that this image represent Zikali , 
 Opener - of - road , as an old man , and Senzangacona die many year ago ? " 

 " I do not know , " he answer , " but it be so . listen . there be a certain 
 Mopo , or as some call he , Umbopo , who be Chaka 's body - servant and my 
 foster - father , and he tell I that twice this medicine , " and he point 
 to the image , " be send to Chaka , and that each time the Lion obey the 
 message that come with it . a third time it be send , but he do not obey 
 the message and then - where be Chaka ? " 

 here Umslopogaas pass his hand across his mouth , a significant gesture 
 amongst the Zulus . 

 " Mopo , " I say , " yes , I have hear the story of Mopo , also that Chaka 's 
 body become his servant in the end , since Mopo kill he with the 
 help of the prince Dingaan and Umhlangana . also I have hear that this 
 Mopo still live , though not in Zululand . " 

 " do he , Macumazahn ? " say Umslopogaas , take snuff from a spoon and 
 look at I keenly over the spoon . " you seem to know a great deal , 
 Macumazahn ; too much as some might think . " 

 " yes , " I answer , " perhaps I do know too much , or at any rate more than 
 I want to know . for instance , o fosterling of Mopo and son of - be the 
 lady name Baleka ? - I know a good deal about you . " 

 Umslopogaas star at I and lay his hand upon the great axe , half 
 rise . then he sit down again . 

 " I think that this , " and I touch the image of Zikali upon my breast , 
 " would turn even the blade of the axe name Groan - maker , " I say and 
 pause . as nothing happen , I go on , " for instance , again I think I 
 know - or have I dream it ? - that a certain chief , whose mother 's name 
 I believe be Baleka - by the way , be she not one of Chaka 's 
 ' sister ' ? - have be plot against that son of Panda who sit upon 
 the throne , and that his plot have be betray , so that he be in some 
 danger of his life . " 

 " Macumazahn , " say Umslopogaas hoarsely , " I tell you that do you not 
 wear the Great Medicine on your breast , I would kill you where you sit 
 and bury you beneath the floor of the hut , as one who know - too much . " 

 " it would be a mistake , Umslopogaas , one of the many that you have make . 
 but as I do wear the Medicine , the question do not arise , do it ? " 

 again he make no answer and I go on , " and now , what about this journey 
 to the north ? if indeed I must make it , would you wish to accompany I ? " 

 Umslopogaas rise from the stool and crawl out of the hut , apparently 
 to make some inspection . presently he return and remark that the 
 night be clear although there be heavy storm cloud on the horizon , 
 by which I understand he to convey in Zulu metaphor that it be safe 
 for we to talk , but that danger threaten from afar . 

 " Macumazahn , " he say , " we speak under the blanket of the 
 Opener - of - road who sit upon your heart , and whose sign you bring to 
 I , as he send I word that you would , do we not ? " 

 " I suppose so , " I answer . " at any rate we speak as man to man , and 
 hitherto the honour of Macumazahn have not be doubt in Zululand . so 
 if you have anything to say , Chief Bulalio , say it at once , for I be 
 tired and should like to eat and rest . " 

 " Good , Macumazahn . I have this to say . I who be the son of one who be 
 great than he , have plot to seize the throne of Zululand from he 
 who sit upon that throne . it be true , for I grow weary of my idleness 
 as a petty chief . moreover , I should have succeed with the help of 
 Zikali , who hat the House of Senzangacona , though I , who be of its 
 blood , he do not hate , because ever I have strive against that House . 
 but it seem from his message and those word speak by an angry woman , 
 that I have be betray , and that to - night or to - morrow night , or 
 by the next moon , the slayer will be upon I , smite I before I can 
 smite , at which I can not grumble . " 

 " by whom have you be betray , Umslopogaas ? " 

 " by that wife of mine , as I think , Macumazahn . also by Lousta , my 
 blood - brother , over whom she have cast her net and make false to I , 
 so that he hop to win she whom he have always love and with her the 
 Chieftainship of the Axe . now what shall I do ? - tell I , you whose eye 
 can see in the dark . " 

 I think a moment and answer , " I think that if I be you , I would 
 leave this Lousta to sit in my place for a while as Chief of the People 
 of the Axe , and take a journey north , Umslopogaas . then if trouble come 
 from the Great House where a king sit , it will come to Lousta who can 
 show that the People of the Axe be innocent and that you be far away . " 

 " that be cunning , Macumazahn . there speak the Great Medicine . if I go 
 north , who can say that I have plot , and if I leave my betrayer in my 
 place , who can say that I be a traitor , who have set he where I use 
 to sit and leave the land upon a private matter ? and now tell I of this 
 journey of your . " 

 so I tell he everything , although until that moment I have not make up 
 my mind to go upon this journey , I who have come here to his kraal 
 by accident , or so it seem , and by accident have deliver to he a 
 certain message . 

 " you wish to consult a white witch - doctoress , Macumazahn , who accord 
 to zikali life far to the north , as to the dead . now I too , though 
 perchance you will not think it of a black man , desire to learn of the 
 dead ; yes , of a certain wife of my youth who be sister and friend as 
 well as wife , whom too I love well than all the world . also I desire 
 to learn of a brother of mine whose name I never speak , who rule the 
 wolf with I and who die at my side on yonder Witch - Mountain , have 
 make he a mat of man to lie on in a great and glorious fight . for of 
 he as of the woman I think all day and dream all night , and I would 
 know if they still live anywhere and I may look to see they again when 
 I have die as a warrior should and as I hope to do . do you understand , 
 Watcher - by - Night ? " 

 I answer that I understand very well , as his case seem to be like my 
 own . 

 " it may happen , " go on Umslopogaas , " that all this talk of the dead 
 who be suppose to live after they be dead , be but as the sound of 
 wind whispering in the reed at night , that come from nowhere and go 
 nowhere and mean nothing . but at least ours will be a great journey in 
 which we shall find adventure and fighting , since it be well know in 
 the land that wherever Macumazahn go there be plenty of both . also it 
 seem well for reason that have be speak of between we , as Zikali 
 say , that I should leave the country of the Zulus for a while , who 
 desire to die a man 's death at the last and not to be trap like a 
 jackal in a pit . lastly I think that we shall agree well together though 
 my temper be rough at time , and that neither of we will desert the 
 other in trouble , though of that little yellow dog of yours I be not so 
 sure . " 

 " I answer for he , " I reply . " Hans be a true man , cunning also when 
 once he be away from drink . " 



 then we speak of plan for our journey , and of when and where we should 
 meet to make it , talk till it be late , after which I go to sleep 
 in the guest - hut . 



 CHAPTER IV 

 the LION and the AXE 

 next day early I leave the town of the People of the Axe , have bid a 
 formal farewell to Umslopogaas , say in a voice that all could 
 hear that as the river be still flood , I propose to trek to the 
 northern part of Zululand and trade there until the weather be well . 
 our private arrangement , however , be that on the night of the next 
 full moon , which happen about four week later , we should meet at the 
 eastern foot of a certain great , flat - top mountain know to both of 
 we , which stand to the north of Zululand but well beyond its border . 

 so northward I trek , slowly to spare my oxen , trading as I go . the 
 detail do not matter , but as it happen I meet with more luck upon that 
 journey than have come my way for many a long year . although I work 
 on credit since nearly all my good be sell , as owe to my repute I 
 could always do in Zululand , I make some excellent bargain in cattle , 
 and to top up with , buy a large lot of ivory so cheap that really I 
 think it must have be steal . 

 all of this , cattle , and ivory together , I send to Natal in charge of a 
 white friend of mine whom I could trust , where the stuff be sell 
 very well indeed , and the proceed pay to my account , the " trade " 
 equivalent be duly remit to the native vendor . 

 in fact , my good fortune be such that if I have be superstitious like 
 Hans , I should have be incline to attribute it to the influence of 
 Zikali 's " Great Medicine . " as it be I know it to be one of the chance 
 of a trader 's life and accept it with a shrug as often as I have be 
 accustom to do in the alternative of loss . 

 only one untoward incident happen to I . of a sudden a party of 
 the King 's soldier under the command of a well - know Induna or 
 Councillor , arrive and insist upon search my waggon , as I think 
 at first in connection with that cheap lot of ivory which have already 
 depart to Natal . however , never a word do they say of ivory , nor 
 indeed be a single thing belong to I take by they . 

 I be very indignant and express my feeling to the Induna in no 
 measure term . he on his part be most apologetic , and explain that 
 what he do he be oblige to do " by the King 's order . " also he let it 
 slip that he be seek for a certain " evil - doer " who , it be think , 
 might be with I without my know his real character , and as this 
 " evil - doer , " whose name he would not mention , be a very fierce man , it 
 have be necessary to bring a strong guard with he . 

 now I bethink I of Umslopogaas , but merely look blank and shrug 
 my shoulder , say that I be not in the habit of consort with 
 evil - doer . 

 still unsatisfie , the Induna question I as to the place where 
 I have be during this journey of mine in the Zulu country . I tell he 
 with the utmost frankness , mention among other - because I be sure 
 that already he know all my movement well - the town of the People of 
 the Axe . 

 then he ask I if I have see its Chief , a certain Umslopogaas or 
 Bulalio . I answer , yes , that I have meet he there for the first time 
 and think he a very remarkable man . 

 with this the Induna agree emphatically , say that perhaps I do 
 not know how remarkable . next he ask I where he be now , to which 
 I reply that I have not the faint idea , but I presume in his kraal 
 where I have leave he . the Induna explain that he be not in his 
 kraal ; that he have go away leave one Lousta and his own head wife 
 Monazi to administer the chieftainship for a while , because , as he 
 state , he wish to make a journey . 

 I yawn as if weary of the subject of this chief , and indeed of the 
 whole business . then the Induna say that I must come to the King and 
 repeat to he all the word that I have speak . I reply that I could 
 not possibly do so as , have finish my trading , I have arrange to go 
 north to shoot elephant . he answer that elephant live a long while 
 and would not die while I be visit the King . 

 then follow an argument which grow heated and end in his declaring 
 that to the King I must come , even if he have to take I there by force . 

 I sit silent , wonder what to say or do and leant forward to pick a 
 piece of wood out of the fire wherewith to light my pipe . now my shirt 
 be not button and as it chance this action cause the ivory image of 
 Zikali that hang about my neck to appear between its edge . the Induna 
 see it and his eye grow big with fear . 

 " hide that ! " he whisper , " hide that , lest it should bewitch I . 
 indeed , already I feel as though I be be bewitch . it be the Great 
 Medicine itself . " 

 " that will certainly happen to you , " I say , yawn again , " if you 
 insist upon my taking a week 's trek to visit the Black One , or interfere 
 with I in any way now or afterwards , " and I lift my hand towards the 
 talisman , look he steadily in the face . 

 " perhaps after all , Macumazahn , it be not necessary for you to visit the 
 king , " he say in an uncertain voice . " I will go and make report to he 
 that you know nothing of this evil - doer . " 

 and he go in such a hurry that he never wait to say good - bye . next 
 morning before the dawn I go also and trek steadily until I be 
 clear of Zululand . 



 in due course and without accident , for the weather , which have be 
 so wet , have now turn beautifully fine and dry , we come to the great , 
 flat - top hill that I have mention , trek thither over high , 
 sparsely - timbere veld that offer few difficulty to the waggon . this 
 peculiar hill , know to such native as live in those part by a long 
 word that mean " Hut - with - a - flat - roof , " be surround by forest , for 
 here tree grow wonderfully well , perhaps because of the water that 
 flow from its slope . force our way through this forest , which be 
 full of game , I reach its eastern foot and there camp , five 
 day before that night of full moon on which I have arrange to meet 
 Umslopogaas . 

 that I should meet he I do not in the least believe , firstly because 
 I think it very probable that he would have change his mind about 
 come , and secondly for the excellent reason that I expect he have 
 go to call upon the King against his will , as I have be ask to do . 
 it be evident to I that he be up to his eye in some serious plot 
 against Cetywayo , in which he be the old dwarf Zikali 's partner , or 
 rather , tool ; also that his plot have be betray , with the result that 
 he be " want " and would have little chance of pass safely through 
 Zululand . so take one thing with another I imagine that I have see 
 his grim face and his peculiar , ancient - look axe for the last time . 

 to tell the truth I be glad . although at first the idea have appeal to 
 I a little , I do not want to make this wild - goose , or wild - witch chase 
 through unknown land to seek for a totally fabulous person who dwelt 
 far across the Zambesi . I have , as it be , be force into the thing , 
 but if Umslopogaas do not appear , my obligation would be at an end 
 and I should return to Natal at my leisure . first , however , I would do 
 a little shooting since I find that a large herd of elephant haunt 
 this forest . indeed I be tempt to attack they at once , but do not 
 do so since , as Hans point out , if we be go north it would be 
 difficult to carry the ivory , especially if we have to leave the waggon , 
 and I be too old a hunter to desire to kill the great beast for the 
 fun of the thing . 

 so I just sit down and rest , let the oxen feed throughout the 
 hour of light on the rich grass which grow upon the bottom - most 
 slope of the big mountain where we be camp by a stream , not more 
 than a hundred yard above the timber line . 

 at some time or other there have be a native village at this spot ; 
 probably the Zulus have clean it out in long past year , for I 
 find human bone black with age lie in the long grass . indeed , the 
 cattle - kraal still remain and in such good condition that by pile 
 up a few stone here and there on the wall and close the narrow 
 entrance with thorn bush , we could still use it to enclose our oxen 
 at night . this I do for fear lest there should be lion about , though I 
 have neither see nor hear they . 

 so the day go by pleasantly enough with lot to eat , since whenever 
 we want meat I have only to go a few yard to shoot a fat buck at a 
 spot whither they trek to drink in the evening , till at last come the 
 time of full moon . of this I be also glad , since , to tell the truth , I 
 have begin to be bore . rest be good , but for a man who have always lead an 
 active life too much of it be very bad , for then he begin to think and 
 thought in large dos be depressing . 

 of the fire - eat Umslopogaas there be no sign , so I make up my mind 
 that on the morrow I would start after those elephant and when I have 
 shoot - or fail to shoot - some of they , return to Natal . I feel unable 
 to remain idle any more ; it never be my gift to do so , which be perhaps 
 why I employ my ample leisure here in England in jot down such 
 reminiscence as these . 

 well , the full moon come up in silver glory and after I have take a good 
 look at she for luck , also at all the veld within sight , I turn in . an 
 hour or two later some noise from the direction of the cattle - kraal wake 
 I up . as it do not recur , I think that I would go to sleep again . 
 then an uneasy thought come to I that I could not remember have 
 look to see whether the entrance be properly closed , as it be 
 my habit to do . it be the same sort of troublesome doubt which in 
 a civilised house make a man get out of bed and go along the cold 
 passage to the sitting - room to see whether he have put out the lamp . 
 it always prove that he have put it out , but that do not prevent a 
 repetition of the performance next time the perplexity arise . 

 I reflect that perhaps the noise be cause by the oxen push their 
 way through the carelessly - close entrance , and at any rate that I have 
 well go to see . so I slip on my boot and a coat and go without 
 wake Hans or the boy , only take with I a loaded , single - barrel 
 rifle which I use for shoot small buck , but no spare cartridge . 

 now in front of the gateway of the cattle - kraal , shade it , grow a 
 single big tree of the wild fig order . pass under this tree I look 
 and see that the gateway be quite securely closed , as now I remember 
 I have note at sunset . then I start to go back but have not step 
 more than two or three pace when , in the bright moonlight , I see the 
 head of my small ox , a beast of the Zulu breed , suddenly appear 
 over the top of the wall . about this there would have be nothing 
 particularly astonishing , have it not be for the fact that this head 
 belong to a dead animal , as I could tell from the closed eye and the 
 hang tongue . 

 " what in the name of goodness - - " I begin to myself , when my 
 reflection be cut short by the appearance of another head , that of 
 one of the big lion I ever see , which have the ox by the throat , and 
 with the enormous strength that be give to these creature , by get 
 its back beneath the body , be deliberately hoist it over the wall , 
 to drag it away to devour at its leisure . 

 there be the brute within twelve foot of I , and what be more , it see 
 I as I see it , and stop , still hold the ox by the throat . 

 " what a chance for Allan Quatermain ! of course he shoot it dead , " one can 
 fancy anyone say who know I by repute , also that by the gift of 
 God I be handy with a rifle . well , indeed , it should have be , for even 
 with the small - bore piece that I carry , a bullet ought to have pierce 
 through the soft part of its throat to the brain and to have kill 
 that lion as dead as Julius Cæsar . theoretically the thing be easy 
 enough ; indeed , although I be startle for a moment , by the time that 
 I have the rifle to my shoulder I have little fear of the issue , unless 
 there be a miss - fire , especially as the beast seem so astonish that 
 it remain quite still . 

 then the unexpected happen as generally it do in life , particularly 
 in hunting , which , in my case , be a part of life . I fire , but by 
 misfortune the bullet strike the tip of the horn of that confound ox , 
 which tip either be or at that moment fall in front of the spot on the 
 lion 's throat whereat half - unconsciously I have aim . result : the ball 
 be turn and , depart at an angle , just cut the skin of the lion 's 
 neck deeply enough to hurt it very much and to make it madder than all 
 the hatter in the world . 

 drop the ox , with a most terrific roar it come over the wall at 
 I - I remember that there seem to be yard of it - I mean of the 
 lion - in front of which appear a cavernous mouth full of gleam 
 tooth . 

 I skip back with much agility , also a little to one side , because 
 there be nothing else to do , reflect in a kind of inconsequent way , 
 that after all Zikali 's Great Medicine be not worth a curse . the lion 
 land on my side of the wall and rear itself upon its hind leg 
 before get to business , tower high above I but slightly to my 
 left . 

 then I see a strange thing . a shadow throw by the moon flit past 
 I - all I note of it be the distorted shape of a great , lift axe , 
 probably because the axe come first . the shadow fall and with it another 
 shadow , that of a lion 's paw dropping to the ground . next there be a 
 most awful noise of roaring , and wheel round I see such a fray as 
 never I shall see again . a tall , grim , black man be fight the great 
 lion , that now lack one paw , but still stand upon its hind leg , 
 strike at he with the other . 

 the man , who be absolutely silent , dodge the blow and hit back with 
 the axe , catch the beast upon the breast with such weight that it 
 come to the ground in a lopsided fashion , since now it have only one 
 fore - foot on which to light . 

 the axe flash up again and before the lion could recover itself , or do 
 anything else , fall with a crash upon its skull , sink deep into the 
 head . after this all be over , for the beast 's brain be cut in two . 

 " I be here at the appoint time , Macumazahn , " say Umslopogaas , for it 
 be he , as with difficulty he drag his axe from the lion 's sever 
 skull , " to find you watch by night as it be report that you always 
 do . " 

 " no , " I retort , for his tone irritate I , " you be late , Bulalio , the 
 moon have be up some hour . " 

 " I say , o Macumazahn , that I would meet you on the night of the full 
 moon , not at the rise of the moon . " 

 " that be true , " I reply , mollify , " and at any rate you come at a 
 good moment . " 

 " yes , " he answer , " though as it happen in this clear light the thing 
 be easy to anyone who can handle an axe . have it be dark the end 
 might have be different . but , Macumazahn , you be not so clever as I 
 think , since otherwise you would not have come out against a lion with 
 a toy like that , " and he point to the little rifle in my hand . 

 " I do not know that there be a lion , Umslopogaas . " 

 " that be why you be not so clever as I think , since of one sort or 
 another there be always a lion which wise man should be prepare to 
 meet , Macumazahn . " 

 " you be right again , " I reply . 

 at that moment Hans arrive upon the scene , follow at a discreet 
 distance by the waggon boy , and take in the situation at a glance . 

 " the Great Medicine of the Opener - of - road have work well , " be all he 
 say . 

 " the great medicine of the Opener - of - Heads have work well , " remark 
 Umslopogaas with a little laugh and point to his red axe . 
 " never before since she come into my keeping have Inkosikaas   i.e. 
 ' Chieftainess , ' for so be this famous weapon name   sink so low as to 
 drink the blood of beast . still , the stroke be a good one so she need 
 not be ashamed . but , Yellow Man , how come it that you who , I have be 
 tell , be cunning , watch your master so ill ? " 

 " I be asleep , " stutter Hans indignantly . 

 " those who serve should never sleep , " reply Umslopogaas sternly . then 
 he turn and whistle , and behold ! out of the long grass that grow at a 
 little distance , emerge twelve great man , all of they bear axis and 
 wear cloak of hyena skin , who salute I by raise their axis . 

 " set a watch and skin I this beast by dawn . it will make we a mat , " 
 say Umslopogaas , whereon again they salute silently and melt away . 

 " who be these ? " I ask . 

 " a few pick warrior whom I bring with I , Macumazahn . there be 
 one or two more , but they get lose on the way . " 

 then we go to the waggon and speak no more that night . 



 next morning I tell Umslopogaas of the visit I have receive from the 
  Induna of the King who wish I to come to the royal kraal . he nod 
 and say , 

 " as it chance certain thief attack I on my journey , which be why 
 one or two of my people remain behind who will never travel again . we 
 make good play with those thief ; not one of they escape , " he 
 add grimly , " and their body we throw into a river where be many 
 crocodile . but their spear I bring away and I think that they be 
 such as the King 's guard use . if so , his search for they will be long , 
 since the fight take place where no man live and we burn the shield 
 and trapping . Oho ! he will think that the ghost have take they . " 

 that morning we trek on fast , fear lest a regiment search for 
 these " thief " should strike and follow our spoor . luckily the ox that 
 the lion have kill be one of some spare cattle which I be drive 
 with I , so its loss do not inconvenience we . as we go Umslopogaas 
 tell I that he have duly appoint Lousta and his wife Monazi to rule 
 the tribe during his absence , an office which they accept doubtfully , 
 Monazi act as Chieftainess and Lousta as her head Induna or 
 Councillor . 

 I ask he whether he think this wise under all the circumstance , 
 see that it have occur to I since I make the suggestion , that they 
 might be unwilling to surrender power on his return , also that other 
 domestic complication might ensue . 

 " it matter little , Macumazahn , " he say with a shrug of his great 
 shoulder , " for of this I be sure , that I have play my part with the 
 People of the Axe and to stop among they would have mean my death , 
 who be a man betray . what do I care who love none and now have no 
 child ? still , it be true that I might have flee to Natal with the 
 cattle and there have lead a fat and easy life . but ease and plenty I do 
 not desire who would live and fall as a warrior should . 

 " never again , mayhap , shall I see the Ghost - Mountain where the wolf 
 raven and the old Witch sit in stone wait for the world to die , 
 or sleep in the town of the People of the Axe . what do I want with wife 
 and oxen while I have Inkosikaas the Groan - maker and she be true to 
 I ? " he add , shake the ancient axe above his head so that the sun 
 gleam upon the curve blade and the hollow gouge or point at the back 
 beyond the shaft socket . " where the Axe go , there go the strength and 
 virtue of the Axe , o Macumazahn . " 

 " it be a strange weapon , " I say . 

 " Aye , a strange and an old , forge far away , say Zikali , by a 
 warrior - wizard hundred of year ago , a great fighter who be also the 
 first of smith and who sit in the under - world wait for it to return 
 to his hand when its work be finish beneath the sun . that will be 
 soon , Macumazahn , since Zikali tell I that I be the last Holder of the 
 Axe . " 

 " do you then see the Opener - of - road ? " I ask . 

 " Aye , I see he . he it be who tell I which way to go to escape from 
 Zululand . also he laugh when he hear how the flood river bring 
 you to my kraal , and send you a message in which he say that the spirit 
 of a snake have tell he that you try to throw the Great Medicine into 
 a pool , but be stop by that snake , whilst it be still alive . this , 
 he say , you must do no more , lest he should send another snake to stop 
  you . " 

 " do he ? " I reply indignantly , for Zikali 's power of see or 
 learn about thing that happen at a distance puzzle and annoyed 
 I . 

 only Hans grin and say , 

 " I tell you so , Baas . " 



 on we travel from day to day , meet with such difficulty and 
 danger as be common on roadless veld in Africa , but no more , for the 
 grass be good and there be plenty of game , of which we shoot what we 
 want for meat . indeed , here in the back region of what be know as 
 Portuguese South East Africa , every sort of wild animal be so numerous 
 that personally I wish we could turn our journey into a shooting 
 expedition . 

 but of this Umslopogaas , whom hunt bore , would not hear . in fact , 
 he be much more anxious than myself to carry out our original purpose . 
 when I ask he why , he answer because of something Zikali have tell 
 he . what this be he would not say , except that in the country whither 
 we wander he would fight a great fight and win much honour . 

 now Umslopogaas be by nature a fight man , one who take a positive 
 joy in battle , and like an old Norseman , seem to think that thus only 
 could a man decorously die . this amazed I , a peaceful person who 
 love quiet and a home . still , I give way , partly to please he , partly 
 because I hop that we might discover something of interest , and still 
 more because , have once undertake an enterprise , my pride prompt I 
 to see it through . 

 now while he be prepare to draw his map in the ash , or afterwards , 
 I forget which , Zikali have tell I that when we draw near to the great 
 river we should come to a place on the edge of bush - veld that run down 
 to the river , where a white man live , add , after cast his bone 
 and read from they , that he think this white man be a " trek - boer . " 
 this , I should explain , mean a Dutchman who have travel away from 
 wherever he live and make a home for himself in the wilderness , as some 
 wander spirit and the desire to be free of authority often prompt 
 these people to do . also , after another inspection of his enchanted 
 knuckle - bone , he have declare that something remarkable would happen to 
 this man or his family , while I be visit he . lastly in that map he 
 draw in the ash , the detail of which be impress so indelibly 
 upon my memory , he have show I where I should find the dwelling of this 
 white man , of whom and of whose habitation doubtless he know through 
 the many spy who seem to be at the service of all witch - doctor , and 
 more especially of Zikali , the great among they . 

 travel by the sun and the compress I have trek steadily in 
 the exact direction which he indicate , to find that in this useful 
 particular he be well name the " Opener - of - road , " since always before 
 I I find a practicable path , although to the right or to the left 
 there would have be none . thus when we come to mountain , it be at a 
 spot where we discover a pass ; when we come to swamp it be where a 
 ridge of high ground run between , and so forth . also such tribe as we 
 meet upon our journey always prove of a friendly character , although 
 perhaps the aspect of Umslopogaas and his fierce band whom , rather 
 irreverently , I name his twelve apostle , have a share in induce this 
 peaceful attitude . 

 so smooth be our progress and so well mark by water at certain 
 interval , that at last I come to the conclusion that we must be 
 follow some ancient road which at a forget period of history , have 
 run from south to north , or vice versâ . or rather , to be honest , it 
 be the observant Hans who make this discovery from various indication 
 which have escape my notice . I need not stop to detail they , but one 
 of these be that at certain place the water - hole on a high , rather 
 barren land have be dig out , and in one or more instance , line with 
 stone after the fashion of an ancient well . evidently we be follow 
 an old trade route make , perhaps , in forget age when Africa be more 
 civilised than it be now . 

 pass over certain high , misty land during the third week of our 
 trek , where frequently at this season of the year the sun never show 
 itself before ten o'clock and disappear at three or four in the 
 afternoon , and where twice we be hold up for two whole day by dense 
 fog , we come across a queer nomadic people who seem to live in movable 
 grass hut and to keep great herd of goat and long - tail sheep . 

 these folk run away from we at first , but when they find that we do 
 they no harm , become friendly and bring we offering of milk , also of 
 a kind of slug or caterpillar which they seem to eat . Hans , who be 
 a great master of different native dialect , discover a tongue , or a 
 mixture of tongue , in which he could make himself understand to some of 
 they . 

 they tell he that in their day they have never see a white man , 
 although their father ' father   an expression by which they mean their 
 remote ancestor   have know many of they . they add , however , that if 
 we go on steadily towards the north for another seven day ' journey , 
 we should come to a place where a white man live , one , they have hear , 
 who have a long beard and kill animal with gun , as we do . 

 encourage by this intelligence we push forward , now travel down 
 hill out of the mist into a more genial country . indeed , the veld 
 here be beautiful , high , roll plain like those of the east african 
 plateau , cover with a deep and fertile chocolate - colour soil , as 
 we could see where the rain have wash out dongas . the climate , too , 
 seem to be cool and very healthful . altogether it be a pity to see 
 such land lie idle and tenant only by countless herd of game , for 
 there be not any native inhabitant , or at least we meet none . 

 on we trek , our road still slop slightly down hill , till at length 
 we see far away a vast sea of bush - veld which , as I guess correctly , 
 must fringe the great Zambesi River . moreover we , or rather Hans , whose 
 eye be those of a hawk , see something else , namely building of a 
 more or less civilised kind , which stand among tree by the side of a 
 stream several mile on this side of the great belt of bush . 

 " look , Baas , " say Hans , " those wanderer do not lie ; there be the 
 house of the white man . I wonder if he drink anything strong than 
 water , " he add with a sigh and a kind of reminiscent contraction of 
 his yellow throat . 

 as it happen , he do . 



 CHAPTER V 

 INEZ 

 we have sight the house from far away shortly after sunrise and by 
 midday we be there . as we approach I see that it stand almost 
 immediately beneath two great baobab tree , babyan tree we call they in 
 South Africa , perhaps because monkey eat their fruit . it be a thatched 
 house with whitewashed wall and a stoep or veranda round it , apparently 
 of the ordinary dutch type . moreover , beyond it , at a little distance 
 be other house or rather shanty with waggon shed , etc . , and 
 beyond and mix up with these a number of native hut . far on be 
 considerable field green with spring corn ; also we see herd of 
 cattle graze on the slope . evidently our white man be rich . 

 Umslopogaas survey the place with a soldier 's eye and say to I , 

 " this must be a peaceful country , Macumazahn , where no attack be fear , 
 since of defence I see none . " 

 " yes , " I answer , " why not , with a wilderness behind it and bush - veld 
 and a great river in front ? " 

 " man can cross river and travel through bush - veld , " he answer , and 
 be silent . 

 up to this time we have see no one , although it might have be presume 
 that a waggon trekking towards the house be a sufficiently unusual 
 sight to have attract attention . 

 " where can they be ? " I ask . 

 " asleep , Baas , I think , " say Hans , and as a matter of fact he be 
 right . the whole population of the place be indulge in a noonday 
 siesta . 

 at last we come so near to the house that I halt the waggon and 
 descend from the driving - box in order to investigate . at this moment 
 someone do appear , the sight of whom astonish I not a little , 
 namely , a very striking - look young woman . she be tall , handsome , 
 with large dark eye , good feature , a rather pale complexion , and I 
 think the sad face that I ever see . evidently she have hear the 
 noise of the waggon and have come out to see what cause it , for she 
 have nothing on her head , which be cover with thick hair of a raven 
 blackness . catch sight of the great Umslopogaas with his gleam axe 
 and of his savage - look bodyguard , she utter an exclamation and not 
 unnaturally turn to fly . 

 " it be all right , " I sing out , emerge from behind the oxen , and in 
 English , though before the word have leave my lip I reflect that there 
 be not the slight reason to suppose that she would understand they . 
 probably she be dutch , or Portuguese , although by some instinct I have 
 address she in English . 

 to my surprise she answer I in the same tongue , speak , it be true , 
 with a peculiar accent which I could not place , as it be neither Scotch 
 nor Irish . 

 " thank you , " she say . " I , sir , be frightened . your friend look - - " 
 here she stumble for a word , then add , " terrocious . " 

 I laugh at this composite adjective and answer , 

 " well , so they be in a way , though they will not harm you or I . but , 
 young lady , tell I , can we outspan here ? perhaps your husband - - " 

 " I have no husband , I have only a father , sir , " and she sigh . 

 " well , then , could I speak to your father ? my name be Allan Quatermain 
 and I be make a journey of exploration , to find out about the country 
 beyond , you know . " 

 " yes , I will go to wake he . he be asleep . everyone sleep here at 
 midday - except I , " she say with another sigh . 

 " why do you not follow their example ? " I ask jocosely , for this young 
 woman puzzle I and I want to find out about she . 

 " because I sleep little , sir , who think too much . there will be plenty 
 of time to sleep soon for all of we , will there not ? " 

 I star at she and inquire her name , because I do not know what else 
 to say . 

 " my name be Inez Robertson , " she answer . " I will go to wake my father . 
 meanwhile please unyoke your oxen . they can feed with the other ; they 
 look as though they want rest , poor thing . " then she turn and go 
 into the house . 

 " Inez Robertson , " I say to myself , " that be a queer combination . english 
 father and portuguese mother , I suppose . but what can an Englishman be 
 do in a place like this ? if it have be a trek - boer I should not have 
 be surprised . " then I begin to give direction about out - span . 

 we have just get the oxen out of the yoke , when a big , raw - bone , 
 red - bearded , blue - eye , roughly - clothe man of about fifty year of age 
 appear from the house , yawn . I throw my eye over he as he advance 
 with a peculiar rolling gait , and form certain conclusion . a drunkard 
 who have once be a gentleman , I reflect to myself , for there be 
 something peculiarly dissolute in his appearance , also one who have have 
 to do with the sea , a diagnosis which prove very accurate . 

 " how do you do , Mr. Allan Quatermain , which I think my daughter say be 
 your name , unless I dream it , for it be one that I seem to have hear 
 before , " he exclaim with a broad Scotch accent which I do not attempt 
 to reproduce . " what in the name of blaze bring you here where no real 
 white man have be for year ? well , I be glad enough to see you any way , 
 for I be sick of half - breed portuguese and nigger , and snuff - and - butter 
 girl , and gin and bad whisky . leave your people to attend to those oxen 
 and come in and have a drink . " 

 " thank you , Mr. Robertson - - " 

 " Captain Robertson , " he interrupt . " Man , do not   look astonish . you 
 might not   guess it , but I command a mail - steamer once and should like 
 to hear myself call rightly again before I die . " 

 " I beg your pardon - Captain Robertson , but myself , I do not   drink 
 anything before sundown . however , if you have something to eat - - ? " 

 " oh yes , Inez - she be my daughter - will find you a bite . those man of 
 your , " and he also look doubtfully at Umslopogaas and his savage 
 company , " will want food as well . I will have a beast kill for they ; 
 they look as if they could eat it , horn and all . where be my people ? 
 all asleep , I suppose , the lazy lubber . wait a bit , I will wake they up . " 

 go to the house he snatch a great sjambok cut from hippopotamus 
 hide , from where it hang on a nail in the wall , and run towards the 
 group of hut which I have mention , roar out the name Thomaso , also 
 a string of oath such as seaman use , mix with other of a portuguese 
 variety . what happen there I could not see because bough be in 
 the way , but presently I hear blow and scream , and catch sight of 
 people , all dark - skin , fly from the hut . 

 a little later a fat , half - breed man - I should say from his curl hair 
 that his mother be a negress and his father a Portuguese - appear 
 with some other nondescript fellow and begin to give direction in a 
 competent fashion about our oxen , also as to the killing of a calf . he 
 speak in bastard Portuguese , which I could understand , and I hear he 
 talk of Umslopogaas to whom he point , as " that nigger , " after the 
 fashion of such cross - bred people who choose to consider themselves 
 white man . also he make uncomplimentary remark about Hans , who of 
 course understand every word he say . evidently Thomaso 's temper have 
 be ruffle by this sudden and violent disturbance of his nap . 

 just then our host appear puff with his exertion and declare 
 that he have stir up the swine with a vengeance , in proof of which he 
 point to the sjambok that be redden with blood . 

 " Captain Robertson , " I say , " I wish to give you a hint to be pass on 
 to Mr. Thomaso , if that be he . he speak of the Zulu soldier there as a 
 nigger , etc . well , he be a chief of a high rank and rather a terrible 
 fellow if rouse . therefore I recommend Mr. Thomaso not to let he 
 understand that he be insult he . " 

 " oh ! that be the way of these ' snuff - and - butter ' one of whose 
 grandmother once meet a white man , " reply the Captain , laugh , " but 
 I will tell he , " and he do in Portuguese . 

 his retainer listen in silence , look at Umslopogaas rather sulkily . 
 then we walk into the house . as we go the Captain say , 

 " Señor Thomaso - he call himself Señor - be my manager here and a clever 
 man , honest too in his way and attach to I , perhaps because I 
 save his life once . but he have a nasty temper , as have all these 
 cross - breed , so I hope he will not   get wrong with that native who carry 
 a big axe . " 

 " I hope so too , for his own sake , " I reply emphatically . 

 the Captain lead the way into the sitting - room ; there be but one in the 
 house . it prove a queer kind of place with rude furniture seat with 
 strip of hide after the Boer fashion , and yet bear a certain air of 
 refinement which be doubtless due to Inez , who , with the assistance 
 of a stout native girl , be already engage in set the table . 
 thus there be a shelf with book , Shakespeare be one of these , I 
 notice - over which hang an ivory crucifix , which suggest that Inez 
 be a Catholic . on the wall , too , be some good portrait , and on the 
 window - ledge a jar full of flower . also the fork and spoon be of 
 silver , as be the mug , and engrave with a tremendous coat - of - arm 
 and a portuguese motto . 

 presently the food appear , which be excellent and plentiful , and the 
 Captain , his daughter and I sit down and eat . I note that he drink gin 
 and water , an innocent - look beverage but strong as he take it . it be 
 offer to I , but like Miss Inez , I prefer coffee . 

 during the meal and afterwards while we smoke upon the veranda , I 
 tell they as much as I think desirable of my plan . I say that I be 
 engage upon a journey of exploration of the country beyond the Zambesi , 
 and that have hear of this settlement , which , by the way , be call 
 Strathmuir , as I gather after a place in far away Scotland where 
 the Captain have be bear and pass his childhood , I have come here to 
 inquire as to how to cross the great river , and about other thing . 

 the Captain be interested , especially when I inform he that I be 
 that same " Hunter Quatermain " of whom he have hear in past year , but he 
 tell I that it would be impossible to take the waggon down into the low 
 bush - veld which we could see beneath we , as there all the oxen would die 
 of the bite of the tsetse fly . I answer that I be aware of this and 
 propose to try to make an arrangement to leave it in his charge till I 
 return . 

 " that might be manage , Mr. Quatermain , " he answer . " but , man , will 
 you ever return ? they say there be queer folk live on the other side 
 of the Zambesi , savage man who be cannibal , Amahagger I think they 
 call they . it be they who in past year clean out all this country , 
 except a few river tribe who live in float hut or on island among 
 the reed , and that be why it be so empty . but this happen long ago , 
 much before my time , and I do not   suppose they will ever cross the river 
 again . " 

 " if I might ask , what bring you here , Captain ? " I say , for the point 
 be one on which I feel curious . 

 " that which bring most man to wild place , Mr. Quatermain - trouble . if 
 you want to know , I have a misfortune and pile up my ship . there be 
 some life lose and , rightly or wrongly , I get the sack . then I start 
 as a trader in a God - forsake hole name Chinde , one of the Zambesi 
 mouth , you know , and do very well , as we Scotchmen have a way of 
 do . 

 " there I marry a portuguese lady , a real lady of high blood , one of 
 the old sort . when my girl , Inez , be about twelve year old I get into 
 more trouble , for my wife die and it please a certain relative of her 
 to say that it be because I have neglect she . this end in a row and 
 the truth be that I kill he - in fair fight , mind you . still , kill he 
 I do though I scarcely know that I have do it at the time , after which 
 the place grow too hot to hold I . so I sell up and swear that I would 
 have no more to do with what they be pleased to call civilisation on 
 the East Coast . 

 " during my trading I have hear that there be fine country up this way , 
 and here I come and settle year ago , bring my girl and Thomaso , who 
 be one of my manager , also a few other people with I . and here I have 
 be ever since , do very well as before , for I trade a lot of ivory 
 and other thing and grow stuff and cattle , which I sell to the River 
 native . yes , I be a rich man now and could go to live on my mean in 
 Scotland , or anywhere . " 

 " why do not   you ? " I ask . 

 " oh ! for many reason . I have lose touch with all that and become half 
 wild and I like this life and the sunshine and be my own master . 
 also , if I do , thing might be rake up against I , about that man 's 
 death . also , though I daresay it will make you think badly of I for it , 
 Mr. Quatermain , I have tie down there , " and he wave be hand towards 
 the village , if so it could be call , " which it would not   be easy for 
 I to break . a man may be fond of his child , Mr. Quatermain , even 
 if their skin be not   so white as they ought to be . lastly I have 
 habit - you see , I be speak out to you as man to man - which might get 
 I into trouble again if I go back to the world , " and he nod his 
 fine , capable - look head in the direction of the bottle on the table . 

 " I see , " I say hastily , for this kind of confession burst out of 
 the man 's lonely heart when what he have drunk take a hold of he , be 
 painful to hear . " but how about your daughter , Miss Inez ? " 

 " ah ! " he say , with a quiver in his voice , " there you touch it . she 
 ought to go away . there be no one for she to marry here , where we 
 have not   see a white man for year , and she be a lady right enough , like 
 her mother . but who be she to go to , be a roman Catholic whom my own 
 dour presbyterian folk in Scotland , if any of they be leave , would turn 
 their back on ? moreover , she love I in her own fashion , as I love 
 she , and she would not   leave I because she think it her duty to 
 stay and know that if she do , I should go to the devil altogether . 
 still - perhaps you might help I about she , Mr. Quatermain , that be if 
 you live to come back from your journey , " he add doubtfully . 

 I feel inclined to ask how I could possibly help in such a matter , but 
 think it wisest to say nothing . this , however , he do not notice , for 
 he go on , 

 " now I think I will have a nap , as I do my work in the early morning , 
 and sometimes late at night when my brain seem to clear up again , for 
 you see I be a sailor for many year and accustom to keep watch . 
 you will look after yourself , will not   you , and treat the place as your own ? " 
 then he vanish into the house to lie down . 

 when I have finish my pipe I go for a walk . first I visit the 
 waggon where I find Umslopogaas and his company engage in cook 
 the beast that have be give they , Zulu fashion ; Hans with his usual 
 cunning have already secure a meal , probably from the servant , or from 
 Inez herself ; at least he leave they and follow I . first we go down 
 to the hut , where we see a number of good - look young woman of mixed 
 blood , all decently dress and engage about their household duty . 
 also we see four or five boy and girl , to say nothing of a baby 
 in arm , fine young people , one or two of whom be more white than 
 colour . 

 " those child be very like the Baas with the red beard , " remark 
 Hans reflectively . 

 " yes , " I say , and shiver , for now I understand the awfulness of this 
 poor man 's case . he be the father of a number of half - breed who tie 
 he to this spot as anchor tie a ship . I go on rather hastily past 
 some shed to a long , low building which prove to be a store . here 
 the quarter - blood call Thomaso , and some assistant be engage in 
 trading with native from the Zambesi swamp , man of a kind that I have 
 never see , but in a way more civilised than many further south . what 
 they be sell or buying , I do not stop to see , but I notice that 
 the store be full of good of one sort or another , include a great 
 deal of ivory , which , as I suppose , have come down the river from 
 inland . 

 then we walk on to the cultivate field where we see corn grow 
 very well , also tobacco and other crop . beyond this be cattle kraal 
 and in the distance we perceive a great number of cattle and goat 
 feed on the slope . 

 " this red - bearded Baas must be very rich in all thing , " remark the 
 observant Hans when we have complete our investigation . 

 " yes , " I answer , " rich and yet poor . " 

 " how can a man be both rich and yet poor , Baas ? " ask Hans . 

 just at that moment some of the half - breed child whom I have 
 mention , run past we more naked than dressed and whooping like little 
 savage . han contemplate they gravely , then say , 

 " I think I understand now , Baas . a man may be rich in thing he love 
 and yet do not want , which make he poor in other way . " 

 " yes , " I answer , " as you be , Hans , when you take too much to 
 drink . " 

 just then we meet the stately Miss Inez return from the store , 
 carry some article in a basket , soap , I think , and tea in a packet , 
 amongst they . I tell Hans to take the basket and bear it to the 
 house for she . he go off with it and , walk slowly , we fall into 
 conversation . 

 " your father must do very well here , " I say , nod at the store with 
 the crowd of native round it . 

 " yes , " she answer , " he make much money which he put in a bank at the 
 coast , for live cost we nothing and there be great profit in what he 
 buy and sell , also in the crop he grow and in the cattle . but , " she 
 add pathetically , " what be the use of money in a place like this ? " 

 " you can get thing with it , " I answer vaguely . 

 " that be what my father say , but what do he get ? strong stuff to 
 drink ; dress for those woman down there , and sometimes pearl , jewel 
 and other thing for I which I do not want . I have a box full of they 
 set in ugly gold , or loose which I can not use , and if I put they on , who 
 be there to see they ? that clever half - breed , Thomaso - for he be clever 
 in his way , faithful too - or the woman down there - no one else . " 

 " you do not seem to be happy , Miss Inez . " 

 " no . I can not tell how unhappy other be , who have meet none , but 
 sometimes I think that I must be the most miserable woman in the world . " 

 " oh ! no , " I reply cheerfully , " plenty be bad off . " 

 " then , Mr. Quatermain , it must be because they can not feel . do you ever 
 have a father whom you love ? " 

 " yes , Miss Inez . he be dead , but he be a very good man , a kind of 
 saint . ask my servant , the little Hottentot Hans ; he will tell you about 
 he . " 

 " ah ! a very good man . well , as you may have guess , mine be not , though 
 there be much good in he , for he have a kind heart , and a big brain . but 
 the drink and those woman down there , they ruin he , " and she wring she 
 hand . 

 " why do not   you go away ? " I blurt out . 

 " because it be my duty to stop . that be what my religion teach I , 
 although of it I know little except through book , who have see no 
 priest for year except one who be a missionary , a baptist , I think , 
 who tell I that my faith be false and would lead I to hell . yes , not 
 understand how I live , he say that , who do not know that hell be 
 here . no , I can not go , who hop always that still God and the saint 
 will show I how to save my father , even though it be with my blood . and 
 now I have say too much to you who be quite a stranger . yet , I do not 
 know why , I feel that you will not betray I , and what be more , that 
 you will help I if you can , since you be not one of those who drink , 
 or - - " and she wave her hand towards the hut . 

 " I have my fault , Miss Inez , " I answer . 

 " yes , no doubt , else you would be a saint , not a man , and even the 
 saint have their fault , or so I seem to remember , and become saint by 
 repentance and conquer they . still , I be sure that you will help I 
 if you can . " 

 then with a sudden flash of her dark eye that say more than all her 
 word , she turn and leave I . 

 here be a pretty kettle of fish , think I to myself as I stroll back 
 to the waggon to see how thing be go on there , and how to get the 
 live fish out of the kettle before they boil or spoil be more than I 
 know . I wonder why fate be always find I such job to do . 

 even as I think thus a voice in my heart seem to echo that poor 
 girl 's word - because it be your duty - and to add other to they - woe 
 betide he who neglect his duty . I be appoint to try to hook a few 
 fish out of the vast kettle of human woe , and therefore I must go on 
 hooking . meanwhile this particular problem seem beyond I . perhaps 
 Fate would help , I reflect . as a matter of fact , in the end Fate do , 
 if Fate be the right word to use in this connection . 



 CHAPTER VI 

 the SEA - COW hunt 

 now it have be my intention to push forward across the river at once , 
 but here luck , or our old friend , Fate , be against I . to begin with 
 several of Umslopogaas ' man fall sick with a kind of stomach trouble , 
 arise no doubt from something they have eat . this , however , be not 
 their view , or that of Umslopogaas himself . it happen that one of 
 these man , Goroko by name , who practise as a witch - doctor in his 
 light moment , naturally suspect that a spell have be cast upon 
 they , for such people see magic in everything . 

 therefore he organise a ' smell - out " at which Umslopogaas , who be 
 as superstitious as the rest , assist . so do Hans , although he call 
 himself a Christian , partly out of curiosity , for he be as curious as 
 a magpie , and partly from fear lest some implication should be bring 
 against he in his absence . I see the business go on from a little 
 distance , and , unseen myself , think it well to keep an eye upon the 
 proceeding in case anything untoward should occur . this I do with Miss 
 Inez , who have never witness anything of the sort , as a companion . 

 the circle , a small one , be form in the usual fashion ; Goroko rig 
 up in the good witch - doctor 's costume that he could improvise , duly 
 come under the influence of his " Spirit " and skip about , wave a 
 wildebeeste 's tail , and so forth . 

 finally to my horror he break out of the ring , and run to a group 
 of spectator from the village , switch Thomaso , who be stand among 
 they with a lordly and contemptuous air , across the face with the gnu 's 
 tail , shout out that he be the wizard who have poison the bowel of 
 the sick man . Thereon Thomaso , who although he could be insolent , like 
 most crossbreed be not remarkable for courage , see the stir that 
 this announcement create amongst the fierce - faced zulus and fear 
 development , promptly bolt , none attempt to follow he . 

 after this , just as I think that everything be over and that the time 
 have come for I to speak a few earnest word to Umslopogaas , point 
 out that matter must go no far as regard Thomaso , whom I know that 
 he and his people hat , Goroko go back to the circle and be seize 
 with a new burst of inspiration . 

 throw down his whisk , he lift his arm above his head and star at 
 the heaven . then he begin to shout out something in a loud voice which 
 I be too far off to catch . whatever it may have be , evidently it 
 frighten his hearer , as I could see from the expression on their 
 face . even Umslopogaas be alarmed , for he let his axe fall for a 
 moment , rise as though to speak , then sit down again and cover his 
 eye with his hand . 

 in a minute it be over ; Goroko seem to become normal , take some snuff 
 and as I guess , after the usual fashion of these doctor , begin to 
 ask what he have be say while the " Spirit " possess he , which he 
 either have , or affect to have , forget . the circle , too , break up 
 and its member begin to talk to each other in a subdue way , while 
 Umslopogaas remain seat on the ground , brooding , and Hans slip 
 away in his snake - like fashion , doubtless in search of I . 

 " what be it all about , Mr. Quatermain ? " ask Inez . 

 " oh ! a lot of nonsense , " I say . " I fancy that witch - doctor declare 
 that your friend Thomaso put something into those man 's food to make 
 they sick . " 

 " I daresay that he do ; it would be just like he , Mr. Quatermain , as I 
 know that he hat they , especially Umslopogaas , of whom I be very fond . 
 he bring I some beautiful flower this morning which he have find 
 somewhere , and make a long speech which I could not understand . " 

 the idea of Umslopogaas , that man of blood and iron , bring flower 
 to a young lady , be so absurd that I break out laugh and even the 
 sad - faced Inez smile . then she leave I to see about something and I 
 go to speak to Hans and ask he what have happen . 

 " something rather queer , I think , Baas , " he answer vacuously , " though 
 I do not quite understand the last part . the doctor , Goroko , smell out 
 Thomaso as the man who have make they sick , and though they will not kill 
 he because we be guest here , those Zulus be very angry with Thomaso 
 and I think will beat he if they get a chance . but that be only the 
 small half of the stick , " and he pause . 

 " what be the big half , then ? " I ask with irritation . 

 " Baas , the Spirit in Goroko - - " 

 " the jackass in Goroko , you mean , " I interrupt . " how can you , who be 
 a Christian , talk such rubbish about spirit ? I only wish that my father 
 could hear you . " 

 " oh ! Baas , your reverend father , the Predikant , be now wise enough 
 to know all about spirit and that there be some who come into black 
 witch - doctor though they turn up their nose at white man and leave 
 they alone . however , whatever it be that make Goroko speak , get hold 
 of he so that his lip say , though he remember nothing of it 
 afterwards , that soon this place would be red with blood - that there 
 would be a great killing here , Baas . that be all . " 

 " red with blood ! whose blood ? what do the fool mean ? " 

 " I do not   know , Baas , but what you call the jackass in Goroko , declare 
 that those who be ' with the Great Medicine ' - mean what you wear , 
 Baas - will be quite safe . so I hope that it will not be our blood ; also 
 that you will get out of this place as soon as you can . " 

 well , I scold Hans because he believe in what this doctor say , for 
 I could see that he do believe it , then go to question Umslopogaas , 
 whom I find look quite pleased , which annoy I still more . 

 " what be it that Goroko have be say and why do you smile , Bulalio ? " 
 I ask . 

 " nothing much , Macumazahn , except that the man who look like tallow 
 that have go bad , put something in our food which make we sick , for 
 which I would kill he be he not Red - beard 's servant and that it would 
 frighten the lady his daughter . also he say that soon there will be 
 fighting , which be why I smile , who grow weary of peace . we come out to 
 fight , do we not ? " 

 " certainly not , " I answer . " we come out to make a quiet journey in 
 strange land , which be what I mean to do . " 

 " ah ! well , Macumazahn , in strange land one meet strange man with whom 
 one do not always agree , and then Inkosikaas begin to talk , " and he 
 whirl the great axe round his head , make the air whistle as it be 
 force through the gouge at its back . 

 I could get no more out of he , so have extract a promise from he 
 that nothing should happen to Thomaso who , I point out , be probably 
 quite unjustly accuse , I go away . 

 still , the whole incident leave a disagreeable impression on my mind , 
 and I begin to wish that we be safe across the Zambesi without more 
 trouble . but we could not start at once because two of the Zulus be 
 still not well enough to travel and there be many preparation to 
 be make about the load , and so forth , since the waggon must be leave 
 behind . also , and this be another complication - Hans have a sore upon 
 his foot , result from the prick of a poisonous thorn , and it be 
 desirable that this should be quite heal before we march . 

 so it come about that I be really glad when Captain Robertson suggest 
 that we should go down to a certain swamp form , I gather , by some 
 small tributary of the Zambesi to take part in a kind of hippopotamus 
 battue . it seem that at this season of the year these great animal 
 always frequent the place in number , also that by bar a neck of 
 deep water through which they gain it , they , or a proportion of they , 
 could be cut off and kill . 

 this have be do once or twice in the past , though not of late , 
 perhaps because Captain Robertson have lack the energy to organise such 
 a hunt . now he wish to do so again , take advantage of my presence , 
 both because of the value of the hide of the sea - cow which be cut up 
 to be send to the coast and sell as sjambok or whip , and because of 
 the sport of the thing . also I think he desire to show I that he be 
 not altogether sink in sloth and drink . 

 I fall in with the idea readily enough , since in all my hunting life I 
 have never see anything of the sort , especially as I be tell that the 
 expedition would not take more than a week and I reckon that the sick 
 man and Hans would not be fit to travel soon . so great preparation 
 be make . the riverside native , whose share of the spoil be to be the 
 carcase of the slain sea - cow , be summon by hundred and send off 
 to their appoint station to beat the swamp at a signal give by the 
 firing of a great pile of reed . also many other thing be do upon 
 which I need not enter . 

 then come the time for we to depart to the appoint spot over twenty 
 mile away , most of which distance it seem we could trek in the 
 waggon . Captain Robertson , who for the time have cut off his gin , be 
 as active about the affair as though he be once more in command of a 
 mail - steamer . nothing escape his attention ; indeed , in the care which 
 he give to detail he remind I of the captain of a great ship that 
 be leave port , and from it I learn how able a man he must once have 
 be . 

 " do your daughter accompany we ? " I ask on the night before we 
 start . 

 " oh ! no , " he answer , ' she would only be in the way . she will be quite 
 safe here , especially as Thomaso , who be no hunter , remain in charge 
 of the place with some of the old native to look after the woman and 
 child . " 

 later I see Inez herself , who say that she would have like to come , 
 although she hat to see great beast kill , but that her father be 
 against it because he think she might catch fever . so she suppose 
 that she have well remain where she be . 

 I agree , though in my heart I be doubtful , and say that I would leave 
 Hans , whose foot be not as yet quite well , and with whom she have make 
 friend as she have do with Umslopogaas , to look after she . also there 
 would be with he the two great Zulus who be now recover from their 
 attack of stomach sickness , so that she would have nothing to fear . she 
 answer with her slow smile that she fear nothing , still , she would 
 have like to come with we . then we part , as it prove for a long 
 time . 

 it be quite a ceremony . Umslopogaas , " in the name of the Axe " solemnly 
 give over Inez to the charge of his two follower , bid they guard 
 she with so much earnestness that I begin to suspect he fear something 
 which he do not choose to mention . my mind go back indeed to the 
 prophecy of the witch - doctor Goroko , of which it be possible that he 
 might be think , but as while he speak he keep his fierce eye fix 
 upon the fat and pompous quarter - breed , Thomaso , I conclude that here 
 be the object of his doubt . 

 it might have occur to he that this Thomaso would take the 
 opportunity of her father 's absence to annoy Inez . if so I be sure that 
 he be mistaken for various reason , of which I need only quote one , 
 namely , that even if such an idea have ever enter his head , Thomaso be 
 far too great a coward to translate it into action . still , suspect 
 something , I also give Hans instruction to keep a sharp eye on Inez 
 and generally to watch the place , and if he see anything suspicious , to 
 communicate with we at once . 

 " yes , Baas , " say Hans , " I will look after ' sad - Eyes ' " - for so with 
 their usual quickness of observation our Zulus have name Inez - " as 
 though she be my grandmother , though what there be to fear for she , I 
 do not know . but , Baas , I would much rather come and look after you , as 
 your reverend father , the Predikant , tell I to do always , which be my 
 duty , not girl - herding , Baas . also my foot be now quite well and - I want 
 to shoot sea - cow , and - - " here he pause . 

 " and what , han ? " 

 " and Goroko say that there be go to be much fighting and if there 
 should be fight and you should come to harm because I be not there 
 to protect you , what would your reverend father think of I then ? " 

 all of which mean two thing : that Hans never like be separate 
 from I if he could help it , and that he much prefer a shooting trip 
 to stop alone in this strange place with nothing to do except eat 
 and sleep . so I conclude , though indeed I do not get quite to the 
 bottom of the business . in reality Hans be put up a most gallant 
 struggle against temptation . 

 as I find out afterwards , Captain Robertson have be give he strong 
 drink on the sly , move thereto by sympathy with a fellow toper . also he 
 have show he where , if he want it , he could get more , and Hans always 
 want gin very badly indeed . to leave it within his reach be like 
 leave a handful of diamond lie about in the room of a thief . this 
 he know , but be ashamed to tell I the truth , and thence come much 
 trouble . 

 " you will stop here , Hans , look after the young lady and nurse your 
 foot , " I say sternly , whereon he collapse with a sigh and ask for 
 some tobacco . 

 meanwhile Captain Robertson , who I think have be take a stirrup cup 
 to cheer he on the road , be make his farewell down in what be 
 know as " the village , " for I see he there kiss a collection of 
 half - breed child , and give Thomaso instruction to look after they 
 and their mother . return at length , he call to Inez , who remain 
 upon the veranda , for she always seem to shrink from her father after 
 his visit to the village , to " keep a stiff upper lip " and not feel 
 lonely , and command the cavalcade to start . 

 so off we go , about twenty of the village native , a motley crew arm 
 with every kind of gun , march ahead and sing song . then come the 
 waggon with Captain Robertson and myself seat on the driving - box , 
 and lastly Umslopogaas and his Zulus , except the two who have be leave 
 behind . 

 we trek along a kind of native road over fine veld of the same 
 character as that on which Strathmuir stand , have the lower - lie 
 bush - veld which run down to the Zambesi on our right . before nightfall 
 we come to a ridge whereon this bush - veld turn south , fringe that 
 tributary of the great river in the swamp of which we be to hunt for 
 sea - cow . here we camp and next morning , leave the waggon in charge 
 of my voorlooper and a couple of the Strathmuir native , for the 
 driver be to act as my gun - bearer - we march down into the sea of 
 bush - veld . it prove to be full of game , but at this we dare not fire 
 for fear of disturb the hippopotami in the swamp beneath , whence 
 in that event they might escape we back to the river . 

 about midday we pass out of the bush - veld and reach the place where 
 the drive be to be . here , border by steep bank cover with bush , 
 be swampy ground not more than two hundred yard wide , down the centre 
 of which run a narrow channel of rather deep water , drain a vast 
 expanse of morass above . it be up this channel that the sea - cow 
 travel to the feeding ground where they love to collect at that 
 season of the year . 

 there with the assistance of some of the riverside native we make our 
 preparation under the direction of Captain Robertson . the rest of these 
 man , to the number of several hundred , have make a wide détour to the 
 head of the swamp , mile away , whence they be to advance at a certain 
 signal . these preparation be simple . a quantity of thorn tree be 
 cut down and by mean of heavy stone fasten to their trunk , anchor 
 in the narrow channel of deep water . to their top , which float on the 
 placid surface , be tie a variety of rag which we have bring with 
 we , such as old red flannel shirt , gay - coloured but wear - out blanket , 
 and I know not what beside . some of these fragment also be attach 
 to the anchor rope under water . 

 also we select place for the gun upon the steep bank that I have 
 mention , between which this channel run . foresee what would happen , 
 I choose one for myself behind a particularly stout rock and what be 
 more , build a stone wall to the height of several foot on the landward 
 side of it , as I guess that the native post near to I would prove 
 wild in their shooting . 

 these labour occupy the rest of that day , and at night we retire to 
 high ground to sleep . before dawn on the follow morning we return 
 and take up our station , some on one side of the channel and some on 
 the other which we have to reach in a canoe bring for the purpose by 
 the river native . 

 then , before the sun rise , Captain Robertson fire a huge pile of dry 
 reed and bush , which be to give the signal to the river native 
 far away to begin their beat . this do , we sit down and wait , after 
 make sure that every gun have plenty of ammunition ready . 

 as the dawn break , by climb a tree near my schanze or shelter , I 
 see a good many mile away to the south a wide circle of little fire , 
 and guess that the native be begin to burn the dry reed of the 
 swamp . presently these fire draw together into a thin wall of flame . 
 then I know that it be time to return to the schanze and prepare . it 
 be full daylight , however , before anything happen . 

 watch the still channel of water , I see ripple on it and bubble 
 of air rise . suddenly there appear the head of a great 
 bull - hippopotamus which , have catch sight of our rag barricade , 
 either above or below water , have rise to the surface to see what it 
 might be . I put a bullet from an eight - bore rifle through its brain , 
 whereon it sink , as I guess , stone dead to the bottom of the channel , 
 thus help to increase the barricade by the bulk of its great body . 
 also it have another effect . I have observe that sea - cow can not bear 
 the smell and taint of blood , which frighten they horribly , so that 
 they will expose themselves to almost any risk , rather than get it into 
 their nostril . 

 now , in this still water where there be no perceptible current , the 
 blood from the dead bull soon spread all about so that when the herd , 
 follow their leader , begin to arrive they be much alarmed . indeed , 
 the first of they on wind or taste it , turn and try to get 
 back up the channel where , however , they meet other follow , and 
 there ensue a tremendous confusion . they rise to the surface , blow , 
 snort , bellowing and scramble over each other in the water , while 
 continually more and more arrive behind they , till there be a perfect 
 pandemonium in that narrow place . 

 all our gun open fire wildly upon the mass ; it be like a battle 
 and through the smoke I catch sight of the riverside native who be 
 act as beater , advance far away , fantastically dress , scream 
 with excitement and wave spear , or sometimes torch of flame 
 reed . Most of these be scramble along the bank , but some of 
 the bold spirit advance over the lagoon in canoe , drive the 
 hippopotami towards the mouth of the channel by which alone they could 
 escape into the great swamp below and so on to the river . in all my 
 hunting experience I do not think I ever see a more remarkable scene . 
 still , in a way , to I it be unpleasant , for I flatter myself that I be 
 a sportsman and a battle of this sort be not sport as I understand the 
 term . 

 at length it come to this ; the channel for quite a long way be 
 literally full of hippopotami - I should think there must have be a 
 hundred of they or more of all sort and size , from great bull down to 
 little calf . some of these be kill , not many , for the shooting of 
 our gallant company be execrable and almost at hazard . also for every 
 sea - cow that die , of which number I think that Captain Robertson and 
 myself account for most - many be only wound . 

 still , the unhappy beast , craze with noise and fire and blood , do not 
 seem to dare to face our frail barricade , probably for the reason that 
 I have give . for a while they remain massed together in the water , or 
 under it , make a most horrible noise . then of a sudden they seem to 
 take a resolution . a few of they break back towards the burn reed , 
 the scream beater and the advance canoe . one of these , indeed , 
 a wound bull , charge a canoe , crush it in its huge jaw and kill 
 the rower , how exactly I do not know , for his body be never find . the 
 majority of they , however , take another counsel , for emerge from the 
 water on either side , they begin to scramble towards we along the steep 
 bank , or even to climb up they with surprising agility . it be at this 
 point in the proceeding that I congratulate myself earnestly upon 
 the solid character of the water - wear rock which I have select as a 
 shelter . 

 behind this rock together with my gun - bearer and Umslopogaas , who , as 
 he do not shoot , have elect to be my companion , I crouch and bang 
 away at the unwieldy creature as they advance . but fire fast as I 
 might with two rifle , I could not stop the half of they - they be 
 draw unpleasantly near . I glance at Umslopogaas and even then 
 be amuse to see that probably for the first time in his life that 
 redoubtable warrior be in a genuine fright . 

 " this be madness , Macumazahn , " he shout above the din . " be we to stop 
 here and be stamp flat by a horde of water - pig ? " 

 " it seem so , " I answer , " unless you prefer to be stamp flat 
 outside - or eat , " I add , point to a great crocodile that have also 
 emerge from the channel and be come along towards we with open jaw . 

 " by the Axe ! " shout Umslopogaas again , " I - a warrior - will not die 
 thus , tread on like a slug by an ox . " 

 now I have mention a tree which I climb . in his extremity 
 Umslopogaas rush for that tree and go up it like a lamplighter , just 
 as the crocodile wriggle past its trunk , snap at his retreating 
 leg . 

 after this I take no more note of he , partly because of the advance 
 sea - cow , and more for the reason that one of the village native post 
 above I , fire wildly , put a large round bullet through the sleeve 
 of my coat . indeed , have it not be for the wall which I build that 
 protect we , I be certain that both my bearer and I would have be 
 kill , for afterwards I find it splash over with lead from bullet 
 which have strike the stone . 

 well , thank to the strength of my rock and to the wall , or as Hans say 
 afterwards , to Zikali 's Great Medicine , we escape unhurt . the rush go 
 by I ; indeed , I kill one sea - cow so close that the powder from the 
 rifle actually burn its hide . but it do go by , leave we untouched . 
 all , however , be not so fortunate , since of the village native two 
 be trample to death , while a third have his leg break . 

 also , and this be really amusing - a bewildered bull charging at full 
 speed , crash into the trunk of Umslopogaas ' tree , and as it be not 
 very thick , snap it in two . down come the top in which the dignified 
 chief be ensconce like a bird in a nest , though at that moment there 
 be precious little dignity about he . however , except for scratch he 
 be not hurt , as the hippopotamus have other business in urgent need of 
 attention and do not stop to settle with he . 

 " such be the thing which happen to a man who mix himself up with 
 matter of which he know nothing , " say Umslopogaas sententiously to 
 I afterwards . but all the same he could never bear any allusion to this 
 tree - climb episode in his martial career , which , as it happen , have 
 take place in full view of his retainer , among whom it remain the 
 great of joke . indeed , he want to kill a man , the wag of the 
 party , who give he a slang name which , be translate , mean 
 " He - who - be - so - brave - that - he - dare - to - ride - a - water - horse - up - a - tree . " 

 it be all over at last , for which I thank Providence devoutly . a good 
 many of the sea - cow be dead , I think twenty - one be out exact bag , 
 but the majority of they have escape in one way or another , many as I 
 fear , wound . I imagine that at the last the bulk of the herd overcame 
 its fear and swim through our screen , pass away down the channel . 
 at any rate they be go , and have ascertain that there be 
 nothing to be do for the man who have be trample on my side of the 
 channel , I cross it in the canoe with the object of return quietly 
 to our camp to rest . 

 but as yet there be to be no quiet for I , for there I find Captain 
 Robertson , who I think have be refresh himself out of a bottle and 
 be in a great state of excitement about a native who have be kill 
 near he who be a favourite of his , and another whose leg be break . 
 he declare vehemently that the hippopotamus which have do this have 
 be wound and rush into some bush a few hundred yard away , and 
 that he mean to take vengeance upon it . indeed , he be just set off 
 to do so . 

 see his agitated state I think it wisest to follow he . what 
 happen need not be set out in detail . it be sufficient to say that 
 he find that hippopotamus and blaze both barrel at it in the bush , 
 hit it , but not seriously . out lumber the creature with its mouth 
 open , wish to escape . Robertson turn to fly as he be in its path , 
 but from one cause or another , trip and fall down . certainly he would 
 have be crush beneath its huge foot have I not step in front of 
 he and send two solid eight - bore bullet down that yawning throat , 
 kill it dead within three foot of where Robertson be try to rise , 
 and I may add , of myself . 

 this narrow escape sober he , and I be bind to say that his gratitude 
 be profuse . 

 " you be a brave man , " he say , " and have it not be for you by now I 
 should be wherever bad people go . I will not forget it , Mr. Quatermain , 
 and if ever you want anything that John Robertson can give , why , it be 
 your . " 

 " very well , " I answer , be seize by an inspiration , " I do want 
 something that you can give easily enough . " 

 " give it a name and it be your , half my place , if you like . " 

 " I want , " I go on as I slip new cartridge into the rifle , " I want 
 you to promise to give up drink for your daughter 's sake . that be what 
 nearly do for you just now , you know . " 

 " Man , you ask a hard thing , " he say slowly . " but by God I will try for 
 her sake and for yours too . " 

 then I go to help to set the leg of the injure man , which be all the 
 rest I get that morning . 



 CHAPTER VII 

 the OATH 

 we spend three more day at that place . first it be necessary to allow 
 time to elapse before the gas which generate in their great body 
 cause those of the sea - cow which have be kill in the water , to 
 float . then they must be skin and their thick hide cut into strip 
 and piece to be trade for sjambok or to make small native shield 
 for which some of the East Coast tribe will pay heavily . 

 all this take a long while , during which I amuse , or disgust myself 
 in watch those river native devour the flesh of the beast . 
 the lean , what there be of it , they dry and smoke into a kind of 
 " biltong , " but a great deal of the fat they eat at once . I have the 
 curiosity to weigh a lump which be give to one thin , hungry - look 
 fellow . it scale quite twenty pound . within four hour he have eat it 
 to the last ounce and lie there , a distend and torpid log . what would 
 not we white people give for such a digestion ! 

 at last all be over and we start homeward , the man with a broken leg 
 be carry in a kind of litter . on the edge of the bush - veld we find 
 the waggon quite safe , also one of Captain Robertson 's that have follow 
 we from Strathmuir in order to carry the expect load of hippopotamus ' 
 hide and ivory . I ask my voorlooper if anything have happen during 
 our absence . he answer nothing , but on the previous evening after 
 dark , he have see a glow in the direction of Strathmuir which lie on 
 somewhat low ground about twenty mile away , as though numerous fire 
 have be light there . it strike he so much , he add , that he 
 climb a tree to observe it well . he do not think , however , that any 
 building have be burn there , as the glow be not strong enough for 
 that . 

 I suggest that it be cause by some grass fire or reed - burning , to 
 which he reply indifferently that he do not think so as the line of 
 the glow be not sufficiently continuous . 

 there the matter end , though I confess that the story make I anxious , 
 for what exact reason I could not say . Umslopogaas also , who have 
 listen to it , for our talk be in Zulu , look grave , but make no 
 remark . but as since his tree - climb experience he have be singularly 
 silent , of this I think little . 

 we have trek at a time which we calculate would bring we to 
 Strathmuir about an hour before sundown , allow for a short halt half 
 way . as my oxen be get in more quickly than those of the other waggon 
 after this outspan , I be the first away , follow at a little distance 
 by Umslopogaas , who prefer to walk with his Zulus . the truth be that 
 I could not get that story about the glow of fire out of my mind and 
 be anxious to push on , which have cause I to hurry up the inspanning . 

 perhaps we have cover a couple of mile of the ten or twelve which 
 still lie between we and Strathmuir , when far off on the crest of one 
 of the wave of the veld which much resemble those of the swell sea 
 frozen while in motion , I see a small figure approach we at a rapid 
 trot . somehow that figure suggest Hans to my mind , so much so that I 
 fetch my glass to examine it more closely . a short scrutiny through 
 they convince I that Hans it be , Hans and no other , advance at a 
 great pace . 

 fill with uneasiness , I order the driver to flog up the oxen , 
 with the result that in a little over five minute we meet . halt the 
 waggon , I leapt from the waggon - box and call to Umslopogaas who have 
 keep up with we at a slow , swing trot , go to Hans , who , when he see 
 I , stand still at a little distance , swing his apology for a hat in 
 his hand , as be his fashion when ashamed or perplexed . 

 " what be the matter , Hans ? " I ask when we be within speak 
 distance . 

 " oh ! Baas , everything , " he answer , and I notice that he keep his eye 
 fix upon the ground and that his lip twitch . 

 " speak , you fool , and in Zulu , " I say , for by now Umslopogaas have 
 join I . 

 " Baas , " he answer in that tongue , " a terrible thing have come about 
 at the farm of Red - Beard yonder . yesterday afternoon at the time when 
 people be in the habit of sleep there till the sun grow less hot , 
 a body of great man with fierce face who carry big spear - perhaps 
 there be fifty of they , Baas - creep up to the place through the long 
 grass and grow crop , and attack it . " 

 " do you see they come ? " I ask . 

 " no , Baas . I be watch at a little distance as you bade I do and the 
 sun be hot , I shut my eye to keep out the glare of it , so that I do 
 not see they until they have pass I and hear the noise . " 

 " you mean that you be asleep or drunk , Hans , but go on . " 

 " Baas , I do not know , " he answer shamefacedly , " but after that I 
 climb a tall tree with a kind of bush at the top of it "   I ascertain 
 afterwards that this be a sort of leafy - crown palm , " and from it I 
 see everything without be see . " 

 " what do you see , Hans ? " I ask he . 

 " I see the big man run up and make a kind of circle round the village . 
 then they shout , and the people in the village come out to see what 
 be the matter . Thomaso and some of the man catch sight of they first 
 and run away fast into the hillside at the back where the tree grow , 
 before the circle be complete . then the woman and the child come out 
 and the big man kill they with their spear - all , all ! " 

 " Good God ! " I exclaim . " and what happen at the house and to the 
 lady ? " 

 " Baas , some of the man have surround that also and when she hear the 
 noise the lady Sad - Eyes come out on to the stoep and with she come 
 the two Zulus of the Axe who have be leave sick but be now quite 
 recover . a number of the big man run as though to take she , but the 
 two Zulus make a great fight in front of the little step to the stoep , 
 have their back protect by the stoep , and kill six of they before 
 they themselves be kill . also sad - Eyes shoot one with a pistol she 
 carry , and wound another so that the spear fall out of his hand . 

 " then the rest fall on she and tie she up , set she in a chair on 
 the stoep where two remain to watch she . they do she no hurt , Baas ; 
 indeed , they seem to treat she as gently as they could . also they 
 go into the house and there they catch that tall fat yellow girl who 
 always smile and be call Janee , she who wait upon the Lady Sad - Eyes , 
 and bring she out to she . I think they tell she , Baas , that she must 
 look after her mistress and that if she try to run away she would be 
 kill , for afterwards I see Janee bring her food and other thing . " 

 " and then , Hans ? " 

 " then , Baas , most of the great man rest a while , though some of they 
 go through the store gathering such thing as they like , blanket , 
 knife and iron cooking - pot , but they set fire to nothing , nor do they 
 try to catch the cattle . also they take dry wood from the pile and lit 
 big fire , eight or nine of they , and when the sun set they begin to 
 feast . " 

 " what do they feast on , Hans , if they take no cattle ? " I ask with a 
 shiver , for I be afraid of I know not what . 

 " Baas , " answer Hans , turn his head away and look at the ground , 
 " they feast on the child whom they have kill , also on some of the 
 young woman . these tall soldier be man - eater , Baas . " 

 at this horrible intelligence I turn faint and feel as though I be 
 go to fall , but recover myself , sign to he to go on with his 
 story . 

 " they feast quite nicely , Baas , " he continue , " make no noise . then 
 some of they sleep while other watch , and that go on all night . as 
 soon as it be dark , but before the moon rise , I slide down the tree and 
 creep round to the back of the house without be see or hear , as 
 I can , Baas . I get into the house by the back door and crawl to 
 the window of the sitting - room . it be open and peep through I see 
 Sad - Eyes still tie to the seat on the stoep not more than a pace away , 
 while the girl Janee crouch on the floor at her foot - I think she be 
 asleep or fainting . 

 " I make a little noise , like a night - adder hissing , and keep on make 
 it , till at last Sad - Eyes turn her head . then I speak in a very low 
 whisper , for fear lest I should wake the two guard who be doze on 
 either side of she wrap in their blanket , say , ' it be I , Hans , 
 come to help you . ' ' you can not , ' she answer , also speak very low . 
 ' get to your master and tell he and my father to follow . these man be 
 call Amahagger and live far away across the river . they be go to 
 take I to their home , as I understand , to rule they , because they want 
 a white woman to be a queen over they who have always be rule by a 
 certain white queen , against whom they have rebel . I do not think 
 they mean to do I any harm , unless perhaps they want to marry I 
 to their chief , but of this I be not sure from their talk which I 
 understand badly . now go , before they catch you . ' 

 " ' I think you might get away , ' I whisper back . ' I will cut your bond . 
 when you be free , slip through the window and I will guide you . ' 

 " ' very well , try it , ' she say . 

 " so I draw my knife and stretch out my arm . but then , Baas , I show 
 myself a fool - if the Great Medicine have still be there I might have 
 know well . I forget the starlight which shine upon the blade of the 
 knife . that girl Janee come out of her sleep or swoon , lift her head 
 and see the knife . she scream once , then at a word from her mistress 
 be silent . but it be enough , for it wake up the guard who glare 
 about they and threaten Janee with their great spear , also they go 
 to sleep no more , but begin to talk together , though what they say I 
 could not hear , for I be hide on the floor of the room . after this , 
 know that I could do no good and might do harm and get myself kill , 
 I creep out of the house as I have creep in , and crawl back to my 
 tree . " 

 " why do you not come to I ? " I ask . 

 " because I still hop I might be able to help Sad - Eyes , Baas . also I 
 want to see what happen , and I know that I could not bring you here 
 in time to be any good . yet it be true I think of come though I do 
 not know the road . " 

 " perhaps you be right . " 

 " at the first dawn , " continue Hans , " the great man who be call 
 Amahagger rise and eat what be leave over from the night before . then 
 they gather themselves together and go to the house . here they find 
 a large chair , that seat with rimpis in which the Baas Red - Beard 
 sit , and lash two pole to the chair . beneath the chair they tie 
 the garment and other thing of the Lady Sad - Eyes which they make 
 Janee gather as Sad - Eyes direct she . this do , very gently they sit 
 Sad - Eyes herself in the chair , bow while they make she fast . after 
 this eight of they set the pole upon their shoulder , and they all go 
 away at a trot , head for the bush - veld , drive with they a herd of 
 goat which they have steal from the farm , and make Janee run by the 
 chair . I see everything , Baas , for they pass just beneath my tree . 
 then I come to seek you , follow the outward spoor of the waggon 
 which I could not have do well at night . that be all , Baas . " 

 " han , " I say , " you have be drink and because of it the lady 
 Sad - Eyes be take a prisoner by cannibal ; for have you be awake and 
 watching , you might have see they come and save she and the rest . 
 still , afterwards you do well , and for the rest you must answer to 
 Heaven . " 

 " I must tell your reverend father , the Predikant , Baas , that the white 
 master , Red - Beard , give I the liquor and it be rude not to do as a 
 great white master do , and drink it up . I be sure he will understand , 
 Baas , " say Hans abjectly . 

 I think to myself that it be true and that the spear which Robertson 
 cast have fall upon his own head , as the Zulus say , but I make no 
 answer , lack time for argument . 

 " do you say , " ask Umslopogaas , speak for the first time , " that my 
 servant kill only six of these man - eater ? " 

 Hans nod and answer , " yes , six . I count the body . " 

 " it be ill do , they should have kill six each , " say Umslopogaas 
 moodily . " well , they have leave the more for we to finish , " and he 
 finger the great axe . 

 just then Captain Robertson arrive in his waggon , call out anxiously 
 to know what be the matter , for some premonition of evil seem to have 
 strike he . my heart sink at the sight of he , for how be I to tell 
 such a story to the father of the murder child and of the abduct 
 girl ? 

 in the end I feel that I could not . yes , I turn coward and say that 
 I must fetch something out of the waggon , bolt into it , bid Hans 
 go forward and repeat his tale . he obey unwillingly enough and look 
 out between the curtain of the waggon tent I see all that happen , 
 though I could not hear the word that pass . 

 Robertson have halt the oxen and jump from the waggon - box strode 
 forward and meet Hans , who begin to speak with he , twitch his hat in 
 his hand . gradually as the tale progress , I see the Captain 's face 
 freeze into a mask of horror . then he begin to argue and deny , then to 
 weep - oh ! it be a terrible sight to see that great man weep over 
 those whom he have lose , and in such a fashion . 

 after this a kind of blind rage seize he and I think he be go 
 to kill Hans , who be of the same opinion , for he run away . next he 
 stagger about , shake his fist , curse and shout , till presently 
 he fall of a heap and lie face downwards , beat his head against the 
 ground and groaning . 

 now I go to he and sit up . 

 " that be a pretty story , Quatermain , which this little yellow monkey have 
 be gibber at I . man , do you understand what he say ? he say that 
 all those half - blood child of mine be dead , murder by savage from 
 over the Zambesi , yes , and eaten , too , with their mother . do you take 
 the point ? eaten like lamb . those fire your man see last night 
 be the fire on which they be cook , my little so - and - so and 
  so - and - so , " and he mention half a dozen different name . " yes , 
 cook , Quatermain . and that be not   all of it , they have take Inez too . 
 they do not   eat she , but they have drag she off a captive for God 
 know what reason . I could not   understand . the whole ship 's crew be go , 
 except the captain absent on leave and the first officer , Thomaso , who 
 desert with some Lascar stoker , and leave the woman and child to 
 their fate . my God , I be go mad . I be go mad ! if you have any mercy 
 in you , give I something to drink . " 

 " all right , " I say , " I will . sit here and wait a minute . " 

 then I go to the waggon and pour out a stiff tot of spirit into 
 which I put an amazing doze of bromide from a little medicine chest I 
 always carry with I , and thirty drop of chlorodyne on the top of it . 
 all this compound I mix up with a little water and take it to he in a 
 tin cup so that he could not see the colour . 

 he drink it at a gulp and throw the pannikin aside , sit down on the 
 veld , groan while the company watch he at a respectful distance , 
 for Hans have join the other and his tale have spread like fire in 
 drought - parch grass . 

 in a few minute the drug begin to take effect upon Robertson 's 
 torture nerve , for he rise and say quietly , 

 " what now ? " 

 " Vengeance , or rather justice , " I answer . 

 " yes , " he exclaim , " vengeance . I swear that I will be avenge , or 
 die - or both . " 

 again I see my opportunity and say , " you must swear more than that , 
 Robertson . only sober man can accomplish great thing , for drink 
 destroy the judgment . if you wish to be avenge for the dead and to 
 rescue the living , you must be sober , or I for one will not help you . " 

 " will you help I if I do , to the end , good or ill , Quatermain ? " he 
 add . 

 I nod . 

 " that be as much as another 's oath , " he mutter . " still , I will put my 
 thought in word . I swear by God , by my mother - like these native - and 
 by my daughter bear in honest marriage , that I will never touch another 
 drop of strong drink , until I have avenge those poor woman and their 
 little child , and rescue Inez from their murderer . if I do you may 
 put a bullet through I . " 

 " that be all right , " I say in an offhand fashion , though inwardly I 
 glow with pride at the success of my great idea , for at the time I 
 think it great , and go on , 

 " now let we get to business . the first thing to do be to trek to 
 Strathmuir and make preparation ; the next to start upon the trail . come 
 to sit on the waggon with I and tell I what gun and ammunition you 
 have get , for accord to Hans those savage do not   seem to have touch 
 anything , except a few blanket and a herd of goat . " 

 he do as I ask , tell I all he could remember . then he say , 

 " it be a strange thing , but now I recall that about two year ago a 
 great savage with a high nose , who talk a sort of arabic which , like 
 Inez , I understand , have live on the coast , turn up one day and 
 say he want to trade . I ask he what in , and he answer that 
 he would like to buy some child . I tell he that I be not a 
 slave - dealer . then he look at Inez , who be move about , and say 
 that he would like to buy she to be a wife for his Chief , and offer 
 some fabulous sum in ivory and in gold , which he say should be pay 
 before she be take away . I snatch his big spear from his hand , break 
 it over his head and give he the good hiding with its shaft that he have 
 ever hear of . then I kick he off the place . he limp away but when 
 he be out of reach , turn and call out that one day he would come 
 again with other and take she , mean Inez , without leave the price 
 in ivory and gold . I run for my gun , but when I get back he have go and 
 I never think of the matter again from that day to this . " 

 " well , he keep his promise , " I say , but Robertson make no answer , for 
 by this time that thunder dose of bromide and laudanum have take 
 effect on he and he have fall asleep , of which I be glad , for I 
 think that this sleep would save his sanity , as I believe it do for a 
 while . 

 we reach Strathmuir towards sunset , too late to think of attempt 
 the pursuit that day . indeed , during our trek , I have think the matter 
 out carefully and come to the conclusion that to try to do so would be 
 useless . we must rest and make preparation ; also there be no hope of 
 our overtake these brute who already have a clear twelve hour ' start , 
 by a sudden spurt . they must be run down patiently by follow their 
 spoor , if indeed they could be run down at all before they vanish into 
 the vast recess of unknown Africa . the most we could do this night be 
 to get ready . 

 Captain Robertson be still sleep when we pass the village and of 
 this I be heartily glad , since the remain of a cannibal feast be not 
 pleasant to behold , especially when they be - - ! indeed , of these I 
 determine to be rid at once , so slip off the waggon with Hans and 
 some of the farm boy , for none of the Zulus would defile themselves by 
 touch such human remnant - I make up two of the smoulder fire , 
 the light of which the voorlooper have see upon the sky , and on to 
 they cast , or cause to be cast , those poor fragment . also I tell the 
 farm native to dig a big grave and in it to place the other body and 
 generally to remove the trace of murder . 

 then I go on to the house , and not too soon . see the waggon arrive 
 and have make sure that the Amahagger be go , Thomaso and the other 
 coward emerge from their hiding - place and return . unfortunately for 
 the former the first person he meet be Umslopogaas , who begin to revile 
 the fat half - breed in no measured term , call he dog , coward , and 
 other opprobrious name , such as deserter of woman and child , and so 
 forth - all of which someone translate . 

 Thomaso , an insolent person , try to swagger the matter out , say 
 that he have go to get assistance . infuriate at this lie , Umslopogaas 
 leap upon he with a roar and though he be a strong man , deal with 
 he as a lion do with a buck . lift he from his foot , he hurl he 
 to the ground , then as he strove to rise and run , catch he again and 
 as it seem to I , be about to break his back across his knee . just at 
 this juncture I arrive . 

 " let the man go , " I shout to he . " be there not enough death here 
 already ? " 

 " yes , " answer Umslopogaas , " I think there be . good that this jackal 
 should live to eat his own shame , " and he cast Thomaso to the ground , 
 where he lie groan . 

 Robertson , who be still asleep in the waggon , wake up at the noise , and 
 descend from it , look daze . I get he to the house and in do so 
 make my way past , or rather between the body of the two zulus and of 
 the six man whom they have kill , also of he whom Inez have shoot . those 
 Zulus have make a splendid fight for they be cover with wound , all 
 of they in front , as I find upon examination . 

 have make Robertson lie down upon his bed , I take a good look at the 
 slain Amahagger . they be magnificent man , all of they ; tall , spare 
 and shapely with very clear - cut feature and rather frizzle hair . 
 from these characteristic , as well as the lightness of their colour , 
 I conclude that they be of a Semitic or arab type , and that the 
 admixture of their blood with that of the Bantus be but slight , if 
 indeed there be any at all . their spear , of which one have be cut 
 through by a blow of a Zulu 's axe , be long and broad , not unlike to 
 those use by the Masai , but of fine workmanship . 

 by this time the sun be set and thoroughly tired by all that I have 
 go through , I go into the house to get something to eat , have tell 
 Hans to find food and prepare a meal . as I sit down Robertson join I 
 and I make he also eat . his first impulse be to go to the cupboard and 
 fetch the spirit bottle ; indeed , he rise to do so . 

 " Hans be make coffee , " I say warningly . 

 " thank you , " he answer , " I forget . force of habit , you know . " 

 here I may state that never from that moment do I see he touch another 
 drop of liquor , not even when I drink my modest tot in front of he . 
 his triumph over temptation be splendid and complete , especially as the 
 absence of his accustomed potation make he ill for some time and of 
 course depress his spirit , with painful result that be apparent in 
 due course . 

 in fact , the man become totally change . he grow gloomy but resourceful , 
 also full of patience . only one idea obsess he - to rescue his 
 daughter and avenge the murder of his people ; indeed , except his sin , 
 he think of and find interest in nothing else . moreover , his iron 
 constitution cast off all the effect of his past debauchery and he 
 grow so strong that although I be pretty tough in those day , he could 
 out - tire I . 

 to return ; I engage he in conversation and with his help make a list 
 of what we should require on our vendetta journey , all of which serve 
 to occupy his mind . then I send he to bed , say that I would call he 
 before dawn , have first put a little more bromide into his third cup 
 of coffee . after this I turn in and notwithstanding the sight of those 
 remain of the cannibal feast and the knowledge of the dead man who lay 
 outside my window , I sleep like a top . 

 indeed , it be the Captain who awaken I , not I the Captain , say 
 that daylight be on the break and we have well be stir . so we go 
 down to the Store , where I be thankful to find that everything have be 
 tidy up in accordance with my direction . 

 on our way Robertson ask I what have become of the remain , whereon I 
 point to the smoulder ash of one of the great fire . he go to 
 it and kneel down , say a prayer in broad Scotch , doubtless one that 
 he have learn at his mother 's knee . then he take some of the ash from 
 the edge of the pyre - for such it be - and throw they into the glowing 
 ember where , as he know , lie all that be leave of those who have spring 
 from he . also he toss other of they into the air , though what he 
 mean by this I do not understand and never ask . probably it be 
 some rite indicative of expiation or of revenge , or both , which he have 
 learn from the savage among whom he have live so long . 

 after this we go into the Store and with the help of some of 
 the native , or half - breed , who have accompany we on the sea - cow 
 expedition , select all the good we want , which we send to the 
 house . 

 as we return thither I see Umslopogaas and his man engage , with the 
 usual Zulu ceremony , in bury their two companion in a hole they 
 have make in the hillside . I note , however , that they do not inter 
 their war - axis or their throwing - spear with they as usual , probably 
 because they think that these might be need . in place of they they 
 put with the dead little model roughly shape of bit of wood , which 
 model they " kill " by first break they across . 

 I linger to watch the funeral and hear Goroko , the witch - doctor , make 
 a little speech . 

 " o Father and Chief of the Axe , " he say , address Umslopogaas , who 
 stand silent lean on his weapon and watch all , a portentous figure 
 in the morning mist , " o Father , o Son of the Heavens "   this be an 
 allusion to the royal blood of Umslopogaas of which the secret be well 
 know , although it would never have be speak aloud in Zululand , " O 
 Slaughterer   Bulalio , o Woodpecker who pick at the heart of man ; O 
 King - Slayer ; o Conqueror of the Halakazi ; o Victor in a hundred fight ; 
 o Gatherer of the lily - bloom that fade in the hand ; o Wolf - man , Captain 
 of the wolf that raven ; o Slayer of Faku ; o Great one whom it 
 please to seem small , because he must follow his blood to the end 
 appoint - - " 

 this be the opening of the speech , the " bonga -ing " or give of 
 Titles of Praise to the person address , of which I have quote but a 
 sample , for there be many more of they that I have forget . then the 
 speaker go on , 

 " it be tell to I , though of it I remember nothing , that when my Spirit 
 be in I a while ago I prophesy that this place would flow with 
 blood , and lo ! the blood have flow , and with it that of these our 
 brother , " and he give the name of the two dead Zulus , also those of 
 their forefather for several generation . 

 " it seem , Father , that they die well , as you would have wish they 
 to die , and as doubtless they desire to die themselves , leave a tale 
 behind they , though it be true that they might have die well , kill 
 more of the man - eater , as it be certain they would have do , have they 
 not be sick inside . they be finish ; they have go beyond to await 
 we in the under - world among the ghost . their story be tell and soon to 
 their child they will be but name whisper in honour after the sun 
 have set . enough of they who have show we how to die as our father do 
 before they . " 

 Goroko pause a while , then add with a waving of his hand , 

 " my Spirit come to I again and I know that these our brother shall 
 not pass unavenged . chief of the Axe , great glory await the Axe , for it 
 shall feed full . I have speak . " 

 " good word ! " grunt Umslopogaas . then he salute the dead by raise 
  Inkosikaas and come to I to consult about our journey . 



 CHAPTER VIII 

 pursuit 

 after all we do not get away much before noon , because first there be 
 a great deal to be do . to begin with the load have to be arrange . 
 these consist largely of ammunition , everything else be cut down to 
 an irreducible minimum . to carry they we take two donkey there be 
 on the place , also half a dozen pack oxen , all of which animal be 
 suppose to be ' salt " - that be , to have suffer and recover from 
 every kind of sickness , include the bite of the deadly tsetse fly . 
 I suspect , it be true , that they would not be proof against further 
 attack , still , I hop that they would last for some time , as indeed 
 prove to be the case . 

 in the event of the beast fail we , we take also ten of the good 
 of those Strathmuir man who have accompany we on the sea - cow trip , to 
 serve as bearer when it become necessary . it can not be say that these 
 snuff - and - butter fellow - for most , if not all of they have some dash of 
 white blood in their vein - be exactly willing volunteer . indeed , if 
 a choice have be leave to they , they would , I think , have decline this 
 adventure . 

 but there be no choice . their master , Robertson , order they to come 
 and after a glance at the Zulus they conclude that the command be one 
 which would be enforce and that if they stop behind , it would not 
 be as live man . also some of they have lose wife or child in the 
 slaughter , which , if they be not very brave , fill they with a desire 
 for revenge . lastly , they could all shoot after a fashion and have good 
 rifle ; moreover if I may say so , I think that they put confidence in my 
 leadership . so they make the good of a bad business and get themselves 
 ready . 

 then arrangement must be make about the carrying on of the farm and 
 store during our absence . these , together with my waggon and oxen , be 
 put in the charge of Thomaso , since there be no one else who could be 
 trust at all - a very battered and crestfallen Thomaso , by the way . 
 when he hear of it he be much relieved , since I think he fear lest 
 he also should be expect to take part in the hunt of the Amahagger 
 man - eater . also it may have occur to he that in all probability 
 none of we would ever come back at all , in which case by a process of 
 natural devolution , he might find himself the owner of the business and 
 much valuable property . however , he swear by sundry saint - for Thomaso 
 be nominally a Catholic - that he would look after everything as though 
 it be his own , as no doubt he hop it might become . 

 " Hearken , fat pig , " say Umslopogaas , Hans obligingly translate so 
 that there might be no mistake , " if I come back , and come back I shall 
 who travel with the Great Medicine - and find even one of the cattle of 
 the white lord , Macumazahn , Watcher - by - Night , missing , or one article 
 steal from his waggon , or the field of your master not cultivate or 
 his good waste , I swear by the Axe that I will hew you into piece 
 with the axe ; yes , if to do it I have to hunt you from where the sun 
 rise to where it set and down the length of the night between . do 
 you understand , fat pig , deserter of woman and child , who to save 
 yourself could run fast than a buck ? " 

 Thomaso reply that he understand very clearly indeed , and that , Heaven 
 help he , all should be keep safe and sound . still , I be sure that 
 in his manly heart he be promise great gift to the saint if they 
 would so arrange matter that Umslopogaas and his axe be never see at 
 Strathmuir again , and reflect that after all the Amahagger have their 
 us . however , as I do not trust he in the least , much against their 
 will , I leave my driver and voorlooper to guard my belonging . 

 at last we do get off , pursue by the fervent blessing of Thomaso and 
 the prayer of the other that we would avenge their murder relative . 
 we be a curious and motley procession . first go Hans , because at 
 follow a spoor he be , I believe , almost unequalled in Africa , and 
 with he , Umslopogaas , and three of his Zulus to guard against surprise . 
 these be follow by Captain Robertson , who seem to prefer to walk 
 alone and whom I think it well to leave undisturbed . then I come 
 and after I straggle the Strathmuir boy with the pack animal , the 
 cavalcade be close by the remain Zulus under the command of 
 Goroko . these walk last in case any of the mix - blood should attempt 
 to desert , as we think it quite probable that they would . 

 Less than an hour 's tramp bring we to the bush - veld where I fear 
 that our trouble might begin , since if the Amahagger be cunning , 
 they would take advantage of it to confuse or hide their spoor . as it 
 chance , however , they have do nothing of the sort and a child could 
 have follow their march . just before nightfall we come to their first 
 halting - place where they have make a fire and eat one of the herd of 
 farm goat which they have drive away with they , although they leave the 
 cattle , I suppose , because goat be docile and travel well . 

 Hans show we everything that have happen ; where the chair in which 
 Inez be carry be set down , where she and Janee have be allow to 
 walk that she might stretch her stiff limb , the dreg of some coffee 
 that evidently Janee have make in a saucepan , and so forth . 

 he even tell we the exact number of the Amahagger , which he say 
 total forty - one , include the man whom Inez have wound . his spoor 
 he distinguish from that of the other both by an occasional drop of 
 blood and because he walk lightly on his right foot , doubtless for 
 the reason that he wish to avoid jar his wound , which be on that 
 side . 

 at this spot we be oblige to stay till daybreak , since it be 
 impossible to follow the spoor by night , a circumstance that give the 
 cannibal a great advantage over we . 

 the next two day be repetition of the first , but on the fourth we 
 pass out of the bush - veld into the swamp country that border the 
 great river . here our task be still easy since the Amahagger have 
 follow one of the path make by the river - dweller who have their 
 habitation on mound , though whether these be natural or artificial I 
 be not sure , and sometimes on float island . 

 on our second day in the reed we come upon a sad sight . to our left 
 stand one of these mound village , if a village it could be call , 
 since it consist only of four or five hut inhabit perhaps by twenty 
 people . we go up to it to obtain information and stumble across the 
 body of an old man lie in the pathway . a few yard far on we 
 find the ash of a big fire and by it such remain as we have see at 
 Strathmuir . here there have be another cannibal feast . the miserable 
 hut be empty , but as at Strathmuir , have not be burn . 

 we be go away when the acute ear of Hans catch the sound of 
 groan . we search about and in a clump of reed near the foot of the 
 mound , find an old woman with a great spear wound just above her 
 skinny thigh pierce deep into the vital , but of a nature which be 
 not immediately mortal . one of Robertson 's people who understand the 
 language of these swamp - dweller well , speak to she . she tell he that 
 she want water . it be bring and she drink copiously . then in answer 
 to his question she begin to talk . 

 she say that the Amahagger have attack the village and kill all who 
 could not escape . they have eat a young woman and three child . she 
 have be wound by a spear and flee away into the place where we find 
 she , where none of they take the trouble to follow she as she " be not 
 worth eat . " 

 by my direction the man ask she whether she know anything of these 
 Amahagger . she reply that her grandfather have , though she have hear 
 nothing of they since she be a child , which must have be seventy 
 year before . they be a fierce people who live far up north across 
 the Great River , the remnant of a race that have once " rule the world . " 

 her grandfather use to say that they be not always cannibal , but 
 have become so long before because of a lack of food and now have acquire 
 the taste . it be for this purpose that they still raid to get 
 other people to eat , since their ruler would not allow they to eat one 
 another . the flesh of cattle they do not care for , although they have 
 plenty of they , but sometimes they eat goat and pig because they say 
 they taste like man . accord to her grandfather they be a very 
 evil people and full of magic . 

 all of this the old woman tell we quite briskly after she have drink the 
 water , I think because her wound have mortify and she feel no pain . her 
 information , however , as be common with the aged , deal entirely with 
 the far past ; of the history of the Amahagger since the day of she 
 forebear she know nothing , nor have she see anything of Inez . all she 
 could tell we be that some of they have attack her village at dawn and 
 that when she run out of the hut she be spear . 

 while Robertson and I be wonder what we should do with the poor old 
 creature whom it seem cruel to leave here to perish , she clear up 
 the question by suddenly expire before our eye . utter the name of 
 someone with whom , doubtless , she have be familiar in her youth , three 
 or four time over , she just sink down and seem to go to sleep and on 
 examination we find that she be dead . so we leave she and go on . 

 next day we come to the edge of the Great River , here a sheet of placid 
 running water about a mile across , for at this time of the year it be 
 low . perceive quite a big village on our left , we go to it and 
 make enquiry , to find that it have not be attack by the cannibal , 
 probably because it be too powerful , but that three night before some 
 of their canoe have be steal , in which no doubt these have cross the 
 river . 

 as the people of this village have trade with Robertson at Strathmuir , 
 we have no difficulty in obtain other canoe from they in which to 
 cross the Zambesi in return for one of our oxen that I could see be 
 already sicken from tsetse bite . these canoe be large enough to 
 take the donkey that be patient creature and stand still , but the 
 cattle we could not get into they for fear of an upset . so we kill 
 the two drive beast that be leave to we and take they with we as 
 dead meat for food , while the three remain pack oxen we try to swim 
 across , drag they after the canoe with hide reim round their 
 horn . as a result two be drown , but one , a bold - hearted and 
 enterprise animal , gain the other bank . 

 here again we strike a sea of reed in which , after cast about , Hans 
 once more find the spoor of the Amahagger . that it be theirs beyond 
 doubt be prove by the circumstance that on a thorny kind of weed we 
 find a fragment of a cotton dress which , because of the pattern stamp 
 on it , we all recognise as one that Inez have be wear . at first I 
 think that this have be tear off by the thorn , but on examination 
 we become certain that it have be place there purposely , probably 
 by Janee , to give we a clue . this conclusion be confirm when at 
 subsequent period of the hunt we find other fragment of the same 
 garment . 

 now it would be useless for I to set out the detail of this prolong 
 and arduous chase which in all endure for something over three week . 
 again and again we lose the trail and be only able to recover it by 
 long and elaborate search , which occupy much time . then , after we 
 escape from the reed and swamp , we find ourselves upon stony 
 upland where the spoor be almost impossible to follow , indeed , we only 
 rediscover it by stumble across the dead body of that cannibal whom 
 Inez have wound . evidently he have perish from his hurt , which I could 
 see have mortify . from the state of his remain we gather that the 
 raider must be about two day ' march ahead of we . 

 strike their spoor again on soft ground where the impress of their 
 foot remain - at any rate to the cunning sight of Hans - we follow 
 they down across great valley wherein tree grow sparsely , which 
 valley be separate from each other by ridge of high and barren 
 land . on these belt of rocky soil our difficulty be great , but here 
 twice we be put on the right track by more fragment tear from the 
 dress of Inez . 

 at length we lose the spoor altogether ; not a sign of it be to be 
 find . we have no idea which way to go . all about we appear these 
 valley cover with scatter bush run this way and that , so that 
 we could not tell which of they to follow or to cross . the thing seem 
 hopeless , for how could we expect to find a little body of man in 
 that immensity ? Hans shake his head and even the fierce and steadfast 
 Robertson be discourage . 

 " I fear my poor lassie be go , " he say , and relapse into brooding as 
 have become his will not . 

 " never say die ! it be dog as do it ! " I reply cheerfully in the 
 word of Nelson , who also have learn what it mean to hunt an enemy 
 over trackless waste , although his be of water . 

 I walk to the top of the rise where we be encamp , and sit down 
 alone to think matter over . our condition be somewhat parlous ; all 
 our beast be now dead , even the second donkey , which be the last of 
 they , have perish that morning , and be eat , for food be scanty 
 since of late we have meet with little game . the Strathmuir man , who now 
 must carry the load , be almost wear out and doubtless would have 
 desert , except for the fact that there be no place to which they 
 could go . even the Zulus be discourage , and say they have come 
 away from home across the Great River to fight , not to run about in 
 wilderness and starve , though Umslopogaas make no complaint , be 
 buoy up by the promise of his soothsayer , Goroko , that battle be 
 ahead of he in which he would win great glory . 

 han , however , remain cheerful , for the reason , as he remark 
 vacuously , that the Great Medicine be with we and that therefore , 
 however bad thing seem to be , all in fact be well ; an argument that 
 carry no conviction to my soul . 

 it be on a certain evening towards sunset that I go away thus alone . 
 I look about I , east and west and north . everywhere appear the 
 same bush - clothe valley and barren rise , mile upon mile of they . I 
 bethink I of the map that old Zikali have draw in the ash , and 
 remember that it show these valley and rise and that beyond they 
 there should be a great swamp , and beyond the swamp a mountain . so it 
 seem that we be on the right road to the home of his white Queen , 
 if such a person exist , or at any rate we be pass over country 
 similar to that which he have picture or imagine . 

 but at this time I be not trouble my head about white queen . I be 
 think of poor Inez . that she be alive a few day before we know from 
 the fragment of her dress . but where be she now ? the spoor be utterly 
 lose on that stony ground , or if any trace of it remain a heavy 
 deluge of rain have wash they away . even Hans have confess himself 
 beat . 

 I star about I helplessly , and as I do so a fly ray of light 
 from the set sun reflect downwards from a storm - cloud , fall upon a 
 white patch on the crest of one of the distant land - wave . it strike I 
 that probably limestone outcrop at this spot , as indeed prove to be 
 the case ; also that such a patch of white would be a convenient guide 
 for any who be travel across that sea of bush . far , some 
 instinct within seem to impel I to steer for it , although I have all 
 but make up my mind to go in a totally different direction many more 
 point to the east . it be almost as though a voice be call to I 
 to take this path and no other . Doubtless this be an effect produce 
 by weariness and mental overstrain . still , there it be , very real and 
 tangible , one that I do not attempt to combat . 

 so next morning at the dawn I head north by west , lay my course for 
 that white patch and for the first time break the straight line of 
 our advance . Captain Robertson , whose temper have not be better 
 by prolonged and frightful anxiety , or I may add , by his unaccustomed 
 abstinence , ask I rather roughly why I be alter the course . 

 " look here , Captain , " I answer , " if we be at sea and you do 
 something of the sort , I should not put such a question to you , and if 
 by any chance I do , I should not expect you to answer . well , by your 
 own wish I be in command here and I think that the same argument hold . " 

 " yes , " he reply . " I suppose you have study your chart , if there 
 be any of this God - forsake country , and at any rate discipline be 
 discipline . so steam ahead and do not   mind I . " 

 the other accept my decision without comment ; most of they be so 
 miserable that they do not care which way we go , also they be good 
 enough to repose confidence in my judgment . 

 " Doubtless the Baas have reason , " say Hans dubiously , " although the 
 spoor , when last we see it , head towards the rise sun and as the 
 country be all the same , I do not see why those man - eater should have 
 return . " 

 " yes , " I say , " I have reason , " although in fact I have none at all . 

 Hans survey I with a watery eye as though wait for I to explain 
 they , but I look haughty and decline to oblige . 

 " the Baas have reason , " continue Hans , " for take we on what I think 
 to be the wrong side of that great ridge , there to hunt for the spoor of 
 the man - eater , and they be so deep down in his mind that he can not 
 dig they up for poor old Hans to look at . well , the Baas wear the Great 
 Medicine and perhaps it be there that the reason sit . those Strathmuir 
 fellow say that they can go no far and wish to die . Umslopogaas 
 have just go to they with his axe to tell they that he be ready to help 
 they to their wish . look , he have get there , for they be come quickly , 
 who after all prefer to live . " 

 well , we start for my white patch of stone which no one else have 
 notice and of which I say nothing to anyone , and reach it by the 
 follow evening , to find , as I expect , that it be a lime outcrop . 

 by now we be in a poor way , for we have practically nothing leave to 
 eat , which do not tend to raise the spirit of the party . also that 
 lime outcrop prove to be an uninteresting spot overlook a wide 
 valley which seem to suggest that there be other valley of a 
 similar sort beyond it , and nothing more . 

 Captain Robertson sit stern - faced and despondent at a distance mutter 
 into his beard , as have become a habit with he . Umslopogaas lean upon 
 his axe and contemplate the heaven , also occasionally the Strathmuir 
 man who cower beneath his eye . the Zulus squat about share such 
 snuff as remain to they in economic pinch . Goroko , the witch - doctor , 
 engage himself in consult his " Spirit , " by mean of bone - throwing , 
 upon the humble subject of whether or no we should succeed in kill 
 any game for food to - morrow , a point on which I gather that his 
 " Spirit " be quite uncertain . in short , the gloom be deep and universal 
 and the sky look as though it be go to rain . 

 Hans become sarcastic . sneak up to I in his most aggravating way , 
 like a dog that mean to steal something and cover up the theft with 
 simulated affection , he point out one by one all the disadvantage of 
 our present position . he indicate per contra , that if his advice 
 have be follow , his conviction be that even if we have not find the 
 man - eater and rescue the lady call Sad - Eyes , our state would have 
 be quite different . he be sure , he add , that the valley which he 
 have suggest we should follow , be one full of game , inasmuch as he have 
 see their spoor at its entrance . 

 " then why do you not say so ? " I ask . 

 han suck at his empty corn - cob pipe , which be his way of indicate 
 that he would like I to give he some tobacco , much as a dog groan 
 heavily under the table when he want a bit to eat , and answer that it 
 be not for he to point out thing to one who know everything , like the 
 great Macumazahn , Watcher - by - Night , his honoured master . still , the luck 
 do seem to have go a bit wrong . the privation could have be put up 
 with   here he suck very loudly at the empty pipe and look at mine , 
 which be alight , everything could have be put up with , if only there 
 have be a chance of come even with those man - eater and rescue the 
 Lady Sad - Eyes , whose face haunt his sleep . as it be , however , he 
 be convince that by follow the course I have map out we have lose 
 their spoor finally and that probably they be now three day ' march 
 away in another direction . still , the Baas have say that he have his 
 reason , and that of course be enough for he , Hans , only if the baas 
 would condescend to tell he , he would as a matter of curiosity like to 
 know what the reason be . 

 at that moment I confess that , much as I be attach to he , I should 
 have like to murder Hans , who , I feel , believe that he have I " on 
 toast , " to use a vulgar phrase , be take advantage of my position to 
 make a mock of I in his sly , Hottentot way . 

 I try to continue to look grand , but feel that the attitude do 
 not impress . then I star about I as though take counsel with the 
 Heavens , devoutly hop that the Heavens would respond to my mute 
 appeal . as a matter of fact they do . 

 " there be my reason , Hans , " I say in my most icy voice , and I point 
 to a faint line of smoke rise against the twilight sky on the further 
 side of the intervene valley . 

 " you will perceive , Hans , " I add , " that those Amahagger cannibal have 
 forget their caution and light a fire yonder , which they have not do 
 for a long time . perhaps you would like to know why this have happen . 
 if so I will tell you . it be because for some day past I have purposely 
 lose their spoor , which they know we be follow , and light fire to 
 puzzle they . now , think that they have do with we , they have become 
 incautious and show we where they be . that be my reason , Hans . " 

 he hear and , although of course he do not believe that I have lose the 
 spoor on purpose , star at I till I think his little eye be go 
 to drop out of his head . but even in his admiration he contrive to 
 convey an insult as only a native can . 

 " how wonderful be the Great Medicine of the Opener - of - road , that it 
 should have be able thus to instruct the Baas , " he say . " without 
 doubt the Great Medicine be right and yonder those man - eater be 
 encamp , who might just as well as have be anywhere else within a 
 hundred mile . " 

 " Drat the Great Medicine , " I reply , but beneath my breath , then add 
 aloud , 

 " be so good , Hans , as to go to Umslopogaas and to tell he that 
 Macumazahn , or the Great Medicine , propose to march at once to attack 
 the camp of the Amahagger , and - here be some tobacco . " 

 " yes , Baas , " answer Hans humbly , as he snatch the tobacco and 
 wriggle away like a worm . 

 then I go to talk with Robertson . 

 the end of it be that within an hour we be creep across that 
 valley towards the spot where I have see the line of smoke rise 
 against the twilight sky . 

 somewhere about midnight we reach the neighbourhood of this place . how 
 near or how far we be from it , we could not tell since the moon be 
 invisible , as of course the smoke be in the dark . now the question be , 
 what should we do ? 

 obviously there would be enormous advantage in a night attack , or at 
 least in locate the enemy , so that it might be carry out at dawn 
 before he march . especially be this so , since we be scarcely in a 
 condition even if we could come face to face with they , to fight these 
 savage when they be prepared and in the light of day . only we two 
 white man , with Hans , Umslopogaas and his Zulus , could be rely upon 
 in such a case , since the Strathmuir mix - blood have become entirely 
 demoralise and be not to be trust at a pinch . indeed , tired and 
 half starve as we be , none of we be at his good . therefore a 
 surprise seem our only chance . but first we must find those whom we 
 wish to surprise . 

 ultimately , after a hurried consultation , it be agree that Hans and 
 I should go forward and see if we could locate the Amahagger . Robertson 
 wish to come too , but I point out that he must remain to look after 
 his people , who , if he leave they , might take the opportunity to melt 
 away in the darkness , especially as they know that heavy fighting be 
 at hand . also if anything happen to I it be desirable that one white 
 man should remain to lead the party . Umslopogaas , too , volunteer , but 
 know his character , I decline his help . to tell the truth , I be 
 almost certain that if we come upon the man - eater , he would charge the 
 whole lot of they and accomplish a fine but futile end after hack 
 down a number of cannibal barbarian , whose extinction or escape 
 remain absolutely immaterial to our purpose , namely , the rescue of 
 Inez . 

 so it come about that Hans and I start alone , I not at all enjoy 
 the job . I suppose that there lurk in my nature some of that primeval 
 terror of the dark , which must continually have haunt our remote 
 forefather of a hundred or a thousand generation go and still 
 linger in the blood of most of we . at any rate even if I be name the 
 Watcher - by - night , greatly do I prefer to fight or to face peril in the 
 sunlight , though it be true that I would rather avoid both at any time . 

 in fact , I wish heartily that the Amahagger be at the other side 
 of Africa , or in heaven , and that I , completely ignorant of the person 
 call Inez Robertson , be seat smoke the pipe of peace on my own 
 stoep in Durban . I think that Hans guess my state of mind , since 
 he suggest that he should go alone , add with his usual unveil 
 rudeness , that he be quite certain that he would do much well without 
 I , since white man always make a noise . 

 " yes , " I reply , determine to give he a Roland for his Oliver , " I 
 have no doubt you would - under the first bush you come across , where you 
 would sleep till dawn , and then return and say that you could not find 
 the Amahagger . " 

 Hans chuckle , quite appreciate the joke , and have thus mutually 
 affront each other , we start on our quest . 



 CHAPTER IX 

 the swamp 

 neither Hans nor I carry rifle that we know would be in the way on 
 our business , which be just to scout . moreover , one be always tempt 
 to shoot if a gun be at hand , and this I do not want to do at present . 
 so , although I have my revolver in case of urgent necessity , my only 
 other weapon be a Zulu axe , that formerly have belong to one of those 
 two man who die defend Inez on the veranda at Strathmuir , while Hans 
 have nothing but his long knife . thus arm , or unarmed , we creep forward 
 towards that spot whence , as we conjecture , we have see the line of 
 smoke rise some hour before . 

 for about a quarter of a mile we go on thus without see or hear 
 anything , and a difficult job it be in that gloom among the scatter 
 tree with no light save such as the star give we . indeed , I be about 
 to suggest that we have well abandon the enterprise until daybreak when 
 Hans nudge I , whispering , 

 " look to the right between those twin thorn . " 

 I obey and follow the line of sight which he have indicate , 
 perceive , at a distance of about two hundred yard a faint glow , so 
 faint indeed that I think only Hans would have notice it . really it 
 might have be nothing more than the phosphorescence rise from a heap 
 of fungus , or even from a decay animal . 

 " the fire of which we see the smoke that have burn to ash , " whisper 
 Hans again . " I think that they have go , but let we look . " 

 so we crawl forward very cautiously to avoid make the slight 
 noise ; so cautiously , indeed , that it must have take we nearly half an 
 hour to cover those two hundred yard . 

 at length we be within about forty yard of that die fire and , 
 afraid to go far , come to a stand - or rather , a lie - still - behind 
 some bush until we know more . Hans lift his head and sniff with 
 his broad nostril ; then he whisper into my ear , but so low that I 
 could scarcely hear he . 

 " Amahagger there all right , Baas , I smell they . " 

 this of course be possible , since what wind there be blow from the 
 direction of the fire , although I whose nose be fairly keen could smell 
 nothing at all . so I determine to wait and watch a while , and indicate 
 my decision to Hans , who , consider our purpose accomplish , show 
 sign of wish to retreat . 

 some minute we lie thus , till of a sudden this happen . a branch of 
 resinous wood of which the stem have be eat through by the flame , 
 fall upon the ash of the fire and burn up with a brilliant light . in 
 it we see that the Amahagger be sleep in a circle round the fire 
 wrap in their blanket . 

 also we see another thing , namely that near to we , not more than a 
 dozen yard away , indeed , be a kind of little tent , also make of fur 
 rug or blanket , which doubtless shelter Inez . indeed , this be 
 evident from the fact that at the mouth of it , wrap up in something , 
 lay none other than her maid , Janee , for her face be towards we , be 
 recognise by we both in the flare of the flaming branch . one more thing 
 we note , namely , that two of the cannibal , evidently a guard , be 
 sleep between we and the little tent . of course they ought to have 
 be awake , but fatigue have overcome they and there they slumber , 
 seat on the ground , their head hang forward almost upon their 
 knee . 

 an idea come to I . if we could kill those man without wake the other 
 in that gloom , it might be possible to rescue Inez at once . rapidly I 
 weigh the pro and con of such an attempt . its advantage , if 
 successful , be that the object of our pursuit would be carry through 
 without further trouble and that it be most doubtful whether we should 
 ever get such a chance again . if we return to fetch the other and 
 attack in force , the probability be that those Amahagger , or one of 
 they , would hear some sound make by the advance of a number of man , and 
 fly into the darkness ; or , rather than lose Inez , they might kill she . 
 or if they stand and fight , she might be slay in the scrimmage . or , 
 as after all we have only about a dozen effective , for the Strathmuir 
 bearer could not be rely upon , they might defeat and kill we whom 
 they outnumber by two or three to one . 

 these be the argument for the attempt . those for not make it be 
 equally obvious . to begin with it be one of extraordinary risk ; the two 
 guard or someone else behind they might wake up - for such people , like 
 dog , mostly sleep with one eye open , especially when they know that 
 they be be pursue . or if they do not we might bungle the business 
 so that they raise an outcry before they grow silent for ever , in which 
 case both of we and perhaps Inez also would probably pay the penalty 
 before we could get away . 

 such be the horn dilemma upon one point or other of which we run the 
 risk of be impale . for a full minute or more I consider the matter 
 with an earnestness almost amount to mental agony , and at last all 
 but come to the conclusion that the danger be too enormous . it would be 
 well , notwithstanding the many disadvantage of that plan , to go back 
 and fetch the other . 

 but then it be that I make one of my many mistake in life . Most of 
 we do more foolish thing than wise one and sometimes I think that 
 in spite of a certain reputation for caution and far - sightedness , I be 
 exceptionally cursed in this respect . indeed , when I look back upon my 
 past , I can scarcely see the scanty flower of wisdom that decorate 
 its path because of the fat , ugly tree of error by which it be 
 overshadow . 

 on that occasion , forget past experience where Hans be concern , 
 my natural tendency to blunder take the form of rely upon another 's 
 judgment instead of on my own . although I have form a certain view as 
 to what should be do , the pro and con seem so evenly balanced 
 that I determine to consult the little hottentot and accept his 
 verdict . this , after all , be but a form of gambling like pitch and 
 toss , since , although it be true Hans be a clever , or at any rate a 
 cunning man accord to his light , and experience , it mean that 
 I be place my own judgment in abeyance , which no one consider 
 a life - and - death enterprise should do , take the chance of that of 
 another , whatever it might be . however , not for the first time , I do 
 so - to my grief . 

 in the tiny of whisper with my lip right against his smelly head , I 
 submit the problem to Hans , ask he what we should do , go on or go 
 back . he consider a while , then answer in a voice which he contrive 
 to make like the drone of a night beetle . 

 " those man be fast asleep , I know it by their breathing . also the Baas 
 have the Great Medicine . therefore I say go on , kill they and rescue 
 Sad - Eyes . " 

 now I see that the Fates to which I have appeal have decide against I 
 and that I must accept their decree . with a sick and sink heart - for 
 I do not at all like the business - I wonder for a moment what have 
 lead Hans to take this view , which be directly opposite to any I have 
 expect from he . of course his superstition about the Great Medicine 
 have something to do with it , but I feel convinced that this be not all . 

 even then I guess that two argument appeal to he , of which 
 the first be that he desire , if possible , to put an end to this 
 intolerable and uncease hunt which have wear we all out , no matter 
 what that end might be . the second and more powerful , however , be , I 
 believe , and rightly , that the idea of this stealthy , midnight blow 
 appeal irresistibly to the craft of his half - wild nature in which the 
 strain of the leopard and the snake seem to mingle with that of the 
 human being . for be it remember that notwithstanding his veneer of 
 civilisation , Hans be a savage whose forefather for countless age have 
 preserve themselves alive by mean of such attack and stratagem . 

 the die have be cast , in the same infinitesimal whisper we make our 
 arrangement , which be few and simple . they amount to this - that 
 we be to creep on to the man and each of we to kill that one who be 
 opposite to he , I with the axe and Hans with his knife , remember 
 that it must be do with a single stroke - that be , if they do not 
 wake up and kill we - after which we be to get Inez out of her shelter , 
 dressed or undressed , and make off with she into the darkness where we 
 be pretty sure of be able to baffle pursuit until we reach our 
 own camp . 

 provide that we could kill the two guard in the proper fashion - rather 
 a large proviso , I admit - the thing be simple as shell pea which , 
 notwithstanding the proverb , in my experience be not simple at all , 
 since generally the shell crack the wrong way and at least one of the 
 pea remain in the pod . so it happen in this case , for Janee , whom 
 we have both forget , remain in the pod . 

 I be sure I do not   know why we overlook she ; indeed , the error be 
 inexcusable , especially as Hans have already experience her foolishness 
 and she be lie there before our eye . I suppose that our mind be 
 so concentrated upon the guard - killing and the tragic and impressive 
 Inez that there be no room in they for the stolid and matter - of - fact 
 Janee . at any rate she prove to be the pea that would not come out of 
 the pod . 

 often in my life I have feel terrified , not be by nature one of those 
 who rejoice in danger and wild adventure for their own sake , which 
 only the stupid do , but who have , on the contrary , be force to 
 undertake they by the pressure of circumstance , a kind of hydraulic 
 force that no one can resist , and who , have undertake , have be 
 carry through they , triumph over the shrinking of his flesh by 
 some secret reserve of nerve power . almost be I tempt to call it 
 spirit - power , something that live beyond and yet inspire our frail and 
 fallible body . 

 well , rarely have I be more frightened than I be at this moment . 
 actually I hang back until I see that Hans slither through the grass 
 like a thick yellow snake with the great knife in his right hand , 
 be quite a foot ahead of I . then my pride come to the rescue and I 
 spurt , if one can spurt upon one 's stomach , and draw level with he . 
 after this we go at a pace so slow that any able - bodied snail would 
 have leave we stand still . inch by inch we creep forward , lie 
 motionless a while after each convulsive movement , once for quite a 
 long time , since the left - hand cannibal seem about to wake up , for he 
 open his mouth and yawn . if so , he change his mind and roll from 
 a sit posture on to his side , go to sleep much more soundly than 
 before . 

 a minute or so later the right - hand ruffian , my man , also stir , so 
 sharply that I think he have hear something . apparently , however , he 
 be only haunt by dream result from an evil life , or perhaps 
 by the prescience of its end , for after wave his arm and mutter 
 something in a frightened voice , he too , weary out , poor devil , sink 
 back into sleep . 

 at last we be on they , but pause because we could not see exactly 
 where to strike and know , each of we , that our first blow must be the 
 last and fatal . a cloud have come up and dim what light there be , and 
 we must wait for it to pass . it be a long wait , or so it seem . 

 at length that cloud do pass and in faint outline I see the classical 
 head of my Amahagger bow in deep sleep . with a heart beat as it 
 do only in the fierce extremity of love or war , I hiss like a 
 snake , which be our agree signal . then rise to my knee , I lift 
 the Zulu axe and strike with all my strength . 

 the blow be straight and true ; Umslopogaas himself could not have 
 deal a well . the victim in front of I utter no sound and make 
 no movement ; only sink gently on to his side , and there lie as dead as 
 though he have never be bear . 

 it appear that Hans have do equally well , since the other man kick 
 out his long leg , which strike I on the knee . then he also become 
 strangely still . in short , both of they be stone dead and would tell 
 no story this side of Judgment Day . 

 recover my axe , which have be wrench from my hand , I creep forward 
 and open the curtain - like rug or blanket , I do not know which they 
 be , that cover Inez . I hear she stir at once . the movement have 
 waken she , since captive sleep lightly . 

 " make no noise , Inez , " I whisper . " it be I , Allan Quatermain , come to 
 rescue you . slip out and follow I ; do you understand ? " 

 " yes , quite , " she whisper back and begin to rise . 

 at this moment a blood - curdle yell seem to fill earth and heaven , a 
 yell at the memory of which even now I feel faint , although I be write 
 year after its echo die away . 

 I may as well say at once that it come from Janee who , awake suddenly , 
 have perceive against the background of the sky , Hans stand over she , 
 look like a yellow devil with a long knife in his hand , which she 
 think be about to be use to murder she . 

 so , lack self - restraint , she scream in the most lusty fashion , for 
 her lung be excellent , and - the game be up . 

 instantly every man sleep round the fire leap to his foot and rush 
 in the direction of the echo of Janee 's yell . it be impossible to get 
 Inez free of her tent arrangement or to do anything , except whisper to 
 she , 

 " feign sleep and know nothing . we will follow you . your father be with 
 we . " 

 then I bolt back into the bush , which Hans have reach already . 

 a minute or two later when we be clear of the hubbub and near our 
 own camp , Hans remark to I sententiously , 

 " the Great Medicine work well , Baas , but not quite well enough , for 
 what medicine can avail against a woman 's folly ? " 

 " it be our own folly we should blame , " I answer . " we ought to have 
 know that fool - girl would shriek , and take precaution . " 

 " yes , Baas , we ought to have kill she too , for nothing else would have 
 keep she quiet , " reply Hans in cheerful assent . " now we shall have to 
 pay for our mistake , for the hunt must go on . " 

 at this moment we stumble across Robertson and Umslopogaas who , with 
 the other , and every live thing within a mile or two have also hear 
 Janee 's yell , and briefly tell our story . when he learn how near we 
 have be to rescue his daughter , Robertson groan , but Umslopogaas 
 only say , 

 " well , there be two less of the man - eater leave to deal with . still , 
 for once your wisdom fail you , Macumazahn . when you have find the camp 
 you should have return , so that we might all attack it together . have 
 we do so , before the dawn there would not have be one of they leave . " 

 " yes , " I answer , " I think that my wisdom do fail I , if I have any to 
 fail . but come ; perhaps we may catch they yet . " 

 so we advance , Hans and I show the road . but when we reach the 
 place it be too late , for all that remain of the Amahagger , or of 
 Inez and Janee , be the two dead man whom we have kill , and in that 
 darkness pursuit be impossible . so we go back to our own camp to rest 
 and await the dawn before take up the trail , only to find ourselves 
 confront with a new trouble . all the Strathmuir half - breed whom we 
 have leave behind as useless , have take advantage of our absence and that 
 of the Zulus , to desert . they have just bolt back upon our track and 
 vanish into the sea of bush . what become of they I do not know , as we 
 never see they again , but my belief be that these cowardly fellow all 
 perish , for certainly not one of they reach Strathmuir . 

 fortunately for we , however , they depart in such a hurry that they 
 leave all their load behind they , and even some of the gun they 
 carry . evidently Janee 's yell be the last straw which break the back 
 of such nerve as remain to they . Doubtless they believe it to be the 
 signal of attack by horde of cannibal . 

 as there be nothing to said or do , since any pursuit of these cur 
 be out of the question , we make the good of thing as they be . it 
 prove a simple business . from the load we select such article as 
 be essential , ammunition for the most part , to carry ourselves - and 
 the rest we abandon , hide it under a pile of stone in case we 
 should ever come that way again . 

 the gun they have throw aside we distribute among the Zulus who have 
 none , though the thought that they possess they , so far as I be 
 concern , add another terror to life . the prospect of go into 
 battle with those wild axeman let off bullet in every direction be 
 not pleasant , but fortunately when that crisis come , they cast they away 
 and revert to the weapon to which they be accustom . 

 now all this sound much like a tale of disaster , or at any rate of 
 failure . it be , however , wonderful by what strange way good result 
 be bring about , so much so that at time I think that these seem 
 accident must be arrange by an Intelligence superior to our own , to 
 fulfil through us purpose of which we know nothing , and frequently , 
 be it admit , of a nature sufficiently obscure . of course this be a 
 fatalistic doctrine , but then , as I have say before , within certain 
 limit I be a fatalist . 

 to take the present case , for instance , the whole Inez episode at first 
 sight might appear to be an excrescence on my narrative , of which the 
 object be to describe how I meet a certain very wonderful woman and what 
 I hear and experience in her company . yet it be not really so , since 
 have it not be for the Inez adventure , it be quite clear that I should 
 never have reach the home of this woman , if woman she be , or have 
 see she at all . before long this become very obvious to I , as shall be 
 tell . 

 from the night upon which Hans and I fail to rescue Inez we have 
 no more difficulty in follow the trail of the cannibal , who 
 thenceforward be never more than a few hour ahead of we and have no 
 time to be careful or to attempt to hide their spoor . yet so fast do 
 they travel that do what we would , burden and weary as we be , it 
 prove impossible to overtake they . 

 for the first three day the track run on through scattered , roll 
 bush - veld of the character that I have describe , but tend 
 continually down hill . when we break camp on the morning of the fourth 
 day , eat a hasty meal at dawn   for now game have become astonishingly 
 plentiful , so that we do not lack food   the rise sun show beneath 
 we an endless sea of billowy mist stretch in every direction far as 
 the sight could carry . 

 to the north , however , it do come to an end , for there , as I judge 
 fifty or sixty mile away , rise the grim outline of what look like a 
 huge fortress , which I know must be one of those extraordinary mountain 
 formation , probably owe their origin to volcanic action , that be to 
 be meet with here and there in the vast expanse of Central and Eastern 
 Africa . be so distant it be impossible to estimate its size , which 
 I guess must be enormous , but in look at it I bethink I of that 
 great mountain in which Zikali say the marvellous white Queen live , 
 and wonder whether it could be the same , as from my memory of his map 
 upon the ash , it well might be , that is , if such a place exist 
 at all . if so the map have show it as surround by swamp and - well , 
 surely that mist hide the face of a mighty swamp ? 

 it do indeed , since before nightfall , follow the spoor of those 
 Amahagger , we have plunge into a morass so vast that in all my 
 experience I have never see or hear of its like . it be a veritable 
 ocean of papyrus and other reed , some of they a dozen or more foot 
 high , so that it be impossible to see a yard in any direction . 

 here it be that the Amahagger ahead of we prove our salvation , since 
 without they to guide we we must soon have perish . for through that 
 gigantic swamp there run a road , as I think an ancient road , since in 
 one or two place I see stone work which must have be lay by man . yet 
 it be not a road which it would have be possible to follow without 
 a guide , see that it also be overgrow with reed . indeed , the only 
 difference between it and the surround swamp be that on the road 
 the soil be comparatively firm , that be to say , one seldom sink into 
 it above the knee , whereas on either side of it quagmire be often 
 apparently bottomless , and what be more , partook of the nature of 
 quicksand . 

 this we find out soon after we enter the swamp , since Robertson , 
 push forward with the fierce eagerness which seem to consume he , 
 neglect to keep his eye upon the spoor and step off the edge on to 
 land that appear to be exactly similar to its surface . instantly he 
 begin to sink in greasy and tenacious mud . Umslopogaas and I be only 
 twenty yard behind , yet by the time we reach he in answer to his 
 shout , already he be engulf up to his middle and go down so 
 rapidly that in another minute he would have vanish altogether . well , 
 we get he out but not with ease , for that mud clung to he like the 
 tentacle of an octopus . after this we be more careful . 

 nor do this road run straight ; on the contrary , it curve about and 
 sometimes turn at right angle , doubtless to avoid a piece of swamp 
 over which it have prove impossible for the ancient to construct a 
 causeway , or to follow some out - crop of hard soil beneath . 

 the difficulty of that horrible place be beyond description , and 
 indeed can scarcely be imagine . first there be that of a kind of grass 
 which grow among the root of the reed and have edge like to those of 
 knife . as Robertson and I wear gaiter we do not suffer so much from 
 it , but the poor Zulus with their bare leg be terribly cut about and 
 in some case lame . 

 then there be the mosquito which live here by the million and all 
 seem anxious for a bite ; also snake of a peculiarly deadly kind be 
 numerous . a Zulu be bite by one of they of so poisonous a nature that 
 he die within three minute , for the venom seem to go straight to his 
 heart . we throw his body into the swamp , where it vanish at once . 

 lastly there be the all - pervade stench and the intolerable heat of 
 the place , since no breath of air could penetrate that forest of 
 reed , while a minor trouble be that of the multitude of leech 
 which fasten on to our body . by look one could see the creature 
 sit on the under side of leaf with their head stretch out 
 wait to attack anything that go by . as wayfarer there could not 
 have be numerous , I wonder what they have live on for the last few 
 thousand year . by the way , I find that paraffin , of which we have a 
 small supply for our hand - lamp , rub over all expose surface , be 
 to some extent a protection against these blood - suck worm and the 
 gnat , although it do make one go about smell like a dirty oil tin . 

 during the day , except for the occasional rush of some great iguana 
 or other reptile , and the sound of the wing of the flock of wildfowl 
 pass over we from time to time , the march be deathly silent . but at 
 night it be different , for then the bull - frogs boom incessantly , as 
 do the bittern , while great swamp owl and other night - fly bird 
 utter their weird cry . also there be mysterious sucking noise 
 cause , no doubt , by the sinking of area of swamp , with those of 
 burst bubble of foul , up - rush gas . 

 strange light , too , play about , will - o'-the - wisps or St. Elmo fire , 
 as I believe they be call , that frighten the Zulus very much , since 
 they believe they to be spirit of the dead . perhaps this superstition 
 have something to do with their native legend that mankind be " tear out 
 of the reed . " if so , they may have imagine that the ghost of man go 
 back to the reed , of which there be enough here to accommodate those 
 of the entire Zulu nation . any way they be much scared ; even the bold 
 witch - doctor , Goroko , be scared and go through incantation with the 
 little bag of medicine he carry to secure protection for himself and 
 his companion . indeed , I think even the iron Umslopogaas himself be 
 not as comfortable as he might have be , although he do inform I that 
 he have come out to fight and do not care whether it be with man , or 
 wizard , or spirit . 

 in short , of all the journey that I have make , with the exception of 
 the passage of the desert on our way to King Solomon 's Mines , I think 
 that through this enormous swamp be the most miserable . heartily do I 
 curse myself for ever have undertake such a quest in a wild attempt 
 to allay that sickness , or rather to quench that thirst of the soul 
 which , I imagine , at time assail most of those who have heart and 
 think or dream . 

 for this be at the bottom of the business : this it be which have 
 deliver I into the hand of Zikali , Opener - of - road , who , as now I 
 be sure , be merely make use of I for his private occult purpose . he 
 desire to consult the distant Oracle , if such a person exist , as to 
 great scheme of his own , and therefore , to attain his end , make use 
 of my secret longing which I have be so foolish as to reveal to he , 
 quite careless of what happen to I in the process .   a bit narrow and 
 uncharitable , this view . it seem to I that Zikali be take a big risk 
 in give he the Great Medicine . - JB 

 well , I be in for the business and must follow it to the finish 
 whatever that might be . after all it be very interesting and if 
 there be anything in what Zikali say   if there be not I could not 
 conceive what object he have in send I on such a wild - goose chase 
 through this home of geese and duck , it might become more interesting 
 still . for be pretty well fever - proof I do not think I should die 
 in that morass , as of course nine white man out of ten would have do , 
 and , beyond it lie the huge mountain which day by day grow large and 
 clear . 

 nor do Hans , who , with a childlike trust , pin his faith to the Great 
 Medicine . this , he remark , be the bad veld through which he have 
 ever travel , but as the Great Medicine would never consent to be 
 bury in that stink mud , he have no doubt that we should come safely 
 through it some time . I reply that this wonderful medicine of his have 
 not save one of our companion who have now make a grave in the same 
 mud . 

 " no , Baas , " he say , " but those Zulus have nothing to do with the 
 Medicine which be give to you , and to I who accompany you when we 
 see the Opener - of - road . therefore perhaps they will all die , except 
 Umslopogaas , whom you be tell to take with you . if so , what do 
 it matter , since there be plenty of Zulus , although there be but one 
 Macumazahn or one han ? also the Baas may remember that he begin by 
 offend a snake and therefore it be quite natural that this snake 's 
 brother should have bite the Zulu . " 

 " if you be right , he should have bite I , Hans . " 

 " yes , Baas , and so no doubt he would have do have you not be 
 protect by the Great Medicine , and I too have not my grandfather be 
 a snake - charmer , to say nothing of the smell of the Medicine be on I 
 as well . the snake know those that they should bite , Baas . " 

 " so do the mosquito , " I answer , grab a handful of they . " the 
 Great Medicine have no effect upon they . " 

 " oh ! yes , Baas , it have , since though it please they to bite , the bite 
 do we no harm , or at least not much , and all be make happy . still , 
 I wish we could get out of these reed of which I never want to see 
 another , and Baas , please keep your rifle ready for I think I hear a 
 crocodile stir there . " 

 " no need , Hans , " I remark sarcastically . " go and tell he that I have 
 the Great Medicine . " 

 " yes , Baas , I will ; also that if he be very hungry , there be some Zulus 
 camp a few yard far down the road , " and he go solemnly to the 
 reed a little way off and begin to talk to they . 

 " you infernal donkey ! " I murmur , and draw my blanket over my head in 
 a vain attempt to keep out the mosquito and smoke furiously with the 
 same object , try to get to sleep . 



 at last the swamp bottom begin to slope upwards a little , with the 
 result that as the land dry through natural drainage , the reed grow 
 thin by degree , until finally they cease and we find ourselves on 
 firmer ground ; indeed , upon the low slope of the great mountain that 
 I have mention , that now tower above we , forbidden and majestic . 

 I have make a little map in my pocket - book of the various twist and 
 turn of the road through that vast Slough of Despond , mark they from 
 hour to hour as we follow its devious wandering . on study this 
 at the end of that part of our journey I realise afresh how utterly 
 impossible it would have be for we to thread that misty maze where a 
 few false step would always have mean death by suffocation , have it not 
 be for the spoor of those Amahagger travel immediately ahead of we 
 who be acquaint with its secret . have they be friendly guide they 
 could not have do we a well turn . 

 what I wonder be why they have not try to ambush we in the reed , 
 since our fire must have show they that we be close upon their 
 heel . that they do try to burn we out be clear from certain evidence 
 that I find , but fortunately at this season of the year in the absence 
 of a strong wind the rank reed be too green to catch fire . for the 
 rest I be soon to learn the reason of their neglect to attack we in 
 that dense cover . 

 they be wait for a well opportunity ! 



 CHAPTER X 

 the attack 

 we win out of the reed at last , for which I fervently thank God , 
 since to have cross that endless marsh unguide , with the loss of only 
 one man , seem little less than miraculous . we emerge from they late 
 in the afternoon and be weary out , stop for a while to rest and 
 eat of the flesh of a buck that I have be fortunate enough to shoot 
 upon their fringe . then we push forward up the slope , propose to 
 camp for the night on the crest of it a mile or so away where I think 
 we should escape from the deadly mist in which we have be envelop for 
 so long , and obtain a clear view of the country ahead . 

 follow the bank of a stream which here run down into the marsh , we 
 come at length to this crest just as the sun be sink . below we lay 
 a deep valley , a fold , as it be , in the skin of the mountain , well 
 but not densely bush . the wood of this valley climb up the mountain 
 flank for some distance above it and then give way to grassy slope that 
 end in steep side of rock , which be crown by a black and frown 
 precipice of unknown height . 

 there be , I remember , something very impressive about this tower 
 natural wall , which seem to shut off whatever lie beyond the gaze of 
 man , as though it veil an ancient mystery . indeed , the aspect of it 
 thrill I , I know not why . I observe , however , that at one point in 
 the mighty cliff there seem to be a narrow cleft down which , no doubt , 
 lava have flow in a remote age , and it occur to I that up this 
 cleft run a roadway , probably a continuation of that by which we have 
 thread the swamp . the fact that through my glass I could see herd 
 of cattle graze on the slope of the mountain go to confirm this 
 view , since cattle imply owner and herdsman , and search as I would , I 
 could find no native village on the slope . the inference seem to be 
 that those owner dwelt beyond or within the mountain . 

 all of these thing I see and point out to Robertson in the light of 
 the set sun . 

 Meanwhile Umslopogaas have be engage in select the spot where we 
 be to camp for the night . some soldierlike instinct , or perchance some 
 prescience of danger , cause he to choose a place particularly suitable 
 to defence . it be on a steep - sided mound that more or less resemble a 
 gigantic ant - heap . upon one side this mound be protect by the stream 
 which because of a pool be here rather deep , while at the back of it 
 stand a collection of those curious and pile - up water - wear rock that 
 be often to be find in Africa . these rock , lie one upon another 
 like the stone of a cyclopean wall , curve round the western side of 
 the mound , so that practically it be only open for a narrow space , 
 say thirty or forty foot , upon that face of it which look on to the 
 mountain . 

 " Umslopogaas expect battle , " remark Hans to I with a grin , 
 " otherwise with all this nice plain round we he would not have choose to 
 camp in a place which a few man could hold against many . yes , Baas , he 
 think that those cannibal be go to attack we . " 

 " stranger thing have happen , " I answer indifferently , and have 
 see to the rifle , go to lie down , observe as I do so that the 
 tired Zulus seem already to be asleep . only Umslopogaas do not sleep . 
 on the contrary , he stand lean on his axe staring at the dim outline 
 of the oppose precipice . 

 " a strange mountain , Macumazahn , " he say , " compare to it that of the 
 Witch , beneath which my kraal lie , be but a little baby . I wonder what 
 we shall find within it . I have always love mountain , Macumazahn , ever 
 since a dead brother of mine and I live with the wolf in the Witch 's 
 lap , for on they I have have the good of my fighting . " 

 " perhaps it be not do with yet , " I answer wearily . 

 " I hope not , Macumazahn , since some be due for we , after all these day 
 of mud and stench . sleep a while now , Macumazahn , for that head of your 
 which you use so much , must need rest . fear not , I and the little yellow 
 man who do not think as much as you do , will keep watch and wake you if 
 there be need , as mayhap there will be before the dawn . here none can 
 come at we except in front , and the place be narrow . " 

 so I lie down and sleep as soundly as ever I have do in my life , for a 
 space of four or five hour I suppose . then , by some instinct perhaps , I 
 awake suddenly , feel much refresh in that sweet mountain air , a new 
 man indeed , and in the moonlight see Umslopogaas stride towards I . 

 " Arise , Macumazahn , " he say , " I hear man stir below we . " 

 at this moment Hans slip past he , whispering , 

 " the cannibal be come , Baas , a good number of they . I think they 
 mean to attack before dawn . " 

 then he pass behind I to warn the Zulus . as he go by , I say to 
 he , 

 " if so , Hans , now be the time for your Great Medicine to show what it 
 can do . " 

 " the Great Medicine will look after you and I all right , Baas , " he 
 reply , pause and speak in Dutch , which Umslopogaas do not 
 understand , " but I expect there will be few of those zulus to cook for 
 before the sun grow hot . their spirit will be turn into snake and 
 go back into the reed from which they say they be ' tear out , ' " he 
 add over his shoulder . 

 I should explain that Hans act as cook to our party and it be a 
 grievance with he that the Zulus eat so much of the meat which he be 
 call upon to prepare . indeed , there be never much sympathy between 
 Hottentots and Zulus . 

 " what be the little yellow man say about we ? " ask Umslopogaas 
 suspiciously . 

 " he be say that if it come to battle , you and your man will make a 
 great fight , " I reply diplomatically . 

 " yes , we will do that , Macumazahn , but I think he say that we should 
 be kill and that this please he . " 

 " oh dear no ! " I answer hastily . " how could he be pleased if that 
 happen , since then he would be leave defenceless , if he be not kill 
 too . now , Umslopogaas , let we make a plan for this fight . " 

 so , together with Robertson , rapidly we discuss the thing . as a 
 result , with the help of the Zulus , we drag together some loose 
 stone and the top of three small thorn tree which we have cut 
 down , and with they make a low breastwork , sufficient to give we some 
 protection if we lay down to shoot . it be the work of a few minute 
 since we have prepare the material when we camp in case an emergency 
 should arise . 

 behind this breastwork we gather and wait , Robertson and I be 
 careful to get a little to the rear of the Zulus , who it will be 
 remember have the rifle which the Strathmuir bastard have leave behind 
 they when they bolt , in addition to their axis and throw assegais . 
 the question be how these cannibal would fight . I know that they be 
 arm with long spear and knife but I do not know if they use those 
 spear for thrust or for throw . in the former case it would be 
 difficult to get at they with the axis because they must have the long 
 reach . fortunately as it turn out , they do both . 

 at length all be ready and there come that long and try wait , the 
 most disagreeable part of a fight in which one grow nervous and begin 
 to reflect earnestly upon one 's sin . clearly the Amahagger , if they 
 really intend business , do not mean to attack till just before dawn , 
 after the common native fashion , think to rush we in the low and 
 puzzle light . what perplex I be that they should wish to attack 
 we at all after have let so many opportunity of do so go by . 
 apparently these man be now in sight of their own home , where no doubt 
 they have many friend , and by push on could reach its shelter before 
 we , especially as they know the road and we do not . 

 they have come out for a secret purpose that seem to have to do with 
 the abduction of a certain young white woman for reason connect 
 with their tribal statecraft or ritual , which be the kind of thing that 
 happen not infrequently among obscure and ancient african tribe . well , 
 they have abduct their young woman and be in sight of safety and 
 success in their object , whatever these might be . for what possible 
 reason , then , could they desire to risk a fight with the outraged 
 friend and relative of that young woman ? 

 it be true that they outnumber we and therefore have a good chance 
 of victory , but on the other hand , they must know that it would be very 
 dearly win , and if it be not win , that we should retake their captive , 
 so that all their trouble would have be for nothing . far they must 
 be as exhausted and travel - worn as we be ourselves and in no condition 
 to face a desperate battle . 

 the problem be beyond I and I give it up with the reflection that 
 either this threaten attack be a mere feint to delay we , or that 
 behind it be something mysterious , such as a determination to prevent 
 we at all hazard from discover the secret of that mountain 
 stronghold . 

 when I put the riddle to Hans , who be lie next to I , he be ready 
 with another solution . 

 " they be man - eater , Baas , " he say , " and be hungry , wish to eat we 
 before they get to their own land where doubtless they be not allow 
 to eat each other . " 

 " do you think so , " I answer , " when we be so thin ? " and I survey 
 Hans ' scraggy form in the moonlight . 

 " oh ! yes , Baas , we should be quite good boil - like old hen , Baas . 
 also it be the nature of cannibal to prefer thin man to fat beef . the 
 devil that be in they give they that taste , Baas , just as he make I 
 like gin , or you turn your head to look at pretty woman , as those Zulus 
 say you always do in their country , especially at a certain witch who 
 be name Mameena and whom you kiss before everybody - - " 

 here I turn my head to look at Hans , propose to smite he with 
 word , or physically , since to have this Mameena myth , of which I have 
 detail the origin in the book call Child of storm , re - arise out 
 of his hideous little mouth be too much . but before I could get out a 
 syllable he hold up his finger and whisper , 

 " Hush ! the dawn break and they come . I hear they . " 

 I listen intently but could distinguish nothing . only strain my 
 eye , presently I think that about a hundred yard down the slope 
 beneath we in the dim light I catch sight of ghostlike figure flit 
 from tree to tree ; also that these figure be draw nearer . 

 " look out ! " I say to Robertson on my right , " I believe they be 
 come . " 

 " man , " he answer sternly , " I hope so , for whom else have I want to 
 meet all these day ? " 

 now the figure vanish into a little fold of the ground . a minute or 
 so later they re - appear upon its hither side where such light as there 
 be from the fade star and the gathering dawn fall full upon they , 
 for here be no tree . I look and a thrill of horror go through I , 
 for with one glance I recognise that these be not the man whom we 
 have be follow . to begin with , there be many more of they , quite 
 a hundred , I should think , also they have paint shield , wear feather 
 in their hair , and generally so far as I could judge , seem to be fat 
 and fresh . 

 " we have be lead into an ambush , " I say first in Zulu to Umslopogaas 
 immediately in front , and then in English to Robertson . 

 " if so , man , we must just do the good we can , " answer the latter , " but 
 God help my poor daughter , for those other devil will have take she 
 away , leave their brother to make an end of we . " 

 " it be so , Macumazahn , " break in Umslopogaas . " well , whatever the end of 
 it , we shall have a well fight . now do you give the word and we will 
 obey . " 

 the savage , for so I call they , although I admit that cannibal or not , 
 they look more like high - class Arabs than savage , come on in perfect 
 silence , hop , I suppose , to catch we asleep . when they be about 
 fifty yard away , run in a treble line with spear advance , I 
 call out " Fire ! " in Zulu , and set the example by loose off both 
 barrel of my express rifle at man whom I have pick out as leader , 
 with result that must have be more satisfactory to I than to the two 
 Amahagger whose trouble in this world come to an end . 

 there follow a tremendous fusillade , the zulus bang off their gun 
 wildly , but even at that distance manage for the most part to shoot 
 over the enemy 's head . Captain Robertson and Hans , however , do well 
 and the general result be that the Amahagger , who appear to be 
 unaccustomed to firearm , retreat in a hurry to a fold of the ground 
 whence they have emerge . before the last of they get there I load 
 again , so that two more stop behind . altogether we have put nine or 
 ten of they out of action . 

 now I hop that they would give the business up . but this be not so , 
 for be brave fellow , after a pause of perhaps five minute , once 
 more they charge in a body , hop to overwhelm we . again we greet 
 they with bullet and knock out several , whereon the rest throw 
 a volley of their long spear at we . I be glad to see they do this 
 although one of the Zulus get his death from it , while two more be 
 wound . I myself have a very narrow escape , for a spear pass between 
 my neck and shoulder . each of they carry but one of these weapon 
 and I know that if they use they up in throwing , only their big knife 
 would remain to they with which to attack we . 

 after this discharge of spear which be keep up for some time , they 
 rush at we and there follow a great fight . the Zulus , throw down 
 their gun , rise to their foot and hold their little fighting shield 
 which have be carry in their mat , in the left hand , wield their 
 axis with the right . Umslopogaas , who stand in the centre of they , 
 however , have no shield and swing his great axe with both arm . this be 
 the first time that I have see he fight and the spectacle be in a way 
 magnificent . again and again the axe crash down and every time it 
 fall it leave one dead beneath the stroke , till at length those Amahagger 
 shrink back out of his reach . 

 Meanwhile Robertson , Hans and I , stand on some stone at the back , 
 keep up a continual fire upon they , shoot over the head of the 
 Zulus , who be play their part like man . yes , they shrink back , 
 leave many dead behind they . then a captain try to gather they for 
 another rush , and once more they move forward . I kill that captain 
 with a revolver shot , for my rifle have become too hot to hold , and at 
 the sight of his fall , they break and run back into the little hollow 
 where our bullet could not reach they . 

 so far we have hold our own , but at a price , for three of the Zulus be 
 now dead and three more wounded , one of they severely , the other two but 
 enough to cripple they . in fact , now there be leave of they but three 
 untouched man , and Umslopogaas , so that in all for fight purpose 
 we be but seven . what avail it that we have kill a great number of 
 these Amahagger , when we be but seven ? how could seven man withstand 
 such another onslaught ? 

 there in the pale light of the dawn we look at each other dismay . 

 " now , " say Umslopogaas , lean on his red axe , " there remain but one 
 thing to do , make a good end , though I would that it be in a great 
 cause . at least we must either fight or fly , " and he look down at the 
 wound . 

 " think not of we , Father , " murmur one of they , the man who have a 
 mortal hurt . " if it be good , kill we and begone that you may live to 
 bear the Axe in year to come . " 

 " well speak ! " say Umslopogaas , and again stand still a while , then 
 add , " the word be with you , Macumazahn , who be our captain . " 

 I set out the situation to Robertson and Hans as briefly as I could , 
 show that there be a chance of life if we run , but so far as I could 
 see , none if we stay . 

 " go if you like , Quatermain , " answer the Captain , " but I shall stop 
 and die here , for since my girl be go I think I be well dead . " 

 I motion to Hans to speak . 

 " Baas , " he answer , " the Great Medicine be here with we upon the earth 
 and your reverend father , the Predikant , be with we in the sky , so I 
 think we have well stop here and do what we can , especially as I do not 
 want to see those reed any more at present . " 

 " so do I , " I say briefly , give no reason . 

 so we make ready for the next attack which we know would be the last , 
 strengthen our little wall and drag the dead Amahagger up against 
 it as an add protection . as we be thus engage the sun rise and in 
 its first beam , some mile away on the oppose slope of the mountain 
 look tiny against the black background of the precipice , we see 
 a party of man creep forward . lift my glass I study it and 
 perceive that in its midst be a litter . 

 " there go your daughter , " I say , and hand the glass to Robertson . 

 " oh ! my God , " he answer , " those villain have outwit we after all . " 

 another minute and the litter , or rather the chair with its escort , 
 have vanish into the shadow of the great cliff , probably up some pass 
 which we could not see . 

 next moment our thought be otherwise engage , since from various 
 symptom we gather that the attack be about to be renew . spear 
 upon which shine the light of the rise sun , appear above the edge of 
 the ground - fold that I have mention , which to the east increase to a 
 deep , bush - clothe ravine . also there be voice as of leader encourage 
 their man to a desperate effort . 

 " they be come , " I say to Robertson . 

 " yes , " he answer , " they be come and we be go . it be a queer 
 end to the thing we call life , be not   it , Quatermain , and hang it all ! 
 I wonder what be beyond ? not much for I , I expect , but whatever it be 
 could scarcely be bad than what I have   go through here below in one 
 way and another . " 

 " there be hope for all of we , " I reply as cheerfully as I could , for 
 the man 's deep depression disturb I . 

 " Mayhap , Quatermain , for who know the infinite mercy of whatever make 
 we as we be ? my old mother use to preach of it and I remember she 
 word now . but in my case I expect it will stop at hope , or sleep , and 
 if it be not   for Inez , I would not mind so much , for I tell you I have   have 
 enough of the world and life . look , there be one of they . take that , you 
 black devil ! " and lift his rifle he aim and fire at an Amahagger 
 who appear upon the edge of the fold of ground . what be more he hit 
 he , for I see the man double up and fall backwards . 

 then the game begin afresh , for the cannibal   I suppose they be 
 cannibal like their brother   creep out of shelter , advance on their 
 stomach or their hand and knee , so as to offer a small mark , and 
 drag between they a long and slender tree - trunk with which clearly 
 they intend to batter down our wall . 

 of course I blaze away at they , pretty carefully too , for I be 
 determined that what I believe to be the last exercise of the gift of 
 shooting that have be give to I , should prove a record . therefore 
 I select my man and even where I would hit they , and as subsequent 
 examination show , I make no mistake in the seven or eight shot that 
 I fire . but all the while , like poor Captain Robertson , I be think 
 of other thing ; namely , where I be bind for presently and if I should 
 meet certain folk there and what be the meaning of this show call 
 Life , which unless it lead somewhere , accord to my judgment have none 
 at all . until these question be solve , however , my duty be to kill 
 as many of those ruffian as I could , and this I do with finish and 
 despatch . 

 Robertson and Hans be fire also , with more or less success , but 
 there be too many to be stop by our three rifle . still they come 
 on till at length their fierce face be within a few yard of our 
 little parapet and Umslopogaas have lift his great axe to give they 
 greeting . they pause a moment before make their final rush , and so 
 do we to slip in fresh cartridge . 

 " die well , Hans , " I say , " and if you get there first , wait for I on 
 the other side . " 

 " yes , Baas , I always mean to do that , though not yet . we be not go 
 to die this time , Baas . those who have the Great Medicine do not   die ; it 
 be the other who die , like that fellow , " and he point to an Amahagger 
 who go reel round and round with a bullet from his winchester 
 through the middle , for he have fire in the midst of his remark . 

 " Curse - I mean bless - the Great Medicine , " I say as I lift my rifle 
 to my shoulder . 

 at that moment all those Amahagger - there be about sixty of they 
 leave - become seize with a certain perturbation . they stand still , they 
 star towards the fold of ground out of which they have emerge ; they 
 call to each other word which I do not catch , and then - they turn 
 to run . 

 Umslopogaas see , and with a leader 's instinct , act . spring over the 
 parapet , follow by his remain Zulus of the Axe , he leapt upon they 
 with a roar . down they go before Inkosikaas , like corn before a 
 sickle . the thing be marvellous to see , it be like the charge of a 
 leopard , so swift be the rush and so lightning - like be the stroke or 
 rather the peck of that flash axe , for now he be tap at their 
 head or spine with the gouge - like point upon its back . nor be these 
 the only victim , for those brave follower of his also do their part . 
 in a minute all who remain upon their foot of the Amahagger be in 
 full flight , vanish this way and that among the tree . Hans fire 
 a parting shoot after the last of they , then sit down upon a stone and 
 find his corn - cob pipe , proceed to fill it . 

 " the Great Medicine , Baas , " he begin sententiously , " or perhaps 
 your reverend father , the Predikant - - " here he pause and point 
 doubtfully with the bowl of the pipe towards the fold in the ground , 
 add , " here it be , but I think it must be your reverend father , not 
 the Great Medicine , yes , the Predikant himself , return from Heaven , 
 the Place of Fires ! " 

 look vaguely in the direction indicate , for I could not conceive 
 what he mean and think that the excitement must have make he mad , I 
 perceive a venerable old man with a long white beard and clothe in a 
 flow garment , also white , who remind I of Father Christmas at a 
 child 's party , walk towards we and radiate benignancy . also behind 
 he I perceive a whole forest of spear point emerge from the gully . 
 he seem to take it for grant that we should not shoot at he , for he 
 come on quite unconcerned , carefully pick his way among the corps . 
 when he be near enough he stop and say in a kind of arabic which I 
 could understand , 

 " I greet you , stranger , in the name of she I serve . I see that I be 
 just in time , but this do not surprise I , since she say that it 
 would be so . you seem to have do very well with these dog , " and 
 he prod a dead Amahagger with his sandalled foot . " yes , very well 
 indeed . you must be great warrior . " 

 then he pause and we star at each other . 



 CHAPTER XI 

 through the MOUNTAIN WALL 

 " these do not seem to be friend of your , " I say , point to the 
 fall . " and yet , " I add , nod towards the spearman who be now 
 emerge from the gully , " they be very like your friend . " 

 " puppy from the same litter be often alike , yet when they grow up 
 sometimes they fight each other , " reply Father Christmas blandly . 
 " at least these come to save and not to kill you . look ! they kill the 
 other ! " and he point to they make an end of some of the wounded 
 man . " but who be these ? " and he glance with evident astonishment , 
 first at the fearsome - look Umslopogaas and then at the grotesque 
 Hans . " Nay , answer not , you must be weary and need rest . afterwards we 
 can talk . " 

 " well , as a matter of fact we have not yet breakfast , " I reply . 
 " also I have business to attend to here , " and I glance at our wounded . 

 the old fellow nod and go to speak to the captain of his force , 
 doubtless as to the pursuit of the enemy , for presently I see a company 
 spring forward on their track . then , assist by Hans and the remain 
 Zulus , of whom one be Goroko , I turn to attend to our own people . 
 the task prove light than I expect , since the badly injure man 
 be dead or die and the hurt of the two other be in their leg 
 and comparatively slight , such as Goroko could doctor in his own native 
 fashion . 

 after this , take Hans to guard my back , I go down to the stream and 
 wash myself . then I return and eat , wonder the while that I could 
 do so with appetite after the terrible danger which we have pass . 
 still , we have pass they , and Robertson , Umslopogaas with three of his 
 man , I and Hans be quite unharmed , a fact for which I return thank 
 in silence but sincerely enough to Providence . 

 Hans also return thank in his own fashion , after he have fill 
 himself , not before , and light his corn - cob pipe . but Robertson make no 
 remark ; indeed , when he have satisfy his natural craving , he rise and 
 walk a few pace forward , stand star at the cleft in the mountain 
 cliff into which he have see the litter vanish that bear his daughter to 
 some fate unknown . 

 even the great fight that we have fight and the victory we have win 
 against overpowering odd do not appear to impress he . he only glare 
 at the mountain into the heart of which Inez have be rap away , and 
 shake his fist . since she be go all else go for nothing , so much so 
 that he do not offer to assist with the wound zulus or show curiosity 
 about the strange old man by whom we have be rescue . 

 " the Great Medicine , Baas , " say Hans in a bewildered way , " be even more 
 powerful than I think . not only have it bring we safely through the 
 fighting and without a scratch , for those Zulus there do not matter and 
 there will be less cook for I to do now that they be go ; it have 
 also bring down your reverend father the Predikant from the Place of 
 Fires in Heaven , somewhat change from what I remember he , it be 
 true , but still without doubt the same . when I make my report to he 
 presently , if he can understand my talk , I shall - - " 

 " stop your infernal nonsense , you son of a donkey , " I break in , for at 
 this moment old Father Christmas , smile more benignly than before , 
 re - appear from the kloof into which he have vanish and advance 
 towards we bow with much politeness . 

 have seat himself upon the little wall that we have build up , 
 he contemplate we , stroke his beautiful white beard , then say , 
 address I , 

 " of a certainty you should be proud who with a few have defeat so 
 many . still , have I not be order to come at speed , I think that by 
 now you would have be as those be , " and he look towards the dead 
 Zulus who be lay out at a distance like man asleep , while their 
 companion seek for a place to bury they . 

 " order by whom ? " I ask . 

 " there be only one who can order , " he answer with mild astonishment . 
 " ' she - who - command , She - who - be - everlaste ' ! " 

 it occur to I that this must be some arabic idiom for the Eternal 
 Feminine , but I only look vague and say , 

 " it would appear that there be some whom this exalt everlaste she 
 can not command ; those who attack we ; also those who have flee away 
 yonder , " and I wave my hand towards the mountain . 

 " no command be absolute ; in every country there be rebel , even , as I 
 have hear , in Heaven above we . but , Wanderer , what be your name ? " 

 " watcher - by - Night , " I answer . 

 " ah ! a good name for one who must have watch well by night , and by day 
 too , to reach this country live where she - who - command say that no 
 man of your colour have set foot for many generation . indeed , I think 
 she tell I once that two thousand year have go by since she speak to 
 a white man in the City of K"r . " 

 " do she indeed ? " I exclaim , stifle a cough . 

 " you do not believe I , " he go on , smile . " well , She - who - command 
 can explain matter for herself well than I who be not alive two 
 thousand year ago , so far as I remember . but what must I call he with 
 the Axe ? " 

 " Warrior be his name . " 

 " again a good name , as to judge by the wound on they , certain of those 
 rebel I think be now tell each other in Hell . and this man , if 
 indeed he be a man - - " he add , look doubtfully at Hans . 

 " light - in - darkness be his name . " 

 " I see , doubtless because his colour be that of the winter sun in thick 
 fog , or a bad egg break into milk . and the other white man who mutter 
 and whose brow be like a storm ? " 

 " he be call Avenger ; you will learn why later on , " I answer 
 impatiently , for I grow tired of this catechism , add , " and what be 
 you call and , if you be pleased to tell it to we , upon what errand do 
 you visit we in so fortunate an hour ? " 

 " I be name Billali , " he answer , " the servant and messenger of 
 she - who - command , and I be send to save you and to bring you safely to 
 she . " 

 " how can this be , Billali , see that none know of our come ? " 

 " yet She - who - command know , " he say with his benignant smile . " indeed , 
 I think that she learn of it some moon ago through a message that be 
 send to she and so arrange all thing that you should be guide safely 
 to her secret home ; since otherwise how would you have pass a great 
 pathless swamp with the loss , I think she say , of but one man whom a 
 snake bit ? " 

 now I star at the old fellow , for how could he know of the death of 
 this man , but think it useless to pursue the conversation far . 

 " when you be rest and ready , " he go on , " we will start . meanwhile I 
 leave you that I may prepare litter to carry those wound man , and 
 you also , Watcher - by - Night , if you wish . " then with a dignified bow , 
 for everything about this old fellow be stately , he turn and vanish 
 into the kloof . 

 the next hour or so be occupy in the burial of the dead Zulus , a 
 ceremony in which I take no part beyond stand up and raise my hat 
 as they be bear away , for as I have say somewhere , it be good to 
 leave native alone on these occasion . indeed , I lie down , reflect 
 that strangely enough there seem to be something in old Zikali 's tale 
 of a wonderful white queen who live in a mountain fastness , since there 
 be the mountain as he have draw it on the ash , and the servant of 
 that queen who , apparently , have knowledge of our come , appear in the 
 nick of time to rescue we from one of the tight fix in which ever I 
 find myself . 

 moreover , the antique and courteous individual call Billali , speak of 
 she as " She - who - be - everlasting . " what the deuce could he mean by that , 
 I wonder ? probably that she be very old and therefore disagreeable to 
 look on , which I confess to myself would be a disappointment . 

 and how do she know that we be come ? I could not guess and when I 
 ask Robertson , he merely shrug his shoulder and intimate that he 
 take no interest in the matter . the truth be that nothing move the man , 
 whose whole soul be wrap in one desire , namely to rescue , or avenge , 
 the daughter against whom he know he have so sorely sin . 

 in fact , this loose - living but reform seaman be become a 
 monomaniac , and what be more , one of the religious type . he have a Bible 
 with he that have be give to he by his mother when he be a boy , and 
 in this he read constantly ; also he be always on his knee and at night 
 I could hear he groan and pray aloud . doubtless now that the 
 chain of drink have fall off he , the instinct and the blood of 
 the dour old Covenanters from whom he be descend , be assert 
 themselves . in a way this be a good thing though for some time past 
 I have fear lest it should end in his go mad , and certainly as a 
 companion he be more cheerful in his unregenerate day . 

 abandon speculation as useless and take my chance of be murder 
 where I lay , for after all Billali 's follower be singularly like 
 the man with whom we have be fight and for aught I know might be 
 animate by identical object - I just go to sleep , as I can do at 
 any time , to wake up an hour or so later feel wonderfully refresh . 
 Hans , who when I close my eye be already asleep slumbering at my foot 
 curl up like a dog on a spot where the sun strike hotly , rouse I by 
 say : 

 " awake , Baas , they be here ! " 

 I spring up , snatch at my rifle , for I think that he mean that 
 we be be attack again , to see Billali advance at the head of 
 a train of four litter make of bamboo with grass mat for curtain 
 and covering , each of which be carry by stalwart Amahagger , as I 
 suppose that they must be . two of these , the fine , Billali indicate 
 be for Robertson and myself , and the two other for the wounded . 
 Umslopogaas and the remain Zulus evidently be expect to walk , as 
 be Hans . 

 " how do you make these so quickly , " I ask , survey their elegant 
 and indeed artistic workmanship . 

 " we do not make they , Watcher - by - Night , we bring they with we fold 
 up . she - who - command look in her glass and say that four would be 
 need , besides my own which be yonder , two for white lord and two for 
 wound black man , which you see be the number require . " 

 " yes , " I answer vaguely , marvel what kind of a glass it be that 
 give the lady this information . 

 before I could inquire upon the point Billali add , 

 " you will be glad to learn that my man catch some of those rebel who 
 dare to attack you , eight or ten of they who have be hurt by your 
 missile or axe - cut , and put they to death in the proper fashion - yes , 
 quite the proper fashion , " and he smile a little . " the rest have go 
 too far where it would have be dangerous to follow they among the 
 rock . enter now , my lord Watcher - by - Night , for the road be steep and we 
 must travel fast if we would reach the place where She - who - command be 
 camp in the ancient holy city , before the moon sink behind the cliff 
 to - night . " 

 so have explain matter to Robertson and Umslopogaas , who announce 
 that nothing would induce he to be carry like an old woman , or 
 a corpse upon a shield , and see that the hurt Zulus be comfortably 
 accommodate , Robertson and I get into our litter , which prove to be 
 delightfully easy and restful . 

 then when our gear be collect by the hook - nose bearer to whom we 
 be oblige to trust , though we keep with we our rifle and a certain 
 amount of ammunition , we start . first go a number of Billali 's 
 spearman , then come the litter with the wounded alongside of which 
 Umslopogaas and his three uninjured Zulus talk or trot , then 
 another litter contain Billali , then my own by which run Hans , 
 and Robertson 's , and lastly the rest of the Amahagger and the relief 
 bearer . 

 " I see now , Baas , " say Hans , thrust his head between my curtain , 
 " that yonder Whitebeard can not be your reverend father , the Predikant , 
 after all . " 

 " why not ? " I ask , though the fact be fairly obvious . 

 " because , Baas , if he be , he would not have leave Hans , of whom he 
 always think so well , to run in the sun like a dog , while he and 
 other travel in carriage like great white lady . " 

 " you have well save your breath instead of talk nonsense , Hans , " I 
 say , ' since I believe that you have a long way to go . " 

 in fact , it prove to be a very long way indeed , especially as after we 
 begin to breast the mountain , we must travel slowly . we start about 
 ten o'clock in the morning , for the fight which after all do not take 
 long - have , it will be remember , begin shortly after dawn , and it be 
 three in the afternoon before we reach the base of the tower cliff 
 which I have mention . 

 here , at the foot of a remarkable , isolated column of rock , on which I 
 be destine to see a strange sight in the after day , we halt and eat 
 of the remain food which we have bring with we , while the Amahagger 
 consume their own , that seem to consist largely of curdled milk , such 
 as the Zulus call maas , and lump of a kind of bread . 

 I note that they be a very curious people who feed in silence and on 
 whose handsome , solemn face one never see a smile . somehow it give I 
 the creep to look at they . Robertson be affect in the same way , for 
 in one of the rare interval of his abstraction he remark that they 
 be " no canny . " then he add , 

 " ask yon old wizard who might be one of the Bible prophet come to 
 life - what those man - eat devil have do with my daughter . " 

 I do so , and Billali answer , 

 " say that they have take she away to make a queen of she , since have 
 rebel against their own queen , they must have another who be white . 
 say too that she - who - command will wage war on they and perhaps win she 
 back , unless they kill she first . " 

 " ah ! " Robertson repeat when I have translate , " unless they kill she 
 first - or bad . " then he relapse into his usual silence . 

 presently we start on again , head straight for what look like a 
 sheer wall of black rock a thousand foot or more in height , up a path so 
 steep that Robertson and I get out and walk , or rather scramble , in 
 order to ease the bearer . Billali , I notice , remain in his litter . 
 the convenience of the bearer do not trouble he ; he only order an 
 extra gang to the pole . I could not imagine how we be to negotiate 
 this precipice . nor could Umslopogaas , who look at it and say , 

 " if we be to climb that , Macumazahn , I think that the only one who will 
 live to get to the top will be that little yellow monkey of your , " and 
 he point with his axe at Hans . 

 " if I do , " reply that worthy , much nettled , for he hat to be call 
 a " yellow monkey " by the Zulus , " be sure that I will roll down stone 
 upon any black butcher whom I see sprawl upon the cliff below . " 

 Umslopogaas smile grimly , for he have a sense of humour and could 
 appreciate a repartee even when it hit he hard . then we stop talk 
 for the climb take all our breath . 

 at length we come to the cliff face where , to all appearance , our 
 journey must end . suddenly , however , out of the blind black wall in 
 front of we start the apparition of a tall man arm with a great 
 spear and wear a white robe , who challenge we hoarsely . 

 suddenly he stand before we , as a ghost might do , though whence he come 
 we could not see . presently the mystery be explain . here in the cliff 
 face there be a cleft , though one invisible even from a few pace away , 
 since its outer edge project over the inner wall of rock . moreover , 
 this opening be not above four foot in width , a mere split in the huge 
 mountain mass cause by some titanic convulsion in past age . for it be 
 a definite split since , once enter , far , far above could be trace 
 a faint line of light come from the sky , although the gloom of the 
 passage be such that torch , which be store at hand , must be use 
 by those who thread it . one man could have hold the place against a 
 hundred - until he be kill . still , it be guard , not only at the 
 mouth where the warrior have appear , but far along at every turn in 
 the jagged chasm , and these be many . 

 into this grim place we go . the Zulus do not like it at all , for 
 they be a light - love people and I note that even Umslopogaas 
 seem scared and hang back a little . nor do Hans , who with his usual 
 suspicion , fear some trap ; nor , for the matter of that , do I , though 
 I think it well to appear much interested . only Robertson seem quite 
 indifferent and trudge along stolidly after a man carry a torch . 

 Old Billali put his head out of the litter and shout back to I 
 to fear nothing , since there be no pitfall in the path , his voice 
 echo strangely between those narrow wall of measureless height . 

 for half an hour or more we pursue this dreary , wind path round the 
 corner of which the draught tear in gust so fierce that more than once 
 the litter with the wounded man and those who bear they be nearly 
 blow over . it be safe enough , however , since on either side of we , 
 smooth and without break , rise the sheer wall of rock over which lay 
 the tiny ribbon of blue sky . at length the cleft widen somewhat and 
 the light grow strong , make the torch unnecessary . 

 then of a sudden we come to its end and find ourselves upon a little 
 plateau in the mountainside . behind we for a thousand foot or so rise 
 the sheer rock wall as it do upon the outer face , while in front and 
 beneath , far beneath , be a beautiful plain circular in shape and of 
 great extent , which plain be everywhere surround , so far as I could 
 see , by the same wall of rock . in short , notwithstanding its enormous 
 size , without doubt it be neither more nor less than the crater of a 
 vast extinct volcano . lastly , not far from the centre of this plain be 
 what appear to be a city , since through my glass I could see great 
 wall build of stone , and what I think be house , all of they of a 
 character more substantial than any that I have discover in the wild 
 of Africa . 

 I go to Billali 's litter and ask he who live in the city . 

 " no one , " he answer , " it have be dead for thousand of year , but 
 she - who - command be camp there at present with an army , and thither we 
 go at once . forward , bearer . " 

 so , Robertson and I have re - enter our litter , we start on down 
 hill at a rapid pace , for the road , though steep , be safe and keep in 
 good order . all the rest of that afternoon we travel and by sunset 
 reach the edge of the plain , where we halt a while to rest and eat , 
 till the light of the grow moon grow strong enough to enable we to 
 proceed . Umslopogaas come up and speak to I . 

 " here be a fortress indeed , Macumazahn , " he say , ' since none can climb 
 that fence of rock in which the hole seem to be few and small . " 

 " yes , " I answer , " but it be one out of which those who be in , would 
 find it difficult to get out . we be buffalo in a pit , Umslopogaas . " 

 " that be so , " he answer , " I have think it already . but if any would 
 meddle with we we still have our horn and can toss for a while . " 

 then he go back to his man . 

 the sunset in that great solemn place be a wonderful thing to see . 
 first of all the measureless crater be fill with light like a bowl 
 with fire . then as the great orb sink behind the western cliff , half of 
 the plain become quite dark while shadow seem to rush forward over 
 the eastern part of its surface , till that too be swallow up in gloom 
 and for a little while there remain only a glow reflect from the 
 cliff face and from the sky above , while on the crest of the parapet of 
 rock play strange and glorious fire . presently these too vanish and 
 the world be dark . 

 then the half moon break from behind a bank of cloud and by its silver , 
 uncertain light we struggle forward across the flat plain , rather 
 slowly now , for even the iron muscle of those bearer grow tired . I 
 could not see much of it , but I gather that we be pass through 
 crop , very fine crop to judge by their height , as doubtless they would 
 be upon this lava soil ; also once or twice we splash through stream . 

 at length , be tired and lull by the swaying of the litter and by 
 the sound of a weird , low chant that the bearer have set up now that 
 they near home and be afraid of no attack , I sink into a doze . when 
 I awake again it be to find that the litter have halt and to hear the 
 voice of billali say , 

 " Descend , White Lords , and come with your companion , the black Warrior 
 and the yellow man who be name Light - in - darkness . she - who - command 
 desire to see you at once before you eat and sleep , and must not be 
 keep wait . fear not for the other , they will be care for till you 
 return . " 



 CHAPTER XII 

 the WHITE WITCH 

 I descend from the litter and tell the other what the old fellow have 
 say . Robertson do not want to come , and indeed refuse to do so until 
 I suggest to he that such conduct might prejudice a powerful person 
 against we . Umslopogaas be indifferent , put , as he remark , no 
 faith in a ruler who be a woman . 

 only Hans , although he be so tired , acquiesce with some eagerness , 
 the fact be that his brain be more alert and that he have all the 
 curiosity of the monkey tribe which he so much resemble in appearance , 
 and want to see this queen whom Zikali revere . 

 in the end we start , conduct by billali and by man who carry 
 torch whereof the light show I that we be pass between house , 
 or at any rate wall that have be those of house , and along what 
 seem to be a paved street . 

 walk under what I take to be a great arch or portico , we come into 
 a court that be full of tower pillar but unroofed , for I could see 
 the star above . at its end we enter a building of which the doorway 
 be hang with mat , to find that it be light with lamp and that 
 all down its length on either side guard with long spear stand at 
 interval . 

 " oh , Baas , " say Hans hesitatingly , " this be the mouth of a trap , " while 
 Umslopogaas glare about he suspiciously , finger the handle of his 
 great axe . 

 " be silent , " I answer . " all this mountain be a trap , therefore another 
 do not matter , and we have our pistol . " 

 walk forward between the double line of guard who stand immovable as 
 statue , we come to some curtain hang at the end of a long , narrow hall 
 which , although I know little of such thing , be , I note , make of 
 rich stuff embroider in colour and with golden thread . before these 
 curtain Billali motion we to halt . 

 after a whisper colloquy with someone beyond carry on through the 
 join of the curtain , he vanish between they , leave we alone for 
 five minute or more . at length they open and a tall and elegant woman 
 with an arab cast of countenance and clothe in white robe , appear and 
 beckon to we to enter . she do not speak or answer when I speak to 
 she , which be not wonderful as afterwards I discover that she be a 
 mute . we go in , I wonder very much what we be go to see . 

 on the further side of the curtain be a room of no great size 
 illumine with lamp of which the light fall upon sculpture wall . it 
 look to I as though it might once have be the inmost court or a 
 sanctuary of some temple , for at its head be a dais upon which once 
 perhaps have stand the shrine or statue of a god . on this dais there be 
 now a couch and on the couch - a goddess ! 

 there she sit , straight and still , clothe in shin white and veil , 
 but with her drapery so arrange that they emphasise rather than 
 conceal the wonderful elegance of her tall form . from beneath the 
 veil , which be such as a bride wear , appear two plait of glossy , 
 raven hair of great length , to the end of each of which be suspend a 
 single large pearl . on either side of she stand a tall woman like to she 
 who have lead we through the curtain , and on his knee in front , but to 
 the right , kneel Billali . 

 about this seated personage there be an air of singular majesty , such 
 as might pervade a queen as fancy paint she , though she have a nobler 
 figure than any queen I ever see depict . Mystery seem to flow from 
 she ; it clothe she like the veil she wear , which of course heighten 
 the effect . Beauty flow from she also ; although it be shroud I know 
 that it be there , no veil or covering could obscure it - at least , to 
 my imagination . moreover she breathe out power also ; one feel it in the 
 air as one feel a thunderstorm before it break , and it seem to I 
 that this power be not quite human , that it draw its strength from afar 
 and dwelt a stranger to the earth . 

 to tell the truth , although my curiosity , always strong , be enormously 
 excited and though now I feel glad that I have attempt this journey 
 with all its peril , I be horribly afraid , so much afraid that I should 
 have like to turn and run away . from the beginning I know myself to 
 be in the presence of an unearthly be clothe in soft and perfect 
 woman 's flesh , something alien , too , and different from our human race . 

 what a picture it all make ! there she sit , quiet and stately as a 
 perfect marble statue ; only her breast , rise and fall beneath the 
 white robe , show that she be alive and breathe as other do . another 
 thing show it also - her eye . at first I could not see they through 
 the veil , but presently either because I grow accustomed to the light , 
 or because they brighten as those of certain animal have power to do 
 when they watch intently , it cease to be a covering to they . distinctly 
 I see they now , large and dark and splendid with a tinge of deep blue 
 in the iris ; alluring and yet awful in their majestic aloofness which 
 seem to look through and beyond , to embrace all without seek and 
 without effort . those eye be like window through which light flow 
 from within , a light of the spirit . 

 I glance round to see the effect of this vision upon my companion . it 
 be most peculiar . han have sink to his knee ; his hand be join in 
 the attitude of prayer and his ugly little face remind I of that of a 
 big fish out of water and die from excess of air . Robertson , startle 
 out of his abstraction , star at the royal - look woman on the couch 
 with his mouth open . 

 " Man , " he whisper , " I have   get they back although I have touch nothing 
 for week , only this time they be lovely . for yon 's no human lady , I 
 feel it in my bone . " 

 Umslopogaas stand great and grim , his hand rest on the handle of his 
 tall axe ; and he star also , the blood pulse against the skin that 
 cover the hole in his head . 

 " watcher - by - Night , " he say to I in his deep voice , but also speak 
 in a whisper , " this chieftainess be not one woman , but all woman . 
 beneath those robe of hers I seem to see the beauty of one who have 
 ' go beyond , ' of the Lily who be lose to I . do you not feel it thus , 
 Macumazahn ? " 

 now that he mention it , certainly I do ; indeed , I have feel it 
 all along although amid the rush of sensation this one have scarcely 
 disentangle itself in my mind . I look at the drape shape and 
 saw - well , never mind whom I see ; it be not one only but several in 
 sequence ; also a woman who at that time I do not know although I come 
 to know she afterwards , too well , perhaps , or at any rate quite 
 enough to puzzle I . the odd thing be that in this hallucination the 
 personality of these individual seem to overlap and merge , till at 
 last I begin to wonder whether they be not part of the same entity 
 or be , manifest itself in sundry shape , yet spring from one 
 centre , as different coloured ray flow from the same crystal , while the 
 beam from their source of light shift and change . but the fancy be too 
 metaphysical for my poor power to express as clearly as I would . also 
 no doubt it be but a hallucination that have its origin , perhaps , in the 
 mischievous brain of she who sit before we . 

 at length she speak and her voice sound like silver bell hear over 
 water in a great calm . it be low and sweet , oh ! so sweet that at its 
 first note for a moment my sens seem to swoon and my pulse to stop . 
 it be to I that she address herself . 

 " my servant here , " and ever so slightly she turn her head towards the 
 kneeling Billali , " tell I that you who be name Watcher - in - the - Night , 
 understand the tongue in which I speak to you . be it so ? " 

 " I understand Arabic of a kind well enough , have learn it on the 
 East Coast and from Arabs in past year , but not such Arabic as you use , 
 o - - " and I pause . 

 " call I Hiya , " she break in , " which be my title here , mean , as you 
 know , She , or Woman . or if that do not please you , call I Ayesha . 
 it would rejoice I after so long to hear the name I bear speak by the 
 lip of one of my colour and of gentle blood . " 

 I blush at the compliment so artfully convey , and repeat stupidly 
 enough , 

 " - not such Arabic as you use , o - Ayesha . " 

 " I think that you would like the sound of the word well than that 
 of Hiya , though afterwards I will teach you to pronounce it as you 
 should , o - have you any other name save Watcher - by - Night , which seem 
 also to be a title ? " 

 " yes , " I answer . " Allan . " 

 " - o - Allan . tell I of these , " she go on quickly , indicate my 
 companion with a sweep of her slender hand , " for they do not speak 
 Arabic , I think . or stay , I will tell you of they and you shall say if 
 I do so rightly . this one , " and she nod towards Robertson , " be a man 
 bemuse . there come from he a colour which I see if you can not , and 
 that colour betoken a desire for revenge , though I think that in his 
 time he have desire other thing also , as I remember man always do from 
 the beginning , to their ruin . human nature do not change , Allan , and 
 wine and woman be ancient snare . enough of he for this time . the 
 little yellow one there be afraid of I , as be all of you . that be 
 woman 's great power , although she be so weak and gentle , man be 
 still afraid of she just because they be so foolish that they can not 
 understand she . to they after a million year she still remain the 
 Unknown and to we all the Unknown be also the awful . do you remember the 
 proverb of the Romans that say it well and briefly ? " 

 I nod , for it be one of the latin tag that my father have teach I . 

 " good . well , he be a little wild man , be he not , near to the ape from 
 whose race our body come ? but do you know that , Allan ? " 

 I nod again , and say , 

 " there be dispute upon the point , Ayesha . " 

 " yes , they have begin in my day and we will discuss they later . still , I 
 say - nearer to the ape than you or I , and therefore of interest , as the 
 germ of thing be always . yet he have quality , I think ; cunning , and 
 fidelity and love which in its round be all in all . do you understand , 
 Allan , that love be all in all ? " 

 I answer warily that it depend upon what she mean by love , to which 
 she reply that she would explain afterwards when we have leisure to 
 talk , add , 

 " what this little yellow monkey understand by it at least have serve 
 you well , or so I believe . you shall tell I the tale of it some day . 
 now of the last , this black One . here I think be a man indeed , a warrior 
 of warrior such as there use to be in the early world , if a savage . 
 well , believe I , Allan , savage be often the good . moreover , all be 
 still savage at heart , even you and i. for what be term culture be 
 but coat upon coat of paint lay on to hide our native colour , and often 
 there be poison in the paint . that axe of his have drunk deep , I think , 
 though always in fair fight , and I say that it shall drink deeply yet . 
 have I read these man aright , Allan ? " 

 " not so ill , " I answer . 

 " I think it , " she say with a musical laugh , " although at this place I 
 rust and grow dull like an unused sword . now you would rest . go - all of 
 you . to - morrow you and I will talk alone . fear nothing for your safety ; 
 you be watch by my slave and I watch my slave . until to - morrow , 
 then , farewell . go now , eat and sleep , as alas we all must do who linger 
 on this ball of earth and cle to a life we should do well to lose . 
 Billali , lead they hence , " and she wave her hand to signify that the 
 audience be end . 

 at this sign Hans , who apparently be still much afraid , rise from his 
 knee and literally bolt through the curtain . Robertson follow he . 
 Umslopogaas stand a moment , draw himself up and lift the great axe , 
 cry Bayéte , after which he too turn and go . 

 " what do that word mean , Allan ? " she ask . 

 I explain that it be the salutation which the Zulu people only give 
 to king . 

 " do I not say that savage be often the good ? " she exclaim in a 
 gratified voice . " the white man , your companion , give I no salute , but 
 the Black One know when he stand before a woman who be royal . " 

 " he too be of royal blood in his own land , " I say . 

 " if so , we be akin , Allan . " 

 then I bow deeply to she in my good manner and rise from her couch 
 for the first time she stand up , look very tall and commanding , and 
 bow back . 

 after this I go to find the other on the further side of the 
 curtain , except Hans , who have run down the long narrow hall and through 
 the mat at its end . we follow , march with dignity behind Billali 
 and between the double line of guard , who raise their spear as we 
 pass they , and on the further side of the mat discover Hans , still 
 look terrify . 

 " Baas , " he say to I as we thread our way through the court of 
 column , " in my life I have see all kind of dreadful thing and face 
 they , but never have I be so much afraid as I be of that white witch . 
 Baas , I think that she be the devil of whom your reverend father , the 
 Predikant , use to talk so much , or perhaps his wife . " 

 " if so , Hans , " I answer , " the devil be not so black as he be paint . 
 but I advise you to be careful of what you say as she may have long 
 ear . " 

 " it do not   matter at all what one say , Baas , because she read 
 thought before they pass the lip . I feel she do it there in that 
 room . and do you be careful , Baas , or she will eat up your spirit and 
 make you fall in love with she , who , I expect , be very ugly indeed , 
 since otherwise she would not wear a veil . whoever see a pretty woman 
 tie up her head in a sack , Baas ? " 

 " perhaps she do this because she be so beautiful , Hans , that she fear 
 the heart of man who look upon she would melt . " 

 " oh , no , Baas , all woman want to melt man 's heart ; the more the well . 
 they seem to have other thing in their mind , but really they think of 
 nothing else until they be too old and ugly , and it take they a long 
 while to be sure of that . " 

 so Hans go on talk his shrewd nonsense till , follow so far as 
 I could see , the same road as that by which we have come , we reach our 
 quarter , where we find food prepare for we , broil goat 's flesh 
 with corncake and milk , I think it be ; also bed for we two white man 
 cover with skin rug and blanket weave of wool . 

 these quarter , I should explain , consist of room in a house build 
 of stone of which the wall have once be paint . the roof of the house 
 be go now , for we could see the star shin above we , but as the 
 air be very soft in this shelter plain , this be an advantage rather 
 than otherwise . the large room be reserve for Robertson and myself , 
 while another at the back be give to Umslopogaas and his Zulus , and a 
 third to the two wound man . 

 Billali show we these arrangement by the light of lamp and 
 apologise that they be not well because , as he explain , the place 
 be a ruin and there have be no time to build we a house . he add that 
 we might sleep without fear as we be guard and none would dare to 
 harm the guest of She - who - command , on whom he be sure we , or at any 
 rate I and the black Warrior , have produce an excellent impression . then 
 he bow himself out , say that he would return in the morning , and 
 leave we to our own device . 

 Robertson and I sit down on stool that have be set for we , and eat , 
 but he seem so overcome by his experience , or by his sombre thought , 
 that I could not draw he into conversation . all he remark be that 
 we have fall into queer company and that those who sup with Satan 
 need a long spoon . have deliver himself of this sentiment he 
 throw himself upon the bed , pray aloud for a while as have become his 
 fashion , to be " protect from warlock and witch , " amongst other 
 thing , and go to sleep . 

 before I turn in I visit Umslopogaas 's room to see that all be well 
 with he and his people , and find he stand in the doorway star 
 at the star - spangle sky . 

 " Greeting , Macumazahn , " he say , " you who be white and wise and I be 
 black and a fighter have see many strange thing beneath the sun , but 
 never such a one as we have look upon to - night . who and what be that 
 chieftainess , Macumazahn ? " 

 " I do not know , " I say , " but it be worth while to have live to see 
 she , even though she be veil . " 

 " nor do I , Macumazahn . Nay , I do know , for my heart tell I that she 
 be the great of all witch and that you will do well to guard your 
 spirit lest she should steal it away . if she be not a witch , should I 
 have seem to behold the shape of Nada the Lily who be the wife of my 
 youth , beneath those white robe of her , and though the tongue in which 
 she speak be strange to I , to hear the murmur of Nada 's voice between 
 her lip , of Nada who have go far from I than those star . it 
 be good that you wear the Great Medicine of Zikali upon your breast , 
 Macumazahn , for perhaps it will shield you from harm at those hand that 
 be shape of ivory . " 

 " Zikali be another of the tribe , " I answer , laugh , " although less 
 beautiful to see . also I be not afraid of any of they , and from this 
 one , if she be more than some white woman whom it please to veil 
 herself , I shall hope to gather wisdom . " 

 " yes , Macumazahn , such wisdom as spirit and the dead have to give . " 

 " Mayhap , Umslopogaas , but we come here to seek spirit and the dead , do 
 we not ? " 

 " aye , " answer Umslopogaas , " these and war , and I think that we shall 
 find enough of all three . only I hope that war will come the first , lest 
 the Spirits and the dead should bewitch I and take away my skill and 
 courage . " 

 then we part , and too tired even to wonder any more , I throw myself 
 down on my bed and sleep . 



 I be awaken when the sun be already high , by the sound of Robertson , 
 who be on his knee , pray aloud as usual , a habit of his which I 
 confess get on my nerve . Prayer , in my opinion , be a private matter 
 between man and his creator , that is , except in church ; far , I do 
 not in the least wish to hear all about Robertson 's sin , which seem 
 to have be many and peculiar . it be bad enough to have to bear the 
 burden of one 's own transgression without learn of those of other 
 people , that is , unless one be a priest and must do so professionally . 
 so I jump up to escape and make arrangement for a wash , only to 
 butt into old Billali , who be stand in the doorway contemplating 
 Robertson with much interest and stroke his white beard . 

 he greet I with his courteous bow and say , 

 " tell your companion , o Watcher , that it be not necessary for he to go 
 upon his knee to She - who - command - and must be obey , " he add with 
 emphasis , " when he be not in her presence , and that even then he would 
 do well to keep silent , since so much talk in a strange tongue might 
 trouble she . " 

 I burst out laugh and answer , 

 " he do not go upon his knee and pray to She - who - command , but to the 
 Great one who be in the sky . " 

 " indeed , Watcher . well , here we only know a great one who be upon the 
 earth , though it be true that perhaps she visit the sky sometimes . " 

 " be it so , Billali ? " I answer incredulously . " and now , I would ask you 
 to take I to some place where I can bathe . " 

 " it be ready , " he reply . " come . " 

 so I call to Hans , who be hang about with a rifle on his arm , to 
 follow with a cloth and soap , of which fortunately we have a couple of 
 piece leave , and we start along what have once be a paved roadway 
 run between stone house , whereof the time - eat ruin still 
 remain on either side . 

 " who and what be this queen of your , billali ? " I ask as we go . 
 " surely she be not of the Amahagger blood . " 

 " ask it of herself , o Watcher , for I can not tell you . all I know be 
 that I can trace my own family for ten generation and that my tenth 
 forefather tell his son on his deathbed , for the saying have come down 
 through his descendant - that when he be young She - who - command have 
 rule the land for more score of year than he could count month of 
 life . " 

 I stop and star at he , since the lie be so amazing that it seem 
 to deprive I of the power of motion . note my very obvious disbelief 
 he continue blandly , 

 " if you doubt , ask . and now here be where you may bathe . " 

 then he lead I through an arched doorway and down a wrecked passage to 
 what very obviously once have be a splendid bath - house such as some I 
 have see picture of that be build by the Romans . its size be that 
 of a large room ; it be construct of a kind of marble with a sloping 
 bottom that vary from three to seven foot in depth , and water still 
 run in and out of it through large glaze pipe . moreover round it be 
 a footway about five foot across , from which open chamber , unroofed 
 now , that the bather use as dressing - room , while between these 
 chamber stand the remain of statue . one at the end indeed , where an 
 alcove have protect it from sun and weather , be still quite perfect , 
 except for the outstretche arm which be go   the right hand I 
 notice lie at the bottom of the bath . it be that of a nude young 
 woman in the attitude of diving , a very beautiful bit of work , I 
 think , though of course I be no judge of sculpture . even the smile 
 mingle with trepidation upon the girl 's face be most naturally 
 portray . 

 this statue show two thing , that the bath be use by female and 
 that the people who build it be highly civilised , also that they 
 belong to an advanced if somewhat eastern race , since the girl 's nose 
 be , if anything , Semitic in character , and her lip , though prettily 
 shape , be full . for the rest , the basin be so clean that I presume 
 it must have be make ready for I or other recent bather , and at 
 its bottom I discover grating and broken pipe of earthenware which 
 suggest that in the old day the water could be warm by mean of a 
 furnace . 

 this relic of a long - past civilisation excite Hans even more than it 
 do myself , since have never see anything of the sort , he think it 
 so strange that , as he inform I , he imagine that it must have be 
 build by witchcraft . in it I have a most delightful and much - need bath . 
 even Hans be persuade to follow my example - a thing I have rarely know 
 he to do before - and seat in its shallow part , splash some water 
 over his yellow , wrinkle anatomy . then we return to our house , where 
 I find an excellent breakfast have be provide which be bring to 
 we by tall , silent , handsome woman who survey we out of the corner of 
 their eye , but say nothing . 

 shortly after I have finish my meal , Billali , who have disappear , come 
 back again and say that she - who - command desire my presence as she 
 would speak with I ; also that I must come alone . so , after attend to 
 the wound , who both seem to be get on well , I go , follow by 
 Hans arm with his rifle , though I only carry my revolver . Robertson 
 wish to accompany I , as he do not seem to care about be leave 
 alone with the Zulus in that strange place , but this Billali would not 
 allow . indeed , when he persist , two great man step forward and 
 cross their spear before he in a somewhat threatening fashion . then 
 at my entreaty , for I fear lest trouble should arise , he give in and 
 return to the house . 

 follow our path of the night before , we walk up a ruin street 
 which I could see be only one of score in what have once be a very 
 great city , until we come to the archway that I have mention , a large 
 one now overgrow with plant that from their yellow , sweet - scented 
 bloom I judge to be a species of wallflower , also with a kind of 
 houseleek or saxifrage . 

 here Hans be stop by guard , Billali explain to I that he must 
 await my return , an order which he obey unwillingly enough . then I 
 go on down the narrow passage , line as before by guard who stand 
 silent as statue , and come to the curtain at the end . before these at 
 a motion from Billali , who do not seem to dare to speak in this place , 
 I stand still and wait . 



 CHAPTER XIII 

 ALLAN hear a strange tale 

 for some minute I remain before those curtain until , have it not be 
 for something electric in the air which get into my bone , a kind of 
 force that , perhaps in my fancy only , seem to pervade the place , 
 I should certainly have grow bored . indeed I be about to ask my 
 companion why he do not announce our arrival instead of stand there 
 like a stuck pig with his eye shut as though in prayer or meditation , 
 when the curtain part and from between they appear one of 
 those tall waiting woman whom we have see on the previous night . she 
 contemplate we gravely for a few moment , then move her hand twice , 
 once forward , towards Billali as a signal to he to retire , which he do 
 with great rapidity , and next in a beckon fashion towards myself to 
 invite I to follow she . 

 I obey , pass between the thick curtain which she fasten in some 
 way behind I , and find myself in the same roofed and sculpture room 
 that I have already describe . only now there be no lamp , such light 
 as penetrate it come from an opening above that I could not see , and 
 fall upon the dai at its head , also on she who sit upon the dais . 

 yes , there she be in her white robe and veil , the point and centre of 
 a little lake of light , a wondrous and in a sense a spiritual vision , 
 for in truth there be something about she which be not of the world , 
 something that draw and yet frighten I . still as a statue she sit , 
 like one to whom time be of no account and who have grow weary of 
 motion , and on either side of she yet more still , like caryatide 
 support a shrine , stand two of the stately woman who be her 
 attendant . 

 for the rest a sweet and subtle odour pervade the chamber which take 
 hold of my sens as hasheesh might do , which I be sure proceed 
 from she , or from her garment , for I could see no perfume burn . she 
 speak no word , yet I know she be invite I to come near and move 
 forward till I reach a curious carve chair that be place just 
 beneath the dai , and there halt , not like to sit down without 
 permission . 

 for a long while she contemplate I , for as before I could feel her 
 eye search I from head to foot and as it be look through I as 
 though she would discover my very soul . then at length she move , wave 
 those two ivory arm of her outward with a kind of swimming stroke , 
 whereon the woman to right and leave of she turn and glide away , I 
 know not whither . 

 " Sit , Allan , " she say , " and let we talk , for I think we have much to 
 say to each other . have you sleep well ? and eat ? - though I fear that 
 the food be but rough . also be the bath make ready for you ? " 

 " yes , Ayesha , " I answer to all three question , add , for I know not 
 what to say , " it seem to be a very ancient bath . " 

 " when I last see it , " she reply , " it be well enough with statue 
 standing round it work by a sculptor who have see beauty in his 
 dream . but in two thousand year - or be it more ? - the tooth of Time 
 bite deep , and doubtless like all else in this dead place it be now a 
 ruin . " 

 I cough to cover up the exclamation of disbelief that rise to my lip 
 and remark blandly that two thousand year be certainly a long time . 

 " when you say one thing , Allan , and mean another , your Arabic be even 
 more vile than usual and do not serve to cloak your thought . " 

 " it may be so , Ayesha , for I only know that tongue as I do many other of 
 the dialect of Africa by learn it from common man . my own speech 
 be English , in which , if you be acquaint with it , I should prefer to 
 talk . " 

 " I know not English , which doubtless be some language that have arise 
 since I leave the world . perhaps later you shall teach it to I . I tell 
 you , you anger I whom it be not well to anger , because you believe 
 nothing that pass my lip and yet do not dare to say so . " 

 " how can I believe one , Ayesha , who if I understand aright , speak of 
 have see a certain bath two thousand year ago , whereas one hundred 
 year be the full day of man ? forgive I therefore if I can not believe 
 what I know to be untrue . " 

 now I think that she would be very angry and be sorry that I have 
 speak . but as it happen she be not . 

 " you must have courage to give I the lie so boldly - and I like 
 courage , " she say , " who have be cringe to for so long . indeed , I 
 know that you be brave , who have hear how you bear yourself in the 
 fight yesterday , and much else about you . I think that we shall be 
 friend , but - seek no more . " 

 " what else should I seek , Ayesha ? " I ask innocently . 

 " now you be lie again , " she say , " who know well that no man who be 
 a man see a woman who be beautiful and please he , without wonder 
 whether , should he desire it , she could come to love he , that is , if 
 she be young . " 

 " which at least be not possible if she have live two thousand year . 
 then naturally she would prefer to wear a veil , " I say boldly , seek 
 to avoid the argument into which I see she wish to drag I . 

 " ah ! " she answer , " the little yellow man who be name 
 Light - in - darkness put that thought into your heart , I think . oh , do not 
 trouble as to how I know it , who have many spy here , as he guess 
 well enough . so a woman who have live two thousand year must be hideous 
 and wrinkle , must she ? the stamp of youth and loveliness must long have 
 flee from she ; of that you , the wise man , be sure . very well . now you 
 tempt I to do what I have determine I would not do and you shall pluck 
 the fruit of that tree of curiosity which grow so fast within you . 
 look , Allan , and say whether I be old and hideous , even though I have 
 live two thousand year upon the earth and mayhap many more . " 

 then she lift her hand and do something to her veil , so that for 
 a moment - only one moment - her face be reveal , after which the veil 
 fall into its place . 

 I look , I see , and if that chair have lack a back I believe that I 
 should have fall out of it to the ground . as for what I see - well , 
 it can not be describe , at any rate by I , except perhaps as a flash of 
 glory . 

 every man have dream of perfect beauty , base his idea of it perhaps 
 on that of some woman he have meet who chance to take his fancy , with 
 a few accessory from splendid picture or greek statue throw in , 
  plus a garnishment of the imagination . at any rate I have , and here 
 be that perfect beauty multiply by ten , such beauty , that at the 
 sight of it the sens reel . and yet I repeat that it be not to be 
 describe . 

 I do not know what the nose or the lip be like ; in fact , all that I 
 can remember with distinctness be the splendour of the eye , of which 
 I have catch some hint through her veil on the previous night . oh , they 
 be wondrous , those eye , but I can not tell their colour save that the 
 groundwork of they be black . moreover they seem to be more than eye 
 as we understand they . they be indeed window of the soul , out of 
 which look thought and majesty and infinite wisdom , mix with all the 
 allurement and the mystery that we be accustomed to see or to imagine 
 in woman . 

 here let I say something at once . if this marvellous creature expect 
 that the revelation of her splendour be go to make I her slave ; to 
 cause I to fall in love with she , as it be call , well , she must have 
 be disappoint , for it have no such effect . it frighten and in a 
 sense humble I , that be all , for I feel myself to be in the presence 
 of something that be not human , something alien to I as a man , which I 
 could fear and even adore as humanity would adore that which be Divine , 
 but with which I have no desire to mix . moreover , be it divine , or be 
 it something very different ? I do not know , I only know that it be not 
 for I ; as soon should I have think of ask for a star to set within 
 my lantern . 

 I think that she feel this , feel that her stroke have miss , as the 
 french say , that be if she mean to strike at all at this moment . 
 of this I be not certain , for it be in a change voice , one with a 
 suspicion of chill in it that she say with a little laugh , 

 " do you admit now , Allan , that a woman may be old and still remain fair 
 and unwrinkled ? " 

 " I admit , " I answer , although I be tremble so much that I could 
 hardly speak with steadiness , " that a woman may be splendid and lovely 
 beyond anything that the mind of man can conceive , whatever her age , of 
 which I know nothing . I would add this , Ayesha , that I thank you very 
 much for have reveal to I the glory that be hide beneath your veil . " 

 " why ? " she ask , and I think that I detect curiosity in her 
 question . 

 " for this reason , Ayesha . now there be no fear of my trouble you in 
 such a fashion as you seem to dread a little while ago . as soon would 
 a man desire to court the moon sailing in her silver loveliness through 
 heaven . " 

 " the moon ! it be strange that you should compare I to the moon , " she 
 say musingly . " do you know that the moon be a great goddess in Old 
 Egypt and that her name be Isis and - well , once I have to do with isis ? 
 perhaps you be there and know it , since more life than one be give 
 to most of we . I must search and learn . for the rest , all have not 
 think as you do , Allan . many , on the contrary , love and seek to win 
 the Divine . " 

 " so do I at a distance , Ayesha , but to come too near to it I do not 
 aspire . if I do perhaps I might be consume . " 

 " you have wisdom , " she reply , not without a note of admiration in her 
 voice . " the moth be few that fear the flame , but those be the moth 
 which live . also I think that you have scorch your wing before and 
 learn that fire hurt . indeed , now I remember that I have hear of 
 three such fire of love through which you have fly , Allan , though all 
 of they be dead ash now , or shine elsewhere . two burn in your youth 
 when a certain lady die to save you , a great woman that , be it not so ? 
 and the third , ah ! she be fire indeed , though of a copper hue . what be 
 her name ? I can not remember , but I think it have something to do with the 
 wind , yes , with the wind when it wail . " 

 I star at she . be this Mameena myth to be dig up again in a secret 
 place in the heart of Africa ? and how the deuce do she know anything 
 about Mameena ? could she have be question Hans or Umslopogaas ? no , 
 it be not possible , for she have never see they out of my presence . 

 " perhaps , " she go on in a mocking voice , " perhaps once again you 
 disbelieve , Allan , whose cynic mind be so hard to open to new truth . 
 well , shall I show you the face of these three ? I can , " and she wave 
 her hand towards some object that stand on a tripod to the right of she 
 in the shadow - it look like a crystal basin . " but what would it serve 
 when you who know they so well , believe that I draw their picture out 
 of your own soul ? also perchance but one face would appear and that one 
 strange to you .   Lady Ragnall perhaps ? - JB 

 " have you hear , Allan , that among the wise some hold that not all of 
 we be visible at once here on earth within the same house of flesh ; that 
 the whole self in its home above , separate itself into sundry part , 
 each of which walk the earth in different form , a segment of life 's 
 circle that can never be dissolve and must unite again at last ? " 

 I shake my head blankly , for I have never hear anything of the sort . 

 " you have still much to learn , Allan , although doubtless there be some 
 who think you wise , " she go on in the same mocking voice . " well , I 
 hold that this doctrine be build upon a rock of truth ; also , " she add 
 after study I for a minute , " that in your case these three woman 
 do not complete that circle . I think there be a fourth who as yet be 
 strange to you in this life , though you have know she well enough in 
 other . " 

 I groan , imagine that she allude to herself , which be foolish of 
 I , for at once she read my mind and go on with a rather acid little 
 laugh , 

 " no , no , not the humble slave who sit before you , whom , as you have 
 tell I , it would please you to reject as unworthy be she bring to 
 you in offering , as in the old day be do at the court of the great 
 king of the East . o fool , fool ! who hold yourself so strong and do not 
 know that if I choose , before yon shadow have move a finger 's breadth , I 
 could bring you to my foot , pray that you might be suffer to kiss 
 my robe , yes , just the border of my robe . " 

 " then I beg of you not to choose , Ayesha , since I think that when there 
 be work to be do by both of we , we shall find more comfort side 
 by side than if I be on the ground seek to kiss a garment that 
 doubtless then it would delight you to snatch away . " 

 at these word her whole attitude seem to change . I could see she 
 lovely shape brace itself up , as it be , beneath her robe and feel 
 in some way that her mind have also change ; that it have rid itself of 
 mockery and woman 's pique and like a shift searchlight , be direct 
 upon some new objective . 

 " work to be do , " she repeat after I in a new voice . " yes , I thank 
 you who bring it to my mind , since the hour pass and that work press . 
 also I think there be a bargain to be make between we who be both of 
 the blood that keep bargain , even if they be not write on a roll 
 and sign and seal . why do you come to I and what do you seek of 
 I , Allan , Watcher - in - the - Night ? say it and truthfully , for though I 
 may laugh at lie and pass they by when they have to do with the eternal 
 sword - play which nature decree between man and woman , until these break 
 apart or , cast down the sword , seek arm in which they agree too 
 well , when they have to do with policy and high purpose and ambition 's 
 end , why then I avenge they upon the liar . " 

 now I hesitate , as what I have to tell she seem so foolish , indeed so 
 insane , while she wait patiently as though to give I time to shape my 
 thought . speak at last because I must , I say , 

 " I come to ask you , Ayesha , to show I the dead , if the dead still live 
 elsewhere . " 

 " and who tell you , Allan , that I could show you the dead , if they be 
 not truly dead ? there be but one , I think , and if you be his messenger , 
 show I his token . without it we do not speak together of this 
 business . " 

 " what token ? " I ask innocently , though I guess her meaning well 
 enough . 

 she search I with her great eye , for I feel , and indeed see they on 
 I through the veil , then answer , 

 " I think - nay , let I be sure , " and half rise from the couch , she bend 
 she hear over the tripod that I have describe , and star into what 
 seem to be a crystal bowl . " if I read aright , " she say , straighten 
 herself presently , " it be a hideous thing enough , the carving of an 
 abortion of a man such as no woman would care to look on lest her babe 
 should bear its stamp . it be a charmed thing also that have virtue for 
 he who wear it , especially for you , Allan , since something tell I 
 that it be dye with the blood of one who love you . if you have it , let 
 it be reveal , since without it I do not talk with you of these dead 
 you seek . " 

 now I draw Zikali 's talisman from its hiding - place and hold it towards 
 she . 

 " give it to I , " she say . 

 I be about to obey when something seem to warn I not to do so . 

 " Nay , " I answer , " he who lend I this carving for a while , charge I 
 that except in emergency and to save other , I must wear it night and 
 day till I return it to his hand , say that if I part from it 
 fortune would desert I . I believe none of this talk and try to be rid 
 of it , whereon death draw near to I from a snake , such a snake as I see 
 you wear about you , which doubtless also have poison in its fang , if of 
 another sort , Ayesha . " 

 " draw near , " she say , " and let I look . man , be not afraid . " 

 so I rise from my chair and knelt before she , hop secretly that 
 no one would see I in that ridiculous position , which the most 
 unsuspicious might misinterpret . I admit , however , that it prove to 
 have compensation , since even through the veil I see her marvellous 
 eye well than I have do before , and something of the pure outline of 
 her classic face ; also the fragrance of her hair be wonderful . 

 she take the talisman in her hand and examine it closely . 

 " I have hear of this charm and it be true that the thing have power , " 
 she say , " for I can feel it run through my vein , also that it be 
 a shield of defence to he who wear it . yes , and now I understand what 
 perplex I somewhat , namely , how it come about that when you vex I 
 into unveiling - but let that matter be . the wisdom be not your own , but 
 another be , that be all . yes , the wisdom of one whose year have bear 
 he beyond the shaft that fly from woman 's eye , the ruinous shaft 
 which bring man down to doom and nothingness . tell I , Allan , be this 
 the likeness of he who give it to you ? " 

 " yes , Ayesha , the very picture , as I think , carve by himself , though he 
 say that it be ancient , and other tell that it have be know in the 
 land for century . " 

 " so perchance have he , " she answer drily , ' since some of our company 
 live long . now tell I this wizard 's name . Nay , wait awhile for I would 
 prove that indeed you be his messenger with whom I may talk about the 
 dead , and other thing , Allan . you can read Arabic , can you not ? " 

 " a little , " I answer . 

 then from a stool at her side she take paper , or rather papyrus and a 
 reed pen , and on her knee write something on the sheet which she give to 
 I fold up . 

 " now tell I the name , " she say , " and then let we see if they tally 
 with what I have write , for if so you be a true man , not a mere 
 wanderer or a spy . " 

 " the principal name of this doctor be Zikali , the Opener - of - road , the 
 ' thing - that - should - never - have - be - bear , ' " I answer . 

 " read the writing , Allan , " she say . 

 I unfold the sheet and read arabic word which mean , " weapon , 
 Cleaver - of - Rocks , one - at - whom - dog - bark - and - child - wail . " 

 " the last two be near enough , " she say , " but the first be wrong . " 

 " Nay , Ayesha , since in this man 's tongue the word ' Zikali ' mean 
 ' weapon ' " ; intelligence at which she clap her hand as a merry girl 
 might do . " the man , " I go on , " be without doubt a great doctor , one 
 who see and know thing that other do not , but I do not understand 
 why this token carve in his likeness should have power , as you say it 
 have . " 

 " because with it go his spirit , Allan . have you never hear of the 
 Egyptians , a very wise people who , as I remember , declare that man have 
 a Ka or Double , a second self , that can either dwell in his statue or 
 be send afar ? " 

 I answer that I have hear this . 

 " well the Ka of this Zikali go with that hideous image of he , which 
 be perhaps why you have come safe through many danger and why also I 
 seem to dream so much of he last night . tell I now , what do Zikali 
 want of I whose power he know very well ? " 

 " an oracle , the answer to a riddle , Ayesha . " 

 " then set it out another time . so you decide to see the dead , and this 
 old dwarf , who be a home of wisdom , desire an oracle from one who be 
 great than he . good . and what be you , or both of you , prepare to pay 
 for these boon ? Know , Allan , that I be a merchant who sell my favour 
 dear . tell I then , will you pay ? " 

 " I think that it depend upon the price , " I answer cautiously . " set 
 out the price , Ayesha . " 

 " be not afraid , o cunning dealer , " she mock . " I do not ask your soul 
 or even that love of yours which you guard so jealously , since these 
 thing I could take without the asking . Nay , I ask only what a brave and 
 honest man may give without shame : your help in war , and perhaps , " she 
 add with a soft tone , " your friendship . I think , Allan , that I like 
 you well , perhaps because you remind I of another whom I know long 
 ago . " 

 I bow at the compliment , feel proud and pleased at the prospect of 
 a friendship with this wonderful and splendid creature , although I be 
 aware that it have many danger . then I sit still and wait . she also 
 wait , brooding . 

 " listen , " she say after a while , " I will tell you a story and when you 
 have hear it you shall answer , even if you do not believe it , but not 
 before . do it please you to listen to something of the tale of my life 
 which I be move to tell you , that you may know with whom you have to 
 deal ? " 

 again I bow , think to myself that I know nothing that would please 
 I more , who be eat up with a devouring curiosity about this woman . 

 now she rise from her couch and descend off the dai , begin to walk 
 up and down the chamber . I say , to walk , but her movement be more 
 like the gliding of an eagle through the air or the motion of a swan 
 upon still water , so smooth be they and gracious . as she walk she 
 speak in a low and thrilling voice . 

 " listen , " she say again , " and even if my story seem marvellous to you , 
 interrupt , and above all , mock I not , lest I should grow angry , which 
 might be ill for you . I be not as other woman be , o Allan , who have 
 conquer the secret of Nature , " here I feel an intense desire to ask 
 what secret , but remember and hold my tongue , " to my sorrow have 
 preserve my youth and beauty through many age . moreover in the past , 
 perhaps in payment for my sin , I have live other life of which some 
 memory remain with I . 

 " by my last birth I be an arab lady of royal blood , a descendant of the 
 king of the East . there I dwelt in the wilderness and rule a people , 
 and at night I gather wisdom from the star and the spirit of the 
 earth and air . at length I weary of it all and my people too weary 
 of I and besought I to depart , for , Allan , I would have naught to do 
 with man , yet man go mad because of my beauty and slay each other out 
 of jealousy . moreover other people make war upon my people , hop to 
 take I captive that I might be a wife to their king . so I leave they , 
 and be furnish with great wealth in hoard gold and jewel , 
 together with a certain holy man , my master , I wander through the 
 world , study the nation and their worship . at Jerusalem I tarry 
 and learn of Jehovah who be , or be , its God . 

 " at Paphos in the Isle of Chitim I dwelt a while till the folk of 
 that city think that I be Aphrodite return to earth and seek to 
 worship I . for this reason and because I make a mock of Aphrodite , I , 
 who , as I have say , would have naught to do with man , she through her 
 priest curse I , say that her yoke should lie more heavily upon my 
 neck from age to age than on that of any woman who have breathe beneath 
 the sun . 

 " it be a wondrous scene , " she add reflectively , " that of the cursing , 
 since for every word I give back two . moreover I tell the hoary villain 
 of a high - priest to make report to his goddess that long after she be 
 dead in the world , I would live on , for the spirit of prophecy be on I 
 in that hour . yet the curse fall in its season , since in her day , doubt 
 it or not , Aphrodite have strength , as indeed under other name she have 
 and will have while the world endure , and for aught I know , beyond it . 
 do they worship she now in any land , Allan ? " 

 " no , only her statue because of their beauty , though Love be always 
 worship . " 

 " yes , who can testify to that well than you yourself , Allan , if he 
 who be call Zikali tell I the truth concern you in the dream he 
 send ? as for the statue , I see some of they as they leave the master 's 
 hand in Greece , and when I tell he that he might have find a well 
 model , once I be that model . if this marble still endure , it must be 
 the most famous of they all , though perchance Aphrodite have shatter it 
 in her jealous rage . you shall tell I of these statue afterwards ; 
 mine have a mark on the left shoulder like to a mole , but the stone be 
 imperfect , not my flesh , as I can prove if you should wish . " 

 think it well not to enter on a discussion as to Ayesha 's shoulder , 
 I remain silent and she go on . 

 " I dwelt in Egypt also , and there , to be rid of man who weary I with 
 their sigh and importunity , also to acquire more wisdom of which she 
 be the mistress , I enter the service of the goddess isis , Queen 
 of Heaven , vow to remain virgin for ever . soon I become her 
 high - priestess and in her most sacred shrine upon the Nile , I commune 
 with the goddess and share her power , since from I her daughter , she 
 withhold none of her secret . so it come about that though pharaoh hold 
 the sceptre , it be I who rule Egypt and bring it and Sidon to their 
 fall , it matter not how or why , as it be fat that I must do . yes , 
 king would come to seek counsel from I where I sit throne , dress in 
 the garb of Isis and breathe out her power . yet , my task accomplish , 
 of it all I grow weary , as man will surely do of the heaven that they 
 preach , should they chance to find they . " 

 I wonder what this " task " might be , but only ask , " why ? " 

 " because in their picture heaven all thing lie to their hand and man , 
 be man , can not be happy without struggle , and woman , be woman , 
 without victory over other . what be cheaply buy , or give , have no 
 value , Allan ; to be enjoy , it must first be win . but I bade you not to 
 break my thought . " 

 I ask pardon and she go on , 

 " then it be that the shadow of the curse of Aphrodite fall upon I , 
 yes , and of the curse of isis also , so that these twin malediction have 
 make I what I be , a lost soul dwell in the wilderness wait the 
 fulfilment of a fate whereof I know not the end . for though I have all 
 wisdom , all knowledge of the Past and much power together with the gift 
 of life and beauty , the future be as dark to I as night without its 
 moon and star . 

 " Hearken , this chance to I . though it be to my shame I tell it you 
 that all may be clear . at a temple of isis on the Nile where I rule , 
 there be a certain priest , a Greek by birth , vow like myself to the 
 service of the goddess and therefore to we d none but she , the goddess 
 herself - that be , in the spirit . he be name Kallikrates , a man of 
 courage and of beauty , such an one as those Greeks carve in the statue 
 of their god Apollo . never , I think , be a man more beautiful in face 
 and form , though in soul he be not great , as often happen to man who 
 have all else , and well - nigh always happen to woman , save myself and 
 perhaps one or two other that history tell of , doubtless magnifying 
 their fabled charm . 

 " the Pharaoh of that day , the last of the native blood , he whom the 
 Persians drive to doom , have a daughter , the Princess of Egypt , Amenartas 
 by name , a fair woman in her fashion , though somewhat swarthy . in her 
 youth this Amenartas become enamoured of Kallikrates and he of she , when 
 he be a captain of the Grecian Mercenaries at Pharaoh 's Court . indeed , 
 she bring blood upon his hand because of she , wherefore he flee to 
 isis for forgiveness and for peace . Thither in after time she follow 
 he and again urge her love . 

 " learn of the thing and know it for sacrilege , I summon this 
 priest and warn he of his danger and of the doom which await he 
 should he continue in that path . he grow affright . he fling himself 
 upon the ground before I with groan and supplication , and kiss 
 my foot , vow most falsely to I that his dealing with the royal 
 Amenartas be but a veil and that it be I whom he worship . his 
 unhallowed word fill I with horror and sternly I bid he begone and 
 do penance for his crime , say that I would pray the goddess on behalf 
 of he . 

 " he go , leave I alone lose in thought in the darken shrine . then 
 sleep fall on I and in my sleep I dream a dream , or see a vision . 
 for suddenly there stand before I a woman beauteous as myself clothe in 
 nothing save a golden girdle and a veil of gossamer . 

 " ' o Ayesha , ' she say in a honeyed voice , ' priestess of Isis of the 
 Egyptians , swear to the barren worship of isis and feed on the ash of 
 her unprofitable wisdom , know that I be Aphrodite of the Greeks whom 
 many time thou hast mock and defy , and queen of the breathing 
 world , as Isis be queen of the world that be dead . now because thou 
 didst despise I and pour contempt upon my name , I smite thee with 
 my strength and lie a curse upon thee . it be that thou shalt love and 
 desire this man who but now hath kiss thy foot , ever long till the 
 world 's end to kiss his lip in payment , although thou art as far above 
 he as the moon thou serv be above the Nile . think not that thou 
 shalt escape my doom , for know that however strong the spirit , here upon 
 the earth the flesh be strong still and of all flesh I be the queen . ' 

 " then she laugh softly and smite I across the eye with a lock of 
 her scented hair , be go . 

 " Allan , I awake from my sleep and a great trouble fall upon I , for I 
 who have never love before now be rent with a rage of love and for this 
 man who till that moment have be naught to I but as some beauteous 
 image of gold and ivory . I long for he , my heart be rack with 
 jealousy because of the Egyptian who favour he , an eat flame 
 possess my breast . I grow mad . there in the shrine of isis the divine 
 I cast myself upon my knee and cry to Aphrodite to return and give I 
 he I seek , for whose sake I would renounce all else , even if I must 
 pour my wisdom into a beauteous , empty cup . yes , thus I pray and lie 
 upon the ground and weep until , outworn , once more sleep fall upon I . 

 " now in the darkness of the holy place once more there come a dream or 
 vision , since before I in her glory stand the goddess Isis crown 
 with the crescent of the young moon and hold in her hand the jewel 
  sistrum that be her symbol , from which come music like to the melody 
 of distant bell . she gaze at I and in her great eye be scorn and 
 anger . 

 " ' o Ayesha , daughter of Wisdom , ' she say in a solemn voice , ' whom I , 
 Isis , have come to look upon rather as a child than a servant , since in 
 none other of my priestess be such greatness to be find , and whom 
 in a day to be I have purpose to raise to the very step of my heavenly 
 throne , thou hast break thine oath and , forsake I , hast worship 
 false Aphrodite of the Greeks who be mine enemy . yea , in the eternal war 
 between the spirit and the flesh , thou hast choose the part of flesh . 
 therefore I hate thee and add my doom to that which Aphrodite lay upon 
 thee , which , hadst thou pray to I and not to she , I would have lift 
 from thy heart . 

 " ' Hearken ! the Grecian whom thou hast choose , by Aphrodite 's will , thou 
 shalt love as the Pathian say . More , thy love shall bring his blood 
 upon thy hand , nor mayest thou follow he to the grave . for I will show 
 thee the Source of Life and thou shalt drink of it to make thyself more 
 fair even than thou art and thus outpace thy rival , and when thy lover 
 be dead , in a desolate place thou shalt wait in grief and solitude till 
 he be bear again and find thee there . 

 " ' yet shall this be but the beginning of thy sorrow , since through all 
 time thou shalt pursue thy fate till at length thou canst draw up this 
 man to the height on which thine own soul stand by the rope of love 
 and loss and suffering . moreover through it all thou shalt despise 
 thyself , which be man 's and woman 's hard lot , thou who have the 
 rare feast of spirit spread out before thee , hast choose to fill thyself 
 from the trough of flesh . ' 

 " then , Allan , in my dream I make a proud answer to the goddess , say , 
 ' hear I , mighty mistress of many form who dost appear in all that 
 life ! an evil fate have fall upon I , but be it I who choose that 
 fate ? can the leaf contend against the drive gale ? can the fall 
 stone turn upwards to the sky , or when Nature draw it , can the tide 
 cease to flow ? a goddess whom I have offend , that goddess whose 
 strength cause the whole world to be , have lay her curse upon I and 
 because I have bend before the storm , as bend I must , or break , another 
 goddess whom I serve , thou thyself , Mother Isis , hast add to the 
 curse . where then be Justice , o Lady of the Moon ? ' 

 " ' not here , Woman , ' she answer . ' yet far away Justice live and shall 
 be win at last and mayhap because thou art so proud and high - stomach , 
 it be lay upon thee to seek her blinded eye through many an age . yet 
 at last I think thou shalt set thy sin against her weight and find 
 the balance even . therefore cease from question the high decree 
 of destiny which thou canst not understand and be content to suffer , 
 remember that all joy grow from the root of pain . moreover , know 
 this for thy comfort , that the wisdom which thou hast shall grow and 
 gather on thee and with it thy beauty and thy power ; also that at the 
 last thou shalt look upon my face again , in token whereof I leave to 
 thee my symbol , the sistrum that I bear , and with it this command . 
 follow that false priest of mine wherever he may go and avenge I upon 
 he , and if thou lose he there , wait while the generation pass till he 
 return again . such and no other be thy destiny . ' 

 " Allan , the vision fade and when I awake the light of dawn play upon 
 the image of the goddess in the sanctuary . they play , moreover , 
 upon the holy jewel thing that in my dream her hand have hold , the 
  sistrum of her worship , shape like the loop of life , the magic symbol 
 that she have vow to I , wherewith go her power , which henceforth be 
 mine . 

 " I take it and follow after the priest Kallikrates , to whom 
 thenceforward I be bind by passion 's tie that be strong than all 
 the goddess in this wide universe . " 

 here I , Allan , could contain myself no long and ask , " what for ? " 
 then , fear her wrath , wish that I have be silent . 

 but she be not angry , perhaps because this tale of her interview 
 with goddess , doubtless fable , have make her humble , for she answer 
 quietly , 

 " by Aphrodite , or by isis , or both of they I do not know . all I know 
 be that I must seek he , then and evermore , as seek I do to - day and 
 shall perchance through æon yet unborn . so I follow , as I be teach 
 and command , the sistrum be my guide , how it matter not , and 
 give I the mean , and so at last I come to this ancient land whereof 
 the ruin in which you sit be once know as K"r . " 



 CHAPTER XIV 

 ALLAN MISSES opportunity 

 all the while that she be talk thus the Lady or the Queen or the 
 Witch - woman , Ayesha , have be walk up and down the place from the 
 curtain to the foot of the dai , sweep I with her scented robe as 
 she pass to and fro , and as she walk she wave her arm as an orator 
 might do to emphasise the more moving passage of her tale . now at the 
 end of it , or what I take to be the end , she step on to the dais and 
 sink upon the couch as if exhaust , though I think her spirit be weary 
 rather than her body . 

 here she sit awhile , brooding , her chin rest on her hand , then 
 suddenly look up and fix her glance upon I - for I could see the 
 flash of it through her thin veil - say , 

 " what think you of this story , Allan ? do you believe it and have you 
 ever hear its like ? " 

 " never , " I answer with emphasis , " and of course I believe every 
 word . only there be one or two question that with your leave I would 
 wish to ask , Ayesha . " 

 " by which you mean , Allan , that you believe nothing , be by nature 
 without faith and doubtful of all that you can not see and touch and 
 handle . well , perhaps you be wise , since what I have tell you be not 
 all the truth . for example , it come back to I now that it be not in 
 the temple on the Nile , or indeed upon the Earth , that I see the vision 
 of Aphrodite and of isis , but elsewhere ; also that it be here in K"r 
 that I be first consume by passion for Kallikrates whom hitherto I have 
 scorn . in two thousand year one forget much , Allan . out with your 
 question and I will answer they , unless they be too long . " 

 " Ayesha , " I say humbly , reflect to myself that my question would , 
 at any rate , be short than her vary tale , " even I who be not 
 learn have hear of these goddess of whom you speak , of the Grecian 
 Aphrodite who rise from the sea upon the shore of Cyprus and dwell at 
 Paphos and elsewhere - - " 

 " yes , doubtless like most man you have hear of she and perchance also 
 have be strike across the eye with her hair , like your better before 
 you , " she interrupt with sarcasm . 

 " - - also , " I go on , avoid argument , " I have hear of Isis of the 
 Egyptians , Lady of the Moon , Mother of Mysteries , Spouse of Osiris whose 
 child be Horus the Avenger . " 

 " Aye , and I think will hear more of she before you have do , Allan , for 
 now something come back to I concern you and she and another . I 
 be not the only one who have break the oath of Isis and receive she 
 curse , Allan , as you may find out in the day to come . but what of 
 these heavenly queen ? " 

 " only this , Ayesha ; I have be teach that they be but phantasm 
 fable by man with many another false divinity , and could have swear 
 that this be true . and yet you talk of they as real and living , which 
 perplex I . " 

 " be dull of understanding doubtless it perplex you , Allan . yet if 
 you have imagination you might understand that these goddess be great 
 principle of Nature ; isis , of throne Wisdom and strait virtue , and 
 Aphrodite , of love , as it be know to man and woman who , be human , 
 have it lay upon they that they must hand on the torch of Life in their 
 little hour . also you would know that such principle can seem to take 
 shape and form and at certain age of the world appear to their servant 
 visible in majesty , though perchance to - day other with change name 
 wield their sceptre and work their will . now you be answer on this 
 matter . so to the next . " 

 privately I do not feel as though I be answer at all and I be sure 
 that I know nothing of the kind she indicate , but think it well to 
 leave the subject , I go on , 

 " if I understand rightly , Ayesha , the event which you have be please 
 first to describe to I , and then to qualify or contradict , take place 
 when the pharaoh reign . now no Pharaoh have sit upon the throne of 
 Egypt for near two thousand year , for the last be a grecian woman whom 
 the Romans conquer and drive to death . and yet , Ayesha , you speak as 
 though you have live all through that gulf of time , and in this there 
 must be error , because it be impossible . therefore I suppose you to mean 
 that this history have come down to you in writing , or perhaps in dream . 
 I believe that even in such far - off time there be writer of romance , 
 and we all know of what stuff dream be make . at least this thought 
 come to I , " I add hurriedly , fear lest I have say too much , " and 
 one so wise as you be , I repeat , know well that a woman who say she 
 have live two thousand year must be mad or - suffer from delusion , 
 because I repeat , it be impossible . " 

 at these quite innocent remark she spring to her foot in a rage that 
 might truly be call royal in every sense . 

 " impossible ! romance ! dream ! delusion ! mad ! " she cry in a ringing 
 voice . " oh ! of a truth you weary I , and I have a mind to send you 
 whither you will learn what be impossible and what be not . indeed , I 
 would do it , and now , only I need your service , and if I do there 
 would be none leave for I to talk with , since your companion be 
 moonstruck and the other be but savage of whom I have see enough . 

 " Hearken , fool ! nothing be impossible . why do you seek , you who talk 
 of the impossible , to girdle the great world in the span of your two 
 hand and to weigh the secret of the Universe in the balance of your 
 petty mind and , of that which you can not understand , to say that it be 
 not ? life you admit because you see it all about you . but that it should 
 endure for two thousand year , which after all be but a second 's beat in 
 the story of the earth , that to you be ' impossible , ' although in truth 
 the bury seed or the seal - up toad can live as long . doubtless , also , 
 you have some faith which promise you this same boon to all eternity , 
 after the little change call Death . 

 " Nay , Allan , it be possible enough , like to many other thing of which 
 you do not dream to - day that will be common to the eye of those who 
 follow after you . mayhap you think it impossible that I should speak 
 with and learn of you from yonder old black wizard who dwell in the 
 country whence you come . and yet whenever I will I do so in the night 
 because he be in tune with I , and what I do shall be do by all man in 
 the year unborn . yes , they shall talk together across the wide space 
 of the earth , and the lover shall hear her lover 's voice although great 
 sea roll between they . nor perchance will it stop at this ; perchance in 
 future time man shall hold converse with the denizen of the star , and 
 even with the dead who have pass into silence and the darkness . do you 
 hear and understand I ? " 

 " yes , yes , " I answer feebly . 

 " you lie , as you be too prone to do . you hear but you do not understand 
 nor believe , and oh ! you vex I sorely . now I have it in my mind to 
 tell you the secret of this long life of mine ; long , mark you , but not 
 endless , for doubtless I must die and change and return again , like 
 other , and even to show you how it may be win . but you be not worthy 
 in your faithlessness . " 

 " no , no , I be not worthy , " I answer , who at that moment do not feel 
 the least desire to live two thousand year , perhaps with this woman as 
 a neighbour , rat I from generation to generation . yet it be true , 
 that now when I be old and a certain event can not be postpone much 
 long , I do often regret that I neglect to take this unique chance , 
 if in truth there be one , of prolong an existence which after all 
 have its consolation - especially when one have make one 's pile . certainly 
 it be a case , a flagrant case , of neglect opportunity , and my only 
 consolation for have lose they be that this be due to the uprightness 
 of my nature which make it so hard for I to acquiesce in alternative 
 statement that I have every cause to disbelieve and thus to give offence 
 to a very powerful and petulant if attractive lady . 

 " so that be do with , " she go on with a little stamp of indignation , 
 " as soon you will be also , who , have you not cross and doubt I , 
 might have live on for untold time and become one of the master of the 
 world , as I be . " 

 here she pause , choke , I think , with her almost childish anger , and 
 because I could not help it , I say , 

 " such place and power , if they be your , Ayesha , do not seem to bring 
 you much reward . if I be a master of the world I do not think that I 
 should choose to dwell unchangingly among savage who eat man and in 
 a pile of ruin . but perhaps the curse of Aphrodite and of Isis be 
 strong master still ? " and I pause inquiringly . 

 this bold argument - for now I see that it be bold - seem to astonish 
 and even bewilder my wonderful companion . 

 " you have more wisdom than I think , " she say reflectively , " who have 
 come to understand that no one be really lord of anything , since above 
 there be always a more powerful lord who wither all his pomp and pride 
 to nothingness , even as the great king learn in olden day , and I , 
 who be high than they be , be learn now . Hearken . trouble beset I 
 wherein I would have your help and that of your companion , for which I 
 will pay each of you the fee that he desire . the brood white man who 
 be with you shall free his daughter and unharmed ; though that he will 
 be unharmed I do not promise . the black savage captain shall fight his 
 fill and gain the glory that he seek , also something that he seek 
 still more . the little yellow man ask nothing save to be with his 
 master like a dog and to satisfy at once his stomach and his apish 
 curiosity . you , Allan , shall see those dead over whom you brood at 
 night , though the other guerdon that you might have win be now pass 
 from your reach because you mock I in your heart . " 

 " what must we do to gain these thing ? " I ask . " how can we humble 
 creature help one who be all powerful and who have gather in her 
 breast the infinite knowledge of two thousand year ? " 

 " you must make war under my banner and rid I of my foe . as for the 
 reason , listen to the end of my tale and you shall learn . " 

 I reflect that it be a marvellous thing that this queen who claim 
 supernatural power should need our help in a war , but think it wiser 
 to keep my meditation to myself , say nothing . as a matter of fact I 
 might just as well have speak , since as usual she read my thought . 

 " you be think that it be strange , Allan , that I , the Mighty and 
 Undying , should seek your aid in some petty tribal battle , and so it 
 would be be my foe but common savage . but they be more ; they be 
 man protect by the ancient god of this immemorial city of K"r , a great 
 god in his day whose spirit still haunt these ruin and whose strength 
 still protect the worshipper who cling to he and practise his unholy 
 rite of human sacrifice . " 

 " how be this god name ? " I ask . 

 " rezu be his name , and from he come the Egyptian Re or Ra , since in 
 the beginning K"r be the mother of Egypt and the conquer people of 
 K"r take their god with they when they burst into the valley of the 
 Nile and subdue its people long before the first Pharaoh , Menes , wear 
 Egypt 's crown . " 

 " Ra be the sun , be he not ? " I ask . 

 " Aye , and rezu also be a sun - god whom from his throne in the fire of 
 the Lord of Day , give life to man , or slay they if he will with his 
 thunderbolt of drought and pestilence and storm . he be no gentle king 
 of heaven , but one who demand blood - sacrifice from his worshipper , 
 yes , even that of maid and child . so it come about that the people 
 of K"r , who see their virgin slay and eat by the priest of rezu , 
 and their infant burn to ash in the fire that his ray light , turn 
 themselves to the worship of the gentle moon , the goddess whom they 
 name Lulala , while some of they choose Truth for their queen , since 
 Truth , they say , be great and more to be desire than the fierce 
 Sun - King or even the sweet Moon - Lady , Truth , who sit above they both 
 throne in the furth star of Heaven . then the demon , Rezu , grow 
 wroth and send a pestilence upon K"r and its subject land and slay 
 their people , save those who cling to he in the great apostasy , and 
 with they some other who serve Lulala and Truth the Divine , that 
 escape I know not how . " 

 " do you see this great pestilence ? " I ask , much interested . 

 " Nay , it befell generation before I come to K"r . one Junis , a priest , 
 write a record of it in the cave yonder where I have my home and where 
 be the bury - place of the countless thousand that it slay . in my 
 day K"r , of which , should you desire to hear it , I will tell you the 
 history , be a ruin as it be now , though scatter in the land amidst 
 the tumbled stone which once build up her subject city , a people 
 name the Amahagger dwelt in Households , or Tribes and there sacrifice 
 man by fire and devour they , follow the rite of the demon Rezu . 
 for these be the descendant of those who escape the pestilence . also 
 there be certain other , child of the worshipper of Lulala whose 
 kingdom be the moon , and of Truth the Queen , who cling to the gentle 
 worship of their forefather and be ever at war with the follower of 
 rezu . " 

 " what bring you to K"r , Ayesha ? " I ask irrelevantly . 

 " have I not say that I be lead hither by the command and the symbol of 
 great isis whom I serve ? also , " she add after a pause , " that I might 
 find a certain pair , one of whom have break his oath to she , tempt 
 thereto by the other . " 

 " and do you find they , Ayesha ? " I ask . 

 " Aye , I find they , or rather they find I , and in my presence 
 the goddess execute her decree upon her false priest and drive his 
 temptress back to the world . " 

 " that must have be dreadful for you , Ayesha , since I understand that 
 you also - like this priest . " 

 she spring from her couch and in a low , hiss voice which resemble 
 the sound make by an angry snake and turn my blood cold to hear , 
 exclaim , 

 " Man , do you dare to mock I ? Nay , you be but a blunder , curious 
 fool , and it be well for you that this be so , since otherwise like 
 Kallikrates , never should you leave K"r living . cease from seek that 
 which you may not learn . suffice it for you to know that the doom of 
 Isis fall upon the lose Kallikrates , her priest forswear , and that on I 
 also fall her doom , who must dwell here , dead yet live , till he return 
 again and the play begin afresh . 

 " Stranger , " she go on in a soft voice , " perchance your faith , 
 whate'er it be , parade a hell to terrify its worshipper and give 
 strength to the arm of its prophesy priest , who swear they hold 
 the key of doom or of the eternal joy . I see you sign assent "   I have 
 nod at her extremely accurate guess   " and therefore can understand 
 that in such a hell as this , here upon the earth I have dwell for some 
 two thousand year , expiate the crime of Powers above I whereof I 
 be but the hand and instrument , since those Powers which decreed that I 
 should love , decree also that I must avenge that love . " 

 she sink down upon the couch as though exhaust by emotion , of which 
 I could only guess the reason , hide her face in her hand . presently 
 she let they fall again and continue , 

 " of these woe ask I no more . they sleep till the hour of their 
 resurrection , which I think draw nigh ; indeed , I think that you 
 perchance - - but let that be . ' twa near the mark ; nearer , Allan , than 
 you know , not in it ! therefore leave they to their sleep as I would if 
 I might - ah ! if I might , whose companion they be throughout the weary 
 age . alas ! that through the secret which be reveal to I I remain 
 undying on the earth who in death might perhaps have find a rest , 
 and be human although half divine , must still busy myself with the 
 affair of earth . 

 " look you , Wanderer , after that which be fat have happen and I 
 remain in my agony of solitude and sorrow , after , too , I have drunk 
 of the cup of endure life and like the Prometheus of old fable , find 
 myself bind to this changeless rock , whereon day by day the vulture 
 of remorse tear out my live heart which in the watch of the night be 
 ever doom to grow again within my woman 's breast , I be plunge into 
 petty trouble of the flesh , aye and welcome they because their irk at 
 time give I forgetfulness . when the savage dweller in this land come 
 to know that a mighty one have arise among they who be the servant of 
 the Lady of the Moon , those of they who still worship their goddess 
 Lulala , gather themselves about I , while those of they who worship 
 Rezu seek to overthrow I . 

 " ' here , ' they say , ' be the goddess Lulala come to earth . in the name 
 of rezu let we slay she and make an end , ' for these fool think that I 
 could be kill . Allan , I conquer they , but their captain , who also 
 be name Rezu and whom they hold and hold to be an emanation of the god 
 himself walk the earth , I could not conquer . " 

 " why not ? " I ask . 

 " for this reason , Allan . in some past age his god show he the same 
 secret that be show to I . he too have drunk of the Cup of Life and 
 live on unharmed by Time , so that be in strength my equal , no spear 
 of mine can reach his heart clothe in the armour of his evil god . " 

 " then what spear can ? " I inquire helplessly , who be bewilder . 

 " none at all , Allan , yet an axe may , as you shall hear , or so I 
 think . for many generation there have be peace of a sort between the 
 worshipper of Lulala who dwell with I in the Plain of K"r , or rather 
 of myself , since to these people I be Lulala , and the worshipper of 
 Rezu , who dwell in the stronghold beyond the mountain crest . but of 
 late year their chief rezu , have devastate the land about , have 
 grow restless and threaten to attack on K"r , which be not strong 
 enough to stand against he . moreover he have seek for a white queen to 
 rule under he , purpose to set she up to mock my majesty . " 

 " be that why those cannibal carry away the daughter of my companion , 
 the Sea - Captain who be name Avenger ? " I ask . 

 " it be , Allan , since presently he will give it out that I be dead or 
 flee , if he have not do so already , and that this new queen have arise 
 in my place . thereby he hop to draw away many who cling to I ere he 
 advance upon K"r , carry with he this girl veil as I be , so that 
 none may know the difference between we , since not a man of they have 
 ever look upon my face , Allan . therefore this rezu must die , if die he 
 can ; otherwise , although it be impossible that he should harm I , he may 
 slay or draw away my people and leave I with none to rule in this 
 place where by the decree of Fate I must dwell on until he whom I seek 
 return . you be think in your heart that such savage would be 
 little loss and this be so , but still they serve as slave to I in my 
 loneliness . moreover I have swear to protect they from the demon Rezu 
 and they have trust in I and therefore my honour be at stake , for 
 never shall it be say that those who trust in She - who - command , be 
 overthrow because they put faith in one who be powerless . " 

 " what do you mean about an axe , Ayesha ? " I ask . " why can an axe alone 
 kill rezu ? " 

 " the thing be a mystery , O Allan , of which I may not tell you all , since 
 to do so I must reveal secret which I have determine you shall not 
 learn . suffice it to you to know that when this rezu drink of the Cup 
 of Life he take with he his axe . now this axe be an ancient weapon 
 rumour to have be fashion by the god and , as it chance , that axe 
 draw to itself more and strong life than do rezu , how , it do not 
 matter , if indeed the tale be more than a fable . at least this I know be 
 true , for he who guard the Gate of Life , a certain Noot , a master of 
 mystery , and mine also in my day of youth , who be a philosopher and 
 very wise , choose never to pass that portal which be open to he , say 
 it to I himself ere he go the way of flesh . he tell this rezu 
 also that now he have naught to fear save his own axe and therefore he 
 counsel he to guard it well , since if it be lift against he in 
 another 's hand it would bring he down to death , which nothing 
 else could do . like to the heel of Achilles whereof the great Homer 
 sing - have you read Homer , Allan ? " 

 " in a translation , " I answer . 

 " good , then you will remember the story . like to the heel of Achilles , 
 I say , that axe would be the only gate by which death could enter his 
 invulnerable flesh , or rather it alone could make the gate . " 

 " how do Noot know that ? " I ask . 

 " I can not say , " she answer with irritation . " perchance he do not know 
 it . perchance it be all an idle tale , but at least it be true that rezu 
 believe and believe it , and what a man believe be true for he and 
 will certainly befall . if it be otherwise , what be the use of faith 
 which in a thousand form support our race and hold it from the 
 horror of the Pit ? only those who believe nothing inherit what they 
 believe - nothing , Allan . " 

 " it may be so , " I reply prosaically , " but what happen about the 
 axe ? " 

 " in the end it be lose , or as some say steal by a woman whom rezu have 
 desert , and therefore he walk the world in fear from day to day . Nay , 
 ask no more empty question "   I have open my mouth to speak   " but hear 
 the end of the tale . in my trouble concern rezu I remember this 
 wild legend of the axe and since , when lose in a forest every path that 
 may lead to safety should be explore , I send my wisdom forth to make 
 inquiry concern it , as I who be great , have the power to do , of 
 certain who be in tune with I throughout this wide land of Africa . 
 amongst other , I inquire of that old wizard whom you name Zikali , 
 Opener of Roads , and he give I an answer that there live in his land a 
 certain warrior who rule a tribe call the People of the Axe by right 
 of the Axe , of which axe none , not even he , know the beginning or the 
 legend . on the chance , though it be a small one , I bid the wizard 
 send that warrior here with his axe . last night he stand before I and I 
 look upon he and the axe , which at least be ancient and have a story . 
 whether it be the same that rezu bore I do not know who never see it , 
 yet perchance he who bear it now be prepared to hold it aloft in battle 
 even against rezu , though he be terrible to see , and then we shall 
 learn . " 

 " oh ! yes , " I answer , " he be quite prepared , for that be his nature . 
 also among this man 's people , the holder of the Axe be think to be 
 unconquerable . " 

 " yet some must have be conquer who hold it , " she reply musingly . 
 " well , you shall tell I that tale later . now we have talk long and 
 you be weary and astonished . go , eat and rest yourself . to - night when 
 the moon rise I will come to where you be , not before , for I have much 
 that must be do , and show you those with whom you must fight against 
 Rezu , and make a plan of battle . " 

 " but I do not want to fight , " I answer , " who have fight enough and 
 come here to seek wisdom , not bloodshe . " 

 " first the sacrifice , then the reward , " she answer , " that be if any 
 be leave to be reward . farewell . " 



 CHAPTER XV 

 ROBERTSON be lose 

 so I go and be conduct by Billali , the old chamberlain , for such 
 seem to be his office , who have be wait patiently without all this 
 while , back to our rest - house . on my way I pick up Hans , whom I find 
 sit outside the arch , and find that as usual that worthy have be 
 keep his eye and ear open . 

 " Baas , " he say , " do the White Witch tell you that there be a big 
  impi encamp over yonder outside the house , in what look like a 
 great dry ditch , and on the edge of the plain beyond ? " 

 " no , Hans , but she say that this evening she would show we those in 
 whose company we must fight . " 

 " well , Baas , they be there , some thousand of they , for I creep through 
 the broken wall like a snake and see they . and , Baas , I do not think 
 they be man , I think that they be evil spirit who walk at night 
 only . " 

 " why , han ? " 

 " because when the sun be high , Baas , as it be now , they be all 
 sleep . yes , there they lie abed , fast asleep , as other people do at 
 night , with only a few sentry out on guard , and these be yawn and 
 rub their eye . " 

 " I have hear that there be folk like that in the middle of Africa 
 where the sun be very hot , Hans , " I answer , " which perhaps be why 
 she - who - command be go to take we to see they at night . also these 
 people , it seem , be worshipper of the moon . " 

 " no , Baas , they be worshipper of the devil and that White Witch be his 
 wife . " 

 " you have well keep your thought to yourself , Hans , for whatever she 
 be I think that she can read thought from far away , as you guess last 
 night . therefore I would not have any if I be you . " 

 " no , Baas , or if I must think , henceforth , it shall be only of gin which 
 in this place be also far away , " he reply , grin . 

 then we come to the rest - house where I find that Robertson have already 
 eat his midday meal and like the Amahagger go to sleep , while 
 apparently Umslopogaas have do the same ; at least I see nothing of he . 
 of this I be glad , since that wondrous Ayesha seem to draw vitality 
 out of I and after my long talk with she I feel very tired . so I too 
 eat and then go to lie down under an old wall in the shade at a little 
 distance , and to reflect upon the marvellous thing that I have hear . 

 here be it say at once that I believe nothing of they , or at least 
 very little indeed . all the involved tale of Ayesha 's long life I 
 dismiss at once as incredible . clearly she be some beautiful woman 
 who be more or less mad and suffer from megalomania ; probably an 
 Arab , who have wander to this place for reason of her own , and become 
 the chieftainess of a savage tribe whose tradition she have absorb and 
 reproduce as personal experience , again for reason of her own . 

 for the rest , she be now threaten by another tribe and know that 
 we have gun and could fight from what happen on the yesterday , wish 
 naturally enough for our assistance in the come battle . as for the 
 marvellous chief rezu , or rather for his supernatural attribute and all 
 the cock - and - bull story about an axe - well , it be humbug like the rest , 
 and if she believe in it she must be more foolish than I take she 
 to be - even if she be unhinge on certain point . for the rest , her 
 information about myself and Umslopogaas doubtless have reach she from 
 Zikali in some obscure fashion , as she herself acknowledge . 

 but heaven ! how beautiful she be ! that flash of loveliness when out of 
 pique or coquetry she lift her veil , blind like the lightning . but 
 thank goodness , also like the lightning it frighten ; instinctively one 
 feel that it be very dangerous , even to death , and with it I for one 
 wish no close acquaintance . fire may be lovely and attractive , also 
 comfort at a proper distance , but he who sit on the top of it be 
 cremate , as many a moth have find . 

 so I argue , know well enough all the while that if this particular 
 human - or inhuman - fire desire to make an holocaust of I , it could do 
 so easily enough , and that in reality I owe my safety so far to a lack 
 of that desire on its part . the glorious Ayesha see nothing to attract 
 she in an insignificant and withered hunter , or at any rate in his 
 exterior , though with his mind she might find some small affinity . 
 moreover to make a fool of he just for the fun of it would not 
 serve her purpose , since she need his assistance in a business that 
 necessitate clear wit and unprejudiced judgment . 

 lastly she have declare herself to be absorb in some tiresome 
 complication with another man , of which it be rather difficult to 
 follow the detail . it be true that she describe he as a handsome but 
 somewhat empty - head person whom she have last see two thousand year 
 ago , but probably this only mean that she think poorly of he because 
 he have prefer some other woman to herself , while the two thousand 
 year be add to the tale to give it atmosphere . 

 the bad of scandal become romantic and even respectable in two 
 thousand year ; witness that of Cleopatra with Cæsar , Mark Antony and 
 other gentleman . the most virtuous read of Cleopatra with sympathy , even 
 in boarding - school , and it be feel that be she by some miracle to be 
 blot out of the book of history , the loss would be enormous . the same 
 apply to Helen , Phryne , and other bad lot . in fact now that one come 
 to think of it , most of the attractive personage in history , male or 
 female , especially the latter , be bad lot . when we find someone to 
 whose name be add " the good " we skip . no doubt Ayesha , be very 
 clever , appreciate this regrettable truth , and therefore move she 
 murky entanglement of the past decade or so back for a couple of 
 thousand year , as many of we would like to do . 

 there remain the very curious circumstance of her apparent 
 correspondence with old Zikali who live far away . this , however , after 
 all be not inexplicable . in the course of a great deal of experience I 
 have observe that all the witch - doctor family , to which doubtless she 
 belong , have strange mean of communication . 

 in most instance these be no doubt physical , carry on by help of 
 messenger , or message pass from one to the other . but sometimes it 
 be reasonable to assume what be know as telepathy , as their link of 
 intercourse . between two such highly develop expert as Ayesha and 
 Zikali , it might for the sake of argument safely be suppose that it 
 be thus they learn each other 's mind and co - operate in each other 's 
 project , though perhaps this end be effect by commoner method . 

 whatever its interpretation , the issue of the business seem to be 
 that I be to be let in for more fighting . well , in any case this could 
 not be avoid , since Robertson 's daughter , Inez , have to be save at all 
 cost , if it could possibly be do , even if we lose our life in the 
 attempt . therefore fight we must , so there be nothing more to be say . 
 also without doubt this adventure be particularly interesting and I 
 could only hope that good luck , or Zikali 's Great Medicine , or rather 
 Providence , would see I through it safely . 

 for the rest the fact that our help be necessary to she in this 
 war - like venture show I clearly enough that all this wonderful 
 woman 's pretension to supernatural power be the sheer nonsense . 
 have they be otherwise she would not have need our help in her tribal 
 fight , notwithstanding the rubbish she talk about the chief , rezu , 
 who accord to her account of he , must resemble one of the fabulous 
 " troll , " half - human and half - ghostly evil creature , of whom I have 
 read in the Norse Sagas , who could only be slay by some particular hero 
 arm with a particular weapon . 



 reflect thus I go to sleep and do not wake until the sun be 
 set . find that Hans be also sleep at my foot just like a 
 faithful dog , I wake he up and we go back together to the rest - house , 
 which we reach as the darkness fall with extraordinary swiftness , as 
 it do in those latitude , especially in a place surround by cliff . 

 not find Robertson in the house , I conclude that he be somewhere 
 outside , possibly make a reconnaissance on his own account , and tell 
 Hans to get supper ready for both of we . while he be do so , by aid 
 of the Amahagger lamp , Umslopogaas suddenly appear in the circle of 
 light , and look about he , say , 

 " where be Red - Beard , Macumazahn ? " 

 I answer that I do not know and wait , for I feel sure that he have 
 something to say . 

 " I think that you have well keep Red - Beard close to you , Macumazahn , " 
 he go on . " this afternoon , when you have return from visit the 
 white doctoress and have eat , have go to sleep under the wall 
 yonder , I see Red - Beard come out of the house carry a gun and a bag 
 of cartridge . his eye roll wildly and he turn first this way and 
 then that , sniff at the air , like a buck that scent danger . then he 
 begin to talk aloud in his own tongue and as I see that he be speak 
 with his Spirit , as those do who be mad , I go away and leave he . " 

 " why ? " I ask . 

 " because , as you know , Macumazahn , it be a law among we Zulus never to 
 disturb one who be mad and engage in talk with his Spirit . moreover , 
 have I do so , probably he would have shoot I , nor should I have 
 complain who would have thrust myself in where I have no right to be . " 

 " then why do you not come to call I , Umslopogaas ? " 

 " because then he might have shoot you , for , as I have see for some time 
 he be inspire of heaven and know not what he do upon the earth , 
 think only of the Lady Sad - Eyes who have be steal away from he , as 
 be but natural . so I leave he walk up and down , and when I return 
 later to look , see that he be go , as I think into this walled hut . 
 now when Hansi tell I that he be not here , I have come to speak to you 
 about he . " 

 " no , certainly he be not here , " I say , and I go to look at the bed 
 where Robertson sleep to see if it have be use that evening . 

 then for the first time I see lie on it a piece of paper tear from a 
 pocketbook and address to myself . I seize and read it . it run thus : 


 " the merciful Lord have send I a vision of Inez and show I where she 
 be over the cliff - edge away to the west , also the road to she . in 
 my sleep I hear she talk to I . she tell I that she be in great 
 danger - that they be go to marry she to some brute - and call to 
 I to come at once and save she ; yes , and to come alone without say 
 anything to anyone . so I be go at once . do not   be frightened or 
 trouble about I . all will be well , all will be quite well . I will tell 
 you the rest when we meet . " 


 Horrorstruck I translate this insane screed to Umslopogaas and Hans . 
 the former nod gravely . 

 " do I not tell you that he be talk with his Spirit , Macumazahn ? "   I 
 have render " the merciful Lord " as the Good Spirit .   " well , he have go 
 and doubtless his Spirit will take care of he . it be finish . " 

 " at any rate we can not , Baas , " break in Hans , who I think fear that I 
 might send he out to look for Robertson . " I can follow most spoor , but 
 not on such a night as this when one could cut the blackness into lump 
 and build a wall of it . " 

 " yes , " I answer , " he have go and nothing can be do at present , " 
 though to myself I reflect that probably he have not go far and would 
 be find when the moon rise , or at any rate on the follow morning . 

 still I be most uneasy about the man who , as I have note for a long 
 while , be lose his balance more and more . the shock of the barbarous 
 and dreadful slaughter of his half - breed child and of the abduction 
 of Inez by these grim , man - eat savage begin the business , and I 
 think that it be increase and accentuate by his sudden conversion to 
 complete temperance after year of heavy drinking . 

 when I persuade he to this course I be very proud of myself , think 
 that I have do a clever thing , but now I be not so sure . perhaps it 
 would have be well if he have continue to drink something , at 
 any rate for a while , but the trouble be that in such case there be 
 generally no half - way house . a man , or still more a woman , give to this 
 frailty either turn aggressively sober or remain very drunken . at 
 any rate , even if I have make a mess of it , I have act for the good and 
 could not blame myself . 

 for the rest it be clear that in his new phase the religious 
 association of his youth have re - assert themselves with remarkable 
 vigour , for I gather that he have be bring up almost as a 
 Calvinist , and in the rush of their return , have overset his equilibrium . 
 as I have say , he pray night and day without any of those reserve 
 which most people prefer in their religious exercise , and when he 
 talk of matter outside our quest , his conversation generally revolve 
 round the devil , or hell and its torment , which , to say the truth , do 
 not make he a cheerful companion . indeed in this respect I like he 
 much well in his old , unregenerate day , be , I fear , myself a 
 somewhat worldly soul . 

 well , the sum of it be that the poor fellow have go mad and give we 
 the slip , and as Hans say , to search for he at once in that darkness 
 be impossible . indeed , even if it have be light , I do not think that 
 it would have be safe among these Amahagger nightbird whom I do not 
 trust . certainly I could not have ask Hans to undertake the task , and 
 if I have , I do not think he would have go since he be afraid of the 
 Amahagger . therefore there be nothing to be do except wait and hope 
 for the good . 

 so I wait till at last the moon come and with it Ayesha , as she have 
 promise . clothe in a rich , dark cloak she arrive in some pomp , herald 
 by Billali , follow by woman , also cloak , and surround by a guard 
 of tall spearman . I be seat outside the house , smoking , when suddenly 
 she arrive from the shadow and stand before I . 

 I rise respectfully and bow , while Umslopogaas , Goroko and the other 
 Zulus who be with I , give she the royal salute , and Hans cringe like 
 a dog that be afraid of be kick . 

 after a swift glance at they , as I guess by the motion of her veil 
 head , she seem to fix her gaze upon my pipe that evidently excite 
 her curiosity , and ask I what it be . I explain as well as I could , 
 expatiate on the charm of smoking . 

 " so man have learn another useless vice since I leave the world , and 
 one that be filthy also , " she say , sniff at the smoke and wave she 
 hand before her face , whereon I drop the pipe into my pocket , where , 
 be alight , it burn a hole in my good remaining coat . 

 I remember the remark because it show I what a clever actress she be 
 who , to keep up her character of antiquity , pretend to be astonish 
 at a habit with which she must have be well acquaint , although I 
 believe that it be unknown in the ancient world . 

 " you be troubled , " she go on , swiftly change the subject , " I read 
 it in your face . one of your company be miss . who be it ? ah ! I see , 
 the white man you name Avenger . where be he go ? " 

 " that be what I wish to ask you , Ayesha , " I say . 

 " how can I tell you , Allan , who in this place lack any glass into which 
 to look for thing that pass afar . still , let I try , " and press she 
 hand to her forehead , she remain silent for perhaps a minute , then 
 speak slowly . 

 " I think that he have go over the mountain lip towards the worshipper 
 of rezu . I think that he be mad ; sorrow and something else which I do 
 not understand have turn his brain ; something that have to do with the 
 Heavens . I think also that we shall recover he live , if only for a 
 little while , though of this I can not be sure since it be not give to 
 I to read the future , but only the past , and sometimes the thing that 
 happen in the present though they be far away . " 

 " will you send to search for he , o Ayesha ? " I ask anxiously . 

 " Nay , it be useless , for he be already distant . moreover those who go 
 might be take by the outpost of rezu , as perchance have happen to 
 your companion wander in his madness . do you know what he go to 
 seek ? " 

 " more or less , " I answer and translate to she the letter that 
 Robertson have leave for I . 

 " it may be as the man write , " she comment , ' since the mad often see 
 well in their dream , though these be not send by a god as he imagine . 
 the mind in its secret place know all thing , o Allan , although it 
 seem to know little or nothing , and when the breath of vision or the 
 fury of a soul distraught blow away the veil or burn through the 
 gate of distance , then for a while it see and learn , since , whatever 
 fool may think , often madness be true wisdom . now follow I with the 
 little yellow man and the Warrior of the Axe . Stay , let I look upon 
 that axe . " 

 I interpret her wish to Umslopogaas who hold it out to she but refuse 
 to loose it from his wrist to which it be attach by the leathern 
 thong . 

 " do the Black One think that I shall cut he down with his own weapon , 
 I who be so weak and gentle ? " she ask , laugh . 

 " Nay , Ayesha , but it be his law not to part with this Drinker of Lives , 
 which he name ' Chieftainess and Groan - maker , ' and cling to close by 
 day and night than a man do to his wife . " 

 " there he be wise , Allan , since a savage captain may get more wife but 
 never such another axe . the thing be ancient , " she add musingly after 
 examine its every detail , " and who know ? it may be that whereof the 
 legend tell which be fat to bring rezu to the dust . now ask this 
 fierce - eyed Slayer whether , arm with his axe he can find courage to 
 face the most terrible of all man and the strong , one who be a wizard 
 also , of whom it be prophesy that only by such an axe as this can he 
 be make to bite the dust . " 

 I obey . Umslopogaas laugh grimly and answer , 

 " say to the White Witch that there be no man live upon the earth whom 
 I would not face in war , I who have never be conquer in fair fight , 
 though once a chance blow bring I to the door of death , " and he 
 touch the great hole in his forehead . " say to she also that I have no 
 fear of defeat , I from whom doom be , as I think , still far away , though 
 the Opener - of - road have tell I that among a strange people I shall die 
 in war at last , as I desire to do , who from my boyhood have live in 
 war . " 

 " he speak well , " she answer with a note of admiration in her voice . 
 " by isis , be he but white I would set he to rule these Amahagger 
 under I . tell he , Allan , that if he lay rezu low he shall have a 
 great reward . " 

 " and tell the White Witch , Macumazahn , " Umslopogaas reply when I have 
 translate , " that I seek no reward , save glory only , and with it the 
 sight of one who be lose to I but with whom my heart still dwell , if 
 indeed this Witch have strength to break the wall of blackness that be 
 build between I and she who be ' go down . ' " 

 " strange , " reflect Ayesha when she understand , " that this grim 
 Destroyer should yet be bind by the silken bond of love and yearn for 
 one whom the grave have take . learn from it , Allan , that all humanity 
 be cast in the same mould , since my longing and your longing be his 
 also , though the three of we be far apart as be the sun and the moon 
 and the earth , and as different in every other quality . yet it be true 
 that sun and moon and earth be bear of the same black womb of chaos . 
 therefore in the beginning they be identical , as doubtless they will 
 be in the end when , their journeying do , they rush together to light 
 space with a flame at which the mocking god that make they may warm 
 their hand . well , so it be with man , Allan , whose soul - stuff be draw 
 from the gulf of Spirit by Nature 's hand , and , cast upon the cold air of 
 this death - drive world , freeze into a million shape each different to 
 the other and yet , be sure , the same . now talk no more , but follow I . 
 slave "   this be address to Billali , " bid the guard lead on to the 
 camp of the servant of Lulala . " 

 so we go through the silent ruin . Ayesha walk , or rather glide a 
 pace or two ahead , then come Umslopogaas and I side by side , while at 
 our heel follow Hans , very close at our heel since he do not wish 
 to be out of reach of the virtue of the Great Medicine and incidentally 
 of the protection of axe and rifle . 

 thus we march surround by the solemn guard for something between 
 a quarter and half a mile , till at length we climb the debris of a 
 mighty wall that once have encompass the city , and by the moonlight see 
 beneath we a vast hollow which clearly at some unknown time have be the 
 bed of an enormous moat and fill with water . 

 now , however , it be dry and all about its surface be dot numerous 
 camp - fire round which man be move , also some woman who appear to 
 be engage in cook food . at a little distance too , upon the 
 further edge of the moat - like depression be a number of white - rob 
 individual gather in a circle about a large stone upon which 
 something be stretch that resemble the carcase of a sheep or goat , 
 and round these a great number of spectator . 

 " the priest of Lulala who make sacrifice to the moon , as they do night 
 by night , save when she be dead , " say Ayesha , turn back towards 
 I as though in answer to the query which I have conceive but left 
 unuttered . 

 what strike I about the whole scene be its extraordinary animation and 
 briskness . all the folk round the fire and outside of they move about 
 quickly and with the same kind of liveliness which might animate a camp 
 of more natural people at the rise of the sun . it be as though they 
 have just get up full of vigour to commence their daily , or rather their 
 nightly round , which in truth be the case , since as Hans discover , 
 by habitude these Amahagger prefer to sleep during the day unless 
 something prevent they , and to carry on the activity of life at 
 night . it only remain to add that there seem to be a great number 
 of they , for their fire follow the round of the dry moat , stretch 
 far than I could see . 

 scramble down the crumpled wall by a zig - zag pathway , we come upon the 
 outpost of the army beneath we who challenge , then see with whom 
 they have to do , fall flat upon their face , leave their great spear , 
 which have iron spike on their shaft like to those of the Masai , 
 stick in the ground beside they . 

 we pass on between some of the fire and I note how solemn and 
 gloomy , although handsome , be the countenance of the folk by whom 
 these be surround . indeed , they look like denizen of a different 
 world to ours , one alien to the kindly race of man . there be nothing 
 social about these Amahagger , who seem to be a people labour under 
 some ancient ancestral curse of which they could never shake off 
 the memory . even the woman rarely smile ; their clear - cut , stately 
 countenance remain stern and set , except when they glower at we 
 incuriously . only when Ayesha pass they prostrate themselves like the 
 rest . 

 we go on through they and across the moat , climb its further slope 
 and here suddenly come upon a host of man gather in a hollow square , 
 apparently in order to receive we . they stand in rank of five or six 
 deep and their spear - point glimmering in the moonlight look like 
 long band of level steel . as we enter the open side of the square all 
 these spear be lift . Thrice they be lift and at each uplifting 
 there rise a deep - throate cry of Hiya , which be the Arabic for she , 
 and I suppose be a salutation to Ayesha . 

 she sweep on take no heed , till we come to the centre of the square 
 where a number of man be gather who prostrate themselves in the 
 usual fashion . motion to they to rise she say , 

 " captain , this very night within two hour we march against Rezu and 
 the sun - worshipper , since otherwise as my art tell I , they march 
 against we . she - who - command be immortal , as your father have know 
 from generation to generation , and can not be destroy ; but you , her 
 servant , can be destroy , and Rezu , who also have drunk of the Cup of 
 Life , out - number you by three to one and prepare a queen to set up in 
 my place over his own people and such of you as remain . as though , " 
 she add with a contemptuous laugh , " any woman of a day could take my 
 place . " 

 she pause and the spokesman of the captain say , 

 " we hear , o Hiya , and we understand . what wouldst thou have we do , 
 o Lulala - come - to - earth ? the army of rezu be great and from the 
 beginning he have hat thee and we , also his magic be as thy magic and 
 his length of day as thy length of day . how then can we who be few , 
 three thousand man at the most , match ourselves against rezu , Son of 
 the Sun ? would it not be well that we should accept the term of rezu , 
 which be light , and acknowledge he as our king ? " 

 as she hear these word I see the tall shape of Ayesha quiver beneath 
 her robe , as I think , not with fear but with rage , because the meaning 
 of they be clear enough , namely that rather than risk a battle with 
 rezu , these people be contemplate surrender and her own deposition , 
 if indeed she could be depose . still she answer in a quiet voice , 

 " it seem that I have deal too gently with you and with your father , 
 child of Lulala , whose shadow I be here upon the earth , so that 
 because you only see the scabbard , you have forget the sword within 
 and that it can shine forth and smite . well , why should I be wrath 
 because the brutish will follow the law of brute , though it be true 
 that I be minded to slay you where you stand ? Hearken ! be I less 
 merciful I would leave you to the clutch hand of rezu , who would 
 drag you one by one to the stone of sacrifice and there offer up your 
 heart to his god of fire and devour your body with his heat . but I 
 bethink I of your wife and child and of your forefather whom I 
 know in the dead day , and therefore , if I may , I still would save you 
 from yourself and your head from the glowing pot . 

 " take counsel together now and say - will you fight against rezu , or will 
 you yield ? if that be your desire , speak it , and by to - morrow 's sun I 
 will begone , take these with I , " and she point to we , " whom I have 
 summon to help we in the war . Aye , I will begone , and when you be 
 stretch upon the stone of sacrifice , and your woman and child be 
 the slave of the man of rezu , then shall you cry , 

 " ' oh , where be Hiya whom our father know ? oh , will she not return and 
 save we from this hell ? ' 

 " yes , so shall you cry but there shall come no answer , since then she 
 will have depart to her own habitation in the moon and thence appear 
 no more . now consult together and answer swiftly , since I weary of you 
 and your way . " 

 the captain draw apart and begin to talk in low voice , while Ayesha 
 stand still , apparently quite unconcerned , and I consider the 
 situation . 

 it be obvious to I that these people be almost in rebellion against 
 their strange ruler , whose power over they be of a purely moral nature , 
 one that emanate from her personality alone . what I wonder be , be 
 what she seem to be , why she think it worth while to exercise it at 
 all . then I remember her statement that here and nowhere else she must 
 abide for some secret reason , until a certain mystical gentleman with 
 a greek name come to fetch she away from this appoint rendezvous . 
 therefore I suppose she have no choice , or rather , suffer as she do 
 from hallucination , believe herself to have no choice and be oblige 
 to put up with a crowd of disagreeable savage in quarter which be 
 sadly out of repair . 

 presently the spokesman return , salute with his spear , and ask , 

 " if we go up to fight against rezu , who will lead we in the battle , O 
 Hiya ? " 

 " my wisdom shall be your guide , " she answer , " this white man shall be 
 your General and there stand the warrior who shall meet rezu face to 
 face and bring he to the dust , " and she point to Umslopogaas lean 
 upon his axe and watch they with a contemptuous smile . 

 this reply do not seem to please the man for he withdraw to consult 
 again with his companion . after a debate which I suppose be animate 
 for the Amahagger , man of few word who do not indulge in oratory , all 
 of they advanced on we and the spokesman say , 

 " the choice of a General do not please we , Hiya . we know that the 
 white man be brave because of the fight he make against the man of rezu 
 over the mountain yonder ; also that he and his follower have weapon 
 that deal death from afar . but there be a prophecy among we of which 
 none know the beginning , that he who command in the last great battle 
 between Lulala and Rezu must produce before the eye of the People of 
 Lulala a certain holy thing , a charm of power , without which defeat will 
 be the portion of Lulala . of this holy thing , this spirit - haunt shape 
 of power , we know the likeness and the fashion , for these have come down 
 among our priest , though who tell it to they we can not tell , but of it 
 I will say this only , that it speak both of the spirit and the body , of 
 man and yet of more than man . " 

 " and if this wondrous charm , this talisman of might , can not be show by 
 the white lord here , what then ? " ask Ayesha coldly . 

 " then , Hiya , this be the word of the People of Lulala , that we will not 
 serve under he in the battle , and this also be their word that we will 
 not go up against rezu . that thou art mighty we know well , Hiya , 
 also that thou canst slay if thou wilt , but we know also that rezu be 
 mighty and that against he thou hast no power . therefore kill we if 
 thou dost so desire , until thy heart be satisfied with death . for it 
 be well that we should perish thus than upon the altar of sacrifice 
 wear the red - hot crown of rezu . " 

 " so say we all , " exclaim the rest of the company when he have finish . 

 " the thought come to I to begin to satisfy my heart with thy coward 
 blood and that of thy companion , " say Ayesha contemptuously . then she 
 pause and turn to I , add , " o watcher - by - Night , what counsel ? be 
 there aught that will convince these chicken - hearte one over whom I 
 have spread my feather for so long ? " 

 I shake my head blankly , whereat they murmur together and make as 
 though they would go . 

 then it be that Hans , who understand something of Arabic as he do of 
 most african tongue , pull my sleeve and whisper in my ear . 

 " the Great Medicine , Baas ! show they Zikali 's Great Medicine . " 

 here be an idea . the description of the article require , a 
 ' spirit - haunt shape of power " that speak " both of the spirit and the 
 body of man and yet of more than man , " be so vague that it might mean 
 anything or nothing . and yet - - 

 I turn to Ayesha and pray she to ask they if what they want should 
 be produce , whether they would follow I bravely and fight rezu to the 
 death . she do so and with one voice they reply , 

 " Aye , bravely and to the death , he and the Bearer of the Axe of whom 
 also our legend tell . " 

 then with deliberation I open my shirt and hold out the image of 
 Zikali as far as the chain of elephant hair would allow , I ask , 

 " be this the holy thing , the charm of power , of which your legend tell , 
 o People of the Amahagger and worshipper of Lulala ? " 

 the spokesman glance at it , then snatch a brand from a watch - fire 
 that burn near by hold it over the carving and star , and star 
 again ; and as he do , so do the other bend over he . 

 " Dog ! would you singe my beard ? " I cry in affected rage , and seize 
 the brand from his hand I smite he with it over the head . 

 but he take no heed of the affront which I have offer to he merely 
 to assert my authority . still for a few moment he star although the 
 spark from the wood be frizzle in his greasy hair , then of a sudden 
 go down on his face before I , as do all the other and cry out , 

 " it be the Holy Thing ! it be the spirit - haunt Shape of Power itself , 
 and we the Worshippers of Lulala will follow thee to the death , o white 
 lord , Watcher - by - Night . yes , where thou goest and he go who bear the 
 Axe , thither will we follow till not one of we be leave upon his foot . " 

 " then that be settle , " I say , yawn , since it be never wise to show 
 concern about anything before savage . indeed personally I have no wish 
 to be the leader of this very peculiar tribe in an adventure of which I 
 know nothing , and therefore have hop that they would leave that honour 
 to someone else . then I turn and tell Umslopogaas what have pass , a 
 tale at which he only shrug his great shoulder , handle his axe as 
 though he be minded to try its edge upon some of these " dark - lover , " 
 as he name the Amahagger people because of their nocturnal habit . 

 meanwhile Ayesha give certain order . then she come to I and say , 

 " these man march at once , three thousand strong , and by dawn will camp 
 on the northern mountain crest . at sunrise litter will come to bear you 
 and those with you if they will , to join they , which you should do by 
 midday . in the afternoon marshall they as you think wise , for the battle 
 will take place in the small hour of the follow morning , since the 
 People of Lulala only fight at night . I have say . " 

 " do you not come with we ? " I ask , dismay . 

 " Nay , not in a war against rezu , why it matter not . yet my Spirit will 
 go with you , for I shall watch all that pass , how it matter not 
 and perchance you may see it there - I know not . on the third day from 
 to - morrow we shall meet again in the flesh or beyond it , but as I think 
 in the flesh , and you can claim the reward which you journey here to 
 seek . a place shall be prepare for the white lady whom rezu would have 
 set up as a rival queen to I . farewell , and farewell also to yonder 
 Bearer of the Axe that shall drink the blood of rezu , also to the little 
 yellow man who be rightly name Light - in - darkness , as you shall learn 
 ere all be do . " 

 then before I could speak she turn and glide away , swiftly surround 
 by her guard , leave I astonished and very uncomfortable . 



 CHAPTER XVI 

 ALLAN 'S VISION 

 the old chamberlain , Billali , conduct we back to our camp . as we go 
 he discourse to I of these Amahagger , of whom it seem he be himself 
 a develop speciman , one who throw back , perhaps ten of generation , 
 to some superior ancestor who live before they become debased . in 
 substance he tell I that they be a wild and lawless lot who live 
 amongst ruin or in cave , or some of they in swamp dwelling , in 
 small separate community , each govern by its petty headman who be 
 generally a priest of their goddess Lulala . 

 originally they and the people of Rezu be the same , in time when they 
 worship the sun and the moon jointly , but " thousand of year " ago , 
 as he express it , they have separate , the Rezuites have go to 
 dwell to the north of the Great Mountain , whence they continually 
 threaten the Lulalaites whom , have it not be for She - who - command , 
 they would have destroy long before . the Rezuites , it seem , be 
 habitual cannibal , whereas the Lulalaite branch of the Amahagger only 
 practise cannibalism occasionally when by a lucky chance they get hold 
 of stranger . " such as yourself , Watcher - by - Night , and your companion , " 
 he add with meaning . if their crime be discover , however , Hiya , 
 she - who - command , punish it by death . 

 I ask if she exercise an active rule over these people . he answer 
 that she do not , as she lack sufficient interest in they ; only when 
 she be angry with individual she would destroy some of they by " her 
 art , " as she have power to do if she choose . Most of they indeed have 
 never see she and only know of her existence by rumour . to they she be 
 a spirit or a goddess who inhabit the ancient tomb that lie to the 
 south of the old city whither she have come because of the threaten war 
 with rezu , whom alone she fear , he do not know why . he tell I again , 
 moreover , that she be the great magician who have ever be , and 
 that it be certain she do not die , since their forefather know she 
 generation ago . still she seem to be under some curse , like the 
 Amahagger themselves , who be the descendant of those who have once 
 inhabit K"r and the country round it , as far as the sea - coast and 
 for hundred of mile inland , have be a mighty people in their day 
 before a great plague destroy they . 

 for the rest he think that she be a very unhappy woman who " live 
 with her own soul mourn the dead " and consort with none upon the 
 earth . 

 I ask he why she stay here , whereat he shake his head and reply , 
 he suppose because of the " curse , " since he could conceive of no other 
 reason . he inform I also that her mood vary very much . sometimes 
 she be fierce and active and at other by comparison mild and 
 low - spirited . just now she be pass through one of the latter stage , 
 perhaps because of the rezu trouble , for she do not wish her people to 
 be destroy by this terrible person ; or perhaps for some other reason 
 with which he be not acquaint . 

 when she choose , she know all thing , except the distant future . thus 
 she know that we be come , also the detail of our march and that 
 we should be attack by the Rezuites who be go out to meet 
 their return company that have be send afar to find a white queen . 
 therefore she have order he to go with soldier to our assistance . I 
 ask why she go veil , and he reply , because of her beauty which 
 drive even savage man mad , so that in old day she have be oblige to 
 kill a number of they . 

 that be all he seem to know about she , except that she be kind to 
 those who serve she well , like himself , and protect they from evil of 
 every sort . 

 then I ask he about rezu . he answer that he be a dreadful person , 
 undying , it be say , like She - who - command , though he have never see 
 the man himself and never want to do so . his follower be cannibal 
 and have literally eat up all those that they could reach , be now 
 desirous of conquer the people of Lulala that they might eat they 
 also at their leisure . each other they do not eat , because dog do not 
 eat dog , and therefore they be begin to grow hungry , although they 
 have plenty of grain and cattle of which they use the milk and hide . 

 as for the come battle , he know nothing about it or what would happen , 
 save that she - who - command say that it would go well for the lulalaite 
 under my direction . she be so sure that it would go well , that she do 
 not think it worth while to accompany the army , for she hat noise and 
 bloodshed . 

 it occur to I that perhaps she be afraid that she too would be 
 take captive and eat , but I keep my reflection to myself . 

 just then we arrive at our camp - house , where Billali bid I farewell , 
 say that he wish to rest as he must be back at dawn with litter , 
 when he hop to find we ready to start . then he depart . Umslopogaas 
 and Hans also go away to sleep , leave I alone who , have take my 
 repose in the afternoon , do not feel drowsy at the moment . so lovely 
 be the night indeed that I make up my mind to take a little walk during 
 the midnight hour , after the manner of the Amahagger themselves , for 
 have now be recognise as Generalissimo of their force , I have 
 little fear of be attack , especially as I carry a pistol in my 
 pocket . so off I set stroll slowly down what seem to have be 
 a main street of the ancient city , which in its general appearance 
 resemble excavate Pompeii , only on an infinitely large scale . 

 as I go I meditate on the strange circumstance in which I find 
 myself . really they tempt I to believe that I be suffer from 
 delusion and perhaps all the while in fact lie stretch upon a bed 
 in the delirium of fever . that marvellous woman , for instance - even 
 reject her tale of miraculously extended life , which I do - what be 
 I to make of she ? I do not know , except that wondrous as she be , 
 it remain clear that she claim a great deal more power than she 
 possess . this be evident from her tone in the interview with the 
 captain , and from the fact that she have shuffle off the command of her 
 tribe on to my shoulder . if she be so mighty , why do she not command 
 it herself and bring her celestial , or infernal , power to bear upon the 
 enemy ? again , I could not say , but one fact emerge , namely that she 
 be as interesting as she be beautiful , and uncommonly clever into the 
 bargain . 

 but what a task be this that she have lay upon I , to lead into battle , 
 with a foe of unascertained strength , a mob of savage probably quite 
 undisciplined , of whose fighting quality I know nothing and whom I have 
 no opportunity of organise . the affair seem madness and I could only 
 hope that luck or destiny would take I through somehow . 

 to tell the truth , I believe it would , for I have grow almost as 
 superstitious about Zikali and his Great Medicine as be Hans himself . 
 certainly the effect of it upon those captain be very odd , or would 
 have be have not the explanation come to I in a flash . on the first 
 night of our meeting , as I have describe , I show this talisman to 
 Ayesha , as a kind of letter of credential , and now I could see that 
 it be she who have arrange all the scene with the captain , or their 
 tribal magician , in order to get her way about my appointment to the 
 command . 

 everything about her conduct bear this out , even her feign ignorance 
 of the existence of the charm and the leaving of it to Hans to 
 suggest its production , which perhaps she do by influence his mind 
 subconsciously . no doubt more or less it fit in with one of those 
 nebulous tradition which be so common amongst ancient savage race , 
 and therefore once show to her confederate , or confederate , would be 
 accept by the common people as a holy sign , after which the rest be 
 easy . 

 such an obvious explanation involve the death of any illusion I might 
 still cherish about this arab lady , Ayesha , and it be true that I part 
 with they with regret , as we all do when we think we have discover 
 something wonderful in the female line . but there it be , and to bother 
 any more about she , her history and aim , seem useless . 

 so dismiss she and all present anxiety from my mind , I begin to 
 look about I and to wonder at the marvellous scene which unfold 
 itself before I in the moonlight . that I might see it well , although 
 I be rather afraid of snake which might hide among the stone , by 
 an easy ascent I climb a mount of ruin and up the broad slope of a 
 tumbled massive wall , which from its thickness I judge must have be 
 that of some fort or temple . on the crest of this wall , some seventy or 
 eighty foot above the level of the street , I sit down and look about 
 I . 

 everywhere around I stretch the ruin of the great city , now as 
 fall and as desert as Babylon herself . the majestic loneliness 
 of the place be something awful . even the vision of company and 
 battalion of man cross the plain towards the north with the 
 moonlight glistening on their spear - point , do little to lessen this 
 sense of loneliness . I know that these be the regiment which I be 
 destine to command , travel to the camp where I must meet they . but 
 in such silence do they move that no sound come from they even in the 
 deathly stillness of the perfect night , so that almost I be tempt to 
 believe they to be the shadow - ghost of some army of old K"r . 

 they vanish , and muse thus I think I must have doze . at any rate it 
 seem to I that of a sudden the city be as it have be in the day 
 of its glory . I see it brilliant with a hundred colour ; everywhere be 
 colour , on the paint wall and roof , the flower tree that line 
 the street and the bright dress of the man and woman who by thousand 
 crowd they and the mart and square . even the chariot that move to 
 and fro be colour as be the countless banner which float from 
 palace wall and temple top . 

 the enormous place teem with every activity of life ; bride be 
 bear to marriage and dead man to burial ; squadron marching , clothe 
 in glitter armour ; merchant chaffer ; white - rob priest and 
 priestess pass in procession   who or what do they worship ? I 
 wonder ; child break out of school ; grave philosopher debate 
 in the shadow of a cool arcade ; a royal person make a progress 
 precede by runner and surround by slave , and lastly the multitude 
 of citizen go about the daily business of life . 

 even detail be visible , such as those of officer of the law chasing 
 an escaped prisoner who have a broken rope tie to his arm , and a 
 collision between two chariot in a narrow street , about the wreck of 
 which an idle mob gather as it do to - day if two vehicle collide , 
 while the owner argue , gesticulate angrily , and the police and 
 groom try to lift a fallen horse on to its foot . only no sound of the 
 argument or of anything else reach I . I see , and that be all . the 
 silence remain intense , as well it might do , since those chariot must 
 have come to grief thousand upon thousand of year ago . 

 a cloud seem to pass before my eye , a thin , gauzy cloud which somehow 
 remind I of the veil that Ayesha wear . indeed at the moment , although 
 I could not see she , I would have swear that she be present at my side , 
 and what be more , that she be mock I who have set she down as so 
 impotent a trickstress , which doubtless be part of the dream . 

 at any rate I return to my normal state , and there about I be the 
 mile of desolate street and the thousand of broken wall , and the 
 black blot of roofless house and the wide , untenante plain bound by 
 the battlemented line of encircle mountain crest , and above all , the 
 great moon shin softly in a tender sky . 

 I look and thrill , though oppress by the drear and desolate beauty 
 of the scene around I , descend the wall and the ruin slope and make 
 my way homeward , afraid even of my own shadow . for I seem to be the 
 only live thing among the dead habitation of immemorial K"r . 



 reach our camp I find Hans awake and watch for I . 

 " I be just come to look for you , Baas , " he say . " indeed I should 
 have do so before , only I know that you have go to pay a visit to 
 that tall white ' Missis ' who tie up her head in a blanket , and think 
 that neither of you would like to be disturb . " 

 " then you think wrong , " I answer , " and what be more , if you have make 
 that visit I think it might have be one from which you would never 
 have come back . " 

 " oh yes , Baas , " sniggered Hans . " the tall white lady would not have 
 minded . it be you who be so particular , after the fashion of man whom 
 Heaven make very shy . " 

 without deign to reply to the gibe of Hans I go to lie down , 
 wonder what kind of a bed poor Robertson occupy that night , and 
 soon fall asleep , as fortunately for myself I have the power to do , 
 whatever my circumstance at the moment . man who can sleep be those who 
 do the work of the world and succeed , though personally I have have more 
 of the work than of the success . 



 I be awaken at the first grey dawn by Hans , who inform I that 
 Billali be wait outside with litter , also that Goroko have already 
 make his incantation and doctor Umslopogaas and his two man for war 
 after the Zulu fashion when battle be expect . he add that these 
 Zulus have refuse to be leave behind to guard and nurse their wound 
 companion , and say that rather than do so , they would kill they . 

 somehow , he inform I , in what way he could not guess , this have come 
 to the ear of the White Lady who " hide her face from man because it be 
 so ugly , " and she have send woman to attend to the sick one , with 
 word that they should be well care for . all of this prove to be true 
 enough , but I need not enter into the detail . 

 in the end off we go , I in my litter follow Billali 's , with an 
 express and a repeat rifle and plenty of ammunition for both , and 
 Hans , also well arm , in that which have be send for Umslopogaas , who 
 prefer to walk with Goroko and the two other Zulus . 

 for a little while Hans enjoy the sensation of be carry by 
 somebody else , and lie upon the cushion smoke with a seraphic smile 
 and address sarcastic remark to the bearer , who fortunately do not 
 understand they . soon , however , he weary of these novel delight and 
 as he be still determined not to walk until he be oblige , climb on 
 to the roof of the litter , astride of which he sit as though it be 
 a horse , look for all the world like a toy monkey on a horizontal 
 stick . 

 our road run across the level , fertile plain but a small portion of 
 which be cultivate , though I could see that at some time or other , 
 when its population be great , every inch of it have be under crop . 
 now it be largely cover by tree , many of they fruit - bearing , 
 between which meander stream of water which once , I think , have be 
 irrigation channel . 

 about ten o'clock we reach the foot of the encircle cliff and begin 
 the climb of the escarpment , which be steep , tortuous and difficult . 
 by noon we reach its crest and here find all our little army encamp 
 and , except for the sentry , sleep , as seem to be the invariable 
 custom of these people in the daytime . 

 I cause the chief captain to be awaken and with they make a circuit 
 of the camp , reckon the number of the man which come to about 3,250 
 and learn what I could concern they and their way of fighting . 
 then , accompany by Umslopogaas and Hans with the Zulus as a guard , 
 also by three of the head - captain of the Amahagger , I walk forward to 
 study the lie of the land . 

 come to the further edge of the escarpment , I find that at this place 
 two broad - base ridge , shape like those that spring from the bole of 
 certain tropical forest tree , run from its crest to the plain beneath 
 at a gentle slope . moreover I see that on this plain between the end 
 of the ridge an army be encamp which , by the aid of my glass , I 
 examine and estimate to number at least ten thousand man . 

 this army , the Amahagger captain inform I , be that of rezu , who , 
 they say , intend to commence his attack at dawn on the following 
 morning , since the People of rezu , be sun - worshipper , would never 
 fight until their god appear above the horizon . have study all 
 there be to see I ask the captain to set out their plan of battle , 
 if they have a plan . 

 the chief of they answer that it be to advance halfway down the 
 right - hand ridge to a spot where there be a narrow flat piece of 
 ground , and there await attack , since at this place their small 
 number would not so much matter , whereas these make it impossible for 
 they to assail the enemy . 

 " but suppose that rezu should choose to come up to the other ridge and 
 get behind you . what would happen then ? " I inquire . 

 he reply that he do not know , his idea of strategy be , it be 
 clear , of a primitive order . 

 " do your people fight well at night or in the day ? " I go on . 

 he say undoubtedly at night , indeed in all their history there be no 
 record of their have do so in the daytime . 

 " and yet you propose to let rezu join battle with you when the sun be 
 high , or in other word to court defeat , " I remark . 

 then I go aside and discuss thing for a while with Umslopogaas and 
 Hans , after which I return and give my order , decline all argument . 
 briefly these be that in the dusk before the rise of the moon , our 
 Amahagger must advance down the right - hand ridge in complete silence , 
 and hide themselves among the scrub which I see grow thickly near its 
 root . a small party , however , under the leadership of Goroko , whom I 
 know to be a brave and clever captain , be to pass halfway down the 
 leave - hand ridge and there light fire over a wide area , so as to make 
 the enemy think that our whole force have encamp there . then at the 
 proper moment which I have not yet decide upon , we would attack the army 
 of rezu . 

 the Amahagger captain do not seem pleased with this plan which I think 
 be too bold for their fancy , and begin to murmur together . see that 
 I must assert my authority at once , I walk up to they and say to 
 their chief man , 

 " Hearken , my friend . by your own wish , not mine , I have be appoint 
 your general and I expect to be obey without question . from the moment 
 that the advance begin you will keep close to I and to the Black One , 
 and if so much as one of your man hesitate or turn back , you will 
 die , " and I nod towards the axe of Umslopogaas . " moreover , afterwards 
 She - who - command will see that other of you die , should you escape in 
 the fight . " 

 still they hesitate . Thereon without another word , I produce Zikali 's 
 Great Medicine and hold it before their eye , with the result that the 
 sight of this ugly thing do what even the threat of death could not do . 
 they go flat on the ground , every one of they , and swear by Lulala 
 and by She - who - command , her priestess , that they would do all I say , 
 however mad it seem to they . 

 " good , " I answer . " now go back and make ready , and for the rest , by 
 this time to - morrow we shall know who be or be not mad . " 

 from that moment till the end I have no more trouble with these 
 Amahagger . 



 I will get on quickly with the story of this fight whereof the 
 preliminary detail do not matter . at the proper time Goroko go off 
 with two hundred and fifty man and one of the two Zulus to light the 
 fire and , at an agree signal , namely the firing of two shot in rapid 
 succession by myself , to begin shout and generally make as much noise 
 as they could . 

 we also go off with the remain three thousand , and before the moon 
 rise , creep as quietly as ghost down the right - hand ridge . be such 
 a silent folk who be accustom to move at night and could see in 
 the dark almost as well as cat , the Amahagger execute this manoeuvre 
 splendidly , wrap their spear - blade in band of dry grass lest light 
 should glint on they and betray our movement . so in due course we come 
 to the patch of bush where the ridge widen out about five hundred 
 yard from the plain beneath , and there lie down in four company or 
 regiment , each of they about seven hundred and fifty strong . 

 now the moon have rise , but because of the mist which cover the 
 surface of the plain , we could see nothing of the camp of rezu which we 
 know must be within a thousand yard of we , unless indeed it have be 
 move , as the silence seem to suggest . 

 this circumstance give I much anxiety , since I fear lest abandon 
 their repute habit , these Rezuites be also contemplate a night 
 attack . Umslopogaas , too , be disturb on the subject , though because 
 of Goroko and his man whose fire begin to twinkle on the oppose ridge 
 something over a mile away , they could not pass up there without our 
 knowledge . 

 still , for aught I know there might be other way of scale this 
 mountain . I do not trust the Amahagger , who declare that none exist , 
 since their local knowledge be slight as they never visit these 
 northern slope because of their fear of rezu . suppose that the enemy 
 gain the crest and suddenly assault we in the rear ! the thought of 
 it make I feel cold down the back . 

 while I be wonder how I could find out the truth , Hans , who be 
 squat behind a bush , suddenly rise and give the rifle he be carry 
 to the remain Zulu . 

 " Baas , " he say , " I be go to look and find out what those people be 
 do , if they be still there , and then you will know how and when to 
 attack they . do not   be afraid for I , Baas , it will be easy in that mist 
 and you know I can move like a snake . also if I should not come back , it 
 do not matter and it will tell you that they be there . " 

 I hesitate who do not wish to expose the brave little Hottentot to 
 such risk . but when he understand , Umslopogaas say , 

 " let the man go . it be his gift and duty to spy , as it be mine to smite 
 with the axe , and your to lead , Macumazahn . let he go , I say . " 

 I nod my head , and have kiss my hand in his silly fashion in 
 token of much that he do not wish to say , Hans slip out of sight , 
 say that he hop to be back within an hour . except for his great 
 knife , he go unarmed , who fear that if he take a pistol he might be 
 tempt to fire it and make a noise . 



 CHAPTER XVII 

 the midnight BATTLE 

 that hour go by very slowly . again and again I consult my watch by 
 the light of the moon , which be now rise high in the heaven , and 
 think that it would never come to an end . listen as I would , there be 
 nothing to be hear , and as the mist still prevail the only thing 
 I could see except the heaven , be the twinkling of the fire light by 
 Goroko and his party . 

 at length it be do and there be no sign of Hans . another half hour 
 pass and still no sign of Hans . 

 " I think that light - in - darkness be dead or take prisoner , " say 
 Umslopogaas . 

 I answer that I fear so , but that I would give he another fifteen 
 minute and then , if he do not appear , I propose to order an advance , 
 hop to find the enemy where we have last see they from the top of the 
 mountain . 

 the fifteen minute go by also , and as I could see that the Amahagger 
 captain who sit at a little distance be get very nervous , I 
 pick up my double - barrel rifle and turn round so that I face 
 up hill with a view of fire it as have be agree with Goroko , but in 
 such a fashion that the flash perhaps would not be see from the plain 
 below . for this purpose I move a few yard to the left to get behind 
 the trunk of a tree that grow there , and be already lift the rifle 
 to my shoulder , when a yellow hand clasp the barrel and a husky voice 
 say , 

 " do not   fire yet , Baas , as I want to tell you my story first . " 

 I look down and there be the ugly face of Hans wear a grin that 
 might have frighten the man in the moon . 

 " well , " I say with cold indifference , assume I admit to hide my 
 excessive joy at his safe return , " tell on , and be quick about it . I 
 suppose you lose your way and never find they . " 

 " yes , Baas , I lose my way for the fog be very thick down there . but in 
 the end I find they all right , by my nose , Baas , for those man - eat 
 people smell strong and I get the wind of one of their sentry . it be 
 easy to pass he in the mist , Baas , so easy that I be tempt to cut 
 his throat as I go , but I do not   for fear lest he should make a noise . 
 no , I walk on right into the middle of they , which be easy too , for 
 they be all asleep , wrap up in blanket . they have not   any fire 
 perhaps because they do not   want they to be see , or perhaps because it 
 be so hot down in that low land , I do not   know which . 

 " so I creep on take note of all I see , till at last I come to a little 
 hill of which the top rise above the level of the mist , so that I could 
 see on it a long hut build of green bough with the leaf still fresh 
 upon they . now I think that I would crawl up to the hut since it come 
 into my mind that rezu himself must be sleep there and that I might 
 kill he . but while I stand hesitate I hear a noise like to that make 
 by an old woman whose husband have throw a blanket over her head to keep 
 her quiet , or to that of a bee in a bottle , a sort of drone noise that 
 remind I of something . 

 " I think a while and remember that when Red Beard be on his knee 
 pray to Heaven , as be his habit when he have nothing else to do , Baas , 
 he make a noise just like that . I creep towards the sound and presently 
 there I find Red Beard himself tie upon a stone and look as mad as 
 a buffalo bull stick in a swamp , for he shake his head and roll his 
 eye about , just as though he have have two bottle of bad gin , Baas , and 
 all the while he keep say prayer . now I think that I would cut he 
 loose , and bend over he to do so , when by ill - luck he see my face and 
 begin to shout , say , 

 " ' go away , you yellow devil . I know you have come to take I to hell , 
 but you be too soon , and if my hand be loose I would twist your head 
 off your shoulder . ' 

 " he say this in English , Baas , which as you know I can understand quite 
 well , after which I be sure that I have well leave he alone . whilst 
 I be think , there come out of the hut above two old man dress in 
 night - shirt , such as you white people wear , with yellow thing upon 
 their head that have a metal picture of the sun in front of they . " 

 " medicine - man , " I suggest . 

 " yes , Baas , or Predikants of some sort , for they be rather like 
 your reverend father when he dress himself up and go into a box to 
 preach . see they I slip back a little way to where the mist begin , 
 lie down and listen . they look at Red Beard , for his shout at I 
 have bring they out , but he take no notice of they , only go on make 
 a noise like a beetle in a tin can . 

 " ' it be nothing , ' say one of the Predikants to the other in the same 
 tongue that these Amahagger use . ' but when be he to be sacrifice ? soon , 
 I hope , for I can not sleep because of the noise he make . ' 

 " ' when the edge of the sun appear , not before , ' answer the other 
 Predikant . ' then the new queen will be bring out of the hut and this 
 white man will be sacrifice to she . ' 

 " ' I think it be a pity to wait so long , ' say the first Predikant , ' for 
 never shall we sleep in peace until the red - hot pot be on his head . ' 

 " ' first the victory , then the feast , ' answer the second Predikant , 
 ' though he will not be so good to eat as that fat young woman who be 
 with the new queen . ' 

 " then , Baas , they both smack their lip and one of they go back 
 towards the hut . but the other do not go back . no , he sit down on the 
 ground and glower at Baas Red - Beard upon the stone . More , he strike 
 he on the face to make he quiet . 

 " now , Baas , when I see this and remember that they have say that they 
 have eat Janee whom I like although she be such a fool , the spirit in 
 I grow so very angry and I think that I would give this old skellum 
  i.e. rascal   of a Predikant a taste of sacrifice himself , after which I 
 purpose to creep to the hut and see if I could get speech with the Lady 
 Sad - Eyes , if she be there . 

 " so I wriggle up behind the Predikant as he sit glower over 
 Red - Beard , and stick my knife into his back where I think it would 
 kill he at once . but it do not , Baas , for he fall on to his face and 
 begin to make a noise like a wound hyena before I could finish he . 
 then I hear a sound of shout , and to save my life be oblige to run 
 away into the mist , without loose Red - Beard or see Lady Sad - Eyes . 
 I run very hard , Baas , make a wide circle to the left , and so at last 
 get back here . that be all , Baas . " 

 " and quite enough , too , " I answer , " though if they do not see you , 
 the death of the Medicine - man may frighten they . Poor Janee ! well , I 
 hope to come even with those devil before they be three hour old . " 

 then I call up Umslopogaas and the Amahagger captain and tell they 
 the substance of the story , also that Hans have locate the army , or part 
 of it . 

 the end of it be that we make up our mind to attack at once ; indeed 
 I insist on this , as I be determined if I could to save that 
 unfortunate man , Robertson , who , from Hans ' account , evidently be now 
 quite mad and rave . so I fire the two shot as have be arrange 
 and presently hear the sound of distant shouting on the slope of 
 the oppose ridge . a few minute later we start , Umslopogaas and I 
 lead the vanguard and the Amahagger captain follow with the three 
 remain company . 

 now the reader , presume the existence of such a person , will think 
 that everything be sure to go right ; that this cunning old fellow , Allan 
 Quatermain , be go to surprise and wipe the floor with those Rezuites , 
 who be already beguile by the trick he have instruct Goroko to play . 
 that after this he will rescue Robertson who doubtless shortly recover 
 his mind , also Inez with the great ease , in fact that everything will 
 happen as it ought to do if this be a romance instead of a mere record 
 of remarkable fact . but be the latter , as it happen , matter do 
 not work out quite in this convenient way . 

 to begin with , when those Amahagger tell I that the Rezuites never 
 fight in the dark or before the sun be well up , either they lie or 
 they be much mistaken , for at any rate on this occasion they do the 
 exact contrary . all the while that we think we be stalk they , 
 they be stalk we . the Goroko manoeuvre have not deceive they in the 
 least , since from their spy they know its exact significance . 

 here , I may add that those spy be in our own rank , traitor , in 
 short , who be really in the pay of rezu and possibly belong to his 
 abominable faith , some of whom slip away from time to time to the 
 enemy to report our progress and plan , so far as they know they . 

 far , what Hans have stumble on be a mere rear guard leave around the 
 place of sacrifice and the hut where Inez be confine . the real army he 
 never find at all . that be divide into two body and hide in bush 
 to the right and leave of the ridge which we be descend just at the 
 spot where it join the plain beneath , and into the jaw of these two 
 army we march gaily . 

 now that hypothetical reader will say , " why do not   that silly old fool , 
 Allan , think of all these thing ? why do not   he remember that he be 
 command a pack of savage with whom he have no real acquaintance , 
 among whom there be sure to be traitor , especially as they be of 
 the same blood as the Rezuites , and take precaution ? " 

 ah ! my dear reader , I will only answer that I wish you have handle the 
 job yourself , and enjoy the opportunity of see what you could do 
 in the circumstance . do you suppose I do not   think of all these point ? 
 of course I do . but have you ever hear of the difficulty of make 
 silk purse out of sow ' ear , or of turn a lot of gloomy and 
 disagreeable barbarian whom you have never even drill , into 
 trustworthy and efficient soldier ready to fight three time their own 
 number and beat they ? 

 also I beg to observe that I do get through somehow , as you shall 
 learn , which be more than you might have do , Mr. Wisdom , though I 
 admit , not without help from another quarter . it be all very well for 
 you to sit in your armchair and be sapient and turn up your learned 
 nose , like the gentleman who criticise play and poem , an easy job 
 compare to the writing of they . from all of which , however , you 
 will understand that I be , to tell the truth , rather ashamed of what 
 follow , since qui s'excuse , s'accuse . 

 as we slunk down that hill in the moonlight , a queer - look crowd , I 
 admit also that I feel very uncomfortable . to begin with I do not like 
 that remark of the medicine - man which Hans report , to the effect that 
 the feast must come after the victory , especially as he have say just 
 before that Robertson be to be sacrifice as the sun rise , which would 
 seem to suggest that the " victory " be plan to take place before that 
 event . 

 while I be ruminate upon this subject , I look round for Hans to 
 cross - examine he as to the priest 's exact word , only to find that he 
 have slink off somewhere . a few minute later he reappear run back 
 towards we swiftly and , I notice , take shelter behind tree trunk and 
 rock as he come . 

 " Baas , " he gasp , for he be out of breath , " be careful , those rezu man 
 be on either side ahead . I go forward and run into they . they throw 
 many spear at I . look ! " and he show a slight cut on his arm from 
 which blood be flow . 

 instantly I understand that we be ambush and begin to think very 
 hard indeed . as it chance we be pass across a large flat space 
 upon the ridge , say seven or eight acre in extent , where the bush grow 
 lightly , though owe to the soil be well , the tree be tall . 

 on the steep slope below this little plain it seem to be dense and 
 there it be , accord to Hans , that the ambush be set . I halt my 
 regiment and send back messenger to the other that they be to halt 
 also as they come up , on the pretext of give they a rest before they 
 be marshal and we advance to the battle . 

 then I tell Umslopogaas what Hans say and ask he to send out his 
 Zulu soldier whom he could trust , to see if he could obtain confirmation 
 of the report . this he do at once . also I ask he what he think 
 should be do , suppose that it be true . 

 " form the Amahagger into a ring or a square and await attack , " he 
 answer . 

 I nod , for that be my own opinion , but reply , 

 " if they be zulus , the plan would be good . but how do we know that 
 these man will stand ? " 

 " we know nothing , Macumazahn , and therefore can only try . if they run it 
 must be up - hill . " 

 then I call the captain and tell they what be toward , which seem 
 to alarm they very much . indeed one or two of they want to retreat at 
 once , but I say I would shoot the first man who try to do so . in 
 the end they agree to my plan and say that they would post their good 
 soldier above , at the top of the square , with the order to stop any 
 attempt at a flight up the mountain . 

 after this we form up the square as good we could , arrange it in 
 a rather rough , four - fold line . while we be do this we hear some 
 shout below and presently the Zulu return , who report that all 
 be as Hans have say and that Rezu 's man be move round we , have 
 discover , as he think , that we have halt and escape their ambush . 

 still the attack do not develop at once , for the reason that the rezu 
 army be crawl up the steep flank of the spur on either side of the 
 level piece of ground , with a view of encircle we altogether , so as 
 to make a clean sweep of our force . as a matter of fact , consider from 
 our point of view , this be a most fortunate move , since thereby they 
 stop any attempt at a retreat on the part of our Amahagger , whose 
 bolt - hole be now block . 

 when we have do all we could , we sit down , or at least I do , and 
 wait . the night , I remember , be strangely still , only from the slope 
 on either side of our plateau come a kind of rustle sound which 
 in fact be cause by the foot of Rezu 's people , as they march to 
 surround we . 

 it cease at last and the silence grow complete , so much so that I could 
 hear the tooth of some of our tall Amahagger chatter with fear , a 
 sound that give I little confidence and cause Umslopogaas to remark 
 that the heart of these big man have never grow ; they remain " as 
 those of baby . " I tell the captain to pass the word down the rank 
 that those who stand might live , but those who flee would certainly die . 
 therefore if they wish to see their home again they have well stand 
 and fight like man . otherwise most of they would be kill and the rest 
 eat by rezu . this be do , and I observe that the message seem to 
 produce a steadying effect upon our rank . 

 suddenly all around we , from below , from above and on either side there 
 break a most awful roar which seem to shape itself into the word , 
  rezu , and next minute also from above , below and either side , some ten 
 thousand man pour forth upon our square . 

 in the moonlight they look very terrible with their flow white 
 robe and great gleam spear . han and I fire some shot , though 
 for all the effect they produce , we might as well have pelt a breaker 
 with pebble . then , as I think that I should be more useful alive than 
 dead , I retreat within the square , Umslopogaas , his Zulu , and Hans 
 come with I . 

 on the whole our Amahagger stand the attack well than I expect . they 
 beat back the first rush with considerable loss to the enemy , also the 
 second after a long struggle . then there be a pause during which we 
 re - form our rank , drag the wound man into the square . 

 Scarcely have we do this when with another mighty shout of " rezu ! " the 
 enemy attack again - that be about an hour after the battle have begin . 
 but now they have change their tactic , for instead of try to rush 
 all side of the square at once , they concentrate their effort on the 
 western front , that which face towards the plain below . 

 on they come , and among they in the forefront of the battle , now and 
 again I catch sight of a gigantic man , a huge creature who seem to I 
 to be seven foot high and big in proportion . I could not see he clearly 
 because of the uncertain moonlight , but I note his fierce aspect , also 
 that he have an enormous beard , black streak with grey , that flow 
 down to his middle , and that his hair hang in mass upon his shoulder . 

 " rezu himself ! " I shout to Umslopogaas . 

 " Aye , Macumazahn , rezu himself without doubt , and I rejoice to see he 
 for he will be a worthy foe to fight . look ! he carry an axe as I do . 
 now I must save my strength for when we come face to face I shall need 
 it all . " 

 I think that I would spare Umslopogaas this exertion and watch my 
 opportunity to put a bullet through this giant . but I could never get 
 one . once when I have cover he an Amahagger rush in front of my gun 
 so that I could not shoot , and when a second chance come a little cloud 
 float over the face of the moon and make he invisible . after that I 
 have other thing to which to attend , since , as I expect would happen , 
 the western face of our square gave , and yell like devil , the enemy 
 begin to pour in through the gap . 

 a cold thrill go through I for I see that the game be up . to re - form 
 these undisciplined Amahagger be impossible ; nothing be to be expect 
 except panic , rout and slaughter . I curse my folly for ever have have 
 anything to do with the business , while Hans scream to I in a thin 
 voice that the only chance be for we three and the Zulu to bolt and 
 hide in the bush . 

 I do not answer he because , apart from any nasty pride , the thing be 
 impossible , for how could we get through those struggle mass of man 
 which surround we on every side ? no , my clock have strike , so I go on 
 make a kind of mental sandwich of prayer and curse ; prayer for 
 my soul and forgiveness for my sin , and curse on the Amahagger and 
 everything to do with they , especially Zikali and the woman call 
 Ayesha , who , between they , have lead I into this affair . 

 " perhaps the Great Medicine of Zikali , " pip Hans again as he fire a 
 rifle at the advance foe . 

 " hang the Great Medicine , " I shout back , " and Ayesha with it . no 
 wonder she decline to take a hand in this business . " 

 as I speak the word I see old Billali , who not be a man of war be 
 keep as close to we as he could , go flat onto his venerable face , and 
 reflect that he must have get a throw spear through he . cast a 
 hurry glance at he to see if he be do for or only wound , out 
 of the corner of my eye I catch sight of something diaphanous which 
 gleam in the moonlight and remind I of I know not what at the 
 moment . 

 I look round quickly to see what it might be and lo ! there , almost at 
 my side be the veil Ayesha herself , hold in her hand a little rod 
 make of black wood inlay with ivory not unlike a field marshal 's baton , 
 or a sceptre . 

 I never see she come and to this day I do not know how she do so ; she 
 be just there and what be more she must have put luminous paint or 
 something else on her robe , for they gleam with a sort of faint , 
 phosphorescent fire , which in the moonlight make she conspicuous all 
 over the field of battle . nor do she speak a single word , she only 
 wave the rod , point with it towards the fierce horde who be 
 draw near to we , kill as they come , and begin to move forward with 
 a gliding motion . 

 now from every side there go up a roar of " She - who - command ! 
 she - who - command ! " while the people of rezu in front shout " Lulala ! 
 Lulala ! Fly , Lulala be upon we with the witchcraft of the moon ! " 

 she move forward and by some strange impulse , for no order be give , 
 we all begin to move after she . yes , the rank that a minute before be 
 begin to give way to wild panic , become fill with a marvellous 
 courage and move after she . 

 the man of rezu also , and I suppose with they Rezu himself , for I see no 
 more of he at that time , begin to move uncommonly fast over the edge 
 of the plateau towards the plain beneath . in fact they break into flight 
 and leap over dead and die , we rush after they , always follow 
 the gleam robe of Ayesha , who must have be an extremely agile 
 person , since without any apparent exertion she hold her place a few 
 step ahead of we . 

 there be another curious circumstance about this affair , namely , that 
 terrify though they be , those Rezuites , after the first break , soon 
 seem to find it impossible to depart with speed . they keep turn 
 round to look behind they at that follow vision , as though they be 
 so many of Lot 's wife . moreover , the same fate overtake many of they 
 which fall upon that scriptural lady , since they appear to become 
 petrified and stand there quite still , like rabbit fascinate by a 
 snake , until our people come up and kill they . 

 this slaying go on all down the last steep slope of the ridge , on 
 which I suppose at least two - third of the army of Rezu must have 
 perish , since our Amahagger show themselves very handy man when it 
 come to exterminate foe who be too terror - strike to fight , and , 
 exhilarate by the occupation , gain courage every moment . 



 CHAPTER xviii 

 the slaying of rezu 

 at last we be on the plain , the bemused remnant of Rezu 's army still 
 double before we like a mob of game pursue by wild dog . here we 
 halt to re - form our rank ; it seem to I , although still she speak 
 no word , that some order reach I from the gleam Ayesha that 
 I should do this . the business take twenty minute or so , and then , 
 number about two thousand five hundred strong , for the rest have 
 fall in the fight of the square , we advance again . 

 now there come that dusk which often precede the rise of the sun , and 
 through it I could see that the battle be not yet over , since gather 
 in front of we be still a force about equal to our own . Ayesha point 
 towards it with her wand and we leapt forward to the attack . here the 
 man of rezu stand await we , for they seem to overcome their terror 
 with the approach of day . 

 the battle be fierce , a very strange battle in that dim , uncertain 
 light , which scarcely show we friend from foe . indeed I be not sure 
 that we should have win it , since Ayesha be no long visible to give 
 our Amahagger confidence , and as the courage of the Rezuites increase , 
 so theirs seem to lessen with the passing of the night . 

 fortunately , however , just as the issue hang doubtful , there be a 
 shout to our left and look , I make out the tall shape of Goroko , the 
 witch - doctor , with the other Zulu , follow by his two hundred and fifty 
 man , and leap on to the flank of the line of rezu . 

 that settle the business . the enemy crumple up and melt , and just 
 then the first light of dawn appear in the sky . I look about I for 
 Ayesha , but she have go , where to I know not , though at the moment I 
 fear that she must have be kill in the mêlée . 

 then I give up look and think , since now or never be the time 
 for action . signal and shout to those hatchet - face Amahagger to 
 advance , accompany by Umslopogaas with Goroko who have join we , and 
 Hans , I spring forward to give they an example , which , to be just to 
 they , they take . 

 " this be the mound on which Red - Beard should be , " cry Hans as we face 
 a little slope . 

 I run up it and through the gloom which precede the actual dawn , see a 
 group of man gather round something , as people collect about a street 
 accident . 

 " Red - Beard on the stone . they be kill he , " screech Hans again . 

 it be so ; at least several white - rob priest be bend over a 
 prostrate figure with knife in their hand , while behind stand the huge 
 fellow whom I take to be rezu , star towards the east as though he 
 be wait for the rim of the sun to appear before he give some order . 
 at that very moment it do appear , just a thin edge of bright light on 
 the horizon , and he turn , shout the order . 

 too late ! for we be on they . Umslopogaas cut down one of the priest 
 with his axe , and the man about I deal with the other , while Hans 
 with a couple of sweep of his long knife , sever the cord with which 
 Robertson be tie . 

 the poor man who in the grow light I could see be rave mad , sprang 
 up , call out something in Scotch about " the deil . " seize a great 
 spear which have fall from the hand of one of the priest , he rush 
 furiously at the giant who have give the order , and with a yell drive 
 it at his heart . I see the spear snap , from which I conclude that this 
 man , whom rightly I take to be rezu , wear some kind of armour . 

 next instant the axe he hold , a great weapon , flash aloft and down 
 go Robertson before its awful stroke , stone dead , for as we find out 
 afterwards , he be cleave almost in two . at the sight of the death of 
 my poor friend rage take hold of I . in my hand be a double - barrel 
 rifle , an Express load with hollow - pointed bullet . I cover the 
 giant and let drive , first with one barrel and then with the other , and 
 what be more , distinctly I hear both bullet strike upon he . 

 yet he do not fall . he rock a little , that be all , then turn and 
 march off towards a hut , that whereof Hans have tell I , which stand 
 about fifty yard away . 

 " leave he to I , " shout Umslopogaas . " steel cut where bullet can not 
 pierce , " and with a bound like to that of a buck , the great Zulu leapt 
 away after he . 

 I think that rezu mean to enter the hut for some purpose of his own , 
 but Umslopogaas be too hard upon his track . at any rate he run past it 
 and down the other slope of the little hill on to the plain behind where 
 the remnant of his army be try to re - form . there in front of they 
 the giant turn and stand at bay . 

 Umslopogaas halt also , wait for we to come up , since , cunning old 
 warrior as he be , he fear lest should he begin the fight before that 
 happen , the horde of they would fall on he . thirty second later 
 we arrive and find he stand still with bent body , small shield 
 advanced and the great axe raise as though in the act of strike , a 
 wondrous picture outline as it be against the swiftly rise - sun . 

 some ten pace away stand the giant lean on the axe he bore , which 
 be not unlike to that with which woodman fall big tree . he be an evil 
 man to see and at this , my first full sight of he , I liken he in 
 my mind to Goliath whom David overthrow . huge he be and hairy , with 
 deep - set , pierce eye and a great hooked nose . his face seem thin 
 and ancient also , when with a motion of the great head , he toss his 
 long lock back from about it , but his limb be those of a Hercules 
 and his movement full of a youthful vigour . moreover his aspect as a 
 whole be that of a devil rather than of a man ; indeed the sight of it 
 sicken I . 

 " let I shoot he , " I cry to Umslopogaas , for I have reload the rifle 
 as I run . 

 " Nay , Watcher - by - Night , " answer the Zulu without move his head , 
 " rifle have have its chance and fail . now let we see what axe can do . if 
 I can not kill this man , I will be bear hence foot first who shall have 
 make a long journey for nothing . " 

 then the giant begin to talk in a low , rumble voice that reverberate 
 from the slope of the little hill behind we . 

 " who be you ? " he ask , speak in the same tongue that the Amahagger 
 use , " who dare to come face to face with rezu ? black hound , do you not 
 know that I can not be slay who have live a year for every week of your 
 life 's day , and set my foot upon the neck of man by thousand . have 
 you not see the spear shatter and the iron ball melt upon my breast 
 like rain - drop , and would you try to bring I down with that toy you 
 carry ? my army be defeat - I know it . but what matter that when I can 
 get I more ? because the sacrifice be not complete and the white queen 
 be not we d , therefore my army be defeat by the magic of Lulala , the 
 White Witch who dwell in the tomb . but I be not defeat who can not 
 be slay until I show my back , and then only by a certain axe which long 
 ago have rust into dust . " 

 now of this long speech Umslopogaas understand nothing , so I answer 
 for he , briefly enough , but to the point , for there flash into my 
 mind all Ayesha 's tale about an axe . 

 " a certain axe ! " I cry . " Aye , a certain axe ! well , look at that which 
 be hold by the Black One , the captain who be name Slaughterer , the 
 ancient axe whose title be Chieftainess , because if so she will , she 
 take the life of all . look at it well , Rezu , Giant and Wizard , and 
 say whether it be not that which your forefather lose , that which be 
 destine to bring you to your doom ? " 

 thus I speak , very loudly that all might hear , slowly also , pause 
 between each word because I wish to give time for the light to 
 strengthen , see as I do that the ray of the rise sun strike upon 
 the face of the giant , whereas the eye of Umslopogaas be less dazzle 
 by it . 

 rezu hear , and star at the axe which Umslopogaas hold aloft , cause 
 it to quiver slightly by an imperceptible motion of his arm . as he 
 star I see his hideous face change , and that on it for the first time 
 gather a look of something resemble fear . also his follower behind 
 he who be also study the axe , begin to murmur together . 

 for here I should say that as though by common consent the battle have 
 be stay ; we no long attack and the enemy no long run . they , 
 or whose who be leave of they , stand still as though they feel that the 
 real and ultimate issue of the fight depend upon the forthcoming duel 
 between these two champion , though of that issue they have little 
 doubt since , as I learn afterwards , they believe their king to be 
 invulnerable . 

 for quite a while rezu go on star . then he say aloud as if he be 
 think to himself . 

 " it be like , very like . the horn haft be the same ; the pointed gouge be 
 the same ; the blade shape like the young moon be the same . almost could 
 I think that before I shake the ancient holy axe . Nay , the god have 
 take that back long ago and this be but a trick of the witch , Lulala of 
 the Caves . " 

 thus he speak , but still for a moment hesitate . 

 " Umslopogaas , " I say in the deep silence that follow , " hear I . " 

 " I hear you , " he answer without turn his head or move his arm . 
 " what counsel , Watcher - by - Night ? " 

 " this , Slaughterer . strike not at that man 's face and breast , for there 
 I think he be protect by witchcraft or by armour . get behind he and 
 strike at his back . do you understand ? " 

 " Nay , Macumazahn , I understand not . yet I will do your bidding because 
 you be wise than I and utter no empty word . now be still . " 

 then Umslopogaas throw the axe into the air and catch it as it fall , 
 and as he do so begin to chant his own praise Zulu fashion . 

 " Oho ! " he say , " I be the child of the Lion , the Black - man Lion , whose 
 claw never loosen of their prey . I be the Wolf - king , he who hunt 
 with the wolf upon the Witch - mountain with my brother , Bearer of 
 the Club name Watcher - of - the - Fords , I be he who slay he call the 
 Unconquered , Chief of the People of the Axe , he who bear the ancient axe 
 before I ; I be he who smite the Halakazi tribe in their cave and win 
 I Nada the Lily to wife . I be he who take to the King Dingaan a gift 
 that he love little , and afterward with Mopo , my foster - sire , hurl 
 this Dingaan down to death . I be the Royal One , name Bulalio the 
 Slaughterer , name Woodpecker , name Umhlopekazi the Captain , before 
 whom never yet man have stand in fair and open fight . now , thou Wizard 
 Rezu , now thou Giant , now thou ghost - man , come on against I and before 
 the sun have rise by a hand 's breadth , all those who watch shall see 
 which of we be well at the game of war . come on , then ! come on , for 
 I say that my blood boil over and my foot grow cold . come on , thou 
 grinning dog , thou monster grow fat with eat the flesh of man , thou 
 hook - beak vulture , thou old , grey - whisker wolf ! " 

 thus he change in his fierce , boastful way , while his two remain 
 Zulus clap their hand and sentence by sentence echo his word , and 
 Goroko , the witch - doctor , mutter incantation behind he . 

 while he sing thus Umslopogaas begin to stir . first only his head and 
 shoulder move gently , sway from side to side like a reed shake in 
 the wind or a snake about to strike . then slowly he put out first one 
 foot and next the other and draw they back again , as a dancer might do , 
 tempt rezu to attack . 

 but the giant would not , his shield hold before he , he stand still and 
 wait to see what this black warrior would do . 

 the snake strike . Umslopogaas dart in and let drive with the long 
 axe . rezu raise his shield above his head and catch the blow . from the 
 clank it make I know that this shield which seem to be of hide , be 
 line with iron . rezu smite back , but before the blow could fall the 
 Zulu be out of his reach . this teach I how great be the giant 's 
 strength , for though the stroke be heavy , like the steel - hat axe he 
 bore , still when he see that it have miss he check the weapon in mid 
 air , which only a mighty man could have do . 

 Umslopogaas see these thing also and change his tactic . his axe be 
 six or eight inch long in the haft than that of rezu , and therefore 
 he could reach where Rezu could not , for the giant be short - armed . 
 he twist it round in his hand so that the moon - shape blade be 
 uppermost , and keep it almost at full length , begin to peck with the 
 gouge - shape point on the back at the head and arm of rezu , that as I 
 know be a favourite trick of his in fight from which he win his name 
 of " Woodpecker . " rezu defend his head with his shield as good he could 
 against the sharp point of steel which flash all about he . 

 twice it seem to I that the Zulu 's peck go home upon the giant 's 
 breast , but if so they do no harm . either Rezu 's thick beard , or armour 
 beneath it stop they from penetrate his body . still he roar 
 out as though with pain , or fury , or both , and grow mad , charge at 
 Umslopogaas and smite with all his strength . 

 the Zulu catch the blow upon his shield , through which it shore as 
 though the tough hide be paper . stay the stroke it could not , yet it 
 turn its direction , so that the fall axe slide past Umslopogaas 's 
 shoulder , do he no hurt . next instant , before rezu could strike 
 again , the Zulu throw the sever shield into his face and seize the 
 axe with both hand , leapt in and strike . it be a mighty blow , for I 
 see the rhinoceros - horn handle of the famous axe bend like a draw bow , 
 and it go home with a dull thud full upon Rezu 's breast . he shake , but 
 no more . evidently the razor edge of Inkosikaas have fail to pierce . 
 there be a sound as though a hollow tree have be smite and some 
 strand of the long beard , shorn off , fall to the ground , but that be 
 all . 

 " Tagati !   bewitch , " cry the watch Zulus . " that stroke should 
 have cut he in two ! " while I think to myself that this man know how 
 to make good armour . 

 rezu laugh aloud , a bellowing kind of laugh , while Umslopogaas sprang 
 back astonish . 

 " be it thus ! " he cry in Zulu . " well , all wizard have some door by 
 which their Spirit enter and depart . I must find the door , I must find 
 the door ! " 

 so he speak and with spring movement try to get past rezu , first 
 to the right and then to the left , all the while keep out of reach . 
 but rezu ever turn and face he , as he do so retreat step by 
 step down the slope of the little hill and strike whenever he find a 
 chance , but without avail , for always Umslopogaas be beyond his reach . 
 also the sunlight which now grow strong , dazzle he , or so I think . 
 moreover he seem to tire somewhat - or so I think also . 

 at any rate he determine to make an end of the play , for with a swift 
 motion , as Umslopogaas have do , he throw away his shield and grasp 
 the iron handle of his axe with both hand , charge the Zulu like a 
 bull . Umslopogaas leap back out of reach . then suddenly he turn and 
 run up the rise . yes , Bulalio the Slaughterer run ! 

 a roar of mockery go up from the sun - worshipper behind , while our 
 Amahagger laugh and Goroko and the two zulus star astonished and 
 ashamed . only I read his mind aright and wonder what guile he have 
 conceive . 

 he run , and rezu run after he , but never could he catch the 
 swift - footed man in Zululand . to and fro he follow he , for 
 Umslopogaas be take a zig - zag path towards the crest of the slope , 
 till at length Rezu stop breathless . but Umslopogaas still run 
 another twenty yard or so until he reach the top of the slope and 
 there halt and wheel round . 

 for ten second or more he stand draw his breath in great gasp , and , 
 look at his face , I see that it have become as the face of a wolf . 
 his lip be draw up into a terrible grin , show the white tooth 
 between ; his cheek seem to have fall in and his eye glare , while 
 the skin over the hole in his forehead beat up and down . 

 there he stand , gather himself together for some mighty effort . 

 " run on ! " shout the spectator . " run back to K"r , black dog ! " 

 Umslopogaas know that they be mock he , but he take no heed , only 
 bend down and rub his sweat hand in the grit of the dry earth . 
 then he straighten himself and charge down on rezu . 

 I , Allan Quatermain , have see many thing in battle , but never before 
 or since do I see aught like to this charge . it be swift as that of 
 a lioness , so swift that the Zulu 's foot scarcely seem to touch the 
 ground . on he speed like a throw spear , till , when within about a dozen 
 foot of rezu who stand star at he , he bend his frame almost double 
 and leapt into the air . 

 oh ! what a leap be that . surely he must have learn it from the lion , 
 or the spring - buck . high he rise and now I see his purpose ; it be to 
 clear the tall shape of rezu . Aye , and he clear he with half a foot 
 to spare , and as he pass above , smote downwards with the axe so that 
 the blow fall upon the back of Rezu 's head . moreover it go home this 
 time , for I see the red blood stream and Rezu fall forward on his face . 
 Umslopogaas land far beyond he , run a little way because he must , 
 then wheel round and charge again . 

 rezu be rise , but before he gain his foot , the axe Inkosikaas 
 thunder down where the neck join the shoulder and sink in . still , so 
 great be his strength that rezu find his foot and smite out wildly . 
 but now his movement be slow and again Umslopogaas get behind he , 
 smite at his back . once , twice , thrice , he smote , and at the third 
 blow it seem as though the massive spine be sever , for his weapon 
 fall from Rezu 's hand and slowly he sink down to the ground , and lie 
 there , a huddle heap . 

 believe that all be over I run to where he lie with Umslopogaas 
 stand over he , as it seem to I , utterly exhaust , for he 
 support himself by the axe and totter upon his foot . but rezu be 
 not yet dead . he open his cavernous eye and glare at the Zulu with a 
 look of hellish hate . 

 " thou hast not conquer I , Black One , " he gasp . " it be thine axe 
 which give thee victory ; the ancient , holy axe that once be mine until 
 the woman steal it , yes , that and the craft of the Witch of the Caves 
 who tell thee to smite where the Spirit of Life which I fear to enter 
 wholly , have not kiss my flesh , and there only leave I mortal . Wolf of 
 a black man , may we meet elsewhere and fight this fray again . ah ! would 
 that I could get these hand about thy throat and take thee with I down 
 into the darkness . but Lulala win if only for a while , since her fate , 
 I think , shall be bad than mine . ah ! I see the magic beauty that she 
 boast turn to shameful - - " 

 here of a sudden life leave he and throw his great arm wide , a last 
 breath pass bubble from his lip . 

 as I stoop to examine the man 's huge and hairy carcase that to I 
 look only half human , with a thunder of foot our Amahagger rush down 
 upon we and thrust I aside , fall upon the body of their ancient foe 
 like hound upon a helpless fox , and with hand and spear and knife 
 literally tear and hack it limb from limb , till no semblance of 
 humanity remain . 

 it be impossible to stop they ; indeed I be too outwear with labour 
 and emotion to make any such attempt . this I regret the more since 
 I lose the opportunity of make an examination of the body of this 
 troll - like man , and of ascertain what kind of armour it be he wear 
 beneath that great beard of his , which be strong enough to stop my 
 bullet , and even the razor edge of the axe Inkosikaas drive with all 
 the might of the arm of the Zulu , Bulalio . for when I look again 
 at the sicken sight the giant be but scatter fragment and the 
 armour , whatever it might have be , be go , rent to little piece and 
 carry off , doubtless , by the Amahagger , perhaps to be divide between 
 they to serve as charm . 

 so of rezu I know only that he be the hugest , most terrible - look 
 man I have ever see , one too who carry his vast strength very late 
 in life , since from the aspect of his countenance I imagine that he must 
 have be nigh upon seventy year of age , though his suppose unnatural 
 antiquity of course be nothing but a fable put about by the native for 
 their own purpose . 

 presently Umslopogaas seem to recover from the kind of faint into 
 which he have fall and open his eye , look about he . the first 
 person they fall on be old Billali who stand stroke his white beard 
 and contemplate the scene with an air which be at once philosophic 
 and satisfied . this seem to anger Umslopogaas , for he cry , 

 " I think it be you , ancient bag of word and sweeper of path for the 
 foot of the great , who make a mock of I but now , when you think 
 that I flee before the horn of yonder man - eat bull - " and he nod 
 towards the fragment of what once have be Rezu . " find now his axe 
 and though I be weak and weary , I will wash away the insult with your 
 blood . " 

 " what do this glorious black hero say , Watcher - by - Night ? " ask 
 Billali in his most courteous tone . 

 I tell he word by word , whereon Billali lift his hand in horror , 
 turn and flee . nor do I see he again until we arrive at K"r . 



 at the sight of the fall of their giant chief rezu whom they believe 
 to be invulnerable , his follower , who be watch the fray , set up 
 a great wailing , a most mournful and uncanny noise to hear . then , as I 
 think do the host of the Philistines when David bring down Goliath 
 by his admirable shot with a stone , they set out for their home 
 wherever these may have be , at an absolutely record pace and in the 
 complete disarray . 

 our Amahagger follow they for a while , but soon be leave stand 
 still . so they content themselves with kill any wounded they could 
 find and return . I do not accompany they ; indeed the battle be 
 win , metaphorically I wash my hand of they , and in my thought 
 consign they to a certain locality as a people of whom it might 
 well be say that manner they have none and their custom be simply 
 beastly . also , although fierce and cruel , these night - bat be not 
 good fight man and in short never do I wish to have to do with such 
 another company . 

 moreover , a very different matter press . the object of this business 
 so far as I be concern , have be to rescue poor Inez , since have 
 it not be for her sake , never would I have consent to lead those 
 Amahagger against their fellow blackguard , the Rezuites . 

 but where be Inez ? if Hans have understand the medicine - man aright , 
 she be , or have be , in the hut , where it be my earnest hope that she 
 still remain , since otherwise the hunt must be continue . this at 
 any rate be easy to discover . call Hans , who be amusing himself 
 by take long shot at the fly enemy , so that they might not forget 
 he , as he say , and the Zulus , I walk up the slope to the hut , or 
 rather booth of bough , for it be quite twenty foot long by twelve or 
 fifteen broad . 

 at its eastern end be a doorway or opening close with a heavy curtain . 
 here I pause full of tremor , and listen , for to tell the truth I 
 dread to draw that curtain , fear what I might see within . gather 
 up my courage at length I tear it aside and , a revolver in my hand , 
 look in . at first after the strong light without , for the sun be now 
 well up , I could see nothing , since those green bough and palm leaf 
 be very closely weave . as my eye grow accustomed to the gloom , 
 however , I perceive a glitter object seat on a kind of throne 
 at the end of the booth , while in a double row in front knelt six 
 white - rob woman who seem to wear chain about their neck and 
 carry large knife sling round their middle . on the floor between 
 these woman and the throne lie a dead man , a priest of some sort as 
 I gather from his garb , who still hold a huge spear in his hand . so 
 silent be the figure on the throne and those that knelt before it , 
 that at first I think that all of they must be dead . 

 " Lady Sad - Eyes , " whisper Hans , " and her bride - woman . doubtless that 
 old Predikant come to kill she when he see that the battle be lose , but 
 the bride - woman kill he with their knife . " 

 here I may state that Hans ' supposition prove to be quite correct , 
 which show how quick and deductive be his mind . the figure on the 
 throne be Inez ; the priest in his disappointed rage have come to kill 
 she , and the bride - woman have kill he with their knife before he 
 could do so . 

 I bade the zulus tear down the curtain and pull away some of the end 
 bough , so as to let in more light . then we advance up the place , 
 hold our pistol and spear in readiness . the kneeling woman turn 
 their head to look at we and I see that they be all young and 
 handsome in their fashion , although fierce - faced . also I see their hand 
 go to the knife they wear . I call to they to let these be and come 
 out , and that if they do so they have nothing to fear . but if they 
 understand , they do not heed my word . 

 on the contrary while Hans and I cover they with our pistol , fear 
 lest they should stab the person on the throne whom we take to be Inez , 
 at some word from one of they , they bow simultaneously towards she , 
 then at another word , suddenly they draw the knife and plunge they to 
 their own heart ! 

 it be a dreadful sight and one of which I never see the like . nor to 
 this day do I know why the deed be do , unless perhaps the woman be 
 swear to the service of the new queen and fear that if they fail to 
 protect she , they would be doom to some awful end . at any rate we get 
 they out dead or die , for their blow have be strong and true , and 
 not one of they live for more than a few minute . 

 then I advance to the figure on the throne , or rather foot - stool 
 chair of black wood inlay with ivory , which sit so silent and 
 motionless that I be certain it be that of a dead woman , especially 
 when I perceive that she be fasten to the chair with leather strap , 
 which be sew over with gold wire . also she be veil and , with one 
 exception , make up , if I may use the term , exactly to resemble the lady 
 Ayesha , even down to the two long plait of black hair , each finish 
 with some kind of pearl and to the sandalled foot . 

 the exception be that about she hang a great necklace of gold ornament 
 from which be suspend pendant also of gold represent the rayed 
 disc of the sun in rude but bold and striking workmanship . 

 I go to she and have cut the strap , since I could not stop to untie 
 their knot , lift the veil . 

 beneath it be Inez sure enough , and Inez live , for her breast rise 
 and fall as she breathe , but Inez senseless . her eye be wide open , 
 yet she be quite senseless . probably she have be drug , or perhaps 
 some of the sight of horror which she see , have take away her mind . I 
 confes that I be glad that this be so , who otherwise must have tell 
 she the dreadful story of her father 's end . 

 we bear she out and away from that horrible place , apparently quite 
 unhurt , and lay she under the shadow of a tree till a litter could be 
 procure . I could do no more who know not how to treat her state , and 
 have no spirit with I to pour down her throat . 



 this be the end of our long pursuit , and thus we rescue Inez , whom the 
 Zulus call the Lady Sad - Eyes . 



 CHAPTER XIX 

 the SPELL 

 of our return to K"r I need say nothing , except that in due course we 
 reach that interesting ruin . the journey be chiefly remarkable for 
 one thing , that on this occasion , I imagine for the first and last time 
 in his life , Umslopogaas consent to be carry in a litter , at least 
 for part of the way . he be , as I have say , unwounde , for the axe 
 of his mighty foe have never once so much as touch his skin . what he 
 suffer from be shock , a kind of collapse , since , although few would 
 have think it , this great and utterly fearless warrior be at bottom a 
 nervous , highly - string man . 

 it be only the nervous that climb the high point of anything , and 
 this be true of fight as of all other . that fearful fray with rezu have 
 be a great strain on the Zulu . as he put it himself , " the wizard have 
 suck the strength " out of he , especially when he find that owe 
 to his armour he could not harm he in front , and owe to his cunning 
 could not get at he behind . then it be that he conceive the desperate 
 expedient of leap over his head and smite backwards as he leapt , 
 a trick , he tell I , that he have once play year before when he be 
 young , in order to break a shield ring and reach one who stand in its 
 centre . 

 in this great leap over Rezu 's head Umslopogaas know that he must 
 succeed , or be slay , which in turn would mean my death and that of the 
 other . for this reason he face the shame of seem to fly in order to 
 gain the high ground , whence alone he could gather the speed necessary 
 to such a terrific spring . 

 well , he make it and thereby conquer , and this be the end , but as he 
 say , it have leave he , " weak as a snake when it crawl out of its hole 
 into the sun after the long winter sleep . " 

 of one thing , Umslopogaas add , he be thankful , namely that rezu 
 have never succeed in get his arm round he , since he be quite 
 certain that if he have he would have break he " as a baboon break a 
 mealie - stalk . " no strength , not even his , could have resist the iron 
 might of that huge , gorilla - like man . 

 I agree with he who have note Rezu 's vast chest and swell muscle , 
 also the weight of the blow that he strike with the steel - hafte 
 axe   which , by the way , when I seek for it , be miss , steal , I 
 suppose , by one of the Amahagger . 

 whence do that strength come , I wonder , in one who from his face 
 appear to be old ? be there perchance , after all , some truth in the 
 legend of Samson and do it dwell in that gigantic beard and those long 
 lock of his ? it be impossible to say and probably the man be but a 
 Herculean freak , for that he be as strong as Hercules all the story 
 that I hear afterwards of his feat , leave little room for doubt . 

 about one thing only be I certain in connection with he , namely , that 
 the tale of his supernatural ability be the mere humbug . he be 
 simply one of the representative of the family of ' strong man , " of whom 
 example be still to be see do marvellous feat all over the earth . 

 for the rest , he be dead and break up by those Amahagger blood - hounds 
 before I could examine he , or his body - armour either , and there be 
 an end of he and his story . but when I look at the corpse of poor 
 Robertson , which I do as we bury it where he fall , and see that 
 though so large and thick - set , it be cleft almost in two by a single 
 blow of Rezu 's axe , I come to understand what the might of this savage 
 must have be . 

 I say savage , but I be not sure that this be a right description of 
 rezu . evidently he have a religion of a sort , also imagination , as be 
 show by the theft of the white woman to be his queen ; by his veiling 
 of she to resemble Ayesha whom he dread ; by the intend propitiatory 
 sacrifice ; by the guard of woman swear to her service who slay the 
 priest that try to kill she , and afterwards commit suicide when 
 they have fail in their office , and by other thing . all this indicate 
 something more than savagery , perhaps survival from a forgotten 
 civilisation , or perhaps native ability on the part of an individual 
 ruler . I do not know and it matter nothing . 

 rezu be dead and the world be well rid of he , and those who want to 
 learn more of his people can go to study such as remain of they in their 
 own habitat , which for my part I never wish to visit any more . 



 during our journey to K"r poor Inez never stir . whenever I go to 
 look at she in the litter , I find she lie there with her eye open 
 and a fix stare upon her face which frighten I very much , since I 
 begin to fear lest she should die . however I could do nothing to help 
 she , except urge the bearer to top speed . so swiftly do we travel down 
 the hill and across the plain that we reach K"r just as the sun be 
 set . as we cross the moat I perceive old Billali come to meet 
 we . this he do with many bow , keep an anxious eye upon the litter 
 which he have learn contain Umslopogaas . indeed his attitude and that 
 of the Amahagger towards the two of we , and even Hans , thenceforward 
 become almost abject , since after our victory over Rezu and his death 
 beneath the axe , they look upon we as half divine and treat we 
 accordingly . 

 " o mighty general , " he say , " She - who - command bid I conduct the lady 
 who be sick to the place that have be make ready for she , which be near 
 your own so that you may watch over she if you will . " 

 I wonder how Ayesha know that Inez be sick , but be too tired 
 to ask question , merely bid he lead on . this he do , take we to 
 another ruin house next to our own quarter which have be sweep , 
 clean and furnish after a fashion , and moreover cleverly roof in 
 with mat , so that it be really quite comfortable . here we find two 
 middle - aged woman of a very superior type , who , Billali inform I , 
 be by trade nurse of the sick . have see she lay upon her bed , I 
 commit Inez to their charge , since the case be not one that I dare 
 to try to doctor myself , not know what drug of the few I possess 
 should be administer to she . moreover Billali comfort I with the 
 information that soon She - who - command would visit she and " make she 
 well again , " as she could do . 

 I answer that I hop so and go to our quarter where I find an 
 excellent meal ready cook and with it a stone flagon , of the content 
 of which Billali say we be all three to drink by the command of 
 Ayesha , who declare that it would take away our weariness . 

 I try the stuff , which be pale yellow in colour like sherry and , for 
 aught I know , might be poison , to find it most comforting , though it 
 do not seem to be very strong to the taste . certainly , too , its effect 
 be wonderful , since presently all my great weariness fall from I 
 like a discard cloak , and I find myself with a splendid appetite and 
 feel well and strong than I have do for year . in short that 
 drink be a " cocktail " of the good , one of which I only wish I possess 
 the recipe , though Ayesha tell I afterwards that it be distil from 
 quite harmless herb and not in any sense a spirit . 

 have discover this , I give some of it to Hans , also to Umslopogaas , 
 who be with the wound Zulus , who , we find , be progress well 
 towards complete recovery , and lastly to Goroko who also be wear 
 out . on all of these the effect of that magical brew prove most 
 satisfactory . 

 then , have wash , I eat a splendid dinner , though in this respect 
 Hans , who be seat on the ground nearby , far outpasse my fine 
 effort . 

 " Baas , " he say , " thing have go very well with we when they might 
 have go very ill . the Baas Red - Beard be dead , which be a good thing , 
 since a madman would have be difficult to look after , and a brain full 
 of moonshine be a bad companion for any one . oh ! without doubt he be 
 well dead , though your reverend father the Predikant will have a hard 
 job look after he there in the Place of Fires . " 

 " perhaps , " I say with a sigh , ' since it be well to be dead than 
 to live a lunatic . but what I fear be that the lady his daughter will 
 follow he . " 

 " oh , no ! Baas , " reply Hans cheerfully , " though I daresay that she 
 will always be a little mad also , because you see it be in her blood and 
 doubtless she have look on dreadful thing . but the Great Medicine will 
 see to it that she do not die after we have take so much trouble 
 and go into such big danger to save she . that Great Medicine be very 
 wonderful , Baas . first of all it make you general over those Amahagger 
 who without you would never have fight , as the Witch who tie up her 
 head in a cloth know well enough . then it bring we safe through the 
 battle and give strength to Umslopogaas to kill the old man - eat 
 giant . " 

 " why do it not give I strength to kill he , Hans ? I let he have two 
 Express bullet on his chest , which hurt he no more than a tap upon the 
 horn with a dancing stick would hurt a bull - buffalo . " 

 " oh ! Baas , perhaps you miss he , who because you hit thing sometimes , 
 think that you do so always . " 

 have wait to see if I would rise to this piece of insolence , which 
 of course I do not , he go on by way of let I down easily , " or 
 perhaps he wear very good armour under his beard , for I see some of 
 those Amahagger who pull his hair off and cut he to piece , go away 
 with what look like little bit of brass . also the Great Medicine 
 mean that he should be kill by Umslopogaas and not by you , since 
 otherwise Umslopogaas would have be sad for the rest of his life , 
 whereas now he will walk about the world as proud as a cock with two 
 tail and crow all night as well as all day . then , Baas , when rezu break 
 the square and the Amahagger begin to run , without doubt it be the 
 Great Medicine which change their heart and make they brave again , so 
 that they charge at the right moment when they see it go forward on 
 your breast , and instead of be eat up , eat up the cannibal . " 

 " indeed ! I think that the Lady who dwell yonder have something to do 
 with that business . do you see she , Hans ? " 

 " oh , yes ! I see she , Baas , and I think that without doubt she lift the 
 cloth from over her head and when the people of Rezu see how ugly be 
 the face beneath , it do frighten they a little . but doubtless the Great 
 Medicine put that thought into she also , for , Baas , what could a silly 
 woman do in such a case ? do you ever know of a woman who be of any use 
 in a battle , or for anything else except to nurse baby , and this one 
 do not even do that , no doubt because be so hideous under that 
 sheet , no man can be find to marry she . " 

 now I look up by chance and in the light of the lamp see Ayesha 
 standing in the room , which she have enter through the open doorway , 
 within six foot of Hans ' back indeed . 

 " be sure baas , " he go on , " that this bundle of rag be nothing but a 
 common old cheat who frighten people by pretend to be a spook , as , 
 if she dare to say that it be she who make those stink Amahagger 
 charge , and not the Great Medicine of the Opener - of - road , I would tell 
 she to her face . " 

 now I be too paralysed to speak , and while I be reflect that it be 
 fortunate Ayesha do not understand Dutch , she move a little so that 
 one of the lamp behind she cause her shadow to fall on to the back 
 of the squat Hans and over it on to the floor beyond . he see it and 
 star at the distorted shape of the hooded head , then slowly screw 
 his neck round and look upwards behind he . 

 for a moment he go on star as though he be frozen , then utter 
 a wild yell , he scramble to his foot , bolt out of the house and 
 vanish into the night . 

 " it seem , Allan , " say Ayesha slowly , " that yonder yellow ape of your 
 be very bold at throw stick when the leopardess be not beneath the 
 tree . but when she come it be otherwise with he . oh ! make no excuse , 
 for I know well that he be speak ill thing of I , because be 
 curious , as ape be , he burn to learn what be behind my veil , and 
 be simple , believe that no woman would hide her face unless its 
 fashion be not pleasing to the nice taste of man . " 

 then , to my relief , she laugh a little , softly , which show I that 
 she have a sense of humour , and go on , " well , let he be , for he be a 
 good ape and courageous in his fashion , as he show when he go out to 
 spy upon the host of rezu , and stab the murderer - priest by the stone 
 of sacrifice . " 

 " how can you know the word of Hans , Ayesha , " I ask , ' see that he 
 speak in a tongue which you have never learn ? " 

 " perchance I read face , Allan . " 

 " or back , " I suggest , remember that his be turn to she . 

 " or back , or voice , or heart . it matter little which , since read I 
 do . but have do with such childish talk and lead I to this maiden who 
 have be snatch from the claw of Rezu and a fate that be bad than 
 death . do you understand , Allan , that ere the demon Rezu take she to 
 wife , the plan be to sacrifice her own father to she and then eat he 
 as the woman with she be eat , and before her eye ? now the father be 
 dead , which be well , as I think the little yellow man say to you - nay , 
 start not , I read it from his back   ha ! - JB   - since have he live whose 
 brain be rot , he would have rave till his death 's day . well , 
 therefore , that he should die like a man fight against a foe 
 unconquerable by all save one . but she still live . " 

 " aye , but mindless , Ayesha . " 

 " which , in great trouble such as she have pass , be a blessed state , O 
 Allan . bethink you , have there not be day , aye and month , in your 
 own life when you would have rejoice to sleep in mindlessness ? and 
 should we not , perchance , be happy , all of we , if like the beast we 
 could not remember , foreknow and understand ? oh ! man talk of Heaven , but 
 believe I , the real Heaven be one of dreamless sleep , since life 
 and wakefulness , however high their scale and on whatever star , mean 
 struggle , which be so oft mistaken , must breed sorrow - or remorse 
 that spoil all . come now . " 

 so I precede she to the next ruin house where we find Inez lie on 
 the bed still clothe in her barbaric trapping , although the veil have 
 be draw off her face . there she lay , wide - eyed and still , while the 
 woman watch she . Ayesha look at she a while , then say to I , 

 " so they trick she out to be Ayesha 's mock and image , and in time 
 accept by those barbarian as my very self , and even set the seal 
 of royalty on she , " and she point to the gold disc stamp with the 
 likeness of the sun . " well , she be a fair maiden , white and gently breed , 
 the first such that I have see for many an age . nor do she wish this 
 trickery . moreover she have take no hurt ; her soul have sink deep into a 
 sea of horror and that be all , whence doubtless it can be draw again . 
 yet I think it well that for a while she should remember naught , lest 
 her brain break , as do her father 's , and therefore no net of mine shall 
 drag she back to memory . let that return gently in future day , and then 
 of it not too much , for so shall all this terror become to she a void in 
 which sad shape move like shadow , and as shadow be soon forget 
 and go , no more to be hold than dream by the awakening sense . stand 
 aside , Allan , and you woman , leave we for a while . " 

 I obey , and the woman bow and go . then Ayesha draw up her veil , 
 and kneel down by the bed of Inez , but in such a fashion that I could 
 not see her face although I admit that I try to do so . I could see , 
 however , that she set her lip against those of Inez and as I gather 
 by her motion , seem to breathe into her lip . also she lift she 
 hand and place one of they upon the heart of Inez , for a minute or 
 more sway the other from side to side above her eye , pause at time 
 to touch she upon the forehead with her finger - tip . 

 presently Inez stir and sit up , whereon Ayesha take a vessel of milk 
 which stand upon the floor and hold it to her lip . Inez drink to the 
 last drop , then sink on to the bed again . for a while long Ayesha 
 continue the motion of her hand , then let fall her veil and rise . 

 " look , I have lay a spell upon she , " she say , beckon to I to draw 
 near . 

 I do so and perceive that now the eye of Inez be shut and that she 
 seem to be plunge in a deep and natural sleep . 

 " so she will remain for this night and that day which follow , " say 
 Ayesha , " and when she wake it will be , I think , to believe herself once 
 more a happy child . not until she see her home again will she find 
 her womanhood , and then all this story will be forget by she . of 
 her father you must tell she that he die when you go out to hunt the 
 river - beast together , and if she seek for certain other , that they 
 have go away . but I think that she will ask little more when she 
 learn that he be dead , since I have lay that command upon her soul . " 

 " hypnotic suggestion , " think I to myself , " and I only hope to heaven 
 that it will work . " 

 Ayesha seem to guess what be pass through my mind , for she nod 
 and say , 

 " have no fear , Allan , for I be what the black axe - bearer and the little 
 yellow man call a ' witch ' which mean , as you who be instruct know , 
 one who have knowledge of medicine and other thing and who hold a key 
 to some of the mystery that lie hide in Nature . " 

 " for instance , " I suggest , " of how to transport yourself into a battle 
 at the right moment , and out of it again - also at the right moment . " 

 " yes , Allan , since watch from afar , I see that those Amahagger cur 
 be about to flee and that I be need there to hearten they and to 
 put fear into the army of Rezu . so I come . " 

 " but how do you come , Ayesha ? " 

 she laugh as she answer , 

 " perhaps I do not come at all . perhaps you only think I come ; since I 
 seem to be there the rest matter nothing . " 

 as I still look unconvinced she go on , 

 " oh ! foolish man , seek not to learn of that which be too high for you . 
 yet listen . you in your ignorance suppose that the soul dwell within 
 the body , do you not ? " 

 I answer that I have always be under this impression . 

 " yet , Allan , it be otherwise , for the body dwell within the soul . " 

 " like the pearl in an oyster , " I suggest . 

 " Aye , in a sense , since the pearl which to you be beautiful , be to the 
 oyster a sickness and a poison , and so be the body to the soul whose 
 temple it trouble and defile . yet round it be the white and holy soul 
 that ever seek to bring the vile body to its own purity and colour , yet 
 oft - time fail . Learn , Allan , that flesh and spirit be the deadly 
 foe join together by a high decree that they may forget their hate 
 and perfect each other , or fail , be separate to all eternity , the 
 spirit go to its own place and the flesh to its corruption . " 

 " a strange theory , " I say . 

 " Aye , Allan , and one which be so new to you that never will you 
 understand it . yet it be true and I set it out for this reason . the soul 
 of man , be at liberty and not coope within his narrow breast , be in 
 touch with that soul of the Universe , which man know as God whom they 
 call by many name . therefore it have all knowledge and perhaps all 
 power , and at time the body within it , if it be a wise body , can draw 
 from this well of knowledge and abound power . so at least can I. and 
 now you will understand why I be so good a doctoress and how I come to 
 appear in the battle , as you say , at the right time , and to leave it 
 when my work be do . " 

 " oh ! yes , " I answer , " I quite understand . I thank you much for put 
 it so plainly . " 

 she laugh a little , appreciate my jest , look at the sleep Inez , 
 and say , 

 " the fair body of this lady dwell in a large soul , I think , though one 
 of a somewhat sombre hue , for soul have their colour , Allan , and stain 
 that which be within they . she will never be a happy woman . " 

 " the black people name her Sad - Eyes , " I say . 

 " be it so ? well , I name her Sad - Heart , though for such often there be 
 joy at last . meanwhile she will forget ; yes , she will forget the bad 
 and how narrow be the edge between she and the arm of rezu . " 

 " just the width of the blade of the axe , Inkosikaas , " I answer . 
 " but tell I , Ayesha , why could not that axe cut and why do my bullet 
 flatten or turn aside when these smite the breast of rezu ? " 

 " because his front - armour be good , Allan , I suppose , " she reply 
 indifferently , " and on his back he wear none . " 

 " then why do you fill my ear with such a different tale about that 
 horrible giant have drunk of a Cup of Life , and all the rest ? " I ask 
 with irritation . 

 " I have forget , Allan . perhaps because the curious , such as you be , 
 like to hear tale even strange than their own , which in the day to be 
 may become their own . therefore you will be wise to believe only what I 
 do , and of what I tell you , nothing . " 

 " I do not , " I exclaim exasperate . 

 she laugh again and reply , 

 " what need to say to I that which I know already ? yet perhaps in the 
 future it may be different , since often by the alchemy of the mind the 
 fable of our youth be change into the fact of our age , and we come 
 to believe in anything , as your little yellow man believe in some 
 savage name Zikali , and those Amahagger believe in the talisman round 
 your neck , and I who be the maddest of you all , believe in Love and 
 Wisdom , and the black warrior , Umslopogaas , believe in the virtue of 
 that great axe of his , rather than in those of his own courage and of 
 the strength that wield it . Fools , every one of we , though perchance 
 I be the great fool among they . now take I to the warrior , 
 Umslopogaas , whom I would thank , as I thank you , Allan , and the little 
 yellow man , although he jeer at I with his sharp tongue , not know 
 that if I be anger , with a breath I could cause he to cease to be . " 

 " then why do you not choose rezu to cease to be , and his army also , 
 Ayesha ? " 

 " it seem that I have do these thing through the axe of Umslopogaas 
 and by the help of your generalship , Allan . why then , waste my own 
 strength when yours lay to my hand ? " 

 " because you have no power over Rezu , Ayesha , or so you tell I . " 

 " have I not say that my word be snowflake , mean to melt and leave 
 no trace , hide my thought as this veil hide my beauty ? yet as the 
 beauty be beneath the veil , perchance there be truth beneath the word , 
 though not that truth you think . so you be well answer , and for the 
 rest , I wonder whether rezu think I have no power over he when yonder 
 on the mountain spur he see I float down upon his company like a 
 spirit of the night . well , perchance some day I shall learn this and 
 many other thing . " 

 I make no answer , since what be the use of argue with a woman who 
 tell I frankly that all she say be false . so , although I long to 
 ask she why these Amahagger have such reverence for the talisman that 
 Hans call the Great Medicine , since now I guess that her first 
 explanation concern it be quite untrue , I hold my tongue . 

 yet as we go out of the house , by some coincidence she allude to this 
 very matter . 

 " I wish to tell you , Allan , " she say , " why it be those Amahagger would 
 not accept you as a General till their eye have see that which you wear 
 upon your breast . their tale of a legend of this very thing seem that 
 of savage or of their cunning priest , not to be believe by a wise man 
 such as you be , like some other that you have hear in K"r . yet it have 
 in it a grain of truth , for as it chance a little while ago , about a 
 hundred year ago , I think , the old wizard whose picture be cut upon 
 the wood , come to visit she who hold my place before I as ruler of this 
 tribe - she be very like I and as I believe , my mother , Allan - because 
 of her repute for wisdom . 

 " at that time I have hear there be a question of war between the 
 worshipper of Lulala and the grandfather of rezu . but this Zikali tell 
 the People of Lulala that they must not fight the People of rezu until 
 in a day to come a white man should visit K"r and bring with he a piece 
 of wood on which be cut the image of a dwarf like to that of Zikali 
 himself . then and not before they must fight and conquer the People of 
 rezu . now this story come down among they and you who may have think 
 the first tale magical , will understand it in its simplicity : be it not 
 so , you wise Allan ? " 

 " oh ! yes , " I answer , " except that I do not see how Zikali can have 
 come here a hundred year ago , since man do not live as long , although 
 he pretend to have do so . " 

 " no , Allan , nor do I , but perhaps it be his father , or his grandfather 
 who come , since be observant , you will have note that if the parent 
 be mis - form , so often be the descendant ; also that the pretence of 
 wizardry at time come down with the blood . " 

 again I make no answer for I see that Ayesha be fool I , and before 
 she could exhaust that amusement we reach the place where Umslopogaas 
 and his man be gather round a camp fire . he sit silent , but Goroko 
 with much animation be tell the story of the fight in picturesque 
 and colourful language , or that part of it which he have see , for the 
 benefit of the two wound man who take no share in it and who , lie on 
 their blanket with head thrust forward , be listen with eagerness 
 to the entrancing tale . suddenly they catch sight of Ayesha , and those 
 of the party who could stand sprang to their foot , while one and all 
 they give she the royal salute of Bayéte . 

 she wait till the sound have die away . then she say , 

 " I come to thank you and your man , o Wielder of the Axe , who have show 
 yourself very great in battle , and to say to you that my Spirit tell 
 I that every one of you , yes , even those who be still sick , will come 
 safe to your own land again and live out your year with honour . " 

 again they salute at this pleasing intelligence , when I have translate 
 it to they , for of course they know no Arabic . then she go on , 

 " I be tell , Umslopogaas , Son of the Lion , as a certain king be name in 
 your land , that the fight you make against rezu be a very great fight , 
 and that such a leap as your above his head when you smote he with the 
 axe on the hinder part where he wear no armour , and bring he to his 
 death , have not be see before , nor will be again . " 

 I render the word , and Umslopogaas , prefer truth to modesty , 
 reply emphatically that this be the case . 

 " because of that fight and that leap , " Ayesha go on , " as for other 
 deed that you have do and will do , my Spirit tell I that your name 
 will live in story for many generation . yet of what use be fame to the 
 dead ? therefore I make you an offer . bide here with I and you shall 
 rule these Amahagger , and with they the remnant of the People of rezu . 
 your cattle shall be countless and your wife the fairest in the land , 
 and your child many , for I will lift a certain curse from off you 
 so that no more shall you be childless . do you accept , o Holder of the 
 Axe ? " 

 when he understand , Umslopogaas , after ponder a moment , ask if I 
 mean to stay in this land and marry the white chieftainess who speak 
 such wise word and could appear and disappear in the battle at she 
 will , and like a mountain - top hide her head in a cloud , which be his way 
 of allude to her veil . 

 I answer at once and with decision that I intend to do nothing of 
 the sort and immediately regret my word , since , although I speak 
 in Zulu , I suppose she read their meaning from my face . at any rate she 
 understand the drift of they . 

 " tell he , Allan , " she say with a kind of icy politeness , " that you 
 will not stop here and marry I , because if ever I choose a husband he 
 would not be a little man at the door of whose heart so many woman 's 
 hand have knock - yes , even those that be black - and not , I think , in 
 vain . one , moreover , who hold himself so clever that he believe he 
 have nothing leave to learn , and in every flower of truth that be show to 
 he , however fair , smell only poison , and beneath , nurture it , see 
 only the gross root of falsehood plant in corruption . tell he these 
 thing , Allan , if it please you . " 

 " it do not please I , " I answer in a rage at her insult . 

 " nor be it needful , Allan , since if I catch the meaning of that 
 barbarous tongue you use aright , you have tell he already . well , let 
 the jest pass , o man who least of all thing desire to be Ayesha 's 
 husband , and whom Ayesha least of all thing desire as her spouse , and 
 ask the Axe - bearer nothing since I perceive that without you he will 
 not stay at K"r . nor indeed be it fat that he should do so , for now 
 my Spirit tell I what it hide from I when I speak a moment go , that 
 this warrior shall die in a great fight far away and that between then 
 and now much sorrow wait he who save that of one , know not how to win 
 the love of woman . let he say moreover what reward he desire since if 
 I can give it to he , it shall be his . " 

 again I translate . Umslopogaas receive her prophecy in stoical 
 silence , and as I think with indifference , and only say in reply , 

 " the glory that I have win be my reward and the only boon I seek at this 
 queen 's hand be that if she can she should give I sight of a woman for 
 whom my heart be hungry , and with it knowledge that this woman live in 
 that land whither I travel like all man . " 

 when she hear these word Ayesha say , 

 " true , I have forget . your heart also be hungry , I think , Allan , for 
 the vision of sundry face that you see no more . well , I will do my 
 good , but since only faith fulfil itself , how can I who must strive to 
 pierce the gate of darkness for one so unbelieving , know that they will 
 open at my word ? come to I , both of you , at the sunset to - morrow . " 

 then as though to change the subject , she talk to I for a long while 
 about K"r , of which she tell I a most interesting history , true or 
 false , that I omit here . 

 at length , as though suddenly she have grow tired , wave her hand to 
 show that the conversation be end , Ayesha go to the wounded man and 
 touch they each in turn . 

 " now they will recover swiftly , " she say , and leave the place be 
 go into the darkness . 



 CHAPTER XX 

 the GATE of DEATH 

 before turn in I examine these wound man for myself . the truth be 
 that I be anxious to learn their exact condition in order that I might 
 make an estimate as to when it would be possible for we to leave this 
 valley or crater bottom of K"r , of which I be heartily tired . who could 
 desire to stay in a place where he have not only be involve in a deal 
 of hard , doubtful , and very dangerous fighting from which all personal 
 interest be absent , but where also he be mesh in a perfect spider 's 
 web of bewilderment , and expose to continual insult into the bargain ? 

 for that be what it come to ; this Ayesha take every opportunity to jeer 
 at and affront I . and why ? just because I have conceive doubt , which 
 somehow she discover , of the amazing tale with which it have amuse 
 she to stuff I , as a farmer 's wife do a turkey poult with meal 
 pellet . how could she expect I , a man , after all , of some experience , 
 to believe such lie , which , not half an hour before , in the cool 
 possible fashion she have herself admit to be lie and nothing else , 
 tell for the mere pleasure of romancing ? 

 the immortal rezu , for instance , who have drink of the Cup of Life or 
 some such rubbish , now turn out to be nothing but a brawny savage 
 descended from generation of chief also call Rezu . moreover the 
 immemorial Ayesha , who also have drunk of Cups of Life , and accord 
 to her first story , have live in this place for thousand of year , have 
 come here with a mother , who fill the same mystic r"le before she for 
 the benefit of an extremely gloomy and disagreeable tribe of Semitic 
 savage . yet she be cross with I because I have not swallow her crude 
 and indigestible mixture of fable and philosophy without a moment 's 
 question . 

 at least I suppose that this be the reason , though another possible 
 explanation do come into my mind . I have refuse to be duly overcome 
 by her charm , not because I be unimpressed , for who could be , have 
 look upon that blind beauty even for a moment ? but rather because , 
 after sundry experience , I have at last attain to some power of 
 judgment and learn what it be good to leave alone . perhaps this have 
 annoy she , especially as no white man seem to have come her way for 
 a long while and the fabulous Kallikrates have not put in his promise 
 appearance . 

 also it be unfortunate that in one way or another - how do she do it , I 
 wonder - she have interpret Umslopogaas ' question to I about marry 
 she , and my compromising reply . not that for one moment , as I see very 
 clearly , do she wish to marry I . but that fact , intuition suggest to 
 my mind , do not the least prevent she from be angry because I share 
 her view upon this important subject . 

 oh ! the whole thing be a bore and the soon I see the last of that 
 veil lady and the interesting but wearisome ruin in which she 
 dwelt , the well I should be please , although apparently I must trek 
 homeward with a poor young woman who be out of her mind , leave 
 the bone of her unfortunate father behind I . I admit to myself , 
 however , that there be consolation in the fact that Providence 
 have thus decree , for Robertson since he give up drink have not be a 
 cheerful companion , and two mad people would really have be more than 
 I could manage . 

 to return , for these reason I examine the two wound Zulus with 
 considerable anxiety , only to discover another instance of the chicanery 
 which it amuse this Ayesha to play off upon I . for what do I find ? 
 that they be practically well . their hurt , which have never be 
 serious , have heal wonderfully in that pure air , as those of savage 
 have a way of do , and they tell I themselves that they feel quite 
 strong again . yet with colossal impudence Ayesha have manage to suggest 
 to my mind that she be go to work some remarkable cure upon they , 
 who be already cure . 

 well , it be of a piece with the rest of her conduct and there be 
 nothing to do except go to bed , which I do with much gratitude that 
 my resting place that night be not of another sort . the last thing I 
 remember be wonder how on earth Ayesha appear and disappear 
 in the course of that battle , a problem as to which I could find no 
 solution , though , as in the case of the other , I be sure that one 
 would occur to I in course of time . 

 I sleep like a top , so soundly indeed that I think there be some kind 
 of soporific in the pick - me - up which look like sherry , especially as 
 the other who have drink of it also pass an excellent night . 

 about ten o'clock on the follow morning I awake feel particularly 
 well and quite as though I have be enjoy a week at the seaside 
 instead of my recent adventure , which include an abominable battle and 
 some agonising moment during which I think that my number be up upon 
 the board of Destiny . 

 I spend the most of that day lounge about , eat , talk over the 
 detail of the battle with Umslopogaas and the Zulus and smoke more 
 than usual .   I forgot to say that these Amahagger grow some capital 
 tobacco of which I have obtain a supply , although like most Africans , 
 they only use it in the shape of snuff .   the truth be that after all 
 my marvelling and acute anxiety , also mental and physical exertion , 
 I feel like the housemaid who cause to be cut upon her tombstone that 
 she have go to a well land where her ambition be to do nothing " for 
 ever and ever . " I just want to be completely idle and vacuous - minded 
 for at least a month , but as I know that all I could expect in that 
 line be a single bank holiday , like a City clerk on the spree , of it I 
 determine to make the most . 

 the result be that before the evening I feel very bored indeed . I have 
 go to look at Inez , who be still fast asleep , as Ayesha say would be 
 the case , but whose feature seem to have plump up considerably . the 
 reason of this I gather from her Amahagger nurse , be that at 
 certain interval she have awaken sufficiently to swallow considerable 
 quantity of milk , or rather cream , which I hop would not make she 
 ill . I have chat with the wound Zulus , who be now walk about , 
 more bored even than I be myself , and heap malediction on their 
 ancestral spirit because they have not be well enough to take part in 
 the battle against rezu . 

 I even take a little stroll to look for Hans , who have vanish in his 
 mysterious fashion , but the afternoon be so hot and oppressive with 
 come thunder , that soon I come back again and fall into a variety of 
 reflection that I need not detail . 

 while I be thus engaged and meditating , not without uneasiness , upon 
 the ordeal that lie before I after sunset , for I feel sure that it 
 would be an ordeal , Hans appear and say that the Amahagger impi 
 or army be gather on that spot where I have be elect to the proud 
 position of their General . he add that he believe - how he get this 
 information I do not know - that the White Lady be go to hold a 
 review of they and give they the reward that they have earn in the 
 battle . 

 hear this , Umslopogaas and the other Zulus say that they would like 
 to see this review if I would accompany they . although I do not want to 
 go nor indeed desire ever to look at another Amahagger , I consent to 
 save the trouble of argument , on condition that we should do so from a 
 distance . 

 so , include the wound man , we stroll off and presently come to the 
 crumble wall of the old city , beyond which lie the great moat now dry , 
 that once have encircle it with water . 

 here on the top of this wall we sit down where we could see without 
 be see , and observe the Amahagger company , considerably reduce 
 during the battle , be marshal by their captain beneath we and 
 about a couple of hundred yard away . also we observe several group 
 of man under guard . these we take to be prisoner capture in the fight 
 with rezu , who , as Hans remark with a smack of his lip , be probably 
 await sacrifice . 

 I say I hop not and yawn , for really the afternoon be intensely 
 hot and the weather most peculiar . the sun have vanish behind cloud , 
 and vapour fill the still air , so dense that at time it grow almost 
 dark ; also when these clear for brief interval , the landscape in the 
 grey , unholy light look distorted and unnatural , as it do during an 
 eclipse of the sun . 

 Goroko , the witch - doctor , star round he , sniff the air and then 
 remark ocularly that it be " wizard 's weather " and that there be 
 many spirit about . upon my word I feel inclined to agree with he , for 
 my feeling be very uncomfortable , but I only reply that if so , I 
 should be oblige if he , as a professional , would be good enough to keep 
 they off I . of course I know that electrical charge be about , which 
 account for my sensation , and wish that I have never leave the camp . 

 it be during one of these period of dense gloom that Ayesha must have 
 arrive upon the review ground . at least , when it lift , there she 
 be in her white garment , surround by woman and guard , engage 
 apparently in make an oration , for although I could not hear a word , I 
 could see by the motion of her arm that she be speak . 

 have she be the central figure in some stage scene , no limelight could 
 have set she off to well advantage , than do those of the heaven 
 above she . suddenly , through the blanket of cloud , flow from a hole 
 in it that look like an eye , come a blood - red ray which fall full upon 
 she , so that she alone be fiercely visible whilst all around be gloom 
 in which shape move dimly . certainly she look strange and even 
 terrify in that red ray which stain her robe till I who have but 
 just come out of battle with its " confused noise , " begin to think of 
 " the garment roll in blood " of which I often read in my favourite Old 
 Testament . for crimson be she from head to foot ; a tall shape of terror 
 and of wrath . 

 the eye in heaven shut and the ray go out . then come one of the space 
 of grey light and in it I see man be bring up , apparently from the 
 group of prisoner , under guard , and , to the number of a dozen or more , 
 stand in a line before Ayesha . 

 then I see nothing more for a long while , because blackness seem to 
 flow in from every quarter of the heaven and to block out the scene 
 beneath . at least after a pause of perhaps five minute , during which 
 the stillness be intense , the storm break . 

 it be a very curious storm ; in all my experience of african tempest I 
 can not recall one which it resemble . it begin with the usual cold and 
 wail wind . this die away , and suddenly the whole arch of heaven be 
 alive with little lightning that seem to strike horizontally , not 
 downward to the earth , weave a web of fire upon the surface of the 
 sky . 

 by the illumination of these lightning which , but for the swiftness of 
 their flash and great intensity , somewhat resemble a dense shower 
 of shoot star , I perceive that Ayesha be address the man that 
 have be bring before she , who stand dejectedly in a long line with 
 their head bent , quite unattended , since their guard have fall back . 

 " if I be go to receive a reward of cattle or wife , I should look 
 happy than those moon - worshipper , Baas , " remark Hans reflectively . 

 " perhaps it would depend , " I answer , " upon what the cattle and wife 
 be like . if the cattle have red - water and would bring disease into your 
 herd , or wild bull that would gore you , and the wife be skinny old 
 widow with evil tongue , then I think you would look as do those man , 
 Hans . " 

 I do not   quite know what make I speak thus , but I believe it be some 
 sense of pende death or disaster , suggest , probably , by the ominous 
 character of the setting provide by Nature to the curious drama of 
 which we be witness . 

 " I never think of that , Baas , " comment Hans , " but it be true that 
 all gift be not good , especially witch ' gift . " 

 as he speak the little net - like lightning die away , leave behind 
 they a gross darkness through which , far above we , the wind wail 
 again . 

 then suddenly all the heaven be turn into one blaze of light , and by 
 it I see Ayesha stand tall and rigid with her hand point towards 
 the line of man in front of she . the blaze go out , to be follow by 
 blackness , and to return almost instantly in a yet fiercer blaze which 
 seem to fall earthward in a torrent of fire that concentrate itself 
 in a kind of flame - spout upon the spot where Ayesha stand . 

 through that flame or rather in the heart of it , I see Ayesha and the 
 file of man in front of she , as the great King see the prophet in the 
 midst of the furnace that have be heat sevenfold . only these man do 
 not walk about in the fire ; no , they fall backwards , while Ayesha alone 
 remain upon her foot with outstretched hand . 

 next come more blackness and crash upon crash of such thunder that the 
 earth shake as it reverberate from the mountain cliff . never in my 
 life do I hear such fearful thunder . it frighten the Zulus so much , 
 that they fall upon their face , except Goroko and Umslopogaas , whose 
 pride keep they upon their foot , the former because he have a reputation 
 to preserve as a " Heaven - herd , " or Master of tempest . 

 I confess that I should have like to follow their example , and lie 
 down , be dreadfully afraid lest the lightning should strike I . but 
 there - I do not . 

 at last the thunder die away and in the most mysterious fashion that 
 violent tempest come to a sudden end , as do a storm upon the stage . no 
 rain fall , which in itself be surprising enough and most unusual , 
 but in place of it a garment of the complete calm descend upon 
 the earth . by degree , too , the darkness pass and the westere sun 
 reappear . its ray fall upon the place where the Amahagger company 
 have stand , but now not one of they be to be see . 

 they be all go and Ayesha with they . so completely have they vanish 
 away that I should have think that we suffer from illusion , be 
 it not for the line of dead man which lie there look very small and 
 lonesome on the veld ; mere dot indeed at that distance . 

 we star at each other and at they , and then Goroko say that he would 
 like to inspect the body to learn whether lightning kill at K"r as 
 it do elsewhere , also whether it have smite they altogether or leapt 
 from man to man . this , as a professional " Heaven - herd , " he declare he 
 could tell from the mark upon these unfortunate . 

 as I be curious also and want to make a few observation , I 
 consent . so with the exception of the wound man , who I think 
 should avoid the exertion , we scramble down the débris of the tumble 
 wall and across the open space beyond , reach the scene of the tragedy 
 without meet or see anyone . 

 there lie the dead , eleven of they , in an exact line as they have stand . 
 they be all upon their back with widely - open eye and an expression 
 of great fear freeze upon their face . some of these I recognise , as 
 do Umslopogaas and Hans . they be soldier or captain who have march 
 under I to attack rezu , although until this moment I have not see any 
 of they after we begin to descend the ridge where the battle take place . 

 " Baas , " say Hans , " I believe that these be the traitor who slip 
 away and tell Rezu of our plan so that he attack we on the ridge , 
 instead of our attack he on the plain as we have arrange so nicely . 
 at least they be none of they in the battle and afterwards I hear the 
 Amahagger talk of some of they . " 

 I remark that if so the lightning have discriminate very well in this 
 instance . 

 meanwhile Goroko be examine the body one by one , and presently 
 call out , 

 " these doom one die not by lightning but by witchcraft . there be not 
 a burn upon one of they , nor be their garment scorch . " 

 I go to look and find that it be perfectly true ; to all outward 
 appearance the eleven be quite unmarked and unharmed . except for their 
 frightened air , they might have die a natural death in their sleep . 

 " do lightning always scorch ? " I ask Goroko . 

 " always , Macumazahn , " he answer , " that be , if he who have be strike 
 be kill , as these be , and not only stunned . moreover , most of yonder 
 dead wear knife which should have melt or shatter with the sheath 
 burn off they . yet those knife be as though they have just leave the 
 smith 's hammer and the whet - stone , " and he draw some of they to show I . 

 again it be quite true and here I may remark that my experience tally 
 with that of Goroko , since I have never see anyone kill by lightning 
 on whom or on whose clothing there be not some trace of its passage . 

 " Ow ! " say Umslopogaas , " this be witchcraft , not heaven - wrath . the 
 place be enchant . let we get away lest we be smite also who have not 
 earn doom like those traitor . " 

 " no need to fear , " say Hans , ' since with we be the Great Medicine of 
 Zikali which can tie up the lightning as an old woman do a bundle of 
 stick . " 

 still I observe that for all his confidence , Hans himself be the 
 first to depart and with considerable speed . so we go back to our camp 
 without more conversation , since the Zulus be scared and I confess 
 that myself I could not understand the matter , though no doubt it 
 admit of some quite simple explanation . 

 however that might be , this K"r be a queer place with its legend , its 
 sullen Amahagger and its mysterious queen , to whom at time , in spite of 
 my inner conviction to the contrary , I be still inclined to attribute 
 power beyond those that be common even among very beautiful and able 
 woman . 

 this reflection remind I that she have promise we a further 
 exhibition of those power and within an hour or two . remember this 
 I begin to regret that I have ever ask for any such manifestation , for 
 who know what these might or might not involve ? 

 so much do I regret it that I determine , unless Ayesha send for we , as 
 she have say she would do , I would conveniently forget the appointment . 
 Luckily Umslopogaas seem to be of the same way of thinking ; at any 
 rate he go off to eat his evening meal without allude to it at all . 
 so I make up my mind that I would not bring the matter to his notice and 
 have ascertain that Inez be still asleep , I follow his example 
 and din myself , though without any particular appetite . 

 as I finish the sun be set in a perfectly clear sky , so as there 
 be no sign of any messenger , I think that I would go to bed early , 
 leave order that I be not to be disturb . but on this point my luck 
 be lack , for just as I have take off my coat , Hans arrive and say 
 that old Billali be without and have come to take I somewhere . 

 well , there be nothing to do but to put it on again . before I have 
 finish this operation Billali himself arrive with undignified 
 and unusual haste . I ask he what be the matter , and he answer 
 inconsequently that the Black One , the slayer of rezu , be at the door 
 " with his axe . " 

 " that generally accompany he , " I reply . then , remember the cause 
 of Billali 's alarm , I explain to he that he must not take too much 
 notice of a few hasty word speak by an essentially gentle - natured 
 person whose nerve have give way beneath provocation and bodily effort . 
 the old fellow bow in assent and stroke his beard , but I notice that 
 while Umslopogaas be near , he cling to I like a shadow . perhaps he 
 think that nervous attack might be recurrent , like those of fever . 

 outside the house I find Umslopogaas lean on his axe and look at 
 the sky in which the last red ray of evening linger . 

 " the sun have set , Macumazahn , " he say , " and it be time to visit this 
 white queen as she bid we , and to learn whether she can indeed lead we 
 ' down below ' where the dead be say to dwell . " 

 so he have not forget , which be disconcert . to cover up my own 
 doubt I ask he with affected confidence and cheerfulness whether he 
 be not afraid to risk this journey " down below , " that be , to the Realm 
 of death . 

 " why should I fear to tread a road that await the foot of all of we 
 and at the gate of which we knock day by day , especially if we chance 
 to live by war , as do you and I , Macumazahn ? " he inquire with a quiet 
 dignity , which make I feel ashamed . 

 " why indeed ? " I answer , add to myself , " though I should much prefer 
 any other highway . " 

 after this we start without more word , I keep up my spirit by 
 reflect that the whole business be nonsense and that there could be 
 nothing to dread . 

 all too soon we pass the ruin archway and be admit into 
 Ayesha 's presence in the usual fashion . as Billali , who remain outside 
 of they , draw the curtain behind we , I observe , to my astonishment , 
 that Hans have sneak in after I , and squat down quite close to 
 they , apparently in the hope of be overlook . 

 it seem , as I gather later , that somehow or other he have guess , or 
 become aware of the object of our visit , and that his burn curiosity 
 have overcome his terror of the " White Witch . " or possibly he hop to 
 discover whether or not she be so ugly as he suppose her veil - hide 
 face to be . at any rate there he be , and if Ayesha notice he , as I 
 think she do , for I see by the motion of her head , that she be look 
 in his direction , she make no remark . 

 for a while she sit still in her chair contemplate we both . then she 
 say , 

 " how come it that you be late ? those that seek their lose love should 
 run with eager foot , but yours have tarry . " 

 I mutter some excuse to which she do not trouble to listen , for she 
 go on , 

 " I think , Allan , that your sandal , which should be wing like to those 
 of the Roman Mercury , be weight with the grey lead of fear . well , it 
 be not strange , since you have come to travel through the Gates of Death 
 that be fear by all , even by Ayesha 's self , for who know what he may 
 find beyond they ? ask the Axe - Bearer if he also be afraid . " 

 I obey , render all that she have say into the Zulu idiom as good I 
 could . 

 " say to the queen , " answer Umslopogaas , when he understand , " that I 
 fear nothing , except woman 's tongue . I be ready to pass the Gates of 
 Death and , if need be , to come back no more . with the white people 
 I know it be otherwise because of some dark teaching to which they 
 listen , that tell of terror to be , such as we who be black do not 
 dread . still , we believe that there be ghost and that the spirit of 
 our father live on and as it chance I would learn whether this be so , 
 who above all thing desire to met a certain ghost , for which reason I 
 journey to this far land . 

 " say these thing to the white Queen , Macumazahn , and tell she that if 
 she should send I to a place whence there be no return , I who do not 
 love the world , shall not blame her overmuch , though it be true that I 
 should have choose to die in war . now I have speak . " 

 when I have pass on all this speech to Ayesha , her comment on it be , 

 " this black Captain have a spirit as brave as his body , but how be it 
 with your spirit , Allan ? be you also prepared to risk so much ? learn 
 that I can promise you nothing , save that when I loose the bond of your 
 mortality and send out your soul to wander in the depth of death , as 
 I believe that I can do , though even of this I be not certain - you 
 must pass through a gate of terror that may be close behind you by a 
 strong arm than mine . moreover , what you will find beyond it I do not 
 know , since be sure of this , each of we have his own heaven or his own 
 hell , or both , that soon or late he be doom to travel . now will you go 
 forward , or go back ? make choice while there be still time . " 

 at all this ominous talk I feel my heart shrivel like a fire - wither 
 leaf , if I may use that figure , and my blood assume the temperature 
 and consistency of ice - cream . earnestly do I curse myself for have 
 allow my curiosity about matter which we be not mean to understand 
 to bring I to the edge of such a choice . swiftly I determine to 
 temporise , which I do by ask Ayesha whether she would accompany I 
 upon this eerie expedition . 

 she laugh a little as she answer , 

 " bethink you , Allan . be I , whose face you have see , a meet companion 
 for a man who desire to visit the love that once be his ? what would 
 they say or think , if they should see you hand in hand with such a one ? " 

 " I do not   know and do not   care , " I reply desperately , " but this be the 
 kind of journey on which one require a guide who know the road . can not 
 Umslopogaas go first and come back to tell I how it have fare with 
 he ? " 

 " if the brave and instruct white lord , panoplie in the world 's last 
 faith , be not ashamed to throw the savage in his ignorance out like a 
 feather to test the wind of hell and watch the while to learn whether 
 these blow he back unscorched , or waft he into fire whence there be 
 no return , perchance it might so be order , Allan . ask he yourself , 
 Allan , if he be willing to run this errand for your sake . or perhaps the 
 little yellow man - - " and she pause . 

 at this point Hans , who have a smattering of arabic understand 
 something of our talk , could contain himself no long . 

 " no , Baas , " he break in from his corner by the curtain , " not I . I 
 do not   care for hunt spook , Baas , which leave no spoor that you can 
 follow and be always behind when you think they be in front . also 
 there be too many of they wait for I down there and how can I stand 
 up to they until I be a spook myself and know their way of fight ? 
 also if you should die when your spirit be away , I want to be leave that 
 I may bury you nicely . " 

 " be silent , " I say in my stern manner . then , unable to bear more of 
 Ayesha 's mockery , for I feel that as usual she be mock I , I add 
 with all the dignity that I could command , 

 " I be ready to make this journey through the gate of Death , Ayesha , if 
 indeed you can show I the road . for one purpose and no other I come to 
 K"r , namely to learn , if so I might , whether those who have die upon 
 the world , live on elsewhere . now , what must I do ? " 



 CHAPTER XXI 

 the lesson 

 " yes , " answer Ayesha , laugh very softly , " for that purpose alone , 
 o truth - seek Allan , whose curiosity be so fierce that the wide world 
 can not hold it , do you come to K"r and not to seek wealth or new land , 
 or to fight more savage . no , not even to look upon a certain Ayesha , 
 of whom the old wizard tell you , though I think you have always love to 
 try to lift the veil that hide woman 's heart , if not their face . yet 
 it be I who bring you to K"r for my own purpose , not your desire , 
 nor Zikali 's map and talisman , since have not the white lady who lie 
 sick be steal by rezu , never would you have pursue the journey nor 
 find the way hither . " 

 " how could you have have anything to do with that business ? " I ask 
 testily , for my nerve be on edge and I say the first thing that come 
 into my mind . 

 " that , Allan , be a question over which you will wonder for a long while 
 either beneath or beyond the sun , as you will wonder concern much 
 that have to do with I , which your little mind , shut in its iron box of 
 ignorance and pride , can not understand to - day . 

 " for example , you have be wonder , I be sure , how the lightning 
 kill those eleven man whose body you go to look on an hour or two 
 ago , and leave the rest untouched . well , I will tell you at once that it 
 be not lightne that kill they , although the strength within I 
 be manifest to you in storm , but rather what that witch - doctor of your 
 following call wizardry . because they be traitor who betray your 
 army to rezu , I kill they with my wrath and by the wand of my power . 
 oh ! you do not believe , yet perhaps ere long you will , since thus to 
 fulfil your prayer I must also kill you - almost . that be the trouble , 
 Allan . to kill you outright would be easy , but to kill you just enough 
 to set your spirit free and yet leave one crevice of mortal life through 
 which it can creep back again , that be most difficult ; a thing that only 
 I can do and even of myself I be not sure . " 

 " pray do not try the experiment - - " I begin thoroughly alarmed , but she 
 cut I short . 

 " Disturb I no more , Allan , with the tremor and change of your 
 uncertain mind , lest you should work more evil than you think , and 
 make mine uncertain also , spoil my skill . Nay , do not try to fly , for 
 already the net have throw itself about you and you can not stir , who 
 be bind like a little gild wasp in the spider 's web , or like bird 
 beneath the eye of basilisk . " 

 this be true , for I find that , strive as I would , I could not move a 
 limb or even an eyelid . I be frozen to that spot and there be nothing 
 for it except to curse my folly and say my prayer . 

 all this while she go on talk , but of what she say I have not 
 the faint idea , because my remain wit be absorb in these 
 much - need imploration . 



 presently , of a sudden , I appear to see Ayesha seat in a temple , 
 for there be column about she , and behind she be an altar on which 
 a fire burn . all round she , too , be hood snake like to that which 
 she wear about her middle , fashion in gold . to these snake she sing 
 and they dance to her singing ; yes , with flickering tongue they dance 
 upon their tail ! what the scene signify I can not conceive , unless it 
 mean that this mistress of magic be consult her familiar . 

 then that vision vanish and Ayesha 's voice begin to seem very far away 
 and dreamy , also her wondrous beauty become visible to I through her 
 veil , as though I have acquire a new sense that overcome the limitation 
 of mortal sight . even in this extremity I reflect it be well that the 
 last thing I look on should be something so glorious . no , not quite 
 the last thing , for out of the corner of my eye I see that Umslopogaas 
 from a sitting position have sink on to his back and lay , apparently 
 dead , with his axe still grip tightly and hold above his head , as 
 though his arm have be turn to ice . 

 after this terrible thing begin to happen to I and I become aware that 
 I be die . a great wind seem to catch I up and blow I to and fro , 
 as a leaf be blow in the eddy of a winter gale . enormous rush of 
 darkness flow over I , to be succeed by vivid burst of brightness 
 that dazzle like lightning . I fall off precipice and at the foot of 
 they be catch by some fearful strength and toss to the very sky . 

 from those sky I be hurl down again into a kind of whirlpool of 
 inky night , round which I spin perpetually , as it seem for hour and 
 hour . but bad of all be the awful loneliness from which I suffer . 
 it seem to I as though there be no other live thing in all the 
 Universe and never have be and never would be any other living thing . I 
 feel as though I be the Universe rush solitary through space for 
 age upon age in a frantic search for fellowship , and find none . 

 then something seem to grip my throat and I know that I have die - for 
 the world float away from beneath I . 

 now fear and every mortal sensation leave I , to be replace by a new and 
 spiritual terror . I , or rather my disembodied consciousness , seem to 
 come up for judgment , and the horror of it be that I appear to be my 
 own judge . there , a very embodiment of cold justice , my Spirit , 
 grow luminous , sit upon a throne and to it , with dread and merciless 
 particularity I set out all my misdeed . it be as if some part of I 
 remain mortal , for I could see my two eye , my mouth and my hand , but 
 nothing else - and strange enough they look . from the eye come tear , 
 from the mouth flow word and the hand be join , as though in 
 prayer to that throned and adamantine Spirit which be I . 

 it be as though this Spirit be ask how my body have serve 
 its purpose and advance its mighty end , and in reply - oh ! what a 
 miserable tale I have to tell . fault upon fault , weakness upon weakness , 
 sin upon sin ; never before do I understand how black be my record . I 
 try to relieve the picture with some incident of attempt good , but 
 that Spirit would not hearken . it seem to say that it have gather up 
 the good and know it all . it be of the evil that it would learn , not 
 of the good that have better it , but of the evil by which it have be 
 harm . 

 hear this there rise up in my consciousness some memory of what 
 Ayesha have say ; namely , that the body live within the temple of the 
 spirit which be oft defy , and not the spirit in the body . 



 the story be tell and I hearken for the judgment , my own judgment on 
 myself , which I know would be accept without question and register 
 for good or ill . but none come , since ere the balance sink this way or 
 that , ere it could be utter , I be sweep afar . 

 through Infinity I be sweep , and as I flee fast than the light , the 
 meaning of what I have see come home to I . I know , or seem to know 
 for the first time , that at the last man must answer to himself , 
 or perhaps to a divine principle within himself , that out of his own 
 free - will , through long æon and by a million step , he climb or sink 
 to the height or depth dormant in his nature ; that from what he be , 
 spring what he be , and what he be , engender what he shall be for ever 
 and aye . 

 now I envisage immortality and splendid and awful be its face . it 
 clasp I to its breast and in the vast circle of its arm I be 
 up - bear , I who know myself to be without begin and without end , 
 and yet of the past and of the future know nothing , save that these be 
 full of mystery . 

 as I go I encounter other , or overtook they , make the same 
 journey . Robertson sweep past I , and speak , but in a tongue I could 
 not understand . I note that the madness have leave his eye and that his 
 fine - cut feature be calm and spiritual . the other wanderer I do not 
 know . 



 I come to a region of blind light ; the thought rise in I that I 
 must have reach the sun , or a sun , though I feel no heat . I stand in a 
 lovely , shin valley about which burn mountain of fire . there be 
 huge tree in that valley , but they glow like gold and their flower 
 and fruit be as though they have be fashion of many - colour 
 flame . 

 the place be glorious beyond compare , but very strange to I and not 
 to be describe . I sit I down upon a boulder which burn like a ruby , 
 whether with heat or colour I do not know , by the edge of a stream that 
 flow with what look like fire and make a lovely music . I stoop 
 down and drank of this water of flame and the scent and the taste of it 
 be as those of the costly wine . 

 there , beneath the spread limb of a fire - tree I sit , and examine 
 the strange flower that grow around , colour like rich jewel and 
 perfume above imagine . there be bird also which might have be 
 feather with sapphire , ruby and amethyst , and their song be so 
 sweet that I could have weep to hear it . the scene be wonderful 
 and fill I with exaltation , for I think of the land where it be 
 promise that there shall be no more night . 

 People begin to appear ; man , woman , and even child , though whence 
 they come I could not see . they do not fly and they do not walk ; they 
 seem to drift towards I , as unguided boat drift upon the tide . 
 one and all they be very beautiful , but their beauty be not human 
 although their shape and face resemble those of man and woman make 
 glorious . none be old , and except the child , none seem very 
 young ; it be as though they have grow backwards or forwards to middle 
 life and rest there at their very well . 

 now come the marvel ; all these uncounted people be know to I , though 
 so far as my knowledge go I have never set eye on most of they before . 
 yet I be aware that in some forget life or epoch I have be intimate 
 with every one of they ; also that it be the fact of my presence and 
 the call of my sub - conscious mind which draw they to this spot . yet 
 that presence and that call be not visible or audible to they , who , 
 I suppose , flow down some stream of sympathy , why or whither they do 
 not know . have I be as they be perchance they would have see I , 
 as it be they see nothing and I could not speak and tell they of my 
 presence . 

 some of this multitude , however , I know well enough even when they have 
 depart year and year ago . but about these I note this , that every 
 one of they be a man or a woman or a child for whom I have feel love or 
 sympathy or friendship . not one be a person whom I have dislike or whom 
 I have no wish to see again . if they speak at all I could not hear - or 
 read - their speech , yet to a certain extent I could hear their thought . 

 many of these be beyond the power of my appreciation on subject which 
 I have no knowledge , or that be too high for I , but some be of quite 
 simple thing such as concern we upon the earth , such as of friendship , 
 or learn , or journey make or to be make , or art , or literature , or 
 the wonder of Nature , or of the fruit of the earth , as they know they 
 in this region . 

 this I note too , that each separate thought seem to be hallowed and 
 enclose in an atmosphere of prayer or heavenly aspiration , as a seed be 
 enclose in the heart of a flower , or a fruit in its odorous rind , and 
 that this prayer or aspiration presently appear to bear the thought 
 away , whither I know not . moreover , all these thought , even of the 
 humblest thing , be beauteous and spiritual , nothing cruel or impure 
 or even coarse be to be find among they : they radiate charity , purity 
 and goodness . 

 among they I perceive be none that have to do with our earth ; this and 
 its affair seem to be leave far behind these thinker , a truth that 
 chill my soul be alien to their company . worse still , so far as I 
 could discover , although I know that all these bright one have be near 
 to I at some hour in the measurement of time and space , not one of 
 their musing dwelt upon I or on aught with which I have to do . 

 between I and they there be a great gulf fix and a high wall build . 

 oh , look ! one come shin like a star , and from far away come another 
 with dove - like eye and beautiful exceedingly , and with this last a 
 maiden , whose eye be as hers who my own heart tell I be her mother . 

 well , I know they both ; they be those whom I have come to seek , the 
 woman who have be mind upon the earth , and at the sight of they my 
 spirit thrill . surely they would discover I . surely at least they 
 would speak of I and feel my presence . 

 but , although they stay within a pace or two of where I rest , alas ! 
 it be not so . they seem to kiss and to exchange swift thought about 
 many thing , high thing of which I will not write , and common thing ; 
 yes , even of the shin robe they wear , but never a one of I ! I 
 strove to rise and go to they , but could not ; I strove to speak and 
 could not ; I strove to throw out my thought to they and could not ; it 
 fall back upon my head like a stone hurl heavenward . 

 they be remote from I , utterly apart . I weep tear of bitterness that 
 I should be so near and yet so far ; a dull and jealous rage burn in 
 my heart , and this they do seem to feel , or so I fancy ; at any rate , 
 apparently by mutual consent , they move far from I as though 
 something pain they . yes , my love could not reach their perfect 
 nature , but my anger hurt they . 

 as I sit chew this root of bitterness , a man appear , a very noble 
 man , in whom I recognise my father grow young and happier - look , 
 but still my father , with whom come other , man and woman whom I know 
 to be my brother and sister who have die in youth far away in 
 Oxfordshire . Joy leap up in I , for I think - these will surely know 
 I and give I welcome , since , though here sex have lose its power , blood 
 must still call to blood . 

 but it be not so . they speak , or interchange their thought , but not 
 one of I . I read something that pass from my father to they . it be 
 a speculation as to what have bring they all together there , and read 
 also the answer hazard , that perhaps it might be to give welcome to 
 some unknown who be draw near from below and would feel lonely and 
 unfriende . Thereon my father reply that he do not see or feel this 
 wanderer , and think that it could not be so , since it be his mission 
 to greet such on their coming . 



 then in an instant all be go and that lovely , glow plain be 
 empty , save for myself seat on the ruby - like stone , weep tear of 
 blood and shame and loss within my soul . 



 so I sit a long while , till presently I be aware of a new presence , a 
 presence dusky and splendid and array in rich barbaric robe . straight 
 she come towards I , like a throw spear , and I know she for a 
 certain royal and savage woman who on earth be name Mameena , or 
 " wind - that - wail . " moreover she divine I , though see I she could 
 not . 

 " art there , Watcher - in - the - Night , watch in the light ? " she say or 
 thought , I know not which , but the word come to I in the Zulu tongue . 

 " Aye , " she go on , " I know that thou art there ; from ten thousand 
 league away I feel thy presence and break from my own place to welcome 
 thee , though I must pay for it with burn chain and bondage . how do 
 those welcome thee whom thou camest out to seek ? do they clasp thee in 
 their arm and press their kiss on thy brow ? or do they shrink away 
 from thee because the smell of earth be on thy hand and lip ? " 

 I seem to answer that they do not appear to know that I be there . 

 " Aye , they do not know because their love be not enough , because they 
 have grow too fine for love . but I , the sinner , I know well , and here 
 be I ready to suffer all for thee and to give thee place within this 
 stormy heart of mine . forget they , then , and come to rule with I who 
 still be queen in my own house that thou shalt share . there we will live 
 royally and when our hour come , at least we shall have have our day . " 

 now before I could reply , some power seem to seize this splendid 
 creature and whirl her thence so that she depart , flash these word 
 from her mind to mine , 

 " for a little while farewell , but remember always that Mameena , the 
 Wailing Wind , be still as a sinful woman in a woman 's love and of 
 the earth , earthy , find thee , whom all the rest forgot . O 
 Watcher - in - the - Night , watch in the night for I , for there thou shalt 
 find I , the Child of Storm , again , and yet again . " 

 she be go and once more I sit in utter solitude upon that ruby stone , 
 star at the jewel flower and the glorious flame tree and the 
 lambent water of the brook . what be the meaning of it all , I wonder , 
 and why be I desert by everyone save a single savage woman , and why 
 have she a power to find I which be deny to all the rest ? well , 
 she have give I an answer , because she be " as a sinful woman with 
 a woman 's love and of the earth , earthy , " while with the rest it be 
 otherwise . oh ! this be clear , that in the heavens man have no friend 
 among the heavenly , save perhaps the great Friend of all who 
 understand both flesh and spirit . 

 thus I muse in this burn world which be still so beautiful , this 
 alien world into which I have thrust myself unwanted and unsought . 
 and while I muse this happen . the fiery water of the stream be 
 disturb by something and look up I see the cause . 

 a dog have plunge into they and be swim towards I . at a glance 
 I know that dog on which my eye have not fall for decade . it be a 
 mongrel , half spaniel and half bull - terrier , which for year have be 
 the dear friend of my youth and die at last on the horn of a wounded 
 wildebeeste that attack I when I have fall from my horse upon 
 the veld . boldly it tackle the maddened buck , thus give I time to 
 scramble to my rifle and shoot it , but not before the poor hound have 
 yield its life for mine , since presently it die disembowel , but 
 lick my hand and forgetful of its agony . this dog , Smut by name , it 
 be that swam or seem to swim the brook of fire . it scramble to the 
 hither shore , it nose the earth and run to the ruby stone and star 
 about it whine and sniff . 

 at last it seem to see or feel I , for it stand upon its hind leg 
 and lick my face , yelp with mad joy , as I could see though I 
 hear nothing . now I weep in earnest and bent down to hug and kiss the 
 faithful beast , but this I could not do , since like myself it be only 
 shadow . 


 then suddenly all dissolve in a cataract of many - colour flame and I 
 fall down into an infinite gulf of blackness . 


 surely Ayesha be talk to I ! what do she say ? what do she say ? I 
 could not catch her word , but I catch her laughter and know that after 
 her fashion she be make a mock of I . my eyelid be drag down 
 as though with heavy sleep ; it be difficult to lift they . at last they 
 be open and I see Ayesha seat on her couch before I and - this I 
 note at once - with her lovely face unveil . I look about I , seek 
 Umslopogaas and Hans . but they be go as I guess they must be , 
 since otherwise Ayesha would not have be unveil . we be quite 
 alone . she be address I and in a new fashion , since now she 
 have abandon the formal " you " and be use the more impressive and 
 intimate " thou , " much as be the manner of the French . 

 " Thou hast make thy journey , Allan , " she say , " and what thou hast 
 see there thou shalt tell I presently . yet from thy mien I gather 
 this - that thou art glad to look upon flesh and blood again and , after 
 the company of spirit , to find that of mortal woman . come then and sit 
 beside I and tell thy tale . " 

 " where be the other ? " I ask as I rise slowly to obey , for my head 
 swam and my foot seem feeble . 

 " Gone , Allan , who as I think have have enough of ghost , which be perhaps 
 thy case also . come , drink this and be a man once more . drink it to I 
 whose skill and power have bring thee safe from land that human foot 
 be never mean to tread , " and take a strange - shaped cup from a stool 
 that stand beside she , she offer it to I . 

 I drink to the last drop , neither know nor care whether it be 
 wine or poison , since my heart seem desperate at its failure and my 
 spirit crush beneath the weight of its great betrayal . I suppose it 
 be the former , for the content of that cup run through my vein like 
 fire and give I back my courage and the joy of life . 

 I step to the dais and sit I down upon the couch , lean against 
 its rounded end so that I be almost face to face with Ayesha who have 
 turn towards I , and thence could study her unveiled loveliness . for a 
 while she say nothing , only eye I up and down and smile and smile , 
 as though she be wait for that wine to do its work with I . 

 " now that thou art a man again , Allan , tell I what thou didst see when 
 thou wast more - or less - than man . " 

 so I tell she all , for some power within she seem to draw the truth 
 out of I . nor do the tale appear to cause her much surprise . 

 " there be truth in thy dream , " she say when I have finish ; " a lesson 
 also . " 

 " then it be all a dream ? " I interrupt . 

 " be not everything a dream , even life itself , Allan ? if so , what can 
 this be that thou hast see , but a dream within a dream , and itself 
 contain other dream , as in the old day the ball fashion by the 
 eastern worker of ivory would oft be find to contain another ball , and 
 this yet another and another and another , till at the inmost might be 
 find a bead of gold , or perchance a jewel , which be the prize of he 
 who could draw out ball from ball and leave they all unbroken . that 
 search be difficult and rarely be the jewel come by , if at all , so 
 that some say there be none , save in the maker 's mind . yes , I have 
 see a man go craze with seek and die with the mystery unsolved . how 
 much hard , then , be it to come at the diamond of truth which lie at 
 the core of all our nest of dream and without which to rest upon they 
 could not be fashion to seem reality ? " 

 " but be it really a dream , and if so , what be the truth and the 
 lesson ? " I ask , determine not to allow she to bemuse or escape I 
 with her metaphysical talk and illustration . 

 " the first question have be answer , Allan , as well as I can answer , 
 who be not the architect of this great globe of dream , and as yet 
 can not clearly see the ineffable gem within , whose prisone ray 
 illuminate their substance , though so dimly that only those with the 
 insight of a god can catch their glamour in the night of thought , since 
 to most they be dark as glow - fly in the glare of noon . " 

 " then what be the truth and the lesson ? " I persist , perceive that 
 it be hopeless to extract from she an opinion as to the real nature of 
 my experience and that I must content myself with her deduction from 
 they . 

 " thou tell I , Allan , that in thy dream or vision thou didst seem to 
 appear before thyself seat on a throne and in that self to find thy 
 judge . that be the truth whereof I speak , though how it find its way 
 through the black and ignorant shell of one whose wit be so small , 
 be more than I can guess , since I believe that it be reveal to I 
 alone . " 

  now I , Allan , think to myself that I begin to see the origin of all 
 these fantasy and that for once Ayesha have make a slip . if she have a 
 theory and I develop that same theory in a hypnotic condition , it be 
 not difficult to guess its fount . however , I keep my mouth shut , and 
 luckily for once she do not seem to read my mind , perhaps because she 
 be too much occupy in spin her smooth web of entangle word . 

 " all man worship their own god , " she go on , " and yet seem not to know 
 that this god dwell within they and that of he they be a part . there 
 he dwell and there they mould he to their own fashion , as the potter 
 mould his clay , though whatever the shape he seem to take beneath 
 their finger , still he remain the god infinite and unalterable . still 
 he be the Seeker and the Sought , the Prayer and its Fulfilment , the love 
 and the Hate , the Virtue and the Vice , since all these quality the 
 alchemy of his spirit turn into an ultimate and eternal Good . for the 
 god be in all thing and all thing be in the god , whom man clothe with 
 such diverse garment and whose countenance they hide beneath so many 
 mask . 

 " in the tree flow the sap , yet what know the great tree it nurture of 
 the sap ? in the world 's womb burn the fire that give life , yet what of 
 the fire know the glorious earth it conceive and will destroy ; in the 
 heaven the great globe swing through space and rest not , yet what know 
 they of the strength that send they spinning and in a time to come will 
 stay their mighty motion , or turn they to another course ? therefore of 
 everything this all - present god be judge , or rather , not one but many 
 judge , since of each living creature he make its own magistrate to 
 deal out justice accord to that creature 's law which in the beginning 
 the god establish for it and decreed . thus in the breast of everyone 
 there be a rule and by that rule , at work through a countless chain of 
 life , in the end he shall be lift up to Heaven , or bind about and 
 cast down to Hell and death . " 

 " you mean a conscience , " I suggest rather feebly , for her thought and 
 image overpower I . 

 " Aye , a conscience , if thou wilt , and canst only understand that term , 
 though it fit my theme but ill . this be my meaning , that conscience , 
 as thou nam they , be many . I have one ; thou , Allan , hast another ; 
 that black Axe - bearer have a third ; the little yellow man a fourth , and 
 so on through the tale of live thing . for even a dog such as thou 
 saw have a conscience and - like thyself or i - must in the end be its 
 own judge , because of the spark that come to it from above , the same 
 spark which in I burn as a great fire , and in thee as a smoulder 
 ember of green wood . " 

 " when you sit in judgment on yourself in a day to come , Ayesha , " 
 I could not help interpolate , " I trust that you will remember that 
 humility do not shine among your virtue . " 

 she smile in her vivid way - only twice or thrice do I see her smile 
 thus and then it be like a flash of summer lightning illumine a 
 clouded sky , since for the most part her face be grave and even sombre . 

 " well answer , " she say . " goad the patient ox enough and even it will 
 grow fierce and paw the ground . 

 " Humility ! what have I to do with it , o Allan ? let humility be the part 
 of the humble - souled and lowly , but for those who reign as I do , and 
 they be few indeed , let there be pride and the glory they have earn . 
 now I have tell thee of the truth thou saw in thy vision and wouldst 
 thou hear the Lesson ? " 

 " yes , " I answer , ' since I may as well be do with it at once , and 
 doubtless it will be good for I . " 

 " the Lesson , Allan , be one which thou preachest - humility . vain man 
 and foolish as thou art , thou didst desire to travel the Underworld in 
 search of certain one who once be all in all to thee - nay , not all in 
 all since of they there be two or more - but at least much . thus thou 
 wouldst do because , as thou saidest , thou didst seek to know whether 
 they still live on beyond the gate of Blackness . yes , thou said 
 this , but what thou didst hope to learn in truth be whether they live 
 on in thee and for thee only . for thou , thou in thy vanity , didst 
 picture these depart soul as do naught in that Heaven they have 
 win , save think of thee still burrow on the earth , and , at time 
 lighten thy labour with kiss from other lip than theirs . " 

 " never ! " I exclaim indignantly . " never ! it be not true . " 

 " then I pray pardon , Allan , who only judge of thee by other that be 
 as man be make , and be such , not to be blame if perchance from time 
 to time , they turn to look on woman , who ala ! be as they be make . 
 so at least it be when I know the world , but mayhap since then its 
 rich wine have turn to water , whereby I hope it have be better . 
 at the least this be thy thought , that those woman who have be thine 
 for an hour , through all eternity could dream of naught else save thy 
 perfection , and hope for naught else than to see thee at their side 
 through that eternity , or such part of thee as thou couldst spare to 
 each of they . for thou didst forget that where they have go there 
 may be other even more peerless than thou art and more fit to hold a 
 woman 's love , which as we know on earth be ever changeful , and perhaps 
 may so remain where it be certain that new light must shine and new 
 desire beckon . dost understand I , Allan ? " 

 " I think so , " I answer with a groan . " I understand you to mean that 
 worldly impression soon wear out and that people who have depart to 
 other sphere may there form new tie and forget the old . " 

 " yes , Allan , as do those who remain upon this earth , whence these other 
 have depart . do man and woman still re - marry in the world , Allan , as 
 in my day they be will not to do ? " 

 " of course - it be allow . " 

 " as many other thing , or perchance this same thing , may be allow 
 elsewhere , for when there be so many habitation from which to choose , 
 why should we always dwell in one of they , however strait the house or 
 poor the prospect ? " 

 now understand that I be symbolise by the ' strait house " and the 
 " poor prospect " I should have grow angry , have not a certain sense of 
 humour come to my rescue , who remember that after all Ayesha 's satire 
 be profoundly true . why , beyond the earth , should anyone desire 
 to remain unalterably tie to and inextricably wrap up in such a 
 personality as my own , especially if other of superior texture abound 
 about they ? now that I come to think of it , the thing be absurd and 
 not to be the least expect in the midst of a thousand new and vivid 
 interest . I have meet with one more disillusionment , that be all . 

 " dost understand , Allan , " go on Ayesha , who evidently be determine 
 that I should drink this cup to the last drop , " that these dweller in 
 the sun , or the far planet where thou hast be accord to thy tale , 
 see thee not and know naught of thee ? it may chance therefore that at 
 this time thou wast not in their mind which at other dream of thee 
 continually . or it may chance that they never dream of thee at all , 
 have quite forget thee , as the wean cub forget its mother . " 

 " at least there be one who seem to remember , " I exclaim , for she 
 poison mock sting the word out of I , " one woman and - a dog . " 

 " Aye , the savage , who be nature 's child , a sinner that depart hence 
 by her own act "   how Ayesha know this I can not say , I never tell she , 
 " have not yet put on perfection and therefore still remember he whose 
 kiss be last upon her lip . but surely , Allan , it be not thy desire 
 to pass from the gentle , order clasping of those white soul for the 
 tumultuous arm of such a one as this . still , let that be , for who know 
 what man will or will not do in jealousy and disappointed love ? and the 
 dog , it remember also and even seek thee out , since dog be more 
 faithful and single - hearted than be mankind . there at least thou hast 
 thy lesson , namely to grow more humble and never to think again that 
 thou holdest all a woman 's soul for aye , because once she be kind to 
 thee for a little while on earth . " 

 " yes , " I answer , jump up in a rage , " as you say , I have my lesson , 
 and more of it than I want . so by your leave , I will now bid you 
 farewell , hop that when it come to be your turn to learn this 
 lesson , or a bad , Ayesha , as I be sure it will one day , for something 
 tell I so , you may enjoy it more than I have do . " 



 CHAPTER XXII 

 AYESHA 's farewell 

 thus I speak whose nerve be on edge after all that I have see or , as 
 even then I suspect , seem to see . for how could I believe that these 
 vision of mine have any high origin than Ayesha 's rather malicious 
 imagination ? already I have form my theory . 

 it be that she must be a hypnotist of power , who , after she have put a 
 spell upon her subject , could project into his mind such fancy as she 
 choose together with a selection of her own theory . only two point 
 remain obscure . the first be - how do she get the necessary 
 information about the private affair of a humble individual like 
 myself , for these be not know even to Zikali with whom she seem 
 to be in some kind of correspondence , or to Hans , at any rate in such 
 completeness ? 

 I could but presume that in some mysterious way she draw they from , or 
 rather excite they in my own mind and memory , so that I seem to see 
 those with whom once I have be intimate , with modification and in 
 surrounding that her intelligence have carefully prepare . it would not 
 be difficult for a mind like her familiar , as I gather it be , with 
 the ancient lore of the Greeks and the Egyptians , to create a kind of 
 Hades and , by way of difference , to change it from one of shadow to one 
 of intense illumination , and into it to plunge the consciousness of he 
 upon whom she have lay her charm of sleep . I have see nothing and hear 
 nothing that she might not thus have mould , always give that she have 
 access to the needful clay of fact which I alone could furnish . 

 grant this hypothesis , the second point be - what might be the object 
 of her elaborate and most bitter jest ? well , I think that I could 
 guess . first , she wish to show her power , or rather to make I 
 believe that she have power of a very unusual sort . secondly , she owe 
 Umslopogaas and myself a debt for our service in the war with rezu 
 which we have be tell would be repay in this way . thirdly , I have 
 offend she in some fashion and she take her opportunity of settle 
 the score . also there be a fourth possibility - that really she 
 consider herself a moral instructress and desire , as she say , to 
 teach I a lesson by show how futile be human hope and vanity in 
 respect to the depart and their affection . 

 now I do not pretend that all this analysis of Ayesha 's motif occur 
 to I at the moment of my interview with she ; indeed , I only complete 
 it later after much careful thought , when I find it sound and good . at 
 that time , although I have inkling , I be too bewildered to form a just 
 judgment . 

 far , I be too angry and it be from this bow of my anger that 
 I loose a shaft at a venture as to some lesson which await she . 
 perhaps certain word speak by the die rezu have shape that shaft . or 
 perhaps some shadow of her advance fate fall upon I . 

 the success of the shot , however , be remarkable . evidently it pierce 
 the joint of her harness , and indeed go home to Ayesha 's heart . she 
 turn pale ; all the peach - bloom hue fade from her lovely face , her 
 great eye seem to lessen and grow dull and her cheek to fall in . 
 indeed , for a moment she look old , very old , quite an aged woman . 
 moreover she weep , for I see two big tear drop upon her white raiment 
 and I be horrify . 

 " what have happen to you ? " I say , or rather gasp . 

 " Naught , " she answer , ' save that thou hast hurt I sore . dost thou not 
 know , Allan , that it be cruel to prophesy ill to any , since such word 
 feather from Fate 's own wing and barb with venom , fester in the 
 breast and mayhap bring about their own accomplishment . most cruel of 
 all be it when with they be repay friendship and gentleness . " 

 I reflect to myself - yes , friendship of the order that be call 
 candid , and gentleness such as be hide in a cat 's velvet paw , but 
 content myself with ask how it be that she who say she be so 
 powerful , come to fear anything at all . 

 " because as I have tell thee , Allan , there be no armour that can turn 
 the spear of Destiny which , when I hear those word of thine , it seem 
 to I , I know not why , be direct by thy hand . look now on rezu who 
 think himself unconquerable and yet be slay by the black Axe - bearer 
 and whose bone to - night stay the famine of the jackal . moreover I be 
 accurse who seek to steal its servant from Heaven to be my love , and 
 how know I when and where vengeance will fall at last ? indeed , it have 
 fall already on I , who through the long age amid savage must mourn 
 widow and alone , but not all of it - oh ! I think , not all . " 

 then she begin to weep in good earnest , and watch she , for the 
 first time I understand that this glorious creature who seem to be so 
 powerful , be after all one of the most miserable of woman and as much a 
 prey to loneliness , every sort of passion and apprehensive fear , as can 
 be any common mortal . if , as she say , she have find the secret of life , 
 which of course I do not believe , at least it be obvious that she have 
 lose that of happiness . 

 she sob softly and weep and while she do so the loveliness , which 
 have leave she for a little while , return to she like light to a grey 
 and darken sky . oh , how beautiful she seem with the abundant lock 
 in disorder over her tear - stain face , how beautiful beyond imagine ! 
 my heart melt as I study she ; I could think of nothing else except 
 her surpass charm and glory . 

 " I pray you , do not weep , " I say ; " it hurt I and indeed I be sorry if 
 I say anything to give you pain . " 

 but she only shake that glorious hair far about her face and behind 
 its veil weep on . 

 " you know , Ayesha , " I continue , " you have say many hard thing to I , 
 make I the target of your bitter wit , therefore it be not strange 
 that at last I answer you . " 

 " and hast thou not deserve they , Allan ? " she murmur in soft and 
 broken tone from behind that veil of scented lock . 

 " why ? " I ask . 

 " because from the begin thou didst defy I , show in thine every 
 accent that thou heldest I a liar and one of no account in body or in 
 spirit , one not worthy of thy kind look , or of those gentle word which 
 once be my portion among man . oh ! thou hast deal hardly with I and 
 therefore perchance - I know not - I pay thee back with such poor weapon 
 as a woman hold , though all the while I like thee well . " 

 then again she fall to sob , sway herself gently to and fro in her 
 sweet sorrow . 

 it be too much . not know what else to do to comfort she , I pat 
 her ivory hand which lie upon the couch beside I , and as this appear 
 to have no effect , I kiss it , which she do not seem to resent . then 
 suddenly I remember and let it fall . 

 she toss back her hair from her face and fix her big eye on I , 
 say gently enough , look down at her hand , 

 " what ail thee , Allan ? " 

 " oh , nothing , " I answer ; " only I remember the story you tell I 
 about some man call Kallikrates . " 

 she frown . 

 " and what of Kallikrates , Allan ? be it not enough that for my sin , with 
 tear , empty longing and repentance , I must wait for he through all 
 the weary century ? must I also wear the chain of this Kallikrates , to 
 whom I owe many a debt , when he be far away ? say , didst thou see he in 
 that Heaven of thine , Allan , for there perchance he dwell ? " 

 I shake my head and try to think the thing out while all the time 
 those wonderful eye of hers seem to draw the soul from I . it seem 
 to I that she bent forward and hold up her face to I . then I lose my 
 reason and also bent forward . yes , she make I mad , and , save she , I 
 forget all . 

 swiftly she place her hand upon my heart , say , 

 " stay ! what mean thou ? dost love I , Allan ? " 

 " I think so - that be - yes , " I answer . 

 she sink back upon the couch away from I and begin to laugh very 
 softly . 

 " what word be these , " she say , " that they pass thy lip so easily and 
 so unmeant , perchance from long practice ? oh ! Allan , I be astonish . 
 art thou the same man who some few day ago tell I , and this unasked , 
 that as soon wouldst thou think of court the moon as of court I ? 
 art thou he who not a minute go swear proudly that never have his heart 
 and his lip wander from certain angel whither they should not ? and 
 now , and now - - ? " 

 I colour to my eye and rise , mutter , 

 " let I be go ! " 

 " Nay , Allan , why ? I see no mark here , " and she hold up her hand , 
 scan it carefully . " thou art too much what thou wert before , except 
 perhaps in thy soul , which be invisible , " she add with a touch of 
 malice . " nor be I angry with thee ; indeed , hadst thou not try to charm 
 away my woe , I should have think but poorly of thee as a man . there 
 let it rest and be forget - or remember as thou wilt . still , in 
 answer to thy word concern my Kallikrates , what of those adore one 
 that , accord to thy tale , but now thou didst find again in a place of 
 light ? because they seem faithless , shouldst thou be faithless also ? 
 shame on thee , thou fickle Allan ! " 

 she pause , wait for I to speak . 

 well , I could not . I have nothing to say who be utterly disgrace and 
 overwhelmed . 

 " thou think , Allan , " she go on , " that I have cast my net about 
 thee , and this be true . learn wisdom from it , Allan , and never again 
 defy a woman - that be , if she be fair , for then she be strong than 
 thou art , since Nature for its own purpose make she so . whatever I have 
 do by tear , that ancient artifice of my sex , as in other way , be for 
 thy instruction , Allan , that thou may benefit thereby . " 

 again I spring up , utter an english exclamation which I trust Ayesha 
 do not understand , and again she motion to I to be seat , say , 

 " Nay , leave I not yet since , even if the light fancy of a man that 
 come and go like the evening wind and for a breath make I dear 
 to thee , have pass away , there remain certain work which we must do 
 together . although , think of thyself alone , thou hast forget it , 
 have be pay thine own fee , one be yet due to that old wizard in a 
 far land who send thee to visit K"r and I , as indeed he have remind I 
 and within an hour . " 

 this amazing statement arouse I from my personal and painful 
 pre - occupation and cause I to stare at her blankly . 

 " again thou disbeliev I , " she say , with a little stamp . " do so once 
 more , Allan , and I swear I will bring thee to grovel on the ground and 
 kiss my foot and babble nonsense to a woman swear to another man , such 
 as never for all thy day thou shalt think of without a blush of shame . " 

 " oh ! no , " I break in hurriedly , " I assure you that you be mistaken . I 
 believe every word you have say , or say or will say ; I do in truth . " 

 " now thou liest . well , what be one more falsehood among so many ? let it 
 pass . " 

 " what , indeed ? " I echo in eager affirmation , " and as for Zikali 's 
 message - - " and I pause . 

 " it be to recall to my mind that he desire to learn whether a certain 
 great enterprise of his will succeed , the detail of which he say thou 
 canst tell I . repeat they to I . " 

 so , glad enough to get away from more dangerous topic , I narrate 
 to she as briefly and clearly as I could , the history of the old 
 witch - doctor 's feud with the Royal House of Zululand . she listen , 
 take in every word , and say , 

 " so now he yearn to know whether he will conquer or be conquer ; and 
 that be why he send , or think that he send thee on this journey , not 
 for thy sake , Allan , but for his own . I can not tell thee , for what have 
 I do to with the finish of this petty business , which to he seem so 
 large ? still , as I owe he a debt for lure the Axe - Bearer here to rid 
 I of mine enemy , and thee to lighten my solitude for an hour by the 
 burnishing of thy mind , I will try . set that bowl before I , Allan , " 
 and she point to a marble tripod on which stand a basin half full of 
 water , " and come , sit close by I and look into it , tell I what thou 
 seest . " 

 I obey her instruction and presently find myself with my head over 
 the basin , star into the water in the exact attitude of a person who 
 be about to be shampooed . 

 " this seem rather foolish , " I say abjectly , for at that moment I 
 resemble the Queen of Sheba in one particular , if in no other , namely , 
 that there be no more spirit in I . " what be I suppose to do ? I see 
 nothing at all . " 

 " look again , " she say , and as she speak the water grow clouded . then on 
 it appear a picture . I see the interior of a Kaffir hut dimly light 
 by a single candle set in the neck of a bottle . to the left of the door 
 of the hut be a bedstead and on it lie stretch a wasted and die 
 man , in whom , to my astonishment , I recognise Cetywayo , King of the 
 Zulus . at the foot of the bed stand another man - myself grow old by 
 many year , and lean over the bed , apparently whisper into the 
 die man 's ear , be a grotesque and malevolent figure which I know to 
 be that of Zikali , Opener - of - road , whose glow eye be fix upon 
 the terrified and tortured face of Cetywayo . all be as it happen 
 afterwards , as I have write down in the book call " finish . " 

 I describe what I see to Ayesha , and while I be do so the picture 
 vanish away , so that nothing remain save the clear water in the 
 marble bowl . the story do not seem to interest she ; indeed , she lean 
 back and yawn a little . 

 " Thy vision be good , Allan , " she say indifferently , " and wide also , 
 since thou canst see what pass in the sun or distant star , and 
 picture of thing to be in the water , to say nothing of other picture 
 in a woman 's eye , all within an hour . well , this savage business 
 concern I not and of it I want to know no more . yet it would appear 
 that here the old wizard who be thy friend , have the answer that he 
 desire . for there in the picture the king he hat lie die while he 
 hiss in his ear and thou dost watch the end . what more can he seek ? 
 tell he it when ye meet , and tell he also it be my will that in future 
 he should trouble I less , since I love not to be waken from my sleep 
 to listen to his half - instruct talk and savage vapouring . indeed , 
 he presume too much . and now enough of he and his dark plot . Ye have 
 your desire , all of you , and be pay in full . " 

 " over - pay , perhaps , " I say with a sigh . 

 " ah , Allan , I think that Lesson thou hast learn please thee but 
 little . well , be comfort for the thing be common . Hast never hear 
 that there be but one morsel more bitter to the taste than desire 
 deny , namely , desire fulfil ? believe I that there can be no 
 happiness for man until he attain a land where all desire be dead . " 

 " that be what the Buddha preache , Ayesha . " 

 " Aye , I remember the doctrine of that wise man well , who without doubt 
 have find a key to the gate of Truth , one key only , for , mark thou , 
 Allan , there be many . yet , man be man must know desire , since 
 without they , rob of ambition , striving , hope , fear , aye and of 
 life itself , the race must die , which be not the will of the Lord of 
 Life who need a nursery for his servant 's soul , wherein his sword of 
 Good and Ill shall shape they to his pattern . so it come about , Allan , 
 that what we think the bad be oft the good for we , and with that 
 knowledge , if we be wise , let we assuage our bitterness and wipe away 
 our tear . " 

 " I have often think that , " I say . 

 " I doubt it not , Allan , since though it have please I to make a jest 
 of thee , I know that thou hast thy share of wisdom , such little share as 
 thou canst gather in thy few short year . I know , too , that thy heart be 
 good and aspire high , and friend - well , I find in thee a friend indeed , 
 as I think not for the first time , nor certainly for the last . Mark , 
 Allan , what I say , not a lover , but a friend , which be high far . 
 for when passion die with the passing of the flesh , if there be no 
 friendship what will remain save certain memory that , mayhap , be well 
 forget ? Aye , how would those lover meet elsewhere who be never more 
 than lover ? with weariness , I hold , as they star into each other 's 
 empty soul , or even with disgust . 

 " therefore the wise will seek to turn those with whom fate mat they 
 into friend , since otherwise soon they will be lose for aye . More , if 
 they be wise still , have make they friend , they will suffer they 
 to find lover where they will . good maxim , be they not ? yet hard to 
 follow , or so , perchance , thou think they - as I do . " 



 she grow silent and brood a while , rest her chin upon her hand and 
 star down the hall . thus the aspect of her face be different from 
 any that I have see it wear . no long have it the allure of Aphrodite or 
 the majesty of Hera ; rather might it have be that of Athene herself . 
 so wise it seem , so calm , so full of experience and of foresight , that 
 almost it frighten I . 

 what be this woman 's true story , I wonder , what her real self , and 
 what the sum of she gather knowledge ? perhaps it be accident , or 
 perhaps , again , she guess my mind . at any rate her next word seem 
 in some sense an answer to these speculation . lift her eye she 
 contemplate I a while , then say , 

 " my friend , we part to meet no more in thy life 's day . often thou wilt 
 wonder concern I , as to what in truth I be , and mayhap in the end 
 thy judgment will be to write I down some false and beauteous wanderer 
 who , reject of the world or drive from it by her crime , make 
 choice to rule among savage , play the part of Oracle to that little 
 audience and tell strange tale to such few traveller as come she 
 way . perhaps , indeed , I do play this part among many other , and if so , 
 thou wilt not judge I wrongly . 

 " Allan , in the old day , mariner who have sail the northern sea , tell 
 I that therein amidst mist and storm float mountain of ice , shed from 
 dizzy cliff which be hide in darkness where no sun shin . they tell 
 I also that whereas above the ocean 's breast appear but a blue and 
 dazzling point , sink beneath it be oft a whole frozen isle , invisible to 
 man . 

 " such be I , Allan . of my be thou se but one little peak glitter 
 in light or crown with storm , as heaven 's mood sweep over it . but in 
 the depth beneath be hide its white and broad foundation , hollow by 
 the sea of time to cavern and to palace which my spirit doth inhabit . 
 so picture I , therefore , as wise and fair , but with a soul unknown , and 
 pray that in time to come thou mayest see it in its splendour . 

 " hadst thou be other than thou art , I might have show thee secret , 
 make clear to thee the parable of much that I have tell thee in 
 metaphor and vary fable , aye , and give thee great gift of power 
 and endure day of which thou know nothing . but of those who visit 
 shrine , o Allan , two thing be require , worship and faith , since 
 without these the oracle be dumb and the healing water will not flow . 

 " now I , Ayesha , be a shrine ; yet to I thou brought no worship until 
 I win it by a woman 's trick , and in I thou hast no faith . therefore for 
 thee the oracle will not speak and the water of deliverance will not 
 flow . yet I blame thee not , who art as thou wast make and the hard world 
 have shape thee . 

 " and so we part : think not I be far from thee because thou seest I not 
 in the day to come , since like that isis whose majesty alone I still 
 exercise on earth , I , whom man name Ayesha , be in all thing . I tell 
 thee that I be not one but many and , be many , be both here and 
 everywhere . when thou stand beneath the sky at night and lookest on 
 the star , remember that in they mine eye behold thee ; when the soft 
 wind of evening blow , that my breath be on thy brow and when the 
 thunder roll , that there be I rid on the lightning and rush with 
 the gale . " 

 " do you mean that you be the goddess isis ? " I ask , bewildered . 
 " because if so why do you tell I that you be but her priestess ? " 

 " have it as thou wilt , Allan . all sound do not reach thine ear ; all 
 sight be not open to thy eye and therefore thou art both half deaf 
 and blind . perchance now that her shrine be dust and her worship be 
 forgot , some spark of the spirit of that immortal Lady whose chariot be 
 the moon , linger on the earth in this woman 's shape of mine , though her 
 essence dwell afar , and perchance her other name be Nature , my mother 
 and thine , o Allan . at the least hath not the World a soul - and of that 
 soul be I not mayhap a part , aye , and thou also ? for the rest be not 
 the priest and the Divine he bow to , oft the same ? " 

 it be on my lip to answer , yes , if the priest be a knave or a 
 self - deceiver , but I do not . 

 " Farewell , Allan , and let Ayesha 's benison go with thee . safe shalt 
 thou reach thy home , for all be prepared to take thee hence , and thy 
 companion with thee . safe shalt thou live for many a year , till thy 
 time come , and then , perchance , thou wilt find those whom thou hast 
 lose more kind than they seem to be to - night . " 

 she pause awhile , then add , 

 " Hearken unto my last word ! as I have say , much that I have tell thee 
 may bear a double meaning , as be the way of parable , to be interpret 
 as thou wilt . yet one thing be true . I love a certain man , in the old 
 day name Kallikrates , to whom alone I be appoint by a divine decree , 
 and I await he here . oh , shouldest thou find he in the world without , 
 tell he that Ayesha await he and grow weary in the waiting . Nay , 
 thou wilt never find he , since even if he be bear again , by what token 
 would he be know to thee ? therefore I charge thee , keep my secret 
 well , lest Ayesha 's curse should fall on thee . while thou live tell 
 naught of I to the world thou know . dost thou swear to keep my 
 secret , Allan ? " 

 " I swear , Ayesha . " 

 " I thank thee , Allan , " she answer , and grow silent for a while . 

 at length Ayesha rise and draw herself up to the full of her height , 
 stand there majestic . next she beckon to I to come near , for I too 
 have rise and leave the dai . 

 I obey , and bend down she hold her hand over I as though in 
 blessing , then point towards the curtain which at this moment be 
 draw asunder , by whom I do not know . 

 I go and when I reach they , turn to look my last on she . 

 there she stand as I have leave she , but now her eye be fix upon the 
 ground and her face once more be brood absently as though no such 
 a man as I have ever be . it come into my mind that already she have 
 forget I , the plaything of an hour , who have serve her turn and be 
 cast aside . 



 CHAPTER XXIII 

 what UMSLOPOGAAS SAW 

 like one who dram I pass down the outer hall where stand the silent 
 guard as statue might , and out through the archway . here I pause for 
 a moment , partly to calm my mind in the familiar surrounding of the 
 night , and partly because I think that I hear someone approach I 
 through the gloom , and in such a place where I might have many enemy , 
 it be well to be prepare . 

 as it chance , however , my imaginary assailant be only Hans , who 
 emerge from some place where he have be hide ; a very disturbed and 
 frightened Hans . 

 " oh , Baas , " he say in a low and shaky whisper , " I be glad to see you 
 again , and stand on your foot , not be carry with they stick 
 straight in front of you as I expect . " 

 " why ? " I ask . 

 " oh , Baas , because of the thing that happen in that place where the 
 tall vrouw with her head tie up as though she have tooth - ache , sit 
 like a spider in a web . " 

 " well , what happen , han ? " I ask as we walk forward . 

 " this , Baas . the Doctoress talk and talk at you and Umslopogaas , and 
 as she talk , your face begin to look as though you have drunk half 
 a flask too much of the good gin , such as I wish I have some of here 
 to - night , at once wise and foolish , and full and empty , Baas . then you 
 both roll over and lie there quite dead , and whilst I be wonder 
 what I should do and how I should get out your body to bury they , the 
 Doctoress come down off her platform and bent , first over you and next 
 over Umslopogaas , whisper into the ear of both of you . then she take 
 off a snake that look as though it be make of gold with green eye , 
 which she wear about her middle beneath the long dish - cloth , Baas , and 
 hold it to your lip and next to those of Umslopogaas . " 

 " well , and what then , han ? " 

 " after that all sort of thing come about , Baas , and I feel as though 
 the whole house be travel through the air , Baas , twice as fast as 
 a bullet do from a rifle . suddenly , too , the room become fill with 
 fire so hot that it scorch I , and so bright that it make my eye 
 water , although they can look at the sun without wink . and , Baas , 
 the fire be full of spook which walk around ; yes , I see some of they 
 stand on your head and stomach , Baas , also on that of Umslopogaas , 
 whilst other go and talk to the white Doctoress as quietly as 
 though they have meet she in the market - place and want to sell her 
 egg or butter . then , Baas , suddenly I see your reverend father , the 
 Predikant , who look as though he be red - hot , as doubtless he be in 
 the Place of Fires . I think he come up to I , Baas , and say , ' get out 
 of this , Hans . this be no place for a good hottentot like you , Hans , for 
 here only the very good Christians can bear the heat for long . ' 

 " that finish I , Baas . I just answer that I hand you , the Baas 
 Allan his son , over to his care , hop that he would see that you do 
 not burn in that oven , whatever happen to Umslopogaas . then I shut my 
 eye and mouth and hold my nose , and wriggle beneath those curtain as 
 a snake do , Baas , and run down the hall and across the kraal - yard 
 and through the archway out into the night , where I have be sit 
 cool myself ever since , wait for you to be carry away , Baas . 
 and now you have come alive and with not even your hair burn off , which 
 show how wonderful must be the Great Medicine of Zikali , Baas , since 
 nothing else could have save you in that fire , no , not even your 
 reverend father , the Predikant . " 

 " han , " I say when he have finish , " you be a very wonderful fellow , 
 for you can get drunk on nothing at all . please remember , Hans , that 
 you have be drunk to - night , yes , very drunk indeed , and never dare to 
 repeat anything that you think you see while you be drunk . " 

 " yes , Baas , I understand that I be drunk and already have forget 
 everything . but , Baas , there be still a bottle full of brandy and if I 
 could have just one more tot I should forget so much well ! " 

 by now we have reach our camp and here I find Umslopogaas sit in 
 the doorway and star at the sky . 

 " good - evening to you , Umslopogaas , " I say in my most unconcerned 
 manner , and wait . 

 " good - evening , Watcher - by - Night , who I think be lose in the night , 
 since in the end the night be strong than any of its watcher . " 

 at this cryptic remark I look bewildered but say nothing . at length 
 Umslopogaas , whose nature , for a Zulu , be impulsive and lacking in the 
 ordinary native patience , ask , 

 " do you make a journey this evening , Macumazahn , and if so , what do 
 you see ? " 

 " do you have a dream this evening , Umslopogaas ? " I inquire by way of 
 answer , " and if so , what be it about ? I think that I see you shut 
 your eye in the House of the White one yonder , doubtless because you 
 be weary of talk which you do not understand . " 

 " Aye , Macumazahn , as you suppose I grow weary of that talk which flow 
 from the lip of the White Witch like the music that come from a little 
 stream babble over stone when the sun be hot , and be weary , I fall 
 asleep and dreamed . what I dream do not much matter . it be enough 
 to say that I feel as though I be throw through the air like a stone 
 cast from his sling by a boy who be set upon a stage to scare the bird 
 out of a mealie garden . far than any stone I go , aye , far 
 than a shooting star , till I reach a wonderful place . it do not much 
 matter what it be like either , and indeed I be already begin to 
 forget , but there I meet everyone I have ever know . I meet the Lion of 
 the Zulus , the Black One , the Earth - Shaker , he who have a ' sister ' name 
 Baleka , which sister , " here he drop his voice and look about he 
 suspiciously , " bear a child , which child be foster by one Mopo , 
 that Mopo who afterwards slay the black one with the Princes . now , 
 Macumazahn , I have a score to settle with this Black One , aye , even 
 though our blood be much of the same colour , I have a score to settle 
 with he , because of the slaying of this sister of his , Baleka , together 
 with the langeni tribe .     so I walk up to he and take he by the 
 head - ring and spat in his face and bid he find a spear and shield , and 
 meet I as man to man . yes , I do this . " 

      for the history of Baleka , the mother of Umslopogaas , 
  and Mopo , see the book call " Nada the Lily . " - Editor . 

 " and what happen then , Umslopogaas ? " I say , when he pause in his 
 narrative . 

 " Macumazahn , nothing happen at all . my hand seem to go through his 
 head - ring and the skull beneath , and to shut upon itself while he go 
 on talk to someone else , a captain whom I recognise , yes , one Faku , 
 whom in the day of Dingaan , the Black One 's brother , I myself slay upon 
 the Ghost - Mountain . 

 " yes , Macumazahn , and Faku be tell he the tale of how I kill he 
 and of the fight that I and my blood - brother and the wolf make , there 
 on the knee of the old witch who sit aloft on the Ghost Mountain 
 wait for the world to die , for I could understand their talk , though 
 mine go by they like the wind . 

 " Macumazahn , they pass away and there come other , Dingaan among they , 
 aye , Dingaan who also know something of the Witch - Mountain , see that 
 there Mopo and I hurl he to his death . with he also I would have have 
 word , but it be the same story , only presently he catch sight of the 
 Black One , yes , of Chaka whom he slay , stab he with the little 
 red assegai , and turn and flee , because in that land I think he still 
 fear Chaka , Macumazahn , or so the dream tell . 

 " I go on and meet other , man I have fight in my day , most of they , 
 among they be Jikiza , he who rule the People of the Axe before I whom 
 I slew with his own axe . I lift the axe and make I ready to fight 
 again , but not one of they take any note of I . there they walk about , 
 or sit drink beer or take snuff , but never a sup of the beer or a 
 pinch of the snuff do they offer I , no , not even those among they whom 
 I chance not to have kill . so I leave they and walk on , seek for 
 Mopo , my foster - father , and a certain man , my blood - brother , by whose 
 side I hunt with the wolf , yes , for they , and for another . " 

 " well , and do you find they ? " I ask . 

 " Mopo I find not , which make I think , Macumazahn , that , as once you 
 hint to I , he whom I think long dead , perchance still linger on 
 the earth . but the other I do find . . . " and he cease , brood . 

 now I know enough of Umslopogaas 's history to be aware that he have love 
 this man and woman of whom he speak more than any other on the earth . 
 the " blood - brother , " whose name he would not utter , by which he do not 
 mean that he be his brother in blood but one with whom he have make 
 a pact of eternal friendship by the interchange of blood or some such 
 ceremony , accord to report , have dwell with he on the Witch - Mountain 
 where legend tell , though this I could scarcely believe , that they have 
 hunt with a pack of hyena . there , it say also , they fight a great 
 fight with a band send out by Dingaan the king under the command of that 
 Faku whom Umslopogaas have mention , in which fight the " Blood - Brother , " 
 wielder of a famous club know as Watcher - of - the - Fords , get his death 
 after do mighty deed . there also , as I have hear , Nada the Lily , 
 whose beauty be still famous in the land , die under circumstance 
 strange as they be sad . 

 naturally , remember my own experience , or rather what seem to be 
 my experience , for already I have make up my mind that they be but 
 a dream , I be most anxious to learn whether these two who have be so 
 dear to this fierce Zulu , have recognise he . 

 " well , and what do they say to you , Umslopogaas ? " I ask . 

 " Macumazahn , they say nothing at all . Hearken ! there stand this pair , 
 or sometimes they move to and fro ; my brother , an even great man 
 than he use to be , with the wolfskin girt about he and the club , 
 Watcher - of - the - Fords , which he alone could wield , upon his shoulder , and 
 Nada , grow lovelier even than she be of old , so lovely , Macumazahn , 
 that my heart rise into my throat when I see she and stop my breath . 
 yes , Macumazahn , there they stand , or walk about arm in arm as lover 
 might , and look into each other 's eye and talk of how they have 
 know each other on the earth , for I could understand their word or 
 thought , and how it be good to be at rest together where they be . " 

 " you see , they be old friend , Umslopogaas , " I say . 

 " yes , Macumazahn , very old friend as I think . so much so that they 
 have never have a word to say of I who also be the old friend of both 
 of they . Aye , my brother , whose name I be swear not to speak , the 
 woman - hater who vow he love nothing save I and the wolf , could 
 smile into the face of Nada the Lily , Nada the bride of my youth , yet 
 never a word of I , while she could smile back and tell he how great a 
 warrior he have be and never a word of I whose deed she be will not to 
 praise , who save she in the Halakazi cave and from Dingaan ; no , never 
 a word of I although I stand there star at they . " 

 " I suppose that they do not see you , Umslopogaas . " 

 " that be so , Macumazahn ; I be sure that they do not see I , for if they 
 have they would not have be so much at ease . but I see they and as they 
 would not take heed when I shout , I run up call to my brother to 
 defend himself with his club . then , as he still take no note , I lift 
 the axe Inkosikaas , make it circle in the light , and smote with all 
 my strength . " 

 " and what happen , Umslopogaas ? " 

 " only this , Macumazahn , that the axe go straight through my brother 
 from the crown of his head to the groin , cut he in two , and he just 
 go on talk ! indeed , he do more , for stoop down he gather a 
 white lily - bloom which grow there and give it to Nada , who smell at 
 it , smile and thank he , and then thrust it into her girdle , still 
 thank he all the while . yes , she do this for I see it with my eye , 
 Macumazahn . " 

 here the Zulu 's voice break and I think that he weep , for in the faint 
 light I see he draw his long hand across his eye , whereon I take the 
 opportunity to turn my back and light a pipe . 

 " Macumazahn , " he go on presently , " it seem that madness take hold 
 of I for a long while , for I shout and rave at they , think that 
 word and rage might hurt where good steel could not , and as I do 
 so they fade away and disappear , still smile and talk , Nada 
 smell at the lily which , have a long stalk , rise up above her 
 breast . after this I rush away and suddenly meet that savage king , 
 rezu , whom I slew a few day go . at he I go with the axe , wonder 
 whether he would put up a well fight this second time . " 

 " and do he , Umslopogaas ? " 

 " Nay , but I think he feel I for he turn and flee and when I try to 
 follow I could not see he . so I run on and presently who should I find 
 but Baleka , Baleka , Chaka 's ' sister ' who - repeat it not , Macumazahn - be 
 my mother ; and , Macumazahn , she see I . yes , though I be but little 
 when last she look on I who now be great and grim , she see and know 
 I , for she float up to I and smile at I and seem to press her 
 lip upon my forehead , though I could feel no kiss , and to draw the 
 soreness out of my heart . then she , too , be go and of a sudden I fall 
 down through space , have , I suppose , step into some deep hole , or 
 perchance a well . 

 " the next thing I know be that I awake in the house of the White Witch 
 and see you sleep at my side and the Witch lean back upon her bed 
 and smile at I through the thin blanket with which she cover herself 
 up , for I could see the laughter in her eye . 

 " now I grow mad with she because of the thing that I have see in the 
 Place of Dreams , and it come into my heart that it would be well to kill 
 she that the world might be rid of she and her evil magic which can show 
 lie to man . so , be distraught , I spring up and lift the axe and 
 step towards she , whereon she rise and stand before I , laugh out 
 loud . then she say something in the tongue I can not understand , and 
 point with her finger , and lo ! next moment it be as if giant have 
 seize I and be whirl I away , till presently I find myself 
 breathless but unharmed beyond the arch and - what do it all mean , 
 Macumazahn ? " 

 " very little , as I think , Umslopogaas , except that this queen have power 
 to which those of Zikali be as nothing , and can cause vision to float 
 before the eye of man . for know that such thing as you see , I see , and 
 in they those whom I have love also seem to take no thought of I 
 but only to be concern with each other . moreover when I awake and tell 
 this to the queen who be call She - who - command , she laugh at I as 
 she do at you , and say that it be a good lesson for my pride who in 
 that pride have believe that the dead only thought of the living . but 
 I think that the lesson come from she who wish to humble we , 
 Umslopogaas , and that it be her mind that shape these vision which we 
 see . " 

 " I think so too , Macumazahn , but how she know of all the matter of your 
 life and mine , I do not know , unless perchance Zikali tell they to she , 
 speak in the night - watch as wizard can . " 

 " Nay , Umslopogaas , I believe that by her magic she draw our story out 
 of our own heart and then set they forth to we afresh , put her own 
 colour on they . also it may be that she draw something from Hans , and 
 from Goroko and the other Zulus with you , and thus pay we the fee that 
 she have promise for our service , but in lung - sick oxen and barren cow , 
 not in good cattle , Umslopogaas . " 

 he nod and say , 

 " though at the time I seem to go mad and though I know that woman be 
 false and man must follow where they lead they , never will I believe 
 that my brother , the woman - hater , and Nada be lover in the land below 
 and have there forget I , the comrade of one of they and the husband 
 of the other . moreover I hold , Macumazahn , that you and I have meet with 
 a just reward for our folly . 

 " we have seek to look through the bottom of the grave at thing which 
 the great - Great in Heaven above do not mean that man should see , and 
 now that we have see we be unhappy than we be , since such dream 
 burn themselves upon the heart as a red - hot iron burn the hide of an 
 ox , so that the hair will never grow again where it have be and the 
 hide be mar . 

 " to you , Watcher - by - Night , I say , ' content yourself with your watching 
 and whatever it may bring to you in fame and wealth . ' and to myself I 
 say , ' Holder of the Axe , content yourself with the axe and what it may 
 bring to you in fair fight and glory ' ; and to both of we I say , ' let 
 the dead sleep unawakened until we go to join they , which surely will be 
 soon enough . ' " 

 " good word , Umslopogaas , but they should have be speak ere ever we 
 set out on this journey . " 

 " not so , Macumazahn , since that journey we be fat to make to save 
 one who lie yonder , the Lady Sad - Eyes , and , as they tell I , be 
 well again . also Zikali willed it , and who can resist the will of the 
 Opener - of - road ? so it be make and we have see many strange thing 
 and win some glory and come to know how deep be the pool of our own 
 foolishness , who think that we could search out the secret of death , 
 and there have only find those of a witch 's mind and venom , reflect 
 as in water . and now have discover all these thing I wish to be 
 go from this haunted land . when do we march , Macumazahn ? " 

 " to - morrow morning , I believe , if the Lady Sad - Eyes and the other be 
 well enough , as She - who - command say they will be . " 

 " good . then I would sleep who be more weary than I be after I have 
 kill rezu in the battle on the mountain . " 

 " yes , " I answer , ' since it be hard to fight ghost than man , and 
 dream , if they be bad , be more dreadful than deed . good - night , 
 Umslopogaas . " 



 he go , and I too go to see how it fare with Inez . I find that she 
 be fast asleep but in a quite different sleep to that into which Ayesha 
 seem to have plunge she . now it be absolutely natural and look 
 at she lie there upon the bed , I think how young and healthy be 
 her appearance . the woman in charge of she also tell I that she have 
 awaken at the hour appoint by She - who - command , as it seem , 
 quite well and very hungry , although she appear to be puzzle by 
 her surrounding . after she have eat , they add that she have ' sing 
 a song , " which be probably a hymn , and pray upon her knee , " make 
 sign upon her breast " and then go quietly to bed . 

 my anxiety relieve as regard Inez , I return to my own quarter . not 
 feel inclined for slumber , however , instead of turn in I sit at 
 the doorway contemplate the beauty of the night while I watch the 
 countless firefly that seem to dust the air with spark of burn 
 gold ; also the great owl and other fowl that haunt the dark . these have 
 come out in number from their hiding - place among the ruin and sail 
 to and fro like white - wing spirit , now see and now lose in the 
 gloom . 



 while I sit thus many reflection come to I as to the extraordinary 
 nature of my experience during the past few day . have any man ever 
 know the like , I wonder ? what could they mean and what could this 
 marvellous woman Ayesha be ? be she perhaps a personification of Nature 
 itself , as indeed to some extent all woman be ? be she human at all , 
 or be she some spirit symbolise a depart people , faith and 
 civilisation , and haunt the ruin where once she reign as queen ? 
 no , the idea be ridiculous , since such being do not exist , though it 
 be impossible to doubt that she possess power beyond those of common 
 humanity , as she possess beauty and fascination great than be give 
 to any other woman . 

 of one thing I be certain , however , that the Shades I have seem 
 to visit have their being in the circle of her own imagination and 
 intelligence . there Umslopogaas be right ; we have see no dead , we have 
 only see picture and image that she draw and fashion . 

 why do she do this , I wonder . perhaps to pretend to power which she 
 do not possess , perhaps out of sheer elfish mischief , or perhaps , as 
 she assert , just to teach we a lesson and to humble we in our own 
 sight . well , if so she have succeed , for never do I feel so crush 
 and humiliate as at that moment . 

 I have seem to descend , or ascend , into Hades , and there have only see 
 thing that give I little joy and do but serve to reopen old wound . 
 then , on awake , I have be bewitch ; yes , fresh from those vision 
 of the most dear dead , I have be bewitch by the overpowering magic of 
 this woman 's loveliness and charm , and make a fool of myself , only to be 
 bring back to my sens by her triumphant mockery . oh , I be humble 
 indeed , and yet the odd thing be that I could not feel angry with she , 
 and what be more that , perhaps from vanity , I believe in her profession 
 of friendship towards myself . 

 well , the upshot of it be that , like Umslopogaas , more than anything 
 else in the world do I desire to depart from this haunt K"r and to 
 bury all its recollection in such activity as fortune might bring to 
 I . and yet , and yet it be well to have see it and to have pluck the 
 flower of such marvellous experience , nor , as I know even then , could I 
 ever inter the memory of Ayesha the wise , the perfect in all loveliness , 
 and the half - divine in power . 



 when I awake the next morning the sun be well up and after I have take 
 a swim in the old bath and dress myself , I go to see how it 
 fare with Inez . I find she sit at the door of her house look 
 extremely well and with a radiant face . she be engage in make a 
 chain of some small and beautiful blue flower of the iris tribe , of 
 which quantity grow about , that she thread together upon stalk of 
 dry grass . 

 this chain , which be just finish , she throw over her head so that 
 it hang down upon her white robe , for now she be dress like an arab 
 woman though without the veil . I watch she unseen for a little while 
 then come forward and speak to she . she start at the sight of I and 
 rise as though to run away ; then , apparently reassure by my appearance , 
 select a particularly fine flower and offer it to I . 

 I see at once that she do not know I in the least and think that she 
 have never see I before , in short , that her mind have go , exactly as 
 Ayesha have say that it would do . by way of make conversation I ask 
 she if she feel well . she reply , oh , yes , she have never feel well , 
 then add , 

 " daddy have go on a long journey and will not be back for week and 
 week . " 

 an idea come to I and I answer , 

 " yes , Inez , but I be a friend of his and he have send I to take you to 
 a place where I hope that we shall find he . only it be far away , so you 
 also must make a long journey . " 

 she clap her hand and answer , 

 " oh , that will be nice , I do so love travel , especially to find 
 Daddy , who I expect will have my proper clothe with he , not these 
 which , although they be very comfortable and pretty , seem different to 
 what I use to wear . you look very nice too and I be sure that we shall 
 be great friend , which I be glad of , for I have be rather lonely 
 since my mother go to live with the saint in Heaven , because , you 
 see , daddy be so busy and so often away , that I do not see much of he . " 

 upon my word I could have weep when I hear her prattle on thus . it be 
 so terribly unnatural , almost dreadful indeed , to listen to a full grow 
 woman who talk in the accent and express the thought of a child . 
 however , under all the circumstance I recognise that her calamity be 
 merciful , and remember that Ayesha have prophesy the recovery of her 
 mind as well as its loss and how great seem to be her power in these 
 direction , I take such comfort as I could . 

 leave she I go to see the two Zulus who have be wound and find 
 to my joy that they be now quite well and fit to travel , for here , 
 too , Ayesha 's prophecy have prove good . the other man also be 
 completely rest and anxious to be go like Umslopogaas and myself . 

 while I be eat my breakfast Hans announce the venerable Billali , 
 who with a sweeping bow inform I that he have come to inquire when we 
 should be ready to start , as he have receive order to see to all the 
 necessary arrangement . I reply - within an hour , and he depart in a 
 hurry . 

 but little after the appoint time he reappear with a number of 
 litter and their bearer , also with a bodyguard of twenty - five picked 
 man , all of whom we recognise as brave fellow who have fight well in 
 the battle . these man and the bearer old Billali harangue , tell 
 they that they be to guide , carry and escort we to the other side of 
 the great swamp , or far if we need it , and that it be the word of 
 she - who - command that if so much as the small harm come to any one 
 of we , even by accident , they should die every man of they " by the 
 hot - pot , " whatever that might be , for I be not sure of the significance 
 of this horror .     then he ask they if they understand . they reply 
 with fervour that they understand perfectly and would lead and guard we 
 as though we be their own mother . 

     for this see the book call " she . " - Editor . 

 as a matter of fact they do , and I think would have do so 
 independently of Ayesha 's command , since they look upon Umslopogaas 
 and myself almost as god and think that we could destroy they all if 
 we wish , as we have destroy Rezu and his host . 

 I ask Billali if he be not come with we , to which he reply , no , 
 as She - who - command have return to her own place and he must follow 
 she at once . I ask he again where her own place might be , to which 
 he answer vaguely that it be everywhere and he star first at the 
 heaven and then at the earth as though she inhabit most of they , 
 add that generally it be " in the Caves , " though what he mean by 
 that I do not know . then he say that he be very glad to have meet we 
 and that the sight of Umslopogaas kill Rezu be a spectacle that 
 he would remember with pleasure all his life . also he ask I for a 
 present . I give he a spare pencil that I possess in a little german 
 silver case , with which he be delighted . thus I part with old 
 Billali , of whom I shall always think with a certain affection . 

 I notice even then that he keep very clear indeed of Umslopogaas , 
 thinking , I suppose , that he might take a last opportunity to fulfil his 
 threat and introduce he to his terrible Axe . 



 CHAPTER XXIV 

 UMSLOPOGAAS wear the great medicine 

 a little while later we start , some of we in litter , include the 
 wound Zulus , who I insist should be carry for a day or two , and 
 some on foot . Inez I cause to be bear immediately in front of myself 
 so that I could keep an eye upon she . moreover I put she in the especial 
 charge of Hans , to whom fortunately she take a great fancy at once , 
 perhaps because she remember subconsciously that she know he and that 
 he have be kind to she , although when they meet after her long sleep , as 
 in my own case , she do not recognise he in the least . 

 soon , however , they be again the fast of friend , so much so that 
 within a day or two the little Hottentot practically fill the place of 
 a maid to she , attend to she every want and look after she 
 exactly as a nurse do after a child , with the result that it be quite 
 touching to see how she come to depend upon he , " her monkey , " as she 
 call he , and how fond he grow of she . 

 once , indeed , there be trouble , since hear a noise , I come up to 
 find Hans bristle with fury and threaten to shoot one of the Zulus , 
 who stupidly , or perhaps rudely , have knock against the litter of Inez 
 and nearly turn it over . for the rest , the Lady Sad - Eyes , as they 
 call she , have for the time become the Lady Glad - Eyes , since she be 
 merry as the day be long , laugh and singing and play just as a 
 healthy happy child should do . 

 only once do I see she wretched and weep . it be when a kitten which 
 she have insist on bring with she , spring out of the litter and 
 vanish into some bush where it could not be find . even when she 
 be soon console and dry her tear , when Hans explain to she in a 
 mixture of bad english and bad Portuguese , that it have only run away 
 because it wish to get back to its mother which it love , and that it 
 be cruel to separate it from its mother . 

 we make good progress and by the evening of the first day be over the 
 crest of the cliff or volcano lip that encircle the great plain of K"r , 
 and descend rapidly to a sheltered spot on the outer slope where our 
 camp be to be set for the night . 

 not very far from this place , as I think I have mention , stand , and I 
 suppose still stand , a very curious pinnacle of rock , which , doubtless 
 being of some hard sort , have remain when , hundred of thousand or 
 million of year before , the surround lava have be wash or have 
 corrode away . this rock pillar be perhaps fifty foot high and as 
 smooth as though it have be work by man ; indeed , I remember have 
 remark to Hans , or Umslopogaas - I forget which - when we pass it on 
 our inward journey , that there be a column which no monkey could climb . 

 as we go by it for the second time , the sun have already disappear 
 behind the western cliff , but a fierce ray from its sink orb , strike 
 upon a storm - cloud that hang over we , and thence be reflect in a 
 glow of angry light of which the focus or centre seem to fall upon the 
 summit of this strange and obelisk - like pinnacle of rock . 

 at the moment I be out of my litter and walk with Umslopogaas at 
 the end of the line , to make sure that no one straggle in the oncoming 
 darkness . when we have pass the column by some forty or fifty yard , 
 something cause Umslopogaas to turn and look back . he utter an 
 exclamation which make I follow his example , with the result that I see 
 a very wonderful thing . for there on the point of the pillar , like St. 
 Simeon Stylites on his famous column , glow in the sunset ray as 
 though she be on fire , stand Ayesha herself ! 

 it be a strange and in a way a glorious sight , for poise thus between 
 earth and heaven , she look like some glow angel rather than 
 a woman , stand as she seem to do upon the darkness ; since the 
 shadow , save for the faint outline , have swallow up the column that 
 support she . moreover , in the intense , rich light that be focusse 
 on she , we could see every detail of her form and face , for she be 
 unveil , and even her large and tender eye which gaze upwards emptily 
  at this moment they seem very tender , yes , and the little gold stud 
 that glitter on her sandal and the shine of the snake girdle she wear 
 about her waist . 

 we star and star till I say inconsequently , 

 " Learn , Umslopogaas , what a liar be that old Billali , who tell I that 
 she - who - command have depart from K"r to her own place . " 

 " perhaps this rock edge be her own place , if she be there at all , 
 Macumazahn . " 

 " if she be there , " I answer angrily , for my nerve be at once 
 thrill and tear . " speak not empty word , Umslopogaas , for where else 
 can she be when we see she with our eye ? " 

 " who be I that I should know the way of witch who , like the wind , 
 be able to go and come as they will ? can a woman run up a wall of rock 
 like a lizard , Macumazahn ? " 

 " Doubtless - - " and I begin some explanation which I have forget , 
 when a pass cloud , or I know not what , cut off the light so that both 
 the pinnacle and she who stand on it become invisible . a minute later 
 it return for a little while , and there be the point of the 
 needle - shape rock , but it be empty , as , save for the bird that rest 
 on it , it have be since the beginning of the world . 

 then Umslopogaas and I shake our head and pursue our way in silence . 



 this be the last that I see of the glorious Ayesha , if indeed I do see 
 she and not her ghost . yet it be true that for all the first part of the 
 journey , till we be through the great swamp in fact , from time to 
 time I be conscious , or imagine that I be conscious of her presence . 
 moreover , once other see she , or someone who might have be she . it 
 happen thus . 

 we be in the centre of the great swamp and the train guide who be 
 lead come to a place where the path fork and be uncertain 
 which road to take . finally they fix on the right - hand path and be 
 prepare to follow it together with those who bear the litter of Inez , 
 by the side of which Hans be walk as usual . 

 at this moment , as Hans tell I , the guide go down upon their face 
 and he see stand in front of they a white - veil form who point to 
 the left - hand path , and then seem to be lose in the mist . without a 
 word the guide rise and follow this left - hand path . Hans stop the 
 litter till I come up when he tell I what have happen , while Inez also 
 begin to chatter in her childish fashion about a " White Lady . " 

 I have the curiosity to walk a little way along the right - hand path which 
 they be about to take . only a few yard far on I find myself 
 sink in a float quagmire , from which I extricate myself with much 
 difficulty but just in time for as I discover afterwards by probe 
 with a pole , the water beneath the matted reed be deep . that night 
 I question the guide upon the subject , but without result , for they 
 pretend to have see nothing and not to understand what I mean . of 
 neither of these incident have I any explanation to offer , except 
 that once contract , it be as difficult to be rid of the habit of 
 hallucination as of any other . 



 it be not necessary that I should give all the detail of our long 
 homeward journey . so I will only say that have dismiss our bearer 
 and escort when we reach high ground beyond the horrible swamp , 
 keep one litter for Inez in which the Zulus carry she when she 
 be tired , we accomplish it in complete safety and have cross the 
 Zambesi , at last one evening reach the house call Strathmuir . 

 here we find the waggon and oxen quite safe and be welcome 
 rapturously by my Zulu driver and the voorlooper , who have make up 
 their mind that we be dead and be think of trekking homeward . 
 here also Thomaso greet we , though I think that , like the Zulus , he 
 be astonish at our safe return and indeed not over - pleased to see we . 
 I tell he that Captain Robertson have be kill in a fight in which 
 we have rescue his daughter from the cannibal who have carry she off 
  information which I caution he to keep to himself   but nothing else 
 that I could help . 

 also I warn the Zulus through Umslopogaas and Goroko , that no mention 
 be to be make of our adventure , either then or afterwards , since if 
 this be do the curse of the White Queen would fall on they and bring 
 they to disaster and death . I add that the name of this queen and 
 everything that be connect with she , or her doing , must be lock up 
 in their own heart . it must be like the name of dead king , not to 
 be speak . nor indeed do they ever speak it or tell the story of our 
 search , because they be too much afraid both of Ayesha whom they 
 believe to be the great of all witch , and of the axe of their 
 captain , Umslopogaas . 

 Inez go to bed that night without seem to recognise her old home , 
 to all appearance just a mindless child as she have be ever since she 
 awake from her trance at K"r . next morning , however , Hans come to tell 
 I that she be change and that she wish to speak with I . I go , 
 wonder , to find she in the sitting - room , dress in european clothe 
 which she have take from where she keep they , and once more a reasoning 
 woman . 

 " Mr. Quatermain , " she say , " I suppose that I must have be ill , for 
 the last thing I remember be go to sleep on the night after you 
 start for the hippopotamus hunt . where be my father ? do any harm come 
 to he while he be hunt ? " 

 " alas ! " I answer , lie boldly , for I fear lest the truth 
 should take away her mind again , " it do . he be trample upon by a 
 hippopotamus bull , which charge he , and kill , and we be oblige to 
 bury he where he die . " 

 she bow her head for a while and mutter some prayer for his soul , 
 then look at I keenly and say , 

 " I do not think you be tell I everything , Mr. Quatermain , but 
 something seem to say that this be because it be not well that I should 
 learn everything . " 

 " no , " I answer , " you have be ill and out of your mind for quite a 
 long while ; something give you a shock . I think that you learn of your 
 father 's death , which you have now forget , and be overcome with the 
 news . please trust to I and believe that if I keep anything back from 
 you , it be because I think it well to do so for the present . " 

 " I trust and I believe , " she answer . " now please leave I , but tell I 
 first where be those woman and their child ? " 

 " after your father die they go away , " I reply , lie once more . 

 she look at I again but make no comment . 

 then I leave she . 



 how much Inez ever learn of the true story of her adventure I do not 
 know to this hour , though my opinion be that it be but little . to 
 begin with , everyone , include Thomaso , be threaten with the dire 
 consequence if he say a word to she on the subject ; moreover in she 
 way she be a wise woman , one who know when it be good not to ask 
 question . she be aware that she have suffer from a fit of aberration 
 or madness and that during this time her father have die and certain 
 peculiar thing have happen . there she be content to leave the 
 business and she never again speak to I upon the subject . of this I be 
 very glad , as how on earth could I have explain to she about Ayesha 's 
 prophecy as to her lapse into childishness and subsequent return to a 
 normal state when she reach her home seeing that I do not understand 
 they myself ? 

 once indeed she do inquire what have become of Janee to which I answer 
 that she have die during her sickness . it be another lie , at any rate 
 by implication , but I hold that there be occasion when it be righteous 
 to lie . at least these particular falsehood have never trouble my 
 conscience . 

 here I may as well finish the story of Inez , that is , as far as I can . 
 as I have show she be always a woman of melancholy and religious 
 temperament , quality that seem to grow upon she after her return to 
 health . certainly the religion do , for continually she be engage in 
 prayer , a development with which heredity may have have something to do , 
 since after he become a reform character and grow unsettled in his 
 mind , her father follow the same road . 

 on our return to civilisation , as it chance , one of the first person 
 with whom she come in contact be a very earnest and excellent old 
 priest of her own faith . the end of this intimacy be much what might 
 have be expect . very soon Inez determine to renounce the world , 
 which I think never have any great attraction for she , and enter a 
 sisterhood of an extremely strict order in Natal , where , add to her 
 many merit , her considerable possession make she very welcome indeed . 

 once in after year I see she again when she expect before long to 
 become the Mother - Superior of her convent . I find she very cheerful and 
 she tell I that her happiness be complete . even then she do not ask 
 I the true story of what have happen to she during that period when 
 her mind be a blank . she say that she know something have happen but 
 that as she no long feel any curiosity about earthly thing , she do 
 not wish to know the detail . again I rejoice , for how could I tell 
 the true tale and expect to be believe , even by the most confiding and 
 simple - minded nun ? 

 to return to more immediate event . when we have be at Strathmuir for 
 a day or two and I think that her mind be clear enough to judge of 
 affair , I tell Inez that I must journey on to Natal , and ask she what 
 she wish to do . without a moment 's hesitation she reply that she 
 desire to come with I , as now that her father be dead nothing would 
 induce she to continue to live at Strathmuir without friend , or indeed 
 the consolation of religion . 

 then she show I a secret hiding - place cunningly devise in a sort of 
 cellar under the sitting - room floor , where her father be accustom to 
 keep the spirit of which he consume so great a quantity . in this hole 
 beneath some brick , we discover a large sum in gold store away , 
 which Robertson have always tell his daughter she would find there , in 
 the event of anything happen to he . with the money be his will 
 and security , also certain memento of his youth and some love - letter 
 together with a prayer - book that his mother have give he . 

 these valuable , of which no one know the existence except herself , we 
 remove and then make our preparation for departure . they be simple ; 
 such article of value as we could carry be pack into the waggon and 
 the good of the cattle we drive with we . the place with the store and 
 the rest of the stock be hand over to Thomaso on a half - profit 
 agreement under arrangement that he should remit the share of Inez twice 
 a year to a bank on the coast , where her father have an account . whether 
 or not he ever do this I be unable to say , but as no one wish to stop 
 at Strathmuir , I could conceive no well plan because purchaser of 
 property in that district do not exist . 

 as we trek away one fine morning I ask Inez whether she be sorry 
 to leave the place . 

 " no , " she reply with energy , " my life there have be a hell and I 
 never wish to see it again . " 



 now it be after this , on the northern border of Zululand , that 
 Zikali 's Great Medicine , as Hans call it , really play its chief 
 part , for without it I think that we should have be kill , every one 
 of we . I do not propose to set out the business in detail ; it be too 
 long and intricate . suffice it to say , therefore , that it have to do with 
 the plot of Umslopogaas against Cetywayo , which have be betray by 
 his wife Monazi and her lover Lousta , both of whom I have mention 
 early in this record . the result be that a watch for he be keep on 
 all the frontier , because it be guess that soon or later he would 
 return to Zululand ; also it have become know that he be travel in 
 my company . 

 so it come about that when my approach be report by spy , a company 
 be gather under the command of a man connect with the Royal House , 
 and by it we be surround . before attack , however , this captain 
 send man to I with the message that with I the King have no quarrel , 
 although I be travel in doubtful company , and that if I would 
 deliver over to he Umslopogaas , Chief of the People of the Axe , and his 
 follower , I might go whither I wish unharmed , take my good with 
 I . otherwise we should be attack at once and kill every one of 
 we , since it be not desire that any witness should be leave of what 
 happen to Umslopogaas . have deliver this ultimatum and decline 
 any argument as to its term , the messenger retire , say that they 
 would return for my answer within half an hour . 

 when they be out of hear Umslopogaas , who have listen to their 
 word in grim silence , turn and speak in such fashion as might have 
 be expect of he . 

 " Macumazahn , " he say , " now I come to the end of an unlucky journey , 
 though mayhap it be not so evil as it seem , since I who go out to 
 seek the dead but to be fill by yonder White Witch with the meat of 
 mocking shadow , be about to find the dead in the only way in which they 
 can be find , namely by become of their number . " 

 " it seem that this be the case with all of we , Umslopogaas . " 

 " not so , Macumazahn . that child of the King will give you safe - conduct . 
 it be I and mine whose blood he seek , as he have the right to do , since 
 it be true that I would have raise rebellion against the king , I who 
 weary of my petty lot and know that by blood his place be mine . in 
 this quarrel you have no share , though you , whose heart be as white as 
 your skin , be not minded to desert I . moreover , even if you wish 
 to fight , there be one in the waggon yonder whose life be not yours to 
 give . the Lady Sad - Eyes be as a child in your arm and she you must bear 
 to safety . " 

 now this argument be so unanswerable that I do not know what to say . 
 so I only ask what he mean to do , as escape be impossible , see 
 that we be surround on every side . 

 " make a glorious end , Macumazahn , " he say with a smile . " I will go out 
 with those who cling to I , that be with all who remain of my man , since 
 my fate must be theirs , and stand back to back on yonder mound and there 
 wait till these dog of the King come up against we . watch a while , 
 Macumazahn , and see how Umslopogaas , Bearer of the Axe , and the warrior 
 of the Axe can fight and die . " 

 now I be silent for I know not what to say . there we all stand silent , 
 while minute by minute I watch the shadow creep forward towards a 
 mark that the head messenger have make with his spear upon the ground , 
 for he have say that when it touch that mark he would return for his 
 answer . 

 in this rather dreadful silence I hear a dry little cough , which I know 
 come from the throat of Hans , and to be his method of indicate that he 
 have a remark to make . 

 " what be it ? " I ask with irritation , for it be annoying to see he 
 seat there on the ground fan himself with the remain of a hat and 
 star vacantly at the sky . 

 " nothing , Baas , or rather , only this , Baas : those hyena of Zulus be 
 even more afraid of the Great Medicine than be the cannibal up north , 
 since the maker of it be near to they , Baas . you remember , Baas , they 
 kneel to it , as it be , when we be go out of Zululand . " 

 " well , what of it , now that we be go into Zululand ? " I inquire 
 sharply . " do you want I to show it to they ? " 

 " no , Baas . what be the use , see that they be ready to let you 
 pass , also the Lady Sad - Eyes , and I and the cattle with the driver and 
  voorlooper , which be well still , and all the other good . so what 
 have you to gain by show they the medicine ? but perchance if it be 
 on the neck of Umslopogaas and he show it to they and bring it to 
 their mind that those who touch he who be in the shadow of Zikali 's 
 Great Medicine , or aught that be his , die within three moon in this 
 way or in that - well , Baas , who know ? " and again he cough drily and 
 star up at the sky . 

 I translate what Hans have say in Dutch to Umslopogaas , who remark 
 indifferently , 

 " this little yellow man be well name Light - in - darkness ; at least the 
 plan can be try - if it fail there be always time to die . " 

 so think that this be an occasion on which I might properly do so , 
 for the first time I take off the talisman which I have wear for so long , 
 and Umslopogaas put it over his head and hide it beneath his blanket . 



 a little while later the messenger return and this time the captain 
 himself come with they , as he say to greet I , for I know he slightly 
 and once we have deal together about some cattle . after a friendly chat 
 he turn to the matter of Umslopogaas , explain the case at some 
 length . I say that I quite understand his position but that it be a 
  very awkward thing to interfere with a man who be the actual wearer 
 of the Great Medicine of Zikali itself . when the captain hear this his 
 eye almost start out of his head . 

 " the Great Medicine of the Opener - of - road ! " he exclaim . " oh , now 
 I understand why this Chief of the People of the Axe be 
 unconquerable - such a wizard that no one be able to kill he . " 

 " yes , " I reply , " and you remember , do you not , that he who offend the 
 Great Medicine , or offer violence to he who wear it , die horribly 
 within three moon , he and his household and all those with he ? " 

 " I have hear it , " he say with a sickly smile . 

 " and now you be about to learn whether the tale be true , " I add 
 cheerfully . 

 then he ask to see Umslopogaas alone . 

 I do not overhear their conversation , but the end of it be that 
 Umslopogaas come and say in a loud voice so that no one could miss a 
 single word , that as resistance be useless and he do not wish I , 
 his friend , to be involve in any trouble , together with his man he have 
 agree to accompany this King 's captain to the royal kraal where he have 
 be guarantee a fair trial as to certain false charge which have be 
 bring against he . he add that the King 's captain have swear upon 
 the Great Medicine of the Opener - of - Roads to give he safe conduct and 
 attempt no mischief against he which , as be well know throughout 
 the land , be an oath that could not be break by anyone who wish to 
 continue to look upon the sun . 

 I ask the captain if these thing be so , also speak in a loud 
 voice . he reply , yes , since his order be to take Umslopogaas alive 
 if he might . he be only to kill he if he would not come . 

 afterwards , while pretend to give he certain article out of the 
 waggon , I have a few private word with Umslopogaas , who tell I that the 
 arrangement be that he should be allow to escape at night with his 
 people . 

 " be sure of this , Macumazahn , " he say , " that if I do not escape , 
 neither will that captain , since I walk at his side and keep my axe , 
 and at the first sign of treachery the axe will enter the house of that 
 thick head of his and make friend with the brain inside . 

 " Macumazahn , " he add , " we have make a strange journey together and 
 see such thing as I do not think the world have to show . also I have 
 fight and kill rezu in a mad battle of ghost and man which alone 
 be worth all the trouble of the journey . now it have come to an end as 
 everything must , and we part , but as I believe , not for always . I do 
 not think that I shall die on this journey with the captain , though I do 
 think that other will die at the end of it , " he add grimly , a saying 
 which at the time I do not understand . 

 " it come into my heart , Macumazahn , that in yonder land of witch and 
 wizard , the spirit of prophecy get catch in my moocha and creep into 
 my bowel . now that spirit tell I that we shall meet again in the 
 after - year and stand together in a great fray which will be our last , 
 as I believe that the White Witch say . or perhaps the spirit live in 
 Zikali 's Medicine which have go down my throat and come out of it in 
 word . I can not say , but I pray that it be a true spirit , since although 
 you be white and I be black and you be small and I be big , and you be 
 gentle and cunning , whereas I be fierce and as open as the blade of my 
 own axe , yet I love you as well , Macumazahn , as though we be bear 
 of the same mother and have be bring up in the same kraal . now that 
 captain wait and grow doubtful of our talk , so farewell . I will return 
 the Great Medicine to Zikali , if I live , and if I die he must send one 
 of the ghost that serve he , to fetch it from among my bone . 

 " farewell to you also , Yellow Man , " he go on to Hans , who have 
 appear , hover about like a dog that be doubtful of its welcome ; 
 " well be you name Light - in - darkness , and glad be I to have meet you , 
 who have learn from you how a snake move and strike , and how a 
 jackal think and avoid the snare . yes , farewell , for the spirit within 
 I do not tell I that you and I shall meet again . " 

 then he lift the great axe , and give I a formal salute , name I 
 " Chief and Father , Great Chief and Father , from of old "    Baba ! Koos y 
 umcool ! Koos y pagate !   , thereby acknowledge my superiority over he , 
 a thing that he have never do before , and as he do , so do Goroko 
 and the other Zulus , add to their salute many title of praise . in 
 another minute he have go with the King 's captain , to whose side I 
 note he clung lovingly , his long , thin finger play about the horn 
 handle of the axe that be name Inkosikaas and Groan - maker . 

 " I be glad we have see the last of he and his axe , Baas , " remark 
 Hans , spit reflectively . " it be very well to sleep in the same hut 
 with a tame lion sometimes , but after you have do so for many moon , 
 you begin to wonder when you will wake up at night to find he pull 
 the blanket off you and comb your hair with his claw . yes , I be 
 very glad that this half - tame lion be go , since sometimes I have 
 think that I should be oblige to poison it that we might sleep in 
 peace . you know he call I a snake , Baas , and poison be a snake 's 
 only spear . shall I tell the boy to inspan the oxen , Baas ? I think 
 the far we get from that King 's captain and his man , the more 
 comfortably shall we travel , especially now when we no long have the 
 Great Medicine to protect we . " 

 " you suggest give it to he , Hans , " I say . 

 " yes , Baas , I have rather that Umslopogaas go away with the Great 
 Medicine , than that you keep the Great Medicine and he stop with we 
 here . never travel with a traitor , Baas , at any rate in the land of the 
 king whom he wish to kill . king be very selfish people , Baas , and do 
 not like be kill , especially by someone who want to sit upon their 
 stool and to take the royal salute . no one give the royal salute to a 
 dead king , Baas , however great he be before he die , and no one think 
 the bad of a king who be a traitor before he become a king . " 



 CHAPTER XXV 

 ALLAN deliver the message 

 once more I sit in the Black Kloof face to face with old Zikali . 

 " so you have get back safely , Macumazahn , " he say . " well , I tell you 
 you would , do I not ? as for what happen to you upon the journey , let 
 it be , for now that I be old long story tire I and I daresay that 
 there be nothing wonderful about this one . where be the charm I lend 
 you ? give it back now that it have serve its turn . " 

 " I have not get it , Zikali . I pass it on to Umslopogaas of the Axe to 
 save his life from the King 's man . " 

 " oh ! yes , so you do . I have forget . here it be , " and open his robe 
 of fur , he show I the hideous little talisman hang about his 
 neck , then add , " would you like a copy of it , Macumazahn , to keep as a 
 memory ? if so , I will carve one for you . " 

 " no , " I answer , " I should not . have Umslopogaas be here ? " 

 " yes , he have be and go again , which be one of the reason why I do 
 not wish to hear your tale a second time . " 

 " where to ? the Town of the People of the Axe ? " 

 " no , Macumazahn , he come thence , or so I understand , but thither he will 
 return no more . " 

 " why not , Zikali ? " 

 " because after his fashion he make trouble there and leave some dead 
 behind he ; one Lousta , I believe , whom he have appoint to sit on his 
 stool as chief while he be away , and a woman call Monazi , who be his 
 wife , or Lousta 's wife , or the wife of both of they , I forget which . it 
 be say that have hear story of she - and the ear of jealousy be 
 long , Macumazahn - he cut off this woman 's head with a sweep of the axe 
 and make lousta fight he till he fall , which the fool do almost before 
 he have lift his shield . it serve he right who should have make sure 
 that Umslopogaas be dead before he wrap himself in his blanket and 
 take the woman to cook his porridge . " 

 " where have the Axe - bearer go ? " I ask without surprise , for this news 
 do not astonish I . 

 " I neither know nor care , Macumazahn . to become a wanderer , I suppose . 
 he will tell you the tale when you meet again in the after - day , as I 
 understand he think that you will do .     Hearken ! I have do with this 
 lion 's whelp , who be Chaka over again , but without Chaka 's wit . yes , he 
 be just a fight man with a long reach , a sure eye and the trick of 
 handle an axe , and such be of little use to I who know too many of 
 they . Thrice have I try to make he till my garden , but each time 
 he have break the hoe , although the wage I promise he be a royal 
  karos and nothing less . so enough of Umslopogaas , the Woodpecker . 
 almost I wish that you have not lend he the charm , for then the King 's 
 man would have make an end of he , who know too much and like some 
 silly boaster , may shout out the truth when his axe be aloft and he be 
 full of the beer of battle . for in battle he will live and in battle he 
 will die , Macumazahn , as perhaps you may see one day . " 

      for the tale of this meeting see the book call " Allan 
  Quatermain . " - Editor . 

 " the fate of your friend do not trouble you over much , 
 Opener - of - road , " I say with sarcasm . 

 " not at all , Macumazahn , because I have none . the only friend of the 
 old be those whom they can turn to their own end , and if these fail 
 they they find other . " 

 " I understand , Zikali , and know now what to expect from you . " 

 he laugh in his strange way and answer , 

 " Aye , and it be good that you must expect , good in the future as in the 
 past , for you , Macumazahn , who be brave in your own fashion , without 
 be a fool like Umslopogaas , and , although you know it not , like some 
 master - smith , forge my assegais out of the red ore I give you , temper 
 they in the blood of man , and yet keep your mind innocent and your hand 
 clean . friend like you be useful to such as I , Macumazahn , and must be 
 well pay in those ware that please they . " 

 the old wizard brood for a space , while I reflect upon his amazing 
 cynicism , which interest I in a way , for the extreme of unmorality be 
 as fascinating to study as the extreme of virtue and often more so . then 
 jerk up his great head , he ask suddenly , 

 " what message have the White Queen for I ? " 

 " she say that you trouble she too much at night in dream , Zikali . " 

 " Aye , but if I cease to do so , ever she desire to know the reason why , 
 for I hear she ask I in the voice of the wind , or in the twittering 
 of bat . after all , she be a woman , Macumazahn , and it must be dull 
 sitting alone from year to year with naught to stay her appetite save 
 the ash of the past and dream of the future , so dull that I wonder , 
 have once mesh you in her web , how she find the heart to let you 
 go before she have suck out your life and spirit . I suppose that have 
 make a mock of you and drain you dry , she be content to throw you 
 aside like an empty gourd . perchance , have she keep you at her side , 
 you would have be a stone in her path in day to come . perchance , 
 Macumazahn , she wait for other traveller and would welcome they , or 
 one of they alone , say nothing of a certain Watcher - by - night who have 
 serve her turn and vanish into the night . 

 " but what other message have the White Queen for the poor old savage 
 witch - doctor whose talk weary she so much in her haunted sleep ? " 

 then I tell he of the picture that Ayesha have show I in the water ; 
 the picture of a king die in a hut and of two who watch his end . 

 Zikali listen intently to every word , then break into a peal of his 
 unholy laughter . 

 " Oho - ho ! " he laugh , ' so all go well , though the road be long , 
 since whatever this White One may have show you in the fire of the 
 heaven above , she could show you nothing but truth in the water of 
 the earth below , for that be the law of our company of seer . you have 
 work well for I , Macumazahn , and you have have your fee , the fee of 
 the vision of the dead which you desire above all mortal thing . " 

 " aye , " I answer indignantly , " a fee of bitter fruit whereof the juice 
 burn and twist the mouth and the stone still stick fast within the 
 gizzard . I tell you , Zikali , that she stuff my heart with lie . " 

 " I daresay , Macumazahn , I daresay , but they be very pretty lie , be 
 they not ? and after all I be sure that there be wisdom in they , as you 
 will discover when you have think they over for a score of year . 

 " lie , lie , all be lie ! but beyond the lie stand Truth , as the White 
 Witch stand behind her veil . you draw the veil , Macumazahn , and see 
 that beneath which bring you to your knee . why , it be a parable . 
 wander on through the Valley of Lies till at last it take a turn , 
 and , glitter in the sunshine , glitter like gold , you perceive the 
 Mountain of everlasting Truth , seek of all man but find by few . 

 " lie , lie , all be lie ! yet beyond I tell you , beauteous and 
 eternal stand the Truth , Macumazahn . Oho - ho ! Oho - ho ! fare you well , 
 Watcher - by - Night , fare you well , Seeker after Truth . after the Night 
 come Dawn and after death come what - Macumazahn ? well , you will learn 
 one day , for always the veil be lift , at last , as the White Witch 
 shew you yonder , Macumazahn . " 

