KING SOLOMON 'S MINES 


 by 

 H. RIDER HAGGARD 



  DEDICATION 

  this faithful but unpretending record 
  of a remarkable adventure 
  be hereby respectfully dedicate 
  by the narrator , 

  ALLAN QUATERMAIN , 

  to all the big and little boy 
  who read it . 





 AUTHOR 's NOTE 

  the author venture to take this opportunity to thank his reader 
  for the kind reception they have accord to the successive 
  edition of this tale during the last twelve year . he hop that 
  in its present form it will fall into the hand of an even wide 
  public , and that in year to come it may continue to afford 
  amusement to those who be still young enough at heart to love a 
  story of treasure , war , and wild adventure . 

  Ditchingham , 
  11 March , 1898 . 



 POST SCRIPTUM 

  now , in 1907 , on the occasion of the issue of this edition , I can 
  only add how glad I be that my romance should continue to please 
  so many reader . imagination have be verify by fact ; the King 
  Solomon 's Mines I dream of have be discover , and be put 
  out their gold once more , and , accord to the late report , 
  their diamond also ; the Kukuanas or , rather , the Matabele , have 
  be tame by the white man 's bullet , but still there seem to be 
  many who find pleasure in these simple page . that they may 
  continue so to do , even to the third and fourth generation , or 
  perhaps long still , would , I be sure , be the hope of our old and 
  depart friend , Allan Quatermain . 

  H. Rider Haggard . 
  Ditchingham , 1907 . 



 introduction 

 now that this book be print , and about to be give to the world , a 
 sense of its shortcoming both in style and content , weigh very 
 heavily upon I . as regard the latter , I can only say that it do not 
 pretend to be a full account of everything we do and see . there be 
 many thing connect with our journey into Kukuanaland that I should 
 have like to dwell upon at length , which , as it be , have be scarcely 
 allude to . amongst these be the curious legend which I collect 
 about the chain armour that save we from destruction in the great 
 battle of Loo , and also about the " Silent Ones " or Colossi at the mouth 
 of the stalactite cave . again , if I have give way to my own impulse , I 
 should have wish to go into the difference , some of which be to my 
 mind very suggestive , between the Zulu and Kukuana dialect . also a few 
 page might have be give up profitably to the consideration of the 
 indigenous flora and fauna of Kukuanaland . 1   then there remain the 
 most interesting subject - that , as it be , have only be touch on 
 incidentally - of the magnificent system of military organisation in 
 force in that country , which , in my opinion , be much superior to that 
 inaugurate by Chaka in Zululand , inasmuch as it permit of even more 
 rapid mobilisation , and do not necessitate the employment of the 
 pernicious system of enforce celibacy . lastly , I have scarcely speak 
 of the domestic and family custom of the Kukuanas , many of which be 
 exceedingly quaint , or of their proficiency in the art of smelting and 
 weld metal . this science they carry to considerable perfection , of 
 which a good example be to be see in their " tolla , " or heavy throwing 
 knife , the back of these weapon be make of hammer iron , and the 
 edge of beautiful steel weld with great skill on to the iron frame . 
 the fact of the matter be , I think , with Sir Henry Curtis and Captain 
 Good , that the good plan would be to tell my story in a plain , 
 straightforward manner , and to leave these matter to be deal with 
 subsequently in whatever way ultimately may appear to be desirable . in 
 the meanwhile I shall , of course , be delighted to give all information 
 in my power to anybody interested in such thing . 

 and now it only remain for I to offer apology for my blunt way of 
 writing . I can but say in excuse of it that I be more accustomed to 
 handle a rifle than a pen , and can not make any pretence to the grand 
 literary flight and flourish which I see in novel - for sometimes I 
 like to read a novel . I suppose they - the flight and flourish - be 
 desirable , and I regret not be able to supply they ; but at the same 
 time I can not help think that simple thing be always the most 
 impressive , and that book be easy to understand when they be 
 write in plain language , though perhaps I have no right to set up an 
 opinion on such a matter . " a sharp spear , " run the Kukuana say , 
 " need no polish " ; and on the same principle I venture to hope that a 
 true story , however strange it may be , do not require to be deck 
 out in fine word . 

 Allan Quatermain . 


  1   I discover eight variety of antelope , with which I be 
 previously totally unacquainted , and many new specie of plant , for 
 the most part of the bulbous tribe . - A.Q. 




 content 

  I I meet SIR HENRY CURTIS 
  II the LEGEND of SOLOMON 'S MINES 
  III UMBOPA enter our service 
  IV an elephant hunt 
  v our MARCH into the desert 
  VI water ! WATER ! 
  VII SOLOMON 'S ROAD 
  VIII we enter KUKUANALAND 
  IX TWALA the king 
  x the WITCH - HUNT 
  XI we give a sign 
  XII before the BATTLE 
  xiii the ATTACK 
  XIV the last stand of the GREYS 
  XV good FALLS SICK 
  XVI the place of DEATH 
  XVII SOLOMON 'S TREASURE CHAMBER 
  xviii we ABANDON HOPE 
  XIX IGNOSI 's FAREWELL 
  XX FOUND 




 KING SOLOMON 'S MINES 


 CHAPTER I 

 I meet SIR HENRY CURTIS 

 it be a curious thing that at my age - fifty - five last birthday - I 
 should find myself take up a pen to try to write a history . I wonder 
 what sort of a history it will be when I have finish it , if ever I 
 come to the end of the trip ! I have do a good many thing in my life , 
 which seem a long one to I , owe to my have begin work so young , 
 perhaps . at an age when other boy be at school I be earn my 
 living as a trader in the old Colony . I have be trading , hunt , 
 fighting , or mining ever since . and yet it be only eight month ago 
 that I make my pile . it be a big pile now that I have get it - I do not 
 yet know how big - but I do not think I would go through the last 
 fifteen or sixteen month again for it ; no , not if I know that I should 
 come out safe at the end , pile and all . but then I be a timid man , and 
 dislike violence ; moreover , I be almost sick of adventure . I wonder why 
 I be go to write this book : it be not in my line . I be not a 
 literary man , though very devoted to the Old Testament and also to the 
 " Ingoldsby legend . " let I try to set down my reason , just to see if 
 I have any . 

 first reason : because Sir Henry Curtis and Captain John Good ask I . 

 second reason : because I be lay up here at Durban with the pain in my 
 left leg . ever since that confound lion get hold of I I have be 
 liable to this trouble , and be rather bad just now , it make I limp 
 more than ever . there must be some poison in a lion 's tooth , otherwise 
 how be it that when your wound be heal they break out again , 
 generally , mark you , at the same time of year that you get your 
 mauling ? it be a hard thing when one have shoot sixty - five lion or more , 
 as I have in the course of my life , that the sixty - sixth should chew 
 your leg like a quid of tobacco . it break the routine of the thing , 
 and put other consideration aside , I be an orderly man and do not 
 like that . this be by the way . 

 third reason : because I want my boy Harry , who be over there at the 
 hospital in London study to become a doctor , to have something to 
 amuse he and keep he out of mischief for a week or so . hospital work 
 must sometimes pall and grow rather dull , for even of cut up dead 
 body there may come satiety , and as this history will not be dull , 
 whatever else it may be , it will put a little life into thing for a 
 day or two while Harry be read of our adventure . 

 fourth reason and last : because I be go to tell the strange story 
 that I remember . it may seem a queer thing to say , especially 
 consider that there be no woman in it - except Foulata . stop , though ! 
 there be Gagaoola , if she be a woman , and not a fiend . but she be a 
 hundred at least , and therefore not marriageable , so I do not   count she . 
 at any rate , I can safely say that there be not a petticoat in the 
 whole history . 

 well , I have well come to the yoke . it be a stiff place , and I feel as 
 though I be bogge up to the axle . but , " sutjes , sutjes , " as the 
 boer say - I be sure I do not   know how they spell it - softly do it . a 
 strong team will come through at last , that is , if they be not too 
 poor . you can never do anything with poor oxen . now to make a start . 

 I , Allan Quatermain , of Durban , Natal , Gentleman , make oath and 
 say - that be how I head my deposition before the magistrate about poor 
 Khiva 's and ventv"gel 's sad death ; but somehow it do not   seem quite 
 the right way to begin a book . and , besides , be I a gentleman ? what be 
 a gentleman ? I do not   quite know , and yet I have have to do with 
 nigger - no , I will scratch out that word " nigger , " for I do not like 
 it . I have   know native who be , and so you will say , Harry , my boy , 
 before you have do with this tale , and I have know mean white with 
 lot of money and fresh out from home , too , who be not . 

 at any rate , I be bear a gentleman , though I have be nothing but a 
 poor travel trader and hunter all my life . whether I have remain 
 so I know not , you must judge of that . Heaven know I have   try . I have 
 kill many man in my time , yet I have never slay wantonly or stain 
 my hand in innocent blood , but only in self - defence . the Almighty give 
 we our life , and I suppose he mean we to defend they , at least I have 
 always act on that , and I hope it will not be bring up against I 
 when my clock strike . there , there , it be a cruel and a wicked world , 
 and for a timid man I have be mix up in a great deal of fighting . I 
 can not tell the right of it , but at any rate I have never steal , 
 though once I cheat a Kafir out of a herd of cattle . but then he have 
 do I a dirty turn , and it have trouble I ever since into the 
 bargain . 


 well , it be eighteen month or so ago since first I meet Sir Henry 
 Curtis and Captain Good . it be in this way . I have be up elephant 
 hunting beyond Bamangwato , and have meet with bad luck . everything go 
 wrong that trip , and to top up with I get the fever badly . so soon as I 
 be well enough I trek down to the Diamond Fields , sell such ivory 
 as I have , together with my wagon and oxen , discharge my hunter , and 
 take the post - cart to the cape . after spend a week in Cape Town , 
 find that they overcharge I at the hotel , and have see 
 everything there be to see , include the botanical garden , which 
 seem to I likely to confer a great benefit on the country , and the new 
 Houses of Parliament , which I expect will do nothing of the sort , I 
 determine to go back to Natal by the Dunkeld , then lie at the 
 dock wait for the Edinburgh Castle due in from England . I take my 
 berth and go aboard , and that afternoon the Natal passenger from the 
  Edinburgh Castle tranship , and we weigh and put to sea . 

 among these passenger who come on board be two who excite my 
 curiosity . one , a gentleman of about thirty , be perhaps the 
 biggest - cheste and long - armed man I ever see . he have yellow hair , a 
 thick yellow beard , clear - cut feature , and large grey eye set deep in 
 his head . I never see a finer - looking man , and somehow he remind I 
 of an ancient dane . not that I know much of ancient dane , though I 
 know a modern dane who do I out of ten pound ; but I remember once 
 see a picture of some of those gentry , who , I take it , be a kind 
 of white Zulus . they be drink out of big horn , and their long 
 hair hang down their back . as I look at my friend stand there by 
 the companion - ladder , I think that if he only let his grow a little , 
 put one of those chain shirt on to his great shoulder , and take hold 
 of a battle - axe and a horn mug , he might have sit as a model for that 
 picture . and by the way it be a curious thing , and just show how the 
 blood will out , I discover afterwards that Sir Henry Curtis , for that 
 be the big man 's name , be of danish blood . 1   he also remind I 
 strongly of somebody else , but at the time I could not remember who it 
 be . 

 the other man , who stand talk to Sir Henry , be stout and dark , and 
 of quite a different cut . I suspect at once that he be a naval 
 officer ; I do not   know why , but it be difficult to mistake a navy man . I 
 have go shoot trip with several of they in the course of my life , 
 and they have always prove themselves the good and brave and nice 
 fellow I ever meet , though sadly give , some of they , to the use of 
 profane language . I ask a page or two back , what be a gentleman ? I will 
 answer the question now : a royal naval officer be , in a general sort of 
 way , though of course there may be a black sheep among they here and 
 there . I fancy it be just the wide sea and the breath of God 's wind 
 that wash their heart and blow the bitterness out of their mind and 
 make they what man ought to be . 

 well , to return , I prove right again ; I ascertain that the dark man 
  be a naval officer , a lieutenant of thirty - one , who , after seventeen 
 year ' service , have be turn out of her Majesty 's employ with the 
 barren honour of a commander 's rank , because it be impossible that he 
 should be promote . this be what people who serve the Queen have to 
 expect : to be shoot out into the cold world to find a living just when 
 they be begin really to understand their work , and to reach the 
 prime of life . I suppose they do not   mind it , but for my own part I have 
 rather earn my bread as a hunter . one 's halfpence be as scarce 
 perhaps , but you do not get so many kick . 

 the officer 's name I find out - by refer to the passenger ' 
 list - be Good - captain John Good . he be broad , of medium height , 
 dark , stout , and rather a curious man to look at . he be so very neat 
 and so very clean - shave , and he always wear an eye - glass in his right 
 eye . it seem to grow there , for it have no string , and he never take 
 it out except to wipe it . at first I think he use to sleep in it , 
 but afterwards I find that this be a mistake . he put it in his 
 trouser pocket when he go to bed , together with his false tooth , of 
 which he have two beautiful set that , my own be none of the good , 
 have often cause I to break the tenth commandment . but I be 
 anticipate . 

 soon after we have get under way evening close in , and bring with it 
 very dirty weather . a keen breeze spring up off land , and a kind of 
 aggravate Scotch mist soon drive everybody from the deck . as for the 
  Dunkeld , she be a flat - bottomed punt , and go up light as she be , 
 she roll very heavily . it almost seem as though she would go right 
 over , but she never do . it be quite impossible to walk about , so I 
 stand near the engine where it be warm , and amuse myself with 
 watch the pendulum , which be fix opposite to I , swing slowly 
 backwards and forwards as the vessel roll , and mark the angle she 
 touch at each lurch . 

 " that pendulum 's wrong ; it be not properly weight , " suddenly say a 
 somewhat testy voice at my shoulder . look round I see the naval 
 officer whom I have notice when the passenger come aboard . 

 " indeed , now what make you think so ? " I ask . 

 " think so . I do not   think at all . why there " - as she right herself 
 after a roll - " if the ship have really roll to the degree that thing 
 point to , then she would never have roll again , that be all . but it 
 be just like these merchant skipper , they be always so confoundedly 
 careless . " 

 just then the dinner - bell rang , and I be not sorry , for it be a 
 dreadful thing to have to listen to an officer of the Royal Navy when 
 he get on to that subject . I only know one bad thing , and that be to 
 hear a merchant skipper express his candid opinion of officer of the 
 Royal Navy . 

 Captain Good and I go down to dinner together , and there we find Sir 
 Henry Curtis already seat . he and Captain Good be place together , 
 and I sit opposite to they . the captain and I soon fall into talk about 
 shooting and what not ; he ask I many question , for he be very 
 inquisitive about all sort of thing , and I answer they as well as 
 I could . presently he get on to elephant . 

 " ah , sir , " call out somebody who be sit near I , " you have   reach 
 the right man for that ; Hunter Quatermain should be able to tell you 
 about elephant if anybody can . " 

 Sir Henry , who have be sit quite quiet listen to our talk , 
 start visibly . 

 " excuse I , sir , " he say , lean forward across the table , and 
 speak in a low deep voice , a very suitable voice , it seem to I , 
 to come out of those great lung . " excuse I , sir , but be your name 
 Allan Quatermain ? " 

 I say that it be . 

 the big man make no further remark , but I hear he mutter " fortunate " 
 into his beard . 

 presently dinner come to an end , and as we be leave the saloon Sir 
 Henry stroll up and ask I if I would come into his cabin to smoke 
 a pipe . I accept , and he lead the way to the Dunkeld deck cabin , and 
 a very good cabin it be . it have be two cabin , but when Sir Garnet 
 Wolseley or one of those big swell go down the coast in the 
  Dunkeld , they knock away the partition and have never put it up 
 again . there be a sofa in the cabin , and a little table in front of 
 it . Sir Henry send the steward for a bottle of whisky , and the three of 
 we sit down and light our pipe . 

 " Mr. Quatermain , " say Sir Henry Curtis , when the man have bring the 
 whisky and light the lamp , " the year before last about this time , you 
 be , I believe , at a place call Bamangwato , to the north of the 
 Transvaal . " 

 " I be , " I answer , rather surprised that this gentleman should be so 
 well acquainted with my movement , which be not , so far as I be 
 aware , consider of general interest . 

 " you be trade there , be you not ? " put in Captain Good , in his 
 quick way . 

 " I be . I take up a wagon - load of good , make a camp outside the 
 settlement , and stop till I have sell they . " 

 Sir Henry be sit opposite to I in a Madeira chair , his arm 
 lean on the table . he now look up , fix his large grey eye full 
 upon my face . there be a curious anxiety in they , I think . 

 " do you happen to meet a man call Neville there ? " 

 " oh , yes ; he outspan alongside of I for a fortnight to rest his 
 oxen before go on to the interior . I have a letter from a lawyer a 
 few month back , ask I if I know what have become of he , which I 
 answer to the good of my ability at the time . " 

 " yes , " say Sir Henry , " your letter be forward to I . you say in it 
 that the gentleman call Neville leave Bamangwato at the beginning of 
 May in a wagon with a driver , a voorlooper , and a Kafir hunter call 
 Jim , announce his intention of trekking if possible as far as Inyati , 
 the extreme trading post in the Matabele country , where he would sell 
 his wagon and proceed on foot . you also say that he do sell his 
 wagon , for six month afterwards you see the wagon in the possession of 
 a portuguese trader , who tell you that he have buy it at Inyati from 
 a white man whose name he have forget , and that he believe the white 
 man with the native servant have start off for the interior on a 
 shooting trip . " 

 " yes . " 

 then come a pause . 

 " Mr. Quatermain , " say Sir Henry suddenly , " I suppose you know or can 
 guess nothing more of the reason of my - of Mr. Neville 's journey to 
 the northward , or as to what point that journey be direct ? " 

 " I hear something , " I answer , and stop . the subject be one which 
 I do not care to discuss . 

 Sir Henry and Captain Good look at each other , and Captain Good 
 nod . 

 " Mr. Quatermain , " go on the former , " I be go to tell you a story , 
 and ask your advice , and perhaps your assistance . the agent who 
 forward I your letter tell I that I might rely on it implicitly , as 
 you be , " he say , " well know and universally respect in Natal , and 
 especially note for your discretion . " 

 I bow and drink some whisky and water to hide my confusion , for I be 
 a modest man - and Sir Henry go on . 

 " Mr. Neville be my brother . " 

 " oh , " I say , start , for now I know of whom Sir Henry have remind 
 I when first I see he . his brother be a much small man and have a 
 dark beard , but now that I think of it , he possess eye of the same 
 shade of grey and with the same keen look in they : the feature too 
 be not unlike . 

 " he be , " go on Sir Henry , " my only and young brother , and till 
 five year ago I do not suppose that we be ever a month away from 
 each other . but just about five year ago a misfortune befall we , as 
 sometimes do happen in family . we quarrel bitterly , and I 
 behave unjustly to my brother in my anger . " 

 here Captain Good nod his head vigorously to himself . the ship give 
 a big roll just then , so that the look - glass , which be fix 
 opposite we to starboard , be for a moment nearly over our head , and 
 as I be sit with my hand in my pocket and star upwards , I 
 could see he nod like anything . 

 " as I daresay you know , " go on Sir Henry , " if a man die intestate , 
 and have no property but land , real property it be call in England , it 
 all descend to his eld son . it so happen that just at the time 
 when we quarrel our father die intestate . he have put off make his 
 will until it be too late . the result be that my brother , who have not 
 be bring up to any profession , be leave without a penny . of course 
 it would have be my duty to provide for he , but at the time the 
 quarrel between we be so bitter that I do not - to my shame I say it 
  and he sigh deeply   - offer to do anything . it be not that I grudge 
 him justice , but I wait for he to make advance , and he make none . I 
 be sorry to trouble you with all this , Mr. Quatermain , but I must to 
 make thing clear , eh , good ? " 

 " quite so , quite so , " say the captain . " Mr. Quatermain will , I be 
 sure , keep this history to himself . " 

 " of course , " say I , for I rather pride myself on my discretion , for 
 which , as Sir Henry have hear , I have some repute . 

 " well , " go on Sir Henry , " my brother have a few hundred pound to his 
 account at the time . without say anything to I he draw out this 
 paltry sum , and , have adopt the name of Neville , start off for 
 South Africa in the wild hope of make a fortune . this I learn 
 afterwards . some three year pass , and I hear nothing of my brother , 
 though I write several time . doubtless the letter never reach he . 
 but as time go on I grow more and more troubled about he . I find 
 out , Mr. Quatermain , that blood be thick than water . " 

 " that be true , " say I , think of my boy Harry . 

 " I find out , Mr. Quatermain , that I would have give half my fortune 
 to know that my brother George , the only relation I possess , be safe 
 and well , and that I should see he again . " 

 " but you never do , Curtis , " jerk out Captain Good , glance at the 
 big man 's face . 

 " well , Mr. Quatermain , as time go on I become more and more anxious 
 to find out if my brother be alive or dead , and if alive to get he 
 home again . I set enquiry on foot , and your letter be one of the 
 result . so far as it go it be satisfactory , for it show that till 
 lately George be alive , but it do not go far enough . so , to cut a 
 long story short , I make up my mind to come out and look for he 
 myself , and Captain Good be so kind as to come with I . " 

 " yes , " say the captain ; " nothing else to do , you see . turn out by my 
 Lords of the Admiralty to starve on half pay . and now perhaps , sir , you 
 will tell we what you know or have hear of the gentleman call 
 Neville . " 


  1   Mr. Quatermain 's idea about ancient Danes seem to be rather 
 confuse ; we have always understand that they be dark - haired people . 
 probably he be think of Saxons . - Editor . 



 CHAPTER II 

 the LEGEND of SOLOMON 'S MINES 

 " what be it that you hear about my brother 's journey at Bamangwato ? " 
 ask Sir Henry , as I pause to fill my pipe before reply to Captain 
 Good . 

 " I hear this , " I answer , " and I have never mention it to a soul 
 till to - day . I hear that he be start for Solomon 's Mines . " 

 " Solomon 's Mines ? " ejaculate both my hearer at once . " where be they ? " 

 " I do not   know , " I say ; " I know where they be say to be . once I see 
 the peak of the mountain that border they , but there be a hundred 
 and thirty mile of desert between I and they , and I be not aware that 
 any white man ever get across it save one . but perhaps the good thing I 
 can do be to tell you the legend of Solomon 's Mines as I know it , you 
 pass your word not to reveal anything I tell you without my 
 permission . do you agree to that ? I have my reason for ask . " 

 Sir Henry nod , and Captain Good reply , " certainly , certainly . " 

 " well , " I begin , " as you may guess , generally speak , elephant 
 hunter be a rough set of man , who do not trouble themselves with much 
 beyond the fact of life and the way of kafir . but here and there you 
 meet a man who take the trouble to collect tradition from the 
 native , and try to make out a little piece of the history of this 
 dark land . it be such a man as this who first tell I the legend of 
 Solomon 's Mines , now a matter of nearly thirty year ago . that be when 
 I be on my first elephant hunt in the Matabele country . his name be 
 Evans , and he be kill the following year , poor fellow , by a wounded 
 buffalo , and lie bury near the Zambesi Falls . I be tell Evans 
 one night , I remember , of some wonderful working I have find whilst 
 hunt koodoo and eland in what be now the Lydenburg district of the 
 Transvaal . I see they have come across these working again lately in 
 prospect for gold , but I know of they year ago . there be a great 
 wide wagon road cut out of the solid rock , and lead to the mouth of 
 the working or gallery . inside the mouth of this gallery be stack of 
 gold quartz pile up ready for roasting , which show that the worker , 
 whoever they be , must have leave in a hurry . also , about twenty pace 
 in , the gallery be build across , and a beautiful bit of masonry it be . " 

 " ' ay , ' say Evans , ' but I will spin you a queerer yarn than that ' ; and 
 he go on to tell I how he have find in the far interior a ruin 
 city , which he believe to be the Ophir of the Bible , and , by the way , 
 other more learned man have say the same long since poor Evans 's time . 
 I be , I remember , listen open - eared to all these wonder , for I be 
 young at the time , and this story of an ancient civilisation and of the 
 treasure which those old jewish or phoenician adventurer use to 
 extract from a country long since lapse into the dark barbarism 
 take a great hold upon my imagination , when suddenly he say to I , 
 ' Lad , do you ever hear of the Suliman Mountains up to the north - west 
 of the Mushakulumbwe country ? ' I tell he I never have . ' ah , well , ' he 
 say , ' that be where Solomon really have his mine , his diamond mine , I 
 mean . ' 

 " ' how do you know that ? ' I ask . 

 " ' know it ! why , what be " Suliman " but a corruption of Solomon ? 1 
 besides , an old Isanusi or witch doctoress up in the Manica country 
 tell I all about it . she say that the people who live across those 
 mountain be a " branch " of the Zulus , speak a dialect of Zulu , but 
 fine and big man even ; that there live among they great wizard , 
 who have learn their art from white man when " all the world be dark , " 
 and who have the secret of a wonderful mine of " bright stone . " ' 

 " well , I laugh at this story at the time , though it interest I , 
 for the Diamond Fields be not discover then , but poor Evans go 
 off and be kill , and for twenty year I never think any more of 
 the matter . however , just twenty year afterwards - and that be a long 
 time , gentleman ; an elephant hunter do not often live for twenty 
 year at his business - I hear something more definite about Suliman 's 
 Mountains and the country which lie beyond they . I be up beyond the 
 Manica country , at a place call Sitanda 's Kraal , and a miserable 
 place it be , for a man could get nothing to eat , and there be but 
 little game about . I have an attack of fever , and be in a bad way 
 generally , when one day a Portugee arrive with a single companion - a 
 half - breed . now I know your low - class Delagoa Portugee well . there be 
 no great devil unhung in a general way , batten as he do upon 
 human agony and flesh in the shape of slave . but this be quite a 
 different type of man to the mean fellow whom I have be accustom to 
 meet ; indeed , in appearance he remind I more of the polite dom I 
 have read about , for he be tall and thin , with large dark eye and 
 curl grey mustachio . we talk together for a while , for he could 
 speak break English , and I understand a little Portugee , and he tell 
 I that his name be José Silvestre , and that he have a place near 
 Delagoa Bay . when he go on next day with his half - breed companion , he 
 say ' good - bye , ' take off his hat quite in the old style . 

 " ' good - bye , senor , ' he say ; ' if ever we meet again I shall be the 
 rich man in the world , and I will remember you . ' I laugh a 
 little - I be too weak to laugh much - and watch he strike out for 
 the great desert to the west , wonder if he be mad , or what he 
 think he be go to find there . 

 " a week pass , and I get the well of my fever . one evening I be 
 sit on the ground in front of the little tent I have with I , 
 chew the last leg of a miserable fowl I have buy from a native for 
 a bit of cloth worth twenty fowl , and star at the hot red sun 
 sink down over the desert , when suddenly I see a figure , apparently 
 that of a European , for it wear a coat , on the slope of the rise 
 ground opposite to I , about three hundred yard away . the figure creep 
 along on its hand and knee , then it get up and stagger forward a 
 few yard on its leg , only to fall and crawl again . see that it 
 must be somebody in distress , I send one of my hunter to help he , and 
 presently he arrive , and who do you suppose it turn out to be ? " 

 " José Silvestre , of course , " say Captain Good . 

 " yes , José Silvestre , or rather his skeleton and a little skin . his 
 face be a bright yellow with bilious fever , and his large dark eye 
 stand nearly out of his head , for all the flesh have go . there be 
 nothing but yellow parchment - like skin , white hair , and the gaunt bone 
 stick up beneath . 

 " ' Water ! for the sake of Christ , water ! ' he moan and I see that his 
 lip be crack , and his tongue , which protrude between they , be 
 swollen and blackish . 

 " I give he water with a little milk in it , and he drink it in great 
 gulp , two quart or so , without stop . I would not let he have any 
 more . then the fever take he again , and he fall down and begin to rave 
 about Suliman 's Mountains , and the diamond , and the desert . I carry 
 he into the tent and do what I could for he , which be little 
 enough ; but I see how it must end . about eleven o'clock he grow 
 quieter , and I lie down for a little rest and go to sleep . at dawn I 
 wake again , and in the half light see Silvestre sit up , a strange , 
 gaunt form , and gaze out towards the desert . presently the first ray 
 of the sun shoot right across the wide plain before we till it reach 
 the faraway crest of one of the tall of the Suliman Mountains more 
 than a hundred mile away . 

 " ' there it be ! ' cry the die man in Portuguese , and point with 
 his long , thin arm , ' but I shall never reach it , never . no one will 
 ever reach it ! ' 

 " suddenly , he pause , and seem to take a resolution . ' friend , ' he 
 say , turn towards I , ' be you there ? my eye grow dark . ' 

 " ' yes , ' I say ; ' yes , lie down now , and rest . ' 

 " ' ay , ' he answer , ' I shall rest soon , I have time to rest - all 
 eternity . listen , I be die ! you have be good to I . I will give you 
 the writing . perhaps you will get there if you can live to pass the 
 desert , which have kill my poor servant and I . ' 

 " then he grope in his shirt and bring out what I think be a boer 
 tobacco pouch make of the skin of the Swart - vet - pen or sable antelope . 
 it be fasten with a little strip of hide , what we call a rimpi , and 
 this he try to loose , but could not . he hand it to I . ' untie it , ' 
 he say . I do so , and extract a bit of tear yellow linen on which 
 something be write in rusty letter . inside this rag be a paper . 

 " then he go on feebly , for he be grow weak : ' the paper have all 
 that be on the linen . it take I year to read . listen : my ancestor , a 
 political refugee from Lisbon , and one of the first Portuguese who 
 land on these shore , write that when he be die on those mountain 
 which no white foot ever press before or since . his name be José da 
 Silvestra , and he live three hundred year ago . his slave , who wait 
 for he on this side of the mountain , find he dead , and bring the 
 writing home to Delagoa . it have be in the family ever since , but none 
 have care to read it , till at last I do . and I have lose my life over 
 it , but another may succeed , and become the rich man in the 
 world - the rich man in the world . only give it to no one , senor ; go 
 yourself ! ' 

 " then he begin to wander again , and in an hour it be all over . 

 " God rest he ! he die very quietly , and I bury he deep , with big 
 boulder on his breast ; so I do not think that the jackal can have dig 
 he up . and then I come away . " 

 " ay , but the document ? " say Sir Henry , in a tone of deep interest . 

 " yes , the document ; what be in it ? " add the captain . 

 " well , gentleman , if you like I will tell you . I have never show it 
 to anybody yet except to a drunken old portuguese trader who translate 
 it for I , and have forget all about it by the next morning . the 
 original rag be at my home in Durban , together with poor Dom José 's 
 translation , but I have the English rendering in my pocket - book , and a 
 facsimile of the map , if it can be call a map . here it be . " 

  Illustration : MAP 

  " I , José da Silvestra , who be now die of hunger in the little 
  cave where no snow be on the north side of the nipple of the 
  southernmost of the two mountain I have name Sheba 's Breasts , 
  write this in the year 1590 with a cleft bone upon a remnant of my 
  raiment , my blood be the ink . if my slave should find it when 
  he come , and should bring it to Delagoa , let my friend   name 
  illegible   bring the matter to the knowledge of the king , that he 
  may send an army which , if they live through the desert and the 
  mountain , and can overcome the brave Kukuanes and their devilish 
  art , to which end many priest should be bring , will make he 
  the rich king since Solomon . with my own eye I have see the 
  countless diamond store in Solomon 's treasure chamber behind the 
  white death ; but through the treachery of Gagool the witch - finder 
  I might bring nought away , scarcely my life . let he who come 
  follow the map , and climb the snow of Sheba 's left breast till he 
  reach the nipple , on the north side of which be the great road 
  Solomon make , from whence three day ' journey to the King 's 
  Palace . let he kill Gagool . pray for my soul . farewell . 

 José da Silvestra . " 2 


 when I have finish read the above , and show the copy of the map , 
 draw by the die hand of the old Dom with his blood for ink , there 
 follow a silence of astonishment . 

 " well , " say Captain Good , " I have be round the world twice , and put 
 in at most port , but may I be hang for a mutineer if ever I hear a 
 yarn like this out of a story book , or in it either , for the matter of 
 that . " 

 " it be a queer tale , Mr. Quatermain , " say Sir Henry . " I suppose you be 
 not hoax we ? it be , I know , sometimes think allowable to take in a 
 greenhorn . " 

 " if you think that , Sir Henry , " I say , much put out , and pocket my 
 paper - for I do not like to be think one of those silly fellow who 
 consider it witty to tell lie , and who be for ever boast to 
 newcomer of extraordinary hunting adventure which never happen - " if 
 you think that , why , there be an end to the matter , " and I rise to go . 

 Sir Henry lay his large hand upon my shoulder . " sit down , Mr. 
 Quatermain , " he say , " I beg your pardon ; I see very well you do not 
 wish to deceive we , but the story sound so strange that I could 
 hardly believe it . " 

 " you shall see the original map and write when we reach Durban , " I 
 answer , somewhat mollify , for really when I come to consider the 
 question it be scarcely wonderful that he should doubt my good faith . 

 " but , " I go on , " I have not tell you about your brother . I know the 
 man Jim who be with he . he be a Bechuana by birth , a good hunter , 
 and for a native a very clever man . that morning on which Mr. Neville 
 be start I see Jim stand by my wagon and cut up tobacco on 
 the disselboom . 

 " ' Jim , ' say I , ' where be you off to this trip ? it be elephant ? ' 

 " ' no , Baas , ' he answer , ' we be after something worth much more than 
 ivory . ' 

 " ' and what might that be ? ' I say , for I be curious . ' be it gold ? ' 

 " ' no , Baas , something worth more than gold , ' and he grin . 

 " I ask no more question , for I do not like to lower my dignity by 
 seem inquisitive , but I be puzzle . presently Jim finish cut 
 his tobacco . 

 " ' baas , ' say he . 

 " I take no notice . 

 " ' baas , ' say he again . 

 " ' eh , boy , what be it ? ' I ask . 

 " ' Baas , we be go after diamond . ' 

 " ' diamond ! why , then , you be steer in the wrong direction ; you 
 should head for the Fields . ' 

 " ' Baas , have you ever hear of Suliman 's Berg ? ' - that be , Solomon 's 
 Mountains , Sir Henry . 

 " ' ay ! ' 

 " ' have you ever hear of the diamond there ? ' 

 " ' I have hear a foolish story , Jim . ' 

 " ' it be no story , Baas . once I know a woman who come from there , and 
 reach Natal with her child , she tell I : - she be dead now . ' 

 " ' your master will feed the assv"gel ' - that is , vulture - ' Jim , if he 
 try to reach Suliman 's country , and so will you if they can get any 
 picking off your worthless old carcass , ' say I. 

 " he grin . ' Mayhap , Baas . man must die ; I would rather like to try a new 
 country myself ; the elephant be get work out about here . ' 

 " ' ah ! my boy , ' I say , ' you wait till the " pale old man " get a grip of 
 your yellow throat , and then we shall hear what sort of a tune you 
 sing . ' 

 " half an hour after that I see Neville 's wagon move off . presently Jim 
 come back run . ' good - bye , Baas , ' he say . ' I do not   like to start 
 without bid you good - bye , for I daresay you be right , and that we 
 shall never trek south again . ' 

 " ' be your master really go to Suliman 's Berg , Jim , or be you lie ? ' 

 " ' no , ' he answer , ' he be go . he tell I he be bind to make his 
 fortune somehow , or try to ; so he might as well have a fling for the 
 diamond . ' 

 " ' oh ! ' I say ; ' wait a bit , Jim ; will you take a note to your master , 
 Jim , and promise not to give it to he till you reach Inyati ? ' which 
 be some hundred mile off . 

 " ' yes , Baas . ' 

 " so I take a scrap of paper , and write on it , ' let he who come . . . 
 climb the snow of Sheba 's left breast , till he reach the nipple , on 
 the north side of which be Solomon 's great road . ' 

 " ' now , Jim , ' I say , ' when you give this to your master , tell he he 
 have well follow the advice on it implicitly . you be not to give it 
 to he now , because I do not   want he back ask I question which I 
 will not   answer . now be off , you idle fellow , the wagon be nearly out of 
 sight . ' 

 " Jim take the note and go , and that be all I know about your brother , 
 Sir Henry ; but I be much afraid - " 

 " Mr. Quatermain , " say Sir Henry , " I be go to look for my brother ; I 
 be go to trace he to Suliman 's Mountains , and over they if 
 necessary , till I find he , or until I know that he be dead . will you 
 come with I ? " 

 I be , as I think I have say , a cautious man , indeed a timid one , and 
 this suggestion frighten I . it seem to I that to undertake such a 
 journey would be to go to certain death , and put other 
 consideration aside , as I have a son to support , I could not afford to 
 die just then . 

 " no , thank you , Sir Henry , I think I have rather not , " I answer . " I be 
 too old for wild - goose chase of that sort , and we should only end up 
 like my poor friend Silvestre . I have a son dependent on I , so I 
 can not afford to risk my life foolishly . " 

 both Sir Henry and Captain Good look very disappointed . 

 " Mr. Quatermain , " say the former , " I be well off , and I be bent upon 
 this business . you may put the remuneration for your service at 
 whatever figure you like in reason , and it shall be pay over to you 
 before we start . moreover , I will arrange in the event of anything 
 untoward happen to we or to you , that your son shall be suitably 
 provide for . you will see from this offer how necessary I think your 
 presence . also if by chance we should reach this place , and find 
 diamond , they shall belong to you and good equally . I do not want 
 they . but of course that promise be worth nothing at all , though the 
 same thing would apply to any ivory we might get . you may pretty well 
 make your own term with I , Mr. Quatermain ; and of course I shall pay 
 all expense . " 

 " Sir Henry , " say I , " this be the most liberal proposal I ever have , and 
 one not to be sneeze at by a poor hunter and trader . but the job be 
 the big I have come across , and I must take time to think it over . 
 I will give you my answer before we get to Durban . " 

 " very good , " answer Sir Henry . 

 then I say good - night and turn in , and dream about poor long - dead 
 Silvestre and the diamond . 


  1   Suliman be the arabic form of Solomon . - Editor . 

  2   Eu José da Silvestra que estou morrendo de fome ná pequena cova 
  onde não ha neve ao lado norte do bico mais ao sul das duas 
  montanhas que chamei scio de Sheba ; escrevo isto no anno 1590 ; 
  escrevo isto com um pedaço d'"sso n ' um farrapo de minha roupa e 
  com sangue meu por tinta ; se o meu escravo dêr com isto quando 
  venha ao levar para Lourenzo Marquez , que o meu amigo - - - - - 
  leve a cousa ao conhecimento d ' El Rei , para que possa mandar um 
  exercito que , se desfiler pelo deserto e pelas montonhas e mesmo 
  sobrepujar os bravos Kukuanes e suas arte diabolicas , pelo que se 
  deviam trazer muito padre Far o Rei mais rico depois de Salomão 
  Com meus proprio olhos vé os di amante sem conto guardados nas 
  camara do thesouro de Salomão a traz da morte branca , mas pela 
  traição de Gagoal a feiticeira achadora , nada poderia levar , e 
  apena a minha vida . quem vier siga o mappa e trepe pela neve de 
  Sheba peito    esquerda até chegar ao bica , do lado norte do qual 
  est   a grande estrada do Solomão por elle feita , donde ha tre 
  dia de jornada até ao Palacio do Rei . Mate Gagoal . reze por minha 
  alma . adeo . José da Silvestra . 



 CHAPTER III 

 umbopa enter our service 

 it take from four to five day , accord to the speed of the vessel 
 and the state of the weather , to run up from the Cape to Durban . 
 sometimes , if the landing be bad at East London , where they have not 
 yet make that wonderful harbour they talk so much of , and sink such a 
 mint of money in , a ship be delay for twenty - four hour before the 
 cargo boat can get out to take off the good . but on this occasion we 
 have not to wait at all , for there be no breaker on the Bar to speak 
 of , and the tug come out at once with the long string of ugly 
 flat - bottom boat behind they , into which the package be bundle 
 with a crash . it do not matter what they might be , over they go 
 slap - bang ; whether they contain china or woollen good they meet with 
 the same treatment . I see one case hold four dozen of champagne 
 smash all to bit , and there be the champagne fizzing and boiling 
 about in the bottom of the dirty cargo boat . it be a wicked waste , and 
 evidently so the Kafirs in the boat think , for they find a couple of 
 unbroken bottle , and knock off the neck drink the content . but 
 they have not allow for the expansion cause by the fizz in the wine , 
 and , feel themselves swell , roll about in the bottom of the 
 boat , call out that the good liquor be " tagati " - that be , 
 bewitch . I speak to they from the vessel , and tell they it be the 
 white man 's strong medicine , and that they be as good as dead man . 
 those Kafirs go to the shore in a very great fright , and I do not 
 think that they will touch champagne again . 

 well , all the time that we be steam up to Natal I be think 
 over Sir Henry Curtis 's offer . we do not speak any more on the subject 
 for a day or two , though I tell they many hunting yarn , all true one . 
 there be no need to tell lie about hunting , for so many curious thing 
 happen within the knowledge of a man whose business it be to hunt ; but 
 this be by the way . 

 at last , one beautiful evening in January , which be our hot month , 
 we steam past the coast of Natal , expect to make Durban Point by 
 sunset . it be a lovely coast all along from East London , with its red 
 sandhill and wide sweep of vivid green , dot here and there with 
 Kafir kraal , and border by a ribbon of white surf , which spout up 
 in pillar of foam where it hit the rock . but just before you come to 
 Durban there be a peculiar richness about the landscape . there be the 
 sheer kloof cut in the hill by the rush rain of century , down 
 which the river sparkle ; there be the deep green of the bush , 
 grow as God plant it , and the other green of the mealie gardens 
 and the sugar patch , while now and again a white house , smile out 
 at the placid sea , put a finish and give an air of homeliness to the 
 scene . for to my mind , however beautiful a view may be , it require the 
 presence of man to make it complete , but perhaps that be because I have 
 live so much in the wilderness , and therefore know the value of 
 civilisation , though to be sure it drive away the game . the Garden of 
 Eden , no doubt , look fair before man be , but I always think that it 
 must have be fair when Eve adorn it . 

 to return , we have miscalculate a little , and the sun be well down 
 before we drop anchor off the point , and hear the gun which tell 
 the good folk of Durban that the English Mail be in . it be too late 
 to think of get over the Bar that night , so we go comfortably to 
 dinner , after see the Mails carry off in the life - boat . 

 when we come up again the moon be out , and shin so brightly over 
 sea and shore that she almost pal the quick , large flash from the 
 lighthouse . from the shore float sweet spicy odour that always 
 remind I of hymn and missionary , and in the window of the house 
 on the Berea sparkle a hundred light . from a large brig lie near 
 also come the music of the sailor as they work at get the anchor 
 up in order to be ready for the wind . altogether it be a perfect 
 night , such a night as you sometimes get in Southern Africa , and it 
 throw a garment of peace over everybody as the moon throw a garment of 
 silver over everything . even the great bulldog , belong to a sporting 
 passenger , seem to yield to its gentle influence , and forget his 
 yearning to come to close quarter with the baboon in a cage on the 
 foc'sle , snore happily at the door of the cabin , dream no doubt 
 that he have finish he , and happy in his dream . 

 we three - that is , Sir Henry Curtis , Captain Good , and myself - go and 
 sit by the wheel , and be quiet for a while . 

 " well , Mr. Quatermain , " say Sir Henry presently , " have you be 
 think about my proposal ? " 

 " ay , " echo Captain Good , " what do you think of they , Mr. Quatermain ? 
 I hope that you be go to give we the pleasure of your company so 
 far as Solomon 's Mines , or wherever the gentleman you know as Neville 
 may have get to . " 

 I rise and knock out my pipe before I answer . I have not make up my 
 mind , and want an additional moment to decide . before the burning 
 tobacco have fall into the sea I have decide ; just that little extra 
 second do the trick . it be often the way when you have be bother 
 a long time over a thing . 

 " yes , gentleman , " I say , sit down again , " I will go , and by your 
 leave I will tell you why , and on what condition . first for the term 
 which I ask . 

 " 1 . you be to pay all expense , and any ivory or other valuable we 
 may get be to be divide between Captain Good and myself . 

 " 2 . that you give I   500 for my service on the trip before we start , 
 I undertaking to serve you faithfully till you choose to abandon the 
 enterprise , or till we succeed , or disaster overtake we . 

 " 3 . that before we trek you execute a deed agree , in the event of my 
 death or disablement , to pay my boy Harry , who be study medicine 
 over there in London , at Guy 's Hospital , a sum of   200 a year for five 
 year , by which time he ought to be able to earn a living for himself 
 if he be worth his salt . that be all , I think , and I daresay you will 
 say quite enough too . " 

 " no , " answer Sir Henry , " I accept they gladly . I be bent upon this 
 project , and would pay more than that for your help , consider the 
 peculiar and exclusive knowledge which you possess . " 

 " pity I do not ask it , then , but I will not   go back on my word . and now 
 that I have get my term I will tell you my reason for make up my 
 mind to go . first of all , gentleman , I have be observe you both for 
 the last few day , and if you will not think I impertinent I may say 
 that I like you , and believe that we shall come up well to the yoke 
 together . that be something , let I tell you , when one have a long 
 journey like this before one . 

 " and now as to the journey itself , I tell you flatly , Sir Henry and 
 Captain Good , that I do not think it probable we can come out of it 
 alive , that is , if we attempt to cross the Suliman Mountains . what be 
 the fate of the old Dom da Silvestra three hundred year ago ? what be 
 the fate of his descendant twenty year ago ? what have be your 
 brother 's fate ? I tell you frankly , gentleman , that as their fate be 
 so I believe our will be . " 

 I pause to watch the effect of my word . Captain Good look a little 
 uncomfortable , but Sir Henry 's face do not change . " we must take our 
 chance , " he say . 

 " you may perhaps wonder , " I go on , " why , if I think this , I , who be , 
 as I tell you , a timid man , should undertake such a journey . it be for 
 two reason . first I be a fatalist , and believe that my time be 
 appoint to come quite without reference to my own movement and will , 
 and that if I be to go to Suliman 's Mountains to be kill , I shall go 
 there and shall be kill . God Almighty , no doubt , know his mind about 
 I , so I need not trouble on that point . secondly , I be a poor man . for 
 nearly forty year I have hunt and trade , but I have never make more 
 than a living . well , gentleman , I do not   know if you be aware that the 
 average life of an elephant hunter from the time he take to the trade 
 be between four and five year . so you see I have live through about 
 seven generation of my class , and I should think that my time can not 
 be far off , anyway . now , if anything be to happen to I in the 
 ordinary course of business , by the time my debt be pay there would 
 be nothing leave to support my son Harry whilst he be get in the 
 way of earn a living , whereas now he will be set up for five year . 
 there be the whole affair in a nutshell . " 

 " Mr. Quatermain , " say Sir Henry , who have be give I his most 
 serious attention , " your motif for undertake an enterprise which 
 you believe can only end in disaster reflect a great deal of credit on 
 you . whether or not you be right , of course time and the event alone 
 can show . but whether you be right or wrong , I may as well tell you at 
 once that I be go through with it to the end , sweet or bitter . if we 
 be to be knock on the head , all I have to say be , that I hope we get 
 a little shooting first , eh , good ? " 

 " yes , yes , " put in the captain . " we have all three of we be 
 accustom to face danger , and to hold our life in our hand in 
 various way , so it be no good turn back now . and now I vote we go 
 down to the saloon and take an observation just for luck , you know . " 
 and we do - through the bottom of a tumbler . 

 next day we go ashore , and I put up Sir Henry and Captain Good at the 
 little shanty I have build on the Berea , and which I call my home . 
 there be only three room and a kitchen in it , and it be construct 
 of green brick with a galvanised iron roof , but there be a good garden 
 with the good loquot tree in it that I know , and some nice young 
 mango , of which I hope great thing . the curator of the botanical 
 garden give they to I . it be look after by an old hunter of mine 
 name Jack , whose thigh be so badly break by a buffalo cow in 
 Sikukunis country that he will never hunt again . but he can potter 
 about and garden , be a Griqua by birth . you will never persuade a 
 Zulu to take much interest in gardening . it be a peaceful art , and 
 peaceful art be not in his line . 

 Sir Henry and Good sleep in a tent pitch in my little grove of orange 
 tree at the end of the garden , for there be no room for they in the 
 house , and what with the smell of the bloom , and the sight of the green 
 and golden fruit - in Durban you will see all three on the tree 
 together - I daresay it be a pleasant place enough , for we have few 
 mosquito here on the Berea , unless there happen to come an unusually 
 heavy rain . 

 well , to get on - for if I do not , Harry , you will be tired of my story 
 before ever we fetch up at Suliman 's Mountains - have once make up my 
 mind to go I set about make the necessary preparation . first I 
 secure the deed from Sir Henry , provide for you , my boy , in case of 
 accident . there be some difficulty about its legal execution , as Sir 
 Henry be a stranger here , and the property to be charge be over the 
 water ; but it be ultimately get over with the help of a lawyer , who 
 charge   20 for the job - a price that I think outrageous . then I 
 pocket my cheque for   500 . 

 have pay this tribute to my bump of caution , I purchase a wagon and 
 a span of oxen on Sir Henry 's behalf , and beauty they be . it be a 
 twenty - two - foot wagon with iron axle , very strong , very light , and 
 build throughout of stink wood ; not quite a new one , have be to the 
 Diamond Fields and back , but , in my opinion , all the well for that , 
 for I could see that the wood be well seasoned . if anything be go 
 to give in a wagon , or if there be green wood in it , it will show out 
 on the first trip . this particular vehicle be what we call a 
 " half - tent " wagon , that be to say , only cover in over the after 
 twelve foot , leave all the front part free for the necessary we have 
 to carry with we . in this after part be a hide " cartle , " or bed , on 
 which two people could sleep , also rack for rifle , and many other 
 little convenience . I give   125 for it , and think that it be cheap at 
 the price . 

 then I buy a beautiful team of twenty Zulu oxen , which I have keep my 
 eye on for a year or two . sixteen oxen be the usual number for a team , 
 but I take four extra to allow for casualty . these Zulu cattle be 
 small and light , not more than half the size of the Africander oxen , 
 which be generally use for transport purpose ; but they will live 
 where the Africanders would starve , and with a moderate load can make 
 five mile a day well go , be quick and not so liable to 
 become footsore . what be more , this lot be thoroughly ' salt , " that 
 be , they have work all over South Africa , and so have become proof , 
 comparatively speak , against red water , which so frequently destroy 
 whole team of oxen when they get on to strange " veldt " or grass 
 country . as for " lung sick , " which be a dreadful form of pneumonia , 
 very prevalent in this country , they have all be inoculate against 
 it . this be do by cut a slit in the tail of an ox , and bind in 
 a piece of the diseased lung of an animal which have die of the 
 sickness . the result be that the ox sicken , take the disease in a 
 mild form , which cause its tail to drop off , as a rule about a foot 
 from the root , and become proof against future attack . it seem cruel 
 to rob the animal of his tail , especially in a country where there be 
 so many fly , but it be well to sacrifice the tail and keep the ox 
 than to lose both tail and ox , for a tail without an ox be not much 
 good , except to dust with . still it do look odd to trek along behind 
 twenty stump , where there ought to be tail . it seem as though Nature 
 make a trifling mistake , and stick the stern ornament of a lot of 
 prize bull - dog on to the rump of the oxen . 

 next come the question of provisioning and medicine , one which 
 require the most careful consideration , for what we have to do be to 
 avoid lumber the wagon , and yet to take everything absolutely 
 necessary . fortunately , it turn out that Good be a bit of a doctor , 
 have at some point in his previous career manage to pass through a 
 course of medical and surgical instruction , which he have more or less 
 keep up . he be not , of course , qualified , but he know more about it 
 than many a man who can write M.D. after his name , as we find out 
 afterwards , and he have a splendid travel medicine chest and a set 
 of instrument . whilst we be at Durban he cut off a Kafir 's big toe 
 in a way which it be a pleasure to see . but he be quite nonplussed 
 when the Kafir , who have sit stolidly watch the operation , ask he 
 to put on another , say that a " white one " would do at a pinch . 

 there remain , when these question be satisfactorily settle , two 
 far important point for consideration , namely , that of arm and 
 that of servant . as to the arm I can not do well than put down a 
 list of those which we finally decide on from among the ample store 
 that Sir Henry have bring with he from England , and those which I 
 own . I copy it from my pocket - book , where I make the entry at the 
 time . 

 " three heavy breech - load double - eight elephant gun , weigh about 
 fifteen pound each , to carry a charge of eleven drachm of black 
 powder . " two of these be by a well - know London firm , most excellent 
 maker , but I do not know by whom mine , which be not so highly 
 finish , be make . I have use it on several trip , and shoot a good 
 many elephant with it , and it have always prove a most superior 
 weapon , thoroughly to be rely on . 

 " three double-500 express , construct to stand a charge of six 
 drachm , " sweet weapon , and admirable for medium - sized game , such as 
 eland or sable antelope , or for man , especially in an open country and 
 with the semi - hollow bullet . 

 " one double no . 12 central - fire Keeper 's shot - gun , full choke both 
 barrel . " this gun prove of the great service to we afterwards in 
 shooting game for the pot . 

 " three Winchester repeating rifle   not carbine , spare gun . 

 " three single - action Colt 's revolver , with the heavy , or american 
 pattern of cartridge . " 

 this be our total armament , and doubtless the reader will observe that 
 the weapon of each class be of the same make and calibre , so that 
 the cartridge be interchangeable , a very important point . I make no 
 apology for detail it at length , as every experienced hunter will 
 know how vital a proper supply of gun and ammunition be to the success 
 of an expedition . 

 now as to the man who be to go with we . after much consultation we 
 decide that their number should be limit to five , namely , a driver , 
 a leader , and three servant . 

 the driver and leader I find without much difficulty , two Zulus , name 
 respectively Goza and Tom ; but to get the servant prove a more 
 difficult matter . it be necessary that they should be thoroughly 
 trustworthy and brave man , as in a business of this sort our life 
 might depend upon their conduct . at last I secure two , one a Hottentot 
 name Ventv"gel , or " windbird , " and one a little Zulu name Khiva , who 
 have the merit of speak English perfectly . ventv"gel I have know 
 before ; he be one of the most perfect ' spoorer , " that be , game 
 tracker , I ever have to do with , and tough as whipcord . he never seem 
 to tire . but he have one fail , so common with his race , drink . put 
 he within reach of a bottle of gin and you could not trust he . 
 however , as we be go beyond the region of grog - shop this little 
 weakness of his do not so much matter . 

 have secure these two man I look in vain for a third to suit my 
 purpose , so we determine to start without one , trust to luck to 
 find a suitable man on our way up country . but , as it happen , on the 
 evening before the day we have fix for our departure the Zulu Khiva 
 inform I that a Kafir be wait to see I . accordingly , when we 
 have do dinner , for we be at table at the time , I tell Khiva to 
 bring he in . presently a tall , handsome - look man , somewhere about 
 thirty year of age , and very light - colour for a Zulu , enter , and 
 lift his knob - stick by way of salute , squat himself down in the 
 corner on his haunch , and sit silent . I do not take any notice of 
 he for a while , for it be a great mistake to do so . if you rush into 
 conversation at once , a Zulu be apt to think you a person of little 
 dignity or consequence . I observe , however , that he be a " Keshla " or 
 ring man ; that is , he wear on his head the black ring , make of a 
 specie of gum polish with fat and work up in the hair , which be 
 usually assume by Zulus on attain a certain age or dignity . also it 
 strike I that his face be familiar to I . 

 " well , " I say at last , " what be your name ? " 

 " Umbopa , " answer the man in a slow , deep voice . 

 " I have see your face before . " 

 " yes ; the Inkoosi , the chief , my father , see my face at the place of 
 the little Hand " - that be , Isandhlwana - " on the day before the battle . " 

 then I remember . I be one of Lord Chelmsford 's guide in that 
 unlucky Zulu War , and have the good fortune to leave the camp in charge 
 of some wagon on the day before the battle . while I be wait for 
 the cattle to be inspan I fall into conversation with this man , who 
 hold some small command among the native auxiliary , and he have 
 express to I his doubt as to the safety of the camp . at the time I 
 tell he to hold his tongue , and leave such matter to wise head ; but 
 afterwards I think of his word . 

 " I remember , " I say ; " what be it you want ? " 

 " it be this , ' Macumazahn . ' " that be my Kafir name , and mean the man 
 who get up in the middle of the night , or , in vulgar English , he who 
 keep his eye open . " I hear that you go on a great expedition far into 
 the North with the white chief from over the water . be it a true word ? " 

 " it be . " 

 " I hear that you go even to the Lukanga River , a moon 's journey beyond 
 the Manica country . be this so also , ' Macumazahn ? ' " 

 " why do you ask whither we go ? what be it to you ? " I answer 
 suspiciously , for the object of our journey have be keep a dead 
 secret . 

 " it be this , o white man , that if indeed you travel so far I would 
 travel with you . " 

 there be a certain assumption of dignity in the man 's mode of speech , 
 and especially in his use of the word " o white man , " instead of " O 
 Inkosis , " or chief , which strike I . 

 " you forget yourself a little , " I say . " your word run out unaware . 
 that be not the way to speak . what be your name , and where be your 
 kraal ? tell we , that we may know with whom we have to deal . " 

 " my name be Umbopa . I be of the Zulu people , yet not of they . the house 
 of my tribe be in the far north ; it be leave behind when the Zulus come 
 down here a ' thousand year ago , ' long before Chaka reign in 
 Zululand . I have no kraal . I have wander for many year . I come from 
 the North as a child to Zululand . I be Cetewayo 's man in the 
 Nkomabakosi Regiment , serve there under the great Captain , 
 Umslopogaasi of the Axe , 1   who teach my hand to fight . afterwards I 
 run away from Zululand and come to Natal because I want to see the 
 white man 's way . next I fight against Cetewayo in the war . since then 
 I have be work in Natal . now I be tired , and would go North again . 
 here be not my place . I want no money , but I be a brave man , and be 
 worth my place and meat . I have speak . " 

 I be rather puzzle by this man and his way of speech . it be evident 
 to I from his manner that in the main he be tell the truth , but 
 somehow he seem different from the ordinary run of Zulus , and I 
 rather mistrust his offer to come without pay . be in a difficulty , 
 I translate his word to Sir Henry and Good , and ask they their 
 opinion . 

 Sir Henry tell I to ask he to stand up . Umbopa do so , at the same 
 time slip off the long military great coat which he wear , and 
 reveal himself naked except for the moocha round his centre and a 
 necklace of lion ' claw . certainly he be a magnificent - look man ; I 
 never see a fine native . stand about six foot three high he be 
 broad in proportion , and very shapely . in that light , too , his skin 
 look scarcely more than dark , except here and there where deep black 
 scar mark old assegai wound . Sir Henry walk up to he and look 
 into his proud , handsome face . 

 " they make a good pair , do not   they ? " say good ; " one as big as the 
 other . " 

 " I like your look , Mr. Umbopa , and I will take you as my servant , " 
 say Sir Henry in English . 

 Umbopa evidently understand he , for he answer in Zulu , " it be well " ; 
 and then add , with a glance at the white man 's great stature and 
 breadth , " we be man , thou and I. " 


  1   for the history of Umslopogaasi and his Axe , the reader be refer 
 to the book call " Allan Quatermain " and " Nada the Lily . " - Editor . 



 CHAPTER IV 

 an elephant hunt 

 now I do not propose to narrate at full length all the incident of our 
 long travel up to Sitanda 's Kraal , near the junction of the Lukanga and 
 Kalukwe Rivers . it be a journey of more than a thousand mile from 
 Durban , the last three hundred or so of which we have to make on foot , 
 owe to the frequent presence of the dreadful " tsetse " fly , whose bite 
 be fatal to all animal except donkey and man . 

 we leave Durban at the end of January , and it be in the second week of 
 May that we camp near Sitanda 's Kraal . our adventure on the way be 
 many and various , but as they be of the sort which befall every 
 african hunter - with one exception to be presently detailed - I shall 
 not set they down here , lest I should render this history too wearisome . 

 at Inyati , the outlying trading station in the Matabele country , of 
 which Lobengula   a great and cruel scoundrel   be king , with many 
 regret we part from our comfortable wagon . only twelve oxen remain 
 to we out of the beautiful span of twenty which I have buy at Durban . 
 one we lose from the bite of a cobra , three have perish from " poverty " 
 and the want of water , one stray , and the other three die from 
 eat the poisonous herb call " tulip . " five more sickened from this 
 cause , but we manage to cure they with dos of an infusion make by 
 boil down the tulip leave . if administer in time this be a very 
 effective antidote . 

 the wagon and the oxen we leave in the immediate charge of Goza and Tom , 
 our driver and leader , both trustworthy boy , request a worthy 
 Scotch missionary who live in this distant place to keep an eye on 
 they . then , accompany by Umbopa , Khiva , Ventv"gel , and half a dozen 
 bearer whom we hire on the spot , we start off on foot upon our wild 
 quest . I remember we be all a little silent on the occasion of this 
 departure , and I think that each of we be wonder if we should ever 
 see our wagon again ; for my part I never expect to do so . for a while 
 we tramp on in silence , till Umbopa , who be march in front , break 
 into a Zulu chant about how some brave man , tired of life and the 
 tameness of thing , start off into a vast wilderness to find new 
 thing or die , and how , lo and behold ! when they have travel far into 
 the wilderness they find that it be not a wilderness at all , but a 
 beautiful place full of young wife and fat cattle , of game to hunt and 
 enemy to kill . 

 then we all laugh and take it for a good oman . Umbopa be a cheerful 
 savage , in a dignified sort of way , when he be not suffer from one 
 of his fit of brooding , and he have a wonderful knack of keep up our 
 spirit . we all grow very fond of he . 

 and now for the one adventure to which I be go to treat myself , for 
 I do dearly love a hunting yarn . 

 about a fortnight 's march from Inyati we come across a peculiarly 
 beautiful bit of well - water woodland country . the kloof in the hill 
 be cover with dense bush , " idoro " bush as the native call it , and 
 in some place , with the " wacht - een - beche , " or " wait - a - little thorn , " 
 and there be great quantity of the lovely " machabell " tree , laden 
 with refresh yellow fruit have enormous stone . this tree be the 
 elephant 's favourite food , and there be not want sign that the 
 great brute have be about , for not only be their spoor frequent , but 
 in many place the tree be break down and even uproot . the 
 elephant be a destructive feeder . 

 one evening , after a long day 's march , we come to a spot of great 
 loveliness . at the foot of a bush - clothe hill lie a dry river - bed , in 
 which , however , be to be find pool of crystal water all trodden 
 round with the hoof - print of game . face this hill be a park - like 
 plain , where grow clump of flat - top mimosa , vary with occasional 
 glossy - leave machabell , and all round stretch the sea of pathless , 
 silent bush . 

 as we emerge into this river - bed path suddenly we start a troop of 
 tall giraffe , who gallop , or rather sail off , in their strange 
 gait , their tail screw up over their back , and their hoof rattle 
 like castanet . they be about three hundred yard from we , and 
 therefore practically out of shot , but Good , who be walk ahead , and 
 who have an express load with solid ball in his hand , could not resist 
 temptation . lift his gun , he let drive at the last , a young cow . by 
 some extraordinary chance the ball strike it full on the back of the 
 neck , shatter the spinal column , and that giraffe go rolling head 
 over heel just like a rabbit . I never see a more curious thing . 

 " curse it ! " say Good - for I be sorry to say he have a habit of use 
 strong language when excite - contract , no doubt , in the course of 
 his nautical career ; " curse it ! I have   kill he . " 

 " Ou , Bougwan , " ejaculate the Kafirs ; " ou ! ou ! " 

 they call Good " Bougwan , " or Glass Eye , because of his eye - glass . 

 " oh , ' Bougwan ! ' " re - echo Sir Henry and I , and from that day Good 's 
 reputation as a marvellous shot be establish , at any rate among the 
 Kafirs . really he be a bad one , but whenever he miss we overlook 
 it for the sake of that giraffe . 

 have set some of the " boy " to cut off the good of the giraffe 's 
 meat , we go to work to build a ' scherm " near one of the pool and 
 about a hundred yard to its right . this be do by cut a quantity 
 of thorn bush and pile they in the shape of a circular hedge . then 
 the space enclose be smooth , and dry tambouki grass , if obtainable , 
 be make into a bed in the centre , and a fire or fire light . 

 by the time the ' scherm " be finish the moon peep up , and our 
 dinner of giraffe steak and roasted marrow - bone be ready . how we 
 enjoy those marrow - bone , though it be rather a job to crack they ! I 
 know of no great luxury than giraffe marrow , unless it be elephant 's 
 heart , and we have that on the morrow . we eat our simple meal by the 
 light of the moon , pause at time to thank Good for his wonderful 
 shot ; then we begin to smoke and yarn , and a curious picture we must 
 have make squat there round the fire . I , with my short grizzle 
 hair stick up straight , and Sir Henry with his yellow lock , which 
 be get rather long , be rather a contrast , especially as I be 
 thin , and short , and dark , weigh only nine stone and a half , and Sir 
 Henry be tall , and broad , and fair , and weigh fifteen . but perhaps the 
 most curious - look of the three , take all the circumstance of the 
 case into consideration , be Captain John Good , R.N. there he sit upon 
 a leather bag , look just as though he have come in from a comfortable 
 day 's shooting in a civilised country , absolutely clean , tidy , and well 
 dress . he wear a shooting suit of brown tweed , with a hat to match , 
 and neat gaiter . as usual , he be beautifully shave , his eye - glass 
 and his false tooth appear to be in perfect order , and altogether he 
 look the neat man I ever have to do with in the wilderness . he even 
 sport a collar , of which he have a supply , make of white gutta - percha . 

 " you see , they weigh so little , " he say to I innocently , when I 
 express my astonishment at the fact ; " and I always like to turn out 
 like a gentleman . " ah ! if he could have foresee the future and the 
 raiment prepare for he . 

 well , there we three sit yarn away in the beautiful moonlight , and 
 watch the Kafirs a few yard off suck their intoxicate " daccha " 
 from a pipe of which the mouthpiece be make of the horn of an eland , 
 till one by one they roll themselves up in their blanket and go to 
 sleep by the fire , that is , all except Umbopa , who be a little apart , 
 his chin rest on his hand , and think deeply . I notice that he 
 never mix much with the other Kafirs . 

 presently , from the depth of the bush behind we , come a loud " woof , 
  woof ! " " that be a lion , " say I , and we all start up to listen . 
 hardly have we do so , when from the pool , about a hundred yard off , 
 we hear the strident trumpeting of an elephant . " Unkungunklovo ! 
  Indlovu ! " " Elephant ! elephant ! " whisper the Kafirs , and a few 
 minute afterwards we see a succession of vast shadowy form move 
 slowly from the direction of the water towards the bush . 

 up jump good , burn for slaughter , and thinking , perhaps , that it 
 be as easy to kill elephant as he have find it to shoot giraffe , but I 
 catch he by the arm and pull he down . 

 " it be no good , " I whisper , " let they go . " 

 " it seem that we be in a paradise of game . I vote we stop here a day 
 or two , and have a go at they , " say Sir Henry , presently . 

 I be rather surprised , for hitherto Sir Henry have always be for 
 push forward as fast as possible , more especially since we 
 ascertain at Inyati that about two year ago an Englishman of the 
 name of Neville have sell his wagon there , and go on up country . but 
 I suppose his hunter instinct get the well of he for a while . 

 Good jump at the idea , for he be long to have a shot at those 
 elephant ; and so , to speak the truth , do I , for it go against my 
 conscience to let such a herd as that escape without a pull at they . 

 " all right , my heartie , " say I. " I think we want a little recreation . 
 and now let us turn in , for we ought to be off by dawn , and then perhaps 
 we may catch they feed before they move on . " 

 the other agree , and we proceed to make our preparation . Good take 
 off his clothe , shake they , put his eye - glass and his false tooth into 
 his trouser pocket , and fold each article neatly , place it out of 
 the dew under a corner of his mackintosh sheet . Sir Henry and I 
 content ourselves with rougher arrangement , and soon be curl up 
 in our blanket , and drop off into the dreamless sleep that reward 
 the traveller . 

 go , go , go - what be that ? 

 suddenly , from the direction of the water come sound of violent 
 scuffling , and next instant there break upon our ear a succession of 
 the most awful roar . there be no mistake their origin ; only a lion 
 could make such a noise as that . we all jump up and look towards 
 the water , in the direction of which we see a confused mass , yellow and 
 black in colour , staggering and struggle towards we . we seize our 
 rifle , and slip on our veldtschoon , that be shoe make of 
 untanne hide , run out of the scherm . by this time the mass have fall , 
 and be roll over and over on the ground , and when we reach the 
 spot it struggle no long , but lie quite still . 

 now we see what it be . on the grass there lie a sable antelope 
 bull - the most beautiful of all the african antelope - quite dead , and 
 transfix by its great curved horn be a magnificent black - man 
 lion , also dead . evidently what have happen be this : the sable 
 antelope have come down to drink at the pool where the lion - no doubt 
 the same which we have hear - be lie in wait . while the antelope 
 drank , the lion have spring upon he , only to be receive upon the sharp 
 curve horn and transfix . once before I see a similar thing happen . 
 then the lion , unable to free himself , have tear and bite at the back 
 and neck of the bull , which , madden with fear and pain , have rush on 
 until it drop dead . 

 as soon as we have examine the beast sufficiently we call the 
 Kafirs , and between we manage to drag their carcase up to the scherm . 
 after that we go in and lie down , to wake no more till dawn . 

 with the first light we be up and make ready for the fray . we take 
 with we the three eight - bore rifle , a good supply of ammunition , and 
 our large water - bottle , fill with weak cold tea , which I have always 
 find the good stuff to shoot on . after swallow a little breakfast 
 we start , Umbopa , Khiva , and ventv"gel accompany we . the other 
 Kafirs we leave with instruction to skin the lion and the sable 
 antelope , and to cut up the latter . 

 we have no difficulty in find the broad elephant trail , which 
 Ventv"gel , after examination , pronounce to have be make by between 
 twenty and thirty elephant , most of they full - grow bull . but the 
 herd have move on some way during the night , and it be nine o'clock , 
 and already very hot , before , by the broken tree , bruised leaf and 
 bark , and smoke dropping , we know that we could not be far from they . 

 presently we catch sight of the herd , which number , as Ventv"gel have 
 say , between twenty and thirty , stand in a hollow , have finish 
 their morning meal , and flap their great ear . it be a splendid 
 sight , for they be only about two hundred yard from we . take a 
 handful of dry grass , I throw it into the air to see how the wind be ; 
 for if once they wind we I know they would be off before we could get 
 a shot . find that , if anything , it blow from the elephant to we , we 
 creep on stealthily , and thank to the cover manage to get within 
 forty yard or so of the great brute . just in front of we , and 
 broadside on , stand three splendid bull , one of they with enormous 
 tusk . I whisper to the other that I would take the middle one ; Sir 
 Henry cover the elephant to the left , and Good the bull with the big 
 tusk . 

 " now , " I whisper . 

 boom ! boom ! boom ! go the three heavy rifle , and down come Sir 
 Henry 's elephant dead as a hammer , shoot right through the heart . mine 
 fall on to its knee and I think that he be go to die , but in 
 another moment he be up and off , tear along straight past I . as he 
 go I give he the second barrel in the rib , and this bring he 
 down in good earnest . hastily slip in two fresh cartridge I run 
 close up to he , and a ball through the brain put an end to the poor 
 brute 's struggle . then I turn to see how good have fare with the big 
 bull , which I have hear scream with rage and pain as I give mine its 
 quietus . on reach the captain I find he in a great state of 
 excitement . it appear that on receive the bullet the bull have 
 turn and come straight for his assailant , who have barely time to get 
 out of his way , and then charge on blindly past he , in the direction 
 of our encampment . meanwhile the herd have crash off in wild alarm in 
 the other direction . 

 for awhile we debate whether to go after the wound bull or to follow 
 the herd , and finally decide for the latter alternative , depart , 
 think that we have see the last of those big tusk . I have often 
 wish since that we have . it be easy work to follow the elephant , for 
 they have leave a trail like a carriage road behind they , crush down 
 the thick bush in their furious flight as though it be tambouki grass . 

 but to come up with they be another matter , and we have struggle on 
 under the broiling sun for over two hour before we find they . with 
 the exception of one bull , they be stand together , and I could 
 see , from their unquiet way and the manner in which they keep lift 
 their trunk to test the air , that they be on the look - out for 
 mischief . the solitary bull stand fifty yard or so to this side of the 
 herd , over which he be evidently keep sentry , and about sixty yard 
 from we . think that he would see or wind we , and that it would 
 probably start they off again if we try to get near , especially as 
 the ground be rather open , we all aim at this bull , and at my 
 whisper word , we fire . the three shot take effect , and down he go 
 dead . again the herd start , but unfortunately for they about a 
 hundred yard far on be a nullah , or dry - out water track , with 
 steep bank , a place very much resemble the one where the Prince 
 Imperial be kill in Zululand . into this the elephant plunge , and 
 when we reach the edge we find they struggle in wild confusion to 
 get up the other bank , fill the air with their scream , and 
 trumpeting as they push one another aside in their selfish panic , 
 just like so many human being . now be our opportunity , and fire 
 away as quickly as we could load , we kill five of the poor beast , 
 and no doubt should have bag the whole herd , have they not suddenly 
 give up their attempt to climb the bank and rush headlong down the 
 nullah . we be too tired to follow they , and perhaps also a little 
 sick of slaughter , eight elephant be a pretty good bag for one day . 

 so after we be rest a little , and the Kafirs have cut out the heart 
 of two of the dead elephant for supper , we start homeward , very 
 well pleased with our day 's work , have make up our mind to send the 
 bearer on the morrow to chop away the tusk . 

 shortly after we re - pass the spot where Good have wound the 
 patriarchal bull we come across a herd of eland , but do not shoot at 
 they , as we have plenty of meat . they trot past we , and then stop 
 behind a little patch of bush about a hundred yard away , wheel 
 round to look at we . as Good be anxious to get a near view of they , 
 never have see an eland close , he hand his rifle to Umbopa , and , 
 follow by Khiva , stroll up to the patch of bush . we sit down and 
 wait for he , not sorry of the excuse for a little rest . 

 the sun be just go down in its reddest glory , and Sir Henry and I 
 be admire the lovely scene , when suddenly we hear an elephant 
 scream , and see its huge and rush form with uplifted trunk and tail 
 silhouette against the great fiery globe of the sun . next second we 
 see something else , and that be good and Khiva tear back towards we 
 with the wound bull - for it be he - charge after they . for a moment 
 we do not dare to fire - though at that distance it would have be of 
 little use if we have do so - for fear of hit one of they , and the 
 next a dreadful thing happen - Good fall a victim to his passion for 
 civilised dress . have he consent to discard his trouser and gaiter 
 like the rest of we , and to hunt in a flannel shirt and a pair of 
 veldt - schoon , it would have be all right . but as it be , his 
 trouser cumber he in that desperate race , and presently , when he 
 be about sixty yard from we , his boot , polish by the dry grass , 
 slip , and down he go on his face right in front of the elephant . 

 we give a gasp , for we know that he must die , and run as hard as we 
 could towards he . in three second it have end , but not as we 
 think . Khiva , the Zulu boy , see his master fall , and brave lad as he 
 be , turn and fling his assegai straight into the elephant 's face . it 
 stick in his trunk . 

 with a scream of pain , the brute seize the poor Zulu , hurl he to 
 the earth , and place one huge foot on to his body about the middle , 
 twin its trunk round his upper part and tear he in two . 

 we rush up mad with horror , and fire again and again , till presently 
 the elephant fall upon the fragment of the Zulu . 

 as for Good , he rise and wrung his hand over the brave man who have 
 give his life to save he , and , though I be an old hand , I feel a lump 
 grow in my throat . Umbopa stand contemplate the huge dead elephant 
 and the mangle remain of poor Khiva . 

 " ah , well , " he say presently , " he be dead , but he die like a man ! " 



 CHAPTER V 

 OUR MARCH into the desert 

 we have kill nine elephant , and it take we two day to cut out the 
 tusk , and have bring they into camp , to bury they carefully in the 
 sand under a large tree , which make a conspicuous mark for mile round . 
 it be a wonderfully fine lot of ivory . I never see a well , average 
 as it do between forty and fifty pound a tusk . the tusk of the great 
 bull that kill poor Khiva scale one hundred and seventy pound the 
 pair , so nearly as we could judge . 

 as for Khiva himself , we bury what remain of he in an ant - bear 
 hole , together with an assegai to protect himself with on his journey 
 to a well world . on the third day we march again , hop that we 
 might live to return to dig up our bury ivory , and in due course , 
 after a long and wearisome tramp , and many adventure which I have not 
 space to detail , we reach Sitanda 's Kraal , near the Lukanga River , 
 the real starting - point of our expedition . very well do I recollect our 
 arrival at that place . to the right be a scatter native settlement 
 with a few stone cattle kraal and some cultivate land down by the 
 water , where these savage grow their scanty supply of grain , and 
 beyond it stretch great tract of wave " veld " cover with tall 
 grass , over which herd of the small game be wander . to the left 
 lie the vast desert . this spot appear to be the outpost of the fertile 
 country , and it would be difficult to say to what natural cause such 
 an abrupt change in the character of the soil be due . but so it be . 

 just below our encampment flow a little stream , on the farth side 
 of which be a stony slope , the same down which , twenty year before , I 
 have see poor Silvestre creep back after his attempt to reach 
 Solomon 's Mines , and beyond that slope begin the waterless desert , 
 cover with a species of karoo shrub . 

 it be evening when we pitch our camp , and the great ball of the sun 
 be sink into the desert , send glorious ray of many - colour 
 light fly all over its vast expanse . leave Good to superintend the 
 arrangement of our little camp , I take Sir Henry with I , and walk 
 to the top of the slope opposite , we gaze across the desert . the air 
 be very clear , and far , far away I could distinguish the faint blue 
 outline , here and there cap with white , of the Suliman Berg . 

 " there , " I say , " there be the wall round Solomon 's Mines , but God 
 know if we shall ever climb it . " 

 " my brother should be there , and if he be , I shall reach he somehow , " 
 say Sir Henry , in that tone of quiet confidence which mark the man . 

 " I hope so , " I answer , and turn to go back to the camp , when I see 
 that we be not alone . behind we , also gaze earnestly towards the 
 far - off mountain , stand the great Kafir Umbopa . 

 the Zulu speak when he see that I have observe he , address Sir 
 Henry , to whom he have attach himself . 

 " be it to that land that thou wouldst journey , Incubu ? "   a native word 
 meaning , I believe , an elephant , and the name give to Sir Henry by the 
 Kafirs , he say , point towards the mountain with his broad assegai . 

 I ask he sharply what he mean by address his master in that 
 familiar way . it be very well for native to have a name for one among 
 themselves , but it be not decent that they should call a white man by 
 their heathenish appellation to his face . the Zulu laugh a quiet 
 little laugh which anger I . 

 " how dost thou know that I be not the equal of the Inkosi whom I 
 serve ? " he say . " he be of a royal house , no doubt ; one can see it in 
 his size and by his mien ; so , mayhap , be I. at least , I be as great a 
 man . be my mouth , o Macumazahn , and say my word to the Inkoos Incubu , 
 my master , for I would speak to he and to thee . " 

 I be angry with the man , for I be not accustomed to be talk to in 
 that way by Kafirs , but somehow he impress I , and besides I be 
 curious to know what he have to say . so I translate , express my 
 opinion at the same time that he be an impudent fellow , and that his 
 swagger be outrageous . 

 " yes , Umbopa , " answer Sir Henry , " I would journey there . " 

 " the desert be wide and there be no water in it , the mountain be high 
 and cover with snow , and man can not say what lie beyond they behind 
 the place where the sun set ; how shalt thou come thither , Incubu , and 
 wherefore dost thou go ? " 

 I translate again . 

 " tell he , " answer Sir Henry , " that I go because I believe that a man 
 of my blood , my brother , have go there before I , and I journey to 
 seek he . " 

 " that be so , Incubu ; a Hottentot I meet on the road tell I that a white 
 man go out into the desert two year ago towards those mountain with 
 one servant , a hunter . they never come back . " 

 " how do you know it be my brother ? " ask Sir Henry . 

 " Nay , I know not . but the Hottentot , when I ask what the white man 
 be like , say that he have thine eye and a black beard . he say , too , 
 that the name of the hunter with he be Jim ; that he be a Bechuana 
 hunter and wear clothe . " 

 " there be no doubt about it , " say I ; " I know Jim well . " 

 Sir Henry nod . " I be sure of it , " he say . " if George set his mind 
 upon a thing he generally do it . it be always so from his boyhood . if 
 he mean to cross the Suliman Berg he have cross it , unless some 
 accident overtake he , and we must look for he on the other side . " 

 Umbopa understand English , though he rarely speak it . 

 " it be a far journey , Incubu , " he put in , and I translate his remark . 

 " yes , " answer Sir Henry , " it be far . but there be no journey upon 
 this earth that a man may not make if he set his heart to it . there be 
 nothing , Umbopa , that he can not do , there be no mountain he may not 
 climb , there be no desert he can not cross , save a mountain and a 
 desert of which you be spar the knowledge , if love lead he and he 
 hold his life in his hand count it as nothing , ready to keep it or 
 lose it as Heaven above may order . " 

 I translate . 

 " great word , my father , " answer the Zulu - I always call he a 
 Zulu , though he be not really one - " great swell word fit to fill 
 the mouth of a man . thou art right , my father Incubu . listen ! what be 
 life ? it be a feather , it be the seed of the grass , blow hither and 
 thither , sometimes multiply itself and die in the act , sometimes 
 carry away into the heaven . but if that seed be good and heavy it 
 may perchance travel a little way on the road it will . it be well to 
 try and journey one 's road and to fight with the air . man must die . at 
 the bad he can but die a little soon . I will go with thee across 
 the desert and over the mountain , unless perchance I fall to the 
 ground on the way , my father . " 

 he pause awhile , and then go on with one of those strange burst of 
 rhetorical eloquence that Zulus sometimes indulge in , which to my mind , 
 full though they be of vain repetition , show that the race be by no 
 mean devoid of poetic instinct and of intellectual power . 

 " what be life ? tell I , o white man , who be wise , who know the secret 
 of the world , and of the world of star , and the world that lie above 
 and around the star ; who flash your word from afar without a voice ; 
 tell I , white man , the secret of our life - whither it go and whence 
 it come ! 

 " you can not answer I ; you know not . listen , I will answer . out of the 
 dark we come , into the dark we go . like a storm - drive bird at night we 
 fly out of the Nowhere ; for a moment our wing be see in the light of 
 the fire , and , lo ! we be go again into the Nowhere . life be nothing . 
 life be all . it be the Hand with which we hold off death . it be the 
 glow - worm that shin in the night - time and be black in the morning ; it 
 be the white breath of the oxen in winter ; it be the little shadow that 
 run across the grass and lose itself at sunset . " 

 " you be a strange man , " say Sir Henry , when he have cease . 

 Umbopa laugh . " it seem to I that we be much alike , Incubu . perhaps 
  I seek a brother over the mountain . " 

 I look at he suspiciously . " what dost thou mean ? " I ask ; " what 
 dost thou know of those mountain ? " 

 " a little ; a very little . there be a strange land yonder , a land of 
 witchcraft and beautiful thing ; a land of brave people , and of tree , 
 and stream , and snowy peak , and of a great white road . I have hear 
 of it . but what be the good of talk ? it grow dark . those who live 
 to see will see . " 

 again I look at he doubtfully . the man know too much . 

 " you need not fear I , Macumazahn , " he say , interpret my look . " I 
 dig no hole for you to fall in . I make no plot . if ever we cross 
 those mountain behind the sun I will tell what I know . but Death sit 
 upon they . be wise and turn back . go and hunt elephant , my master . I 
 have speak . " 

 and without another word he lift his spear in salutation , and 
 return towards the camp , where shortly afterwards we find he 
 clean a gun like any other Kafir . 

 " that be an odd man , " say Sir Henry . 

 " yes , " answer I , " too odd by half . I do not   like his little way . he 
 know something , and will not speak out . but I suppose it be no use 
 quarrel with he . we be in for a curious trip , and a mysterious 
 Zulu will not   make much difference one way or another . " 

 next day we make our arrangement for start . of course it be 
 impossible to drag our heavy elephant rifle and other kit with we 
 across the desert , so , dismiss our bearer , we make an arrangement 
 with an old native who have a kraal close by to take care of they till 
 we return . it go to my heart to leave such thing as those sweet 
 tool to the tender mercy of an old thief of a savage whose greedy 
 eye I could see gloating over they . but I take some precaution . 

 first of all I load all the rifle , place they at full cock , and 
 inform he that if he touch they they would go off . he try the 
 experiment instantly with my eight - bore , and it do go off , and blow a 
 hole right through one of his oxen , which be just then be drive 
 up to the kraal , to say nothing of knock he head over heel with 
 the recoil . he get up considerably startle , and not at all pleased at 
 the loss of the ox , which he have the impudence to ask I to pay for , 
 and nothing would induce he to touch the gun again . 

 " put the live devil out of the way up there in the thatch , " he say , 
 " or they will murder we all . " 

 then I tell he that , when we come back , if one of those thing be 
 miss I would kill he and his people by witchcraft ; and if we die 
 and he try to steal the rifle I would come and haunt he and turn 
 his cattle mad and his milk sour till life be a weariness , and would 
 make the devil in the gun come out and talk to he in a way he do 
 not like , and generally give he a good idea of judgment to come . after 
 that he promise to look after they as though they be his father 's 
 spirit . he be a very superstitious old Kafir and a great villain . 

 have thus dispose of our superfluous gear we arrange the kit we 
 five - Sir Henry , Good , myself , Umbopa , and the Hottentot 
 ventv"gel - be to take with we on our journey . it be small enough , 
 but do what we would we could not get its weight down under about forty 
 pound a man . this be what it consist of : - 

 the three express rifle and two hundred round of ammunition . 

 the two Winchester repeating rifle   for Umbopa and Ventv"gel , with 
 two hundred round of cartridge . 

 five Cochrane 's water - bottle , each hold four pint . 

 five blanket . 

 twenty - five pound ' weight of biltong - i.e. sun - dry game flesh . 

 ten pound ' weight of good mixed bead for gift . 

 a selection of medicine , include an ounce of quinine , and one or two 
 small surgical instrument . 

 our knife , a few sundrie , such as a compass , match , a pocket 
 filter , tobacco , a trowel , a bottle of brandy , and the clothe we stand 
 in . 

 this be our total equipment , a small one indeed for such a venture , 
 but we dare not attempt to carry more . indeed , that load be a heavy 
 one per man with which to travel across the burn desert , for in such 
 place every additional ounce tell . but we could not see our way to 
 reduce the weight . there be nothing take but what be absolutely 
 necessary . 

 with great difficulty , and by the promise of a present of a good 
 hunting - knife each , I succeed in persuade three wretched native 
 from the village to come with we for the first stage , twenty mile , and 
 to carry a large gourd hold a gallon of water apiece . my object be 
 to enable we to refill our water - bottle after the first night 's march , 
 for we determine to start in the cool of the evening . I give out to 
 these native that we be go to shoot ostrich , with which the 
 desert abound . they jabber and shrug their shoulder , say 
 that we be mad and should perish of thirst , which I must say seem 
 probable ; but be desirous of obtain the knife , which be almost 
 unknown treasure up there , they consent to come , have probably 
 reflect that , after all , our subsequent extinction would be no affair 
 of theirs . 

 all next day we rest and sleep , and at sunset eat a hearty meal of 
 fresh beef wash down with tea , the last , as Good remark sadly , we 
 be likely to drink for many a long day . then , have make our final 
 preparation , we lie down and wait for the moon to rise . at last , 
 about nine o'clock , up she come in all her glory , flood the wild 
 country with light , and throw a silver sheen on the expanse of 
 rolling desert before we , which look as solemn and quiet and as alien 
 to man as the star - stud firmament above . we rise up , and in a few 
 minute be ready , and yet we hesitate a little , as human nature be 
 prone to hesitate on the threshold of an irrevocable step . we three 
 white man stand by ourselves . Umbopa , assegai in hand and a rifle 
 across his shoulder , look out fixedly across the desert a few pace 
 ahead of we ; while the hire native , with the gourd of water , and 
 Ventv"gel , be gather in a little knot behind . 

 " gentleman , " say Sir Henry presently , in his deep voice , " we be go 
 on about as strange a journey as man can make in this world . it be very 
 doubtful if we can succeed in it . but we be three man who will stand 
 together for good or for evil to the last . now before we start let we 
 for a moment pray to the Power who shape the destiny of man , and who 
 age since have mark out our path , that it may please he to direct 
 our step in accordance with his will . " 

 take off his hat , for the space of a minute or so , he cover his 
 face with his hand , and Good and I do likewise . 

 I do not say that I be a first - rate pray man , few hunter be , and 
 as for Sir Henry , I never hear he speak like that before , and only 
 once since , though deep down in his heart I believe that he be very 
 religious . good too be pious , though apt to swear . anyhow I do not 
 remember , except on one single occasion , ever put up a well 
 prayer in my life than I do during that minute , and somehow I feel the 
 happy for it . our future be so completely unknown , and I think that 
 the unknown and the awful always bring a man near to his maker . 

 " and now , " say Sir Henry , " trek ! " 

 so we start . 

 we have nothing to guide ourselves by except the distant mountain and 
 old José da Silvestre 's chart , which , consider that it be draw by 
 a die and half - distraught man on a fragment of linen three century 
 ago , be not a very satisfactory sort of thing to work with . still , 
 our sole hope of success depend upon it , such as it be . if we fail 
 in find that pool of bad water which the old Dom mark as be 
 situate in the middle of the desert , about sixty mile from our 
 starting - point , and as far from the mountain , in all probability we 
 must perish miserably of thirst . but to my mind the chance of our 
 find it in that great sea of sand and karoo scrub seem almost 
 infinitesimal . even suppose that da Silvestra have mark the pool 
 correctly , what be there to prevent its have be dry up by the 
 sun generation ago , or trample in by game , or fill with the 
 drift sand ? 

 on we tramp silently as shade through the night and in the heavy 
 sand . the karoo bush catch our foot and retard we , and the sand 
 work into our veldtschoon and Good 's shooting - boot , so that every 
 few mile we have to stop and empty they ; but still the night keep 
 fairly cool , though the atmosphere be thick and heavy , give a sort 
 of creamy feel to the air , and we make fair progress . it be very 
 silent and lonely there in the desert , oppressively so indeed . good 
 feel this , and once begin to whistle " the Girl I leave behind I , " but 
 the note sound lugubrious in that vast place , and he give it up . 

 shortly afterwards a little incident occur which , though it startle 
 we at the time , give rise to a laugh . Good be lead , as the holder 
 of the compass , which , be a sailor , of course he understand 
 thoroughly , and we be toil along in single file behind he , when 
 suddenly we hear the sound of an exclamation , and he vanish . next 
 second there arise all around we a most extraordinary hubbub , snort , 
 groan , and wild sound of rush foot . in the faint light , too , we 
 could descry dim galloping form half hide by wreath of sand . the 
 native throw down their load and prepare to bolt , but remember 
 that there be nowhere to run to , they cast themselves upon the ground 
 and howl out that it be ghost . as for Sir Henry and myself , we 
 stand amazed ; nor be our amazement lessen when we perceive the form 
 of Good career off in the direction of the mountain , apparently 
 mount on the back of a horse and halloae wildly . in another second 
 he throw up his arm , and we hear he come to the earth with a thud . 

 then I see what have happen ; we have stumble upon a herd of sleep 
 quagga , on to the back of one of which Good actually have fall , and 
 the brute naturally enough get up and make off with he . call out to 
 the other that it be all right , I run towards good , much afraid lest 
 he should be hurt , but to my great relief I find he sit in the 
 sand , his eye - glass still fix firmly in his eye , rather shake and 
 very much frightened , but not in any way injure . 

 after this we travel on without any further misadventure till about 
 one o'clock , when we call a halt , and have drink a little water , 
 not much , for water be precious , and rest for half an hour , we 
 start again . 

 on , on we go , till at last the east begin to blush like the cheek of 
 a girl . then there come faint ray of primrose light , that change 
 presently to golden bar , through which the dawn glide out across the 
 desert . the star grow pale and pale still , till at last they 
 vanish ; the golden moon wax wan , and her mountain ridge stand out 
 against her sickly face like the bone on the cheek of a die man . 
 then come spear upon spear of light flash far away across the 
 boundless wilderness , pierce and fire the veil of mist , till the 
 desert be drape in a tremulous golden glow , and it be day . 

 still we do not halt , though by this time we should have be glad 
 enough to do so , for we know that when once the sun be fully up it 
 would be almost impossible for we to travel . at length , about an hour 
 later , we spy a little pile of boulder rise out of the plain , and 
 to this we drag ourselves . as luck would have it , here we find an 
 overhang slab of rock carpet beneath with smooth sand , which 
 afford a most grateful shelter from the heat . underneath this we 
 crept , and each of we have drunk some water and eat a bit of 
 biltong , we lie down and soon be sound asleep . 

 it be three o'clock in the afternoon before we wake , to find our 
 bearer prepare to return . they have see enough of the desert 
 already , and no number of knife would have tempt they to come a step 
 far . so we take a hearty drink , and have empty our 
 water - bottle , fill they up again from the gourd that they have 
 bring with they , and then watch they depart on their twenty mile ' 
 tramp home . 

 at half - past four we also start . it be lonely and desolate work , for 
 with the exception of a few ostrich there be not a single living 
 creature to be see on all the vast expanse of sandy plain . evidently 
 it be too dry for game , and with the exception of a deadly - look 
 cobra or two we see no reptile . one insect , however , we find 
 abundant , and that be the common or house fly . there they come , " not 
 as single spy , but in battalion , " as I think the Old Testament 1 
 say somewhere . he be an extraordinary insect be the house fly . go 
 where you will you find he , and so it must have be always . I have 
 see he enclose in amber , which be , I be tell , quite half a million 
 year old , look exactly like his descendant of to - day , and I have 
 little doubt but that when the last man lie die on the earth he will 
 be buzz round - if this event happen to occur in summer - watch 
 for an opportunity to settle on his nose . 

 at sunset we halt , wait for the moon to rise . at last she come up , 
 beautiful and serene as ever , and , with one halt about two o'clock in 
 the morning , we trudge on wearily through the night , till at last the 
 welcome sun put a period to our labour . we drink a little and flung 
 ourselves down on the sand , thoroughly tired out , and soon be all 
 asleep . there be no need to set a watch , for we have nothing to fear 
 from anybody or anything in that vast untenanted plain . our only 
 enemy be heat , thirst , and fly , but far rather would I have face 
 any danger from man or beast than that awful trinity . this time we be 
 not so lucky as to find a shelter rock to guard we from the glare of 
 the sun , with the result that about seven o'clock we wake up 
 experience the exact sensation one would attribute to a beefsteak on 
 a gridiron . we be literally be bake through and through . the 
 burn sun seem to be suck our very blood out of we . we sit up 
 and gasp . 

 " Phew , " say I , grab at the halo of fly which buzz cheerfully 
 round my head . the heat do not affect they . 

 " my word ! " say Sir Henry . 

 " it be hot ! " echo Good . 

 it be hot , indeed , and there be not a bit of shelter to be find . 
 look where we would there be no rock or tree , nothing but an unending 
 glare , render dazzle by the heated air that dance over the surface 
 of the desert as it dance over a red - hot stove . 

 " what be to be do ? " ask Sir Henry ; " we can not   stand this for long . " 

 we look at each other blankly . 

 " I have it , " say Good , " we must dig a hole , get in it , and cover 
 ourselves with the karoo bush . " 

 it do not seem a very promising suggestion , but at least it be well 
 than nothing , so we set to work , and , with the trowel we have bring 
 with we and the help of our hand , in about an hour we succeed in 
 delve out a patch of ground some ten foot long by twelve wide to the 
 depth of two foot . then we cut a quantity of low scrub with our 
 hunting - knife , and creep into the hole , pull it over we all , with 
 the exception of Ventv"gel , on whom , be a Hottentot , the heat have no 
 particular effect . this give we some slight shelter from the burning 
 ray of the sun , but the atmosphere in that amateur grave can be well 
 imagine than describe . the Black Hole of Calcutta must have be a 
 fool to it ; indeed , to this moment I do not know how we live through 
 the day . there we lay panting , and every now and again moisten our 
 lip from our scanty supply of water . have we follow our inclination 
 we should have finish all we possess in the first two hour , but we 
 be force to exercise the most rigid care , for if our water fail we 
 we know that very soon we must perish miserably . 

 but everything have an end , if only you live long enough to see it , and 
 somehow that miserable day wear on towards evening . about three o'clock 
 in the afternoon we determine that we could bear it no long . it 
 would be well to die walk that to be kill slowly by heat and 
 thirst in this dreadful hole . so take each of we a little drink from 
 our fast diminish supply of water , now warm to about the same 
 temperature as a man 's blood , we stagger forward . 

 we have then cover some fifty mile of wilderness . if the reader will 
 refer to the rough copy and translation of old da Silvestra 's map , he 
 will see that the desert be mark as measure forty league across , 
 and the " pan bad water " be set down as be about in the middle of it . 
 now forty league be one hundred and twenty mile , consequently we 
 ought at the most to be within twelve or fifteen mile of the water if 
 any should really exist . 

 through the afternoon we creep slowly and painfully along , scarcely 
 do more than a mile and a half in an hour . at sunset we rest 
 again , wait for the moon , and after drink a little manage to get 
 some sleep . 

 before we lie down , Umbopa point out to we a slight and indistinct 
 hillock on the flat surface of the plain about eight mile away . at the 
 distance it look like an ant - hill , and as I be drop off to sleep 
 I fall to wonder what it could be . 

 with the moon we march again , feel dreadfully exhaust , and 
 suffer torture from thirst and prickly heat . nobody who have not 
 feel it can know what we go through . we walk no long , we 
 stagger , now and again fall from exhaustion , and be oblige to 
 call a halt every hour or so . we have scarcely energy leave in we to 
 speak . up to this Good have chat and joke , for he be a merry fellow ; 
 but now he have not a joke in he . 

 at last , about two o'clock , utterly wear out in body and mind , we come 
 to the foot of the queer hill , or sand koppie , which at first sight 
 resemble a gigantic ant - heap about a hundred foot high , and cover 
 at the base nearly two acre of ground . 

 here we halt , and drive to it by our desperate thirst , suck down 
 our last drop of water . we have but half a pint a head , and each of we 
 could have drink a gallon . 

 then we lie down . just as I be drop off to sleep I hear Umbopa 
 remark to himself in Zulu - 

 " if we can not find water we shall all be dead before the moon rise 
 to - morrow . " 

 I shudder , hot as it be . the near prospect of such an awful death be 
 not pleasant , but even the thought of it could not keep I from 
 sleep . 


  1   reader must beware of accept Mr. Quatermain 's reference as 
 accurate , as , it have be find , some be prone to do . although his 
 reading evidently be limit , the impression produce by it upon his 
 mind be mixed . thus to he the Old Testament and Shakespeare be 
 interchangeable authority . - Editor . 



 CHAPTER VI 

 WATER ! WATER ! 

 two hour later , that is , about four o'clock , I wake up , for so soon as 
 the first heavy demand of bodily fatigue have be satisfy , the 
 torture thirst from which I be suffer assert itself . I could 
 sleep no more . I have be dream that I be bath in a run 
 stream , with green bank and tree upon they , and I awake to find 
 myself in this arid wilderness , and to remember , as Umbopa have say , 
 that if we do not find water this day we must perish miserably . no 
 human creature could live long without water in that heat . I sit up and 
 rub my grimy face with my dry and horny hand , as my lip and 
 eyelid be stick together , and it be only after some friction and 
 with an effort that I be able to open they . it be not far from dawn , 
 but there be none of the bright feel of dawn in the air , which be 
 thick with a hot murkiness that I can not describe . the other be 
 still sleep . 

 presently it begin to grow light enough to read , so I draw out a little 
 pocket copy of the " Ingoldsby legend " which I have bring with I , and 
 read " the Jackdaw of Rheims . " when I get to where 

  " a nice little boy hold a golden ewer , 
  emboss , and fill with water as pure 
  as any that flow between Rheims and Namur , " 

 literally I smack my crack lip , or rather try to smack they . 
 the mere thought of that pure water make I mad . if the Cardinal have 
 be there with his bell , book , and candle , I would have whip in and 
 drunk his water up ; yes , even if he have fill it already with the sud 
 of soap " worthy of wash the hand of the Pope , " and I know that the 
 whole consecrated curse of the Catholic Church should fall upon I for 
 so do . I almost think that I must have be a little light - head 
 with thirst , weariness and the want of food ; for I fall to think how 
 astonish the Cardinal and his nice little boy and the jackdaw would 
 have look to see a burn up , brown - eye , grizzly - haired little 
 elephant hunter suddenly bind between they , put his dirty face into 
 the basin , and swallow every drop of the precious water . the idea 
 amuse I so much that I laugh or rather cackle aloud , which wake 
 the other , and they begin to rub their dirty face and drag their 
 gum - up lip and eyelid apart . 

 as soon as we be all well awake we begin to discuss the situation , 
 which be serious enough . not a drop of water be leave . we turn the 
 bottle upside down , and lick their top , but it be a failure ; they 
 be dry as a bone . good , who have charge of the flask of brandy , get it 
 out and look at it longingly ; but Sir Henry promptly take it away 
 from he , for to drink raw spirit would only have be to precipitate 
 the end . 

 " if we do not find water we shall die , " he say . 

 " if we can trust to the old Dom 's map there should be some about , " I 
 say ; but nobody seem to derive much satisfaction from this remark . 
 it be so evident that no great faith could be put in the map . now it 
 be gradually grow light , and as we sit star blankly at each 
 other , I observe the Hottentot ventv"gel rise and begin to walk about 
 with his eye on the ground . presently he stop short , and utter a 
 guttural exclamation , point to the earth . 

 " what be it ? " we exclaim ; and rise simultaneously we go to where 
 he be stand star at the sand . 

 " well , " I say , " it be fresh Springbok spoor ; what of it ? " 

 " springbuck do not go far from water , " he answer in Dutch . 

 " no , " I answer , " I forget ; and thank God for it . " 

 this little discovery put new life into we ; for it be wonderful , when a 
 man be in a desperate position , how he catch at the slight hope , 
 and feel almost happy . on a dark night a single star be well than 
 nothing . 

 meanwhile ventv"gel be lift his snub nose , and sniff the hot air 
 for all the world like an old Impala ram who scent danger . presently 
 he speak again . 

 " I smell water , " he say . 

 then we feel quite jubilant , for we know what a wonderful instinct 
 these wild - breed man possess . 

 just at that moment the sun come up gloriously , and reveal so grand a 
 sight to our astonished eye that for a moment or two we even forget 
 our thirst . 

 there , not more than forty or fifty mile from we , glitter like 
 silver in the early ray of the morning sun , soar Sheba 's Breasts ; 
 and stretch away for hundred of mile on either side of they run 
 the great Suliman Berg . now that , sit here , I attempt to describe 
 the extraordinary grandeur and beauty of that sight , language seem to 
 fail I . I be impotent even before its memory . straight before we , rise 
 two enormous mountain , the like of which be not , I believe , to be 
 see in Africa , if indeed there be any other such in the world , 
 measure each of they at least fifteen thousand foot in height , 
 stand not more than a dozen mile apart , link together by a 
 precipitous cliff of rock , and tower in awful white solemnity 
 straight into the sky . these mountain place thus , like the pillar of 
 a gigantic gateway , be shape after the fashion of a woman 's breast , 
 and at time the mist and shadow beneath they take the form of a 
 recumbent woman , veil mysteriously in sleep . their basis swell gently 
 from the plain , look at that distance perfectly round and smooth ; 
 and upon the top of each be a vast hillock cover with snow , exactly 
 correspond to the nipple on the female breast . the stretch of cliff 
 that connect they appear to be some thousand of foot in height , and 
 perfectly precipitous , and on each flank of they , so far as the eye can 
 reach , extent similar line of cliff , break only here and there by 
 flat table - top mountain , something like the world - fame one at Cape 
 Town ; a formation , by the way , that be very common in Africa . 

 to describe the comprehensive grandeur of that view be beyond my 
 power . there be something so inexpressibly solemn and overpower 
 about those huge volcano - for doubtless they be extinct 
 volcano - that it quite awe we . for a while the morning light play 
 upon the snow and the brown and swell mass beneath , and then , as 
 though to veil the majestic sight from our curious eye , strange 
 vapour and cloud gather and increase around the mountain , till 
 presently we could only trace their pure and gigantic outline , show 
 ghostlike through the fleecy envelope . indeed , as we afterwards 
 discover , usually they be wrap in this gauze - like mist , which 
 doubtless account for our not have see they more clearly before . 

 Sheba 's Breasts have scarcely vanish into cloud - clothe privacy , before 
 our thirst - literally a burn question - reassert itself . 

 it be all very well for ventv"gel to say that he smell water , but we 
 could see no sign of it , look which way we would . so far as the eye 
 might reach there be nothing but arid swelter sand and karoo scrub . 
 we walk round the hillock and gaze about anxiously on the other 
 side , but it be the same story , not a drop of water could be find ; 
 there be no indication of a pan , a pool , or a spring . 

 " you be a fool , " I say angrily to Ventv"gel ; " there be no water . " 

 but still he lift his ugly snub nose and sniff . 

 " I smell it , Baas , " he answer ; " it be somewhere in the air . " 

 " yes , " I say , " no doubt it be in the cloud , and about two month 
 hence it will fall and wash our bone . " 

 Sir Henry stroke his yellow beard thoughtfully . " perhaps it be on the 
 top of the hill , " he suggest . 

 " rot , " say good ; " whoever hear of water be find at the top of a 
 hill ! " 

 " let we go and look , " I put in , and hopelessly enough we scramble up 
 the sandy side of the hillock , Umbopa leading . presently he stop as 
 though he be petrify . 

 " Nanzia manzie ! " that be , " here be water ! " he cry with a loud voice . 

 we rush up to he , and there , sure enough , in a deep cut or 
 indentation on the very top of the sand koppie , be an undoubted pool 
 of water . how it come to be in such a strange place we do not stop to 
 inquire , nor do we hesitate at its black and unpleasant appearance . it 
 be water , or a good imitation of it , and that be enough for we . we 
 give a bound and a rush , and in another second we be all down on our 
 stomach suck up the uninviting fluid as though it be nectar fit 
 for the god . heaven , how we do drink ! then when we have do drinking 
 we tear off our clothe and sit down in the pool , absorb the 
 moisture through our parch skin . you , Harry , my boy , who have only 
 to turn on a couple of tap to summon " hot " and " cold " from an unseen , 
 vasty cistern , can have little idea of the luxury of that muddy wallow 
 in brackish tepid water . 

 after a while we rise from it , refresh indeed , and fall to on our 
 " biltong , " of which we have scarcely be able to touch a mouthful for 
 twenty - four hour , and eat our fill . then we smoke a pipe , and lay 
 down by the side of that bless pool , under the overhang shadow of 
 its bank , and sleep till noon . 

 all that day we rest there by the water , thank our star that we 
 have be lucky enough to find it , bad as it be , and not forget to 
 render a due share of gratitude to the shade of the long - depart da 
 Silvestra , who have set its position down so accurately on the tail of 
 his shirt . the wonderful thing to we be that the pan should have 
 last so long , and the only way in which I can account for this be on 
 the supposition that it be feed by some spring deep down in the sand . 

 have fill both ourselves and our water - bottle as full as possible , 
 in far well spirit we start off again with the moon . that night we 
 cover nearly five - and - twenty mile ; but , needless to say , find no 
 more water , though we be lucky enough the following day to get a 
 little shade behind some ant - heap . when the sun rise , and , for awhile , 
 clear away the mysterious mist , Suliman 's Berg with the two majestic 
 Breasts , now only about twenty mile off , seem to be tower right 
 above we , and look grander than ever . at the approach of evening we 
 march again , and , to cut a long story short , by daylight next morning 
 find ourselves upon the low slope of Sheba 's left breast , for 
 which we have be steadily steer . by this time our water be 
 exhausted once more , and we be suffer severely from thirst , nor 
 indeed could we see any chance of relieve it till we reach the snow 
 line far , far above we . after rest an hour or two , drive to it by 
 our torture thirst , we go on , toil painfully in the burn heat 
 up the lava slope , for we find that the huge base of the mountain be 
 compose entirely of lava bed belch from the bowel of the earth in 
 some far past age . 

 by eleven o'clock we be utterly exhaust , and , generally speak , 
 in a very bad state indeed . the lava clinker , over which we must drag 
 ourselves , though smooth compare with some clinker I have hear of , 
 such as that on the Island of Ascension , for instance , be yet rough 
 enough to make our foot very sore , and this , together with our other 
 misery , have pretty well finish we . a few hundred yard above we 
 be some large lump of lava , and towards these we steer with the 
 intention of lie down beneath their shade . we reach they , and to 
 our surprise , so far as we have a capacity for surprise leave in we , on a 
 little plateau or ridge close by we see that the clinker be cover 
 with a dense green growth . evidently soil form of decompose lava have 
 rest there , and in due course have become the receptacle of seed 
 deposit by bird . but we do not take much further interest in the 
 green growth , for one can not live on grass like Nebuchadnezzar . that 
 require a special dispensation of Providence and peculiar digestive 
 organ . 

 so we sit down under the rock and groan , and for one I wish 
 heartily that we have never start on this fool 's errand . as we be 
 sit there I see Umbopa get up and hobble towards the patch of 
 green , and a few minute afterwards , to my great astonishment , I 
 perceive that usually very dignified individual dancing and shout 
 like a maniac , and wave something green . off we all scramble towards 
 he as fast as our weary limb would carry we , hop that he have 
 find water . 

 " what be it , Umbopa , son of a fool ? " I shout in Zulu . 

 " it be food and water , Macumazahn , " and again he wave the green thing . 

 then I see what he have find . it be a melon . we have hit upon a patch 
 of wild melon , thousand of they , and dead ripe . 

 " melon ! " I yell to Good , who be next I ; and in another minute his 
 false tooth be fix in one of they . 

 I think we eat about six each before we have do , and poor fruit as 
 they be , I doubt if I ever think anything nicer . 

 but melon be not very nutritious , and when we have satisfy our 
 thirst with their pulpy substance , and put a stock to cool by the 
 simple process of cut they in two and set they end on in the 
 hot sun to grow cold by evaporation , we begin to feel exceedingly 
 hungry . we have still some biltong leave , but our stomach turn from 
 biltong , and besides , we be oblige to be very sparing of it , for we 
 could not say when we should find more food . just at this moment a 
 lucky thing chance . look across the desert I see a flock of about 
 ten large bird fly straight towards we . 

 " Skit , Baas , skit ! " " Shoot , master , shoot ! " whisper the Hottentot , 
 throw himself on his face , an example which we all follow . 

 then I see that the bird be a flock of pauw or bustard , and that 
 they would pass within fifty yard of my head . take one of the 
 repeat winchester , I wait till they be nearly over we , and then 
 jump to my foot . on see I the pauw bunch up together , as I 
 expect that they would , and I fire two shot straight into the thick 
 of they , and , as luck would have it , bring one down , a fine fellow , 
 that weigh about twenty pound . in half an hour we have a fire make of 
 dry melon stalk , and he be toast over it , and we make such a feed 
 as we have not taste for a week . we eat that pauw ; nothing be leave 
 of he but his leg - bone and his beak , and we feel not a little the 
 well afterwards . 

 that night we go on again with the moon , carry as many melon as 
 we could with we . as we ascend we find the air grow cool and 
 cooler , which be a great relief to we , and at dawn , so far as we could 
 judge , we be not more than about a dozen mile from the snow line . 
 here we discover more melon , and so have no long any anxiety about 
 water , for we know that we should soon get plenty of snow . but the 
 ascent have now become very precipitous , and we make but slow progress , 
 not more than a mile an hour . also that night we eat our last morsel of 
 biltong . as yet , with the exception of the pauw , we have see no 
 living thing on the mountain , nor have we come across a single spring or 
 stream of water , which strike we as very odd , consider the expanse 
 of snow above we , which must , we think , melt sometimes . but as we 
 afterwards discover , owe to a cause which it be quite beyond my 
 power to explain , all the stream flow down upon the north side of 
 the mountain . 

 now we begin to grow very anxious about food . we have escape death by 
 thirst , but it seem probable that it be only to die of hunger . the 
 event of the next three miserable day be well describe by copy 
 the entry make at the time in my note - book . 

 " 21st May . - start 11 a.m. , find the atmosphere quite cold enough 
 to travel by day , and carry some water - melon with we . struggle on 
 all day , but find no more melon , have evidently pass out of their 
 district . see no game of any sort . halt for the night at sundown , 
 have have no food for many hour . suffer much during the night from 
 cold . 

 " 22nd . - start at sunrise again , feel very faint and weak . only 
 make about five mile all day ; find some patch of snow , of which we 
 eat , but nothing else . camp at night under the edge of a great 
 plateau . cold bitter . drank a little brandy each , and huddle ourselves 
 together , each wrap up in his blanket , to keep ourselves alive . be 
 now suffer frightfully from starvation and weariness . thought that 
 ventv"gel would have die during the night . 

 " 23rd . - struggle forward once more as soon as the sun be well up , and 
 have thaw our limb a little . we be now in a dreadful plight , and I 
 fear that unless we get food this will be our last day 's journey . but 
 little brandy leave . good , Sir Henry , and Umbopa bear up wonderfully , 
 but ventv"gel be in a very bad way . like most hottentot , he can not 
 stand cold . pang of hunger not so bad , but have a sort of numb feeling 
 about the stomach . other say the same . we be now on a level with the 
 precipitous chain , or wall of lava , link the two Breasts , and the 
 view be glorious . behind we the glow desert roll away to the 
 horizon , and before we lie mile upon mile of smooth hard snow almost 
 level , but swell gently upwards , out of the centre of which the 
 nipple of the mountain , that appear to be some mile in circumference , 
 rise about four thousand foot into the sky . not a live thing be to 
 be see . God help we ; I fear that our time have come . " 

 and now I will drop the journal , partly because it be not very 
 interesting reading ; also what follow require tell rather more 
 fully . 

 all that day - the 23rd May - we struggle slowly up the incline of snow , 
 lie down from time to time to rest . a strange gaunt crew we must have 
 look , while , laden as we be , we drag our weary foot over the 
 dazzle plain , glare round we with hungry eye . not that there be 
 much use in glaring , for we could see nothing to eat . we do not 
 accomplish more than seven mile that day . just before sunset we find 
 ourselves exactly under the nipple of Sheba 's left Breast , which 
 tower thousand of foot into the air , a vast smooth hillock of frozen 
 snow . weak as we be , we could not but appreciate the wonderful scene , 
 make even more splendid by the fly ray of light from the setting 
 sun , which here and there stain the snow blood - red , and crown the 
 great dome above we with a diadem of glory . 

 " I say , " gasp Good , presently , " we ought to be somewhere near that 
 cave the old gentleman write about . " 

 " yes , " say I , " if there be a cave . " 

 " come , Quatermain , " groan Sir Henry , " do not   talk like that ; I have 
 every faith in the Dom ; remember the water ! we shall find the place 
 soon . " 

 " if we do not   find it before dark we be dead man , that be all about 
 it , " be my consolatory reply . 

 for the next ten minute we trudge in silence , when suddenly Umbopa , 
 who be march along beside I , wrap in his blanket , and with a 
 leather belt strap so tightly round his stomach , to " make his hunger 
 small , " as he say , that his waist look like a girl 's , catch I by 
 the arm . 

 " look ! " he say , point towards the spring slope of the nipple . 

 I follow his glance , and some two hundred yard from we perceive 
 what appear to be a hole in the snow . 

 " it be the cave , " say Umbopa . 

 we make the good of our way to the spot , and find sure enough that the 
 hole be the mouth of a cavern , no doubt the same as that of which da 
 Silvestra write . we be not too soon , for just as we reach shelter 
 the sun go down with startling rapidity , leave the world nearly 
 dark , for in these latitude there be but little twilight . so we creep 
 into the cave , which do not appear to be very big , and huddle 
 ourselves together for warmth , swallow what remain of our 
 brandy - barely a mouthful each - and try to forget our misery in 
 sleep . but the cold be too intense to allow we to do so , for I be 
 convince that at this great altitude the thermometer can not have 
 mark less than fourteen or fifteen degree below freeze point . what 
 such a temperature mean to we , enervate as we be by hardship , want 
 of food , and the great heat of the desert , the reader may imagine 
 well than I can describe . suffice it to say that it be something as 
 near death from exposure as I have ever feel . there we sit hour after 
 hour through the still and bitter night , feel the frost wander round 
 and nip we now in the finger , now in the foot , now in the face . in vain 
 do we huddle up close and close ; there be no warmth in our 
 miserable starve carcase . sometimes one of we would drop into an 
 uneasy slumber for a few minute , but we could not sleep much , and 
 perhaps this be fortunate , for if we have I doubt if we should have 
 ever wake again . indeed , I believe that it be only by force of will 
 that we keep ourselves alive at all . 

 not very long before dawn I hear the Hottentot ventv"gel , whose tooth 
 have be chatter all night like castanet , give a deep sigh . then 
 his tooth stop chatter . I do not think anything of it at the 
 time , conclude that he have go to sleep . his back be rest 
 against mine , and it seem to grow cold and colder , till at last it 
 feel like ice . 

 at length the air begin to grow grey with light , then golden arrow 
 speed across the snow , and at last the glorious sun peep above the 
 lava wall and look in upon our half - frozen form . also it look upon 
 Ventv"gel , sit there amongst we , stone dead . no wonder his back 
 feel cold , poor fellow . he have die when I hear he sigh , and be now 
 freeze almost stiff . shocked beyond measure , we drag ourselves from 
 the corpse - how strange be that horror we mortal have of the 
 companionship of a dead body - and leave it sit there , its arm 
 clasp about its knee . 

 by this time the sunlight be pour its cold ray , for here they be 
 cold , straight into the mouth of the cave . suddenly I hear an 
 exclamation of fear from someone , and turn my head . 

 and this be what I see : sit at the end of the cavern - it be not 
 more than twenty foot long - be another form , of which the head rest 
 on its chest and the long arm hang down . I star at it , and see that 
 this too be a dead man , and , what be more , a white man . 

 the other see also , and the sight prove too much for our shatter 
 nerve . one and all we scramble out of the cave as fast as our 
 half - frozen limb would carry we . 



 CHAPTER VII 

 SOLOMON 'S ROAD 

 outside the cavern we halt , feel rather foolish . 

 " I be go back , " say Sir Henry . 

 " why ? " ask Good . 

 " because it have strike I that - what we see - may be my brother . " 

 this be a new idea , and we re - enter the place to put it to the 
 proof . after the bright light outside , our eye , weak as they be with 
 star at the snow , could not pierce the gloom of the cave for a 
 while . presently , however , they grow accustomed to the semi - darkness , 
 and we advance towards the dead man . 

 Sir Henry kneel down and peer into his face . 

 " thank God , " he say , with a sigh of relief , " it be not my brother . " 

 then I draw near and look . the body be that of a tall man in middle 
 life with aquiline feature , grizzle hair , and a long black moustache . 
 the skin be perfectly yellow , and stretch tightly over the bone . 
 its clothing , with the exception of what seem to be the remain of a 
 woollen pair of hose , have be remove , leave the skeleton - like frame 
 naked . round the neck of the corpse , which be freeze perfectly stiff , 
 hang a yellow ivory crucifix . 

 " who on earth can it be ? " say I. 

 " can not   you guess ? " ask Good . 

 I shake my head . 

 " why , the old Dom , José da Silvestra , of course - who else ? " 

 " impossible , " I gasp ; " he die three hundred year ago . " 

 " and what be there to prevent he from last for three thousand year 
 in this atmosphere , I should like to know ? " ask Good . " if only the 
 temperature be sufficiently low , flesh and blood will keep fresh as New 
 Zealand mutton for ever , and Heaven know it be cold enough here . the 
 sun never get in here ; no animal come here to tear or destroy . no 
 doubt his slave , of whom he speak on the writing , take off his clothe 
 and leave he . he could not have bury he alone . look ! " he go on , 
 stoop down to pick up a queerly - shape bone scrap at the end into 
 a sharp point , " here be the ' cleft bone ' that Silvestra use to draw 
 the map with . " 

 we gaze for a moment astonish , forget our own misery in this 
 extraordinary and , as it seem to we , semi - miraculous sight . 

 " ay , " say Sir Henry , " and this be where he get his ink from , " and he 
 point to a small wound on the Dom 's left arm . " do ever man see such 
 a thing before ? " 

 there be no long any doubt about the matter , which for my own part I 
 confess perfectly appal I . there he sit , the dead man , whose 
 direction , write some ten generation ago , have lead we to this spot . 
 here in my own hand be the rude pen with which he have write they , 
 and about his neck hang the crucifix that his die lip have kiss . 
 gaze at he , my imagination could reconstruct the last scene of the 
 drama , the traveller dying of cold and starvation , yet strive to 
 convey to the world the great secret which he have discover : - the 
 awful loneliness of his death , of which the evidence sit before we . it 
 even seem to I that I could trace in his strongly - mark feature a 
 likeness to those of my poor friend Silvestre his descendant , who have 
 die twenty year before in my arm , but perhaps that be fancy . at any 
 rate , there he sit , a sad memento of the fate that so often overtake 
 those who would penetrate into the unknown ; and there doubtless he will 
 still sit , crown with the dread majesty of death , for century yet 
 unborn , to startle the eye of wanderer like ourselves , if ever any 
 such should come again to invade his loneliness . the thing overpower 
 we , already almost perish as we be with cold and hunger . 

 " let we go , " say Sir Henry in a low voice ; ' stay , we will give he a 
 companion , " and lift up the dead body of the Hottentot ventv"gel , he 
 place it near to that of the old Dom . then he stoop , and with a jerk 
 break the rotten string of the crucifix which hang round da Silvestra 's 
 neck , for his finger be too cold to attempt to unfasten it . I 
 believe that he have it still . I take the bone pen , and it be before I 
 as I write - sometimes I use it to sign my name . 

 then leave these two , the proud white man of a past age , and the poor 
 Hottentot , to keep their eternal vigil in the midst of the eternal 
 snow , we creep out of the cave into the welcome sunshine and resume 
 our path , wonder in our heart how many hour it would be before we 
 be even as they be . 

 when we have walk about half a mile we come to the edge of the 
 plateau , for the nipple of the mountain do not rise out of its exact 
 centre , though from the desert side it have seem to do so . what lie 
 below we we could not see , for the landscape be wreathe in billow of 
 morning fog . presently , however , the high layer of mist clear a 
 little , and reveal , at the end of a long slope of snow , a patch of 
 green grass , some five hundred yard beneath we , through which a stream 
 be run . nor be this all . by the stream , bask in the bright 
 sun , stand and lie a group of from ten to fifteen large antelope - at 
 that distance we could not see of what specie . 

 the sight fill we with an unreasone joy . if only we could get it , 
 there be food in plenty . but the question be how to do so . the beast 
 be fully six hundred yard off , a very long shot , and one not to be 
 depend on when our life hang on the result . 

 rapidly we discuss the advisability of try to stalk the game , but 
 in the end dismiss it reluctantly . to begin with , the wind be not 
 favourable , and far , we must certainly be perceive , however 
 careful we be , against the blind background of snow , which we 
 should be oblige to traverse . 

 " well , we must have a try from where we be , " say Sir Henry . " which 
 shall it be , Quatermain , the repeat rifle or the express ? " 

 here again be a question . the Winchester repeater - of which we have 
 two , Umbopa carry poor ventv"gel 's as well as his own - be sight 
 up to a thousand yard , whereas the express be only sight to 
 three hundred and fifty , beyond which distance shoot with they be 
 more or less guess - work . on the other hand , if they do hit , the 
 express bullet , be " expand , " be much more likely to bring the 
 game down . it be a knotty point , but I make up my mind that we must 
 risk it and use the express . 

 " let each of we take the buck opposite to he . aim well at the point of 
 the shoulder and high up , " say I ; " and Umbopa , do you give the word , 
 so that we may all fire together . " 

 then come a pause , each of we aim his level well , as indeed a man be 
 likely to do when he know that life itself depend upon the shot . 

 " Fire , " say Umbopa in Zulu , and at almost the same instant the three 
 rifle rang out loudly ; three cloud of smoke hang for a moment before 
 we , and a hundred echo go fly over the silent snow . presently 
 the smoke clear , and reveal - oh , joy ! - a great buck lie on its 
 back and kick furiously in its death agony . we give a yell of 
 triumph - we be save - we should not starve . weak as we be , we 
 rush down the intervene slope of snow , and in ten minute from the 
 time of shooting , that animal 's heart and liver be lie before we . 
 but now a new difficulty arise , we have no fuel , and therefore could 
 make no fire to cook they . we gaze at each other in dismay . 

 " starve man should not be fanciful , " say good ; " we must eat raw 
 meat . " 

 there be no other way out of the dilemma , and our gnawing hunger make 
 the proposition less distasteful than it would otherwise have be . so 
 we take the heart and liver and bury they for a few minute in a 
 patch of snow to cool they . then we wash they in the ice - cold water 
 of the stream , and lastly eat they greedily . it sound horrible enough , 
 but honestly , I never taste anything so good as that raw meat . in a 
 quarter of an hour we be change man . our life and vigour come back 
 to we , our feeble pulse grow strong again , and the blood go course 
 through our vein . but mindful of the result of over - feeding on 
 starve stomach , we be careful not to eat too much , stop whilst 
 we be still hungry . 

 " thank Heaven ! " say Sir Henry ; " that brute have save our life . what 
 be it , Quatermain ? " 

 I rise and go to look at the antelope , for I be not certain . it be 
 about the size of a donkey , with large curved horn . I have never see 
 one like it before ; the specie be new to I . it be brown in colour , 
 with faint red stripe , and grow a thick coat . I afterwards discover 
 that the native of that wonderful country call these buck " inco . " 
 they be very rare , and only find at a great altitude where no other 
 game will live . this animal be fairly hit high up in the shoulder , 
 though whose bullet bring it down we could not , of course , discover . 
 I believe that good , mindful of his marvellous shot at the giraffe , 
 secretly set it down to his own prowess , and we do not contradict he . 

 we have be so busy satisfy our hunger that hitherto we have not 
 find time to look about we . but now , have set Umbopa to cut off as 
 much of the good meat as we be likely to be able to carry , we begin 
 to inspect our surrounding . the mist have clear away , for it be 
 eight o'clock , and the sun have suck it up , so we be able to take in 
 all the country before we at a glance . I know not how to describe the 
 glorious panorama which unfold itself to our gaze . I have never see 
 anything like it before , nor shall , I suppose , again . 

 behind and over we tower Sheba 's snowy Breasts , and below , some five 
 thousand foot beneath where we stand , lie league on league of the most 
 lovely champaign country . here be dense patch of lofty forest , 
 there a great river wind its silvery way . to the left stretch a vast 
 expanse of rich , undulate veld or grass land , whereon we could just 
 make out countless herd of game or cattle , at that distance we could 
 not tell which . this expanse appear to be ring in by a wall of 
 distant mountain . to the right the country be more or less 
 mountainous ; that is , solitary hill stand up from its level , with 
 stretch of cultivate land between , amongst which we could see group 
 of dome - shape hut . the landscape lie before we as a map , wherein 
 river flash like silver snake , and Alp - like peak crown with 
 wildly twisted snow wreath rise in grandeur , whilst over all be the 
 glad sunlight and the breath of Nature 's happy life . 

 two curious thing strike we as we gaze . first , that the country 
 before we must lie at least three thousand foot high than the desert 
 we have cross , and secondly , that all the river flow from south to 
 north . as we have painful reason to know , there be no water upon the 
 southern side of the vast range on which we stand , but on the northern 
 face be many stream , most of which appear to unite with the great 
 river we could see wind away far than our eye could follow . 

 we sit down for a while and gaze in silence at this wonderful view . 
 presently Sir Henry speak . 

 " be not   there something on the map about Solomon 's Great Road ? " he say . 

 I nod , for I be still gaze out over the far country . 

 " well , look ; there it be ! " and he point a little to our right . 

 good and I look accordingly , and there , wind away towards the 
 plain , be what appear to be a wide turnpike road . we have not see it 
 at first because , on reach the plain , it turn behind some break 
 country . we do not say anything , at least , not much ; we be begin 
 to lose the sense of wonder . somehow it do not seem particularly 
 unnatural that we should find a sort of roman road in this strange 
 land . we accept the fact , that be all . 

 " well , " say Good , " it must be quite near we if we cut off to the 
 right . had not   we well be make a start ? " 

 this be sound advice , and so soon as we have wash our face and hand 
 in the stream we act on it . for a mile or more we make our way over 
 boulder and across patch of snow , till suddenly , on reach the top 
 of the little rise , we find the road at our foot . it be a splendid 
 road cut out of the solid rock , at least fifty foot wide , and 
 apparently well keep ; though the odd thing be that it seem to begin 
 there . we walk down and stand on it , but one single hundred pace 
 behind we , in the direction of Sheba 's Breasts , it vanish , the entire 
 surface of the mountain be strew with boulder intersperse with 
 patch of snow . 

 " what do you make of this , Quatermain ? " ask Sir Henry . 

 I shake my head , I could make nothing of the thing . 

 " I have it ! " say Good ; " the road no doubt run right over the range and 
 across the desert on the other side , but the sand there have cover it 
 up , and above we it have be obliterate by some volcanic eruption of 
 molten lava . " 

 this seem a good suggestion ; at any rate , we accept it , and 
 proceed down the mountain . it prove a very different business 
 travel along down hill on that magnificent pathway with full 
 stomach from what it be travel uphill over the snow quite starve 
 and almost frozen . indeed , have it not be for melancholy recollection 
 of poor ventv"gel 's sad fate , and of that grim cave where he keep 
 company with the old Dom , we should have feel positively cheerful , 
 notwithstanding the sense of unknown danger before we . every mile we 
 walk the atmosphere grow soft and balmy , and the country before 
 we shine with a yet more luminous beauty . as for the road itself , I 
 never see such an engineering work , though Sir Henry say that the 
 great road over the St. Gothard in Switzerland be very similar . no 
 difficulty have be too great for the Old World engineer who lay it 
 out . at one place we come to a ravine three hundred foot broad and at 
 least a hundred foot deep . this vast gulf be actually fill in with 
 huge block of dress stone , have arch pierce through they at the 
 bottom for a waterway , over which the road go on sublimely . at 
 another place it be cut in zigzag out of the side of a precipice five 
 hundred foot deep , and in a third it tunnel through the base of an 
 intervene ridge , a space of thirty yard or more . 

 here we notice that the side of the tunnel be cover with quaint 
 sculpture , mostly of mail figure drive in chariot . one , which 
 be exceedingly beautiful , represent a whole battle scene with a 
 convoy of captive be march off in the distance . 

 " well , " say Sir Henry , after inspect this ancient work of art , " it 
 be very well to call this Solomon 's Road , but my humble opinion be that 
 the Egyptians have be here before Solomon 's people ever set a foot on 
 it . if this be not   egyptian or phoenician handiwork , I must say that it 
 be very like it . " 

 by midday we have advance sufficiently down the mountain to search the 
 region where wood be to be meet with . first we come to scattered bush 
 which grow more and more frequent , till at last we find the road 
 wind through a vast grove of silver tree similar to those which be 
 to be see on the slope of Table Mountain at Cape Town . I have never 
 before meet with they in all my wandering , except at the Cape , and 
 their appearance here astonish I greatly . 

 " ah ! " say Good , survey these shin - leave tree with evident 
 enthusiasm , " here be lot of wood , let we stop and cook some dinner ; I 
 have about digest that raw heart . " 

 nobody object to this , so leave the road we make our way to a 
 stream which be babble away not far off , and soon have a goodly fire 
 of dry bough blaze . cut off some substantial hunk from the 
 flesh of the inco which we have bring with we , we proceed to toast 
 they on the end of sharp stick , as one see the Kafirs do , and eat 
 they with relish . after fill ourselves , we light our pipe and give 
 ourselves up to enjoyment that , compare with the hardship we have 
 recently undergo , seem almost heavenly . 

 the brook , of which the bank be clothe with dense mass of a 
 gigantic specie of maidenhair fern intersperse with feathery tuft of 
 wild asparagus , sing merrily at our side , the soft air murmur through 
 the leaf of the silver tree , dove coo around , and bright - wing 
 bird flash like live gem from bough to bough . it be a Paradise . 

 the magic of the place combine with an overwhelming sense of danger 
 leave behind , and of the promise land reach at last , seem to charm 
 we into silence . Sir Henry and Umbopa sit converse in a mixture of 
 break English and Kitchen Zulu in a low voice , but earnestly enough , 
 and I lay , with my eye half shut , upon that fragrant bed of fern and 
 watch they . 

 presently I miss Good , and I look to see what have become of he . 
 soon I observe he sit by the bank of the stream , in which he have 
 be bath . he have nothing on but his flannel shirt , and his natural 
 habit of extreme neatness have reassert themselves , he be 
 actively employ in make a most elaborate toilet . he have wash his 
 gutta - percha collar , have thoroughly shake out his trouser , coat and 
 waistcoat , and be now fold they up neatly till he be ready to put 
 they on , shake his head sadly as he scan the numerous rent and 
 tear in they , which naturally have result from our frightful journey . 
 then he take his boot , scrub they with a handful of fern , and 
 finally rub they over with a piece of fat , which he have carefully 
 save from the inco meat , till they look , comparatively speak , 
 respectable . have inspect they judiciously through his eye - glass , 
 he put the boot on and begin a fresh operation . from a little bag that 
 he carry he produce a pocket - comb in which be fix a tiny 
 look - glass , and in this he survey himself . apparently he be not 
 satisfied , for he proceed to do his hair with great care . then come a 
 pause whilst he again contemplate the effect ; still it be not 
 satisfactory . he feel his chin , on which the accumulate scrub of a ten 
 day ' beard be flourish . 

 " surely , " think I , " he be not go to try to shave . " but so it be . 
 take the piece of fat with which he have grease his boot , good 
 wash it thoroughly in the stream . then diving again into the bag he 
 bring out a little pocket razor with a guard to it , such as be 
 buy by people who be afraid of cut themselves , or by those 
 about to undertake a sea voyage . then he rub his face and chin 
 vigorously with the fat and begin . evidently it prove a painful 
 process , for he groan very much over it , and I be convulse with 
 inward laughter as I watch he struggle with that stubbly beard . it 
 seem so very odd that a man should take the trouble to shave himself 
 with a piece of fat in such a place and in our circumstance . at last 
 he succeed in get the hair off the right side of his face and 
 chin , when suddenly I , who be watch , become conscious of a flash of 
 light that pass just by his head . 

 Good spring up with a profane exclamation   if it have not be a safety 
 razor he would certainly have cut his throat , and so do I , without 
 the exclamation , and this be what I see . stand not more than twenty 
 pace from where I be , and ten from Good , be a group of man . they 
 be very tall and copper - colour , and some of they wear great plume 
 of black feather and short cloak of leopard skin ; this be all I 
 notice at the moment . in front of they stand a youth of about 
 seventeen , his hand still raise and his body bend forward in the 
 attitude of a grecian statue of a spear - thrower . evidently the flash of 
 light have be cause by a weapon which he have hurl . 

 as I look an old soldier - like man step forward out of the group , 
 and catch the youth by the arm say something to he . then they 
 advance upon we . 

 Sir Henry , Good , and Umbopa by this time have seize their rifle and 
 lift they threateningly . the party of native still come on . it 
 strike I that they could not know what rifle be , or they would not 
 have treat they with such contempt . 

 " put down your gun ! " I halloe to the other , see that our only 
 chance of safety lie in conciliation . they obey , and walk to the 
 front I address the elderly man who have check the youth . 

 " greet , " I say in Zulu , not know what language to use . to my 
 surprise I be understand . 

 " greeting , " answer the old man , not , indeed , in the same tongue , but 
 in a dialect so closely ally to it that neither Umbopa nor myself have 
 any difficulty in understand he . indeed , as we afterwards find 
 out , the language speak by this people be an old - fashioned form of the 
 Zulu tongue , bear about the same relationship to it that the English 
 of Chaucer do to the English of the nineteenth century . 

 " whence come you ? " he go on , " who be you ? and why be the face of 
 three of you white , and the face of the fourth as the face of our 
 mother 's son ? " and he point to Umbopa . I look at Umbopa as he say 
 it , and it flash across I that he be right . the face of Umbopa be 
 like the face of the man before I , and so be his great form like 
 their form . but I have not time to reflect on this coincidence . 

 " we be stranger , and come in peace , " I answer , speak very 
 slowly , so that he might understand I , " and this man be our servant . " 

 " you lie , " he answer ; " no stranger can cross the mountain where all 
 thing perish . but what do your lie matter ? - if ye be stranger then 
 ye must die , for no stranger may live in the land of the Kukuanas . it 
 be the king 's law . prepare then to die , O stranger ! " 

 I be slightly stagger at this , more especially as I see the hand of 
 some of the man steal down to their side , where hang on each what 
 look to I like a large and heavy knife . 

 " what do that beggar say ? " ask Good . 

 " he say we be go to be kill , " I answer grimly . 

 " oh , Lord ! " groan Good ; and , as be his way when perplex , he put 
 his hand to his false tooth , drag the top set down and allow 
 they to fly back to his jaw with a snap . it be a most fortunate move , 
 for next second the dignified crowd of Kukuanas utter a simultaneous 
 yell of horror , and bolt back some yard . 

 " what be up ? " say I. 

 " it be his tooth , " whisper Sir Henry excitedly . " he move they . take 
 they out , good , take they out ! " 

 he obey , slip the set into the sleeve of his flannel shirt . 

 in another second curiosity have overcome fear , and the man advance 
 slowly . apparently they have now forget their amiable intention of 
 kill we . 

 " how be it , O stranger , " ask the old man solemnly , " that this fat 
 man   pointing to Good , who be clothe in nothing but boot and a flannel 
 shirt , and have only half finish his shaving , whose body be clothe , 
 and whose leg be bare , who grow hair on one side of his sickly face 
 and not on the other , and who wear one shin and transparent 
 eye - how be it , I ask , that he have tooth which move of themselves , 
 come away from the jaw and return of their own will ? " 

 " open your mouth , " I say to Good , who promptly curl up his lip and 
 grin at the old gentleman like an angry dog , reveal to his 
 astonish gaze two thin red line of gum as utterly innocent of 
 ivory as a new - bear elephant . the audience gasp . 

 " where be his tooth ? " they shout ; " with our eye we see they . " 

 turn his head slowly and with a gesture of ineffable contempt , Good 
 sweep his hand across his mouth . then he grin again , and lo , there 
 be two row of lovely tooth . 

 now the young man who have fling the knife throw himself down on the 
 grass and give vent to a prolonged howl of terror ; and as for the old 
 gentleman , his knee knock together with fear . 

 " I see that ye be spirit , " he say falteringly ; " do ever man bear of 
 woman have hair on one side of his face and not on the other , or a 
 round and transparent eye , or tooth which move and melt away and 
 grow again ? pardon we , o my lord . " 

 here be luck indeed , and , needless to say , I jump at the chance . 

 " it be grant , " I say with an imperial smile . " Nay , ye shall know the 
 truth . we come from another world , though we be man such as ye ; we 
 come , " I go on , " from the big star that shin at night . " 

 " oh ! oh ! " groan the chorus of astonished aborigine . 

 " yes , " I go on , " we do , indeed " ; and again I smile benignly , as I 
 utter that amazing lie . " we come to stay with you a little while , and 
 to bless you by our sojourn . Ye will see , o friend , that I have 
 prepare myself for this visit by the learning of your language . " 

 " it be so , it be so , " say the chorus . 

 " only , my lord , " put in the old gentleman , " thou hast learn it very 
 badly . " 

 I cast an indignant glance at he , and he quail . 

 " now friend , " I continue , " ye might think that after so long a 
 journey we should find it in our heart to avenge such a reception , 
 mayhap to strike cold in death the imperious hand that - that , in 
 short - throw a knife at the head of he whose tooth come and go . " 

 " spare he , my lord , " say the old man in supplication ; " he be the 
 king 's son , and I be his uncle . if anything befall he his blood will 
 be require at my hand . " 

 " yes , that be certainly so , " put in the young man with great emphasis . 

 " Ye may perhaps doubt our power to avenge , " I go on , heedless of this 
 by - play . " stay , I will show you . here , thou dog and slave   address 
 Umbopa in a savage tone , give I the magic tube that speak " ; and I 
 tip a wink towards my express rifle . 

 Umbopa rise to the occasion , and with something as nearly resemble a 
 grin as I have ever see on his dignified face he hand I the gun . 

 " it be here , o Lord of Lords , " he say with a deep obeisance . 

 now just before I have ask for the rifle I have perceive a little 
  klipspringer antelope stand on a mass of rock about seventy yard 
 away , and determine to risk the shot . 

 " ye see that buck , " I say , point the animal out to the party before 
 I . " tell I , be it possible for man bear of woman to kill it from here 
 with a noise ? " 

 " it be not possible , my lord , " answer the old man . 

 " yet shall I kill it , " I say quietly . 

 the old man smile . " that my lord can not do , " he answer . 

 I raise the rifle and cover the buck . it be a small animal , and one 
 which a man might well be excuse for miss , but I know that it would 
 not do to miss . 

 I draw a deep breath , and slowly press on the trigger . the buck stand 
 still as a stone . 

 " Bang ! thud ! " the antelope spring into the air and fall on the rock 
 dead as a door nail . 

 a groan of simultaneous terror burst from the group before we . 

 " if you want meat , " I remark coolly , " go fetch that buck . " 

 the old man make a sign , and one of his follower depart , and 
 presently return bear the klipspringer . I notice with 
 satisfaction that I have hit it fairly behind the shoulder . they 
 gather round the poor creature 's body , gaze at the bullet - hole in 
 consternation . 

 " ye see , " I say , " I do not speak empty word . " 

 there be no answer . 

 " if ye yet doubt our power , " I go on , " let one of you go stand upon 
 that rock that I may make he as this buck . " 

 none of they seem at all inclined to take the hint , till at last the 
 king 's son speak . 

 " it be well say . do thou , my uncle , go stand upon the rock . it be but 
 a buck that the magic have kill . surely it can not kill a man . " 

 the old gentleman do not take the suggestion in good part . indeed , he 
 seem hurt . 

 " no ! no ! " he ejaculate hastily , " my old eye have see enough . these 
 be wizard , indeed . let we bring they to the king . yet if any should 
 wish a further proof , let he stand upon the rock , that the magic 
 tube may speak with he . " 

 there be a most general and hasty expression of dissent . 

 " let not good magic be waste on our poor body , " say one ; " we be 
 satisfied . all the witchcraft of our people can not show the like of 
 this . " 

 " it be so , " remark the old gentleman , in a tone of intense relief ; 
 " without any doubt it be so . listen , child of the Stars , child of 
 the shin Eye and the movable Teeth , who roar out in thunder , and 
 slay from afar . I be Infadoos , son of Kafa , once king of the Kukuana 
 people . this youth be Scragga . " 

 " he nearly scrag I , " murmur Good . 

 " Scragga , son of Twala , the great king - Twala , husband of a thousand 
 wife , chief and lord paramount of the Kukuanas , keeper of the great 
 Road , terror of his enemy , student of the Black Arts , leader of a 
 hundred thousand warrior , Twala the one - eye , the Black , the terrible . " 

 " so , " say I superciliously , " lead we then to Twala . we do not talk 
 with low people and underling . " 

 " it be well , my lord , we will lead you ; but the way be long . we be 
 hunt three day ' journey from the place of the king . but let my 
 lord have patience , and we will lead they . " 

 " so be it , " I say carelessly ; " all time be before we , for we do not 
 die . we be ready , lead on . but Infadoos , and thou Scragga , beware ! 
 play we no monkey trick , set for we no fox ' snare , for before your 
 brain of mud have think of they we shall know and avenge . the light 
 of the transparent eye of he with the bare leg and the half - haire 
 face shall destroy you , and go through your land ; his vanish tooth 
 shall affix themselves fast in you and eat you up , you and your wife 
 and child ; the magic tube shall argue with you loudly , and make you 
 as sieve . beware ! " 

 this magnificent address do not fail of its effect ; indeed , it might 
 almost have be spar , so deeply be our friend already impress 
 with our power . 

 the old man make a deep obeisance , and murmur the word , " Koom 
 Koom , " which I afterwards discover be their royal salute , 
 correspond to the Bayéte of the Zulus , and turning , address his 
 follower . these at once proceed to lay hold of all our good and 
 chattel , in order to bear they for we , except only the gun , which 
 they would on no account touch . they even seize Good 's clothe , that , 
 as the reader may remember , be neatly fold up beside he . 

 he see and make a dive for they , and a loud altercation ensue . 

 " let not my lord of the transparent Eye and the melt Teeth touch 
 they , " say the old man . " surely his slave shall carry the thing . " 

 " but I want to put them on ! " roar Good , in nervous English . 

 Umbopa translate . 

 " Nay , my lord , " answer Infadoos , " would my lord cover up his 
 beautiful white leg   although he be so dark good have a singularly 
 white skin   from the eye of his servant ? have we offend my lord 
 that he should do such a thing ? " 

 here I nearly explode with laughing ; and meanwhile one of the man 
 start on with the garment . 

 " damn it ! " roar Good , " that black villain have get my trouser . " 

 " look here , good , " say Sir Henry ; " you have appear in this country 
 in a certain character , and you must live up to it . it will never do 
 for you to put on trouser again . henceforth you must exist in a 
 flannel shirt , a pair of boot , and an eye - glass . " 

 " yes , " I say , " and with whisker on one side of your face and not on 
 the other . if you change any of these thing the people will think that 
 we be impostor . I be very sorry for you , but , seriously , you must . if 
 once they begin to suspect we our life will not be worth a brass 
 farthing . " 

 " do you really think so ? " say Good gloomily . 

 " I do , indeed . your ' beautiful white leg ' and your eye - glass be now 
  the feature of our party , and as Sir Henry say , you must live up to 
 they . be thankful that you have get your boot on , and that the air be 
 warm . " 

 Good sigh , and say no more , but it take he a fortnight to become 
 accustomed to his new and scant attire . 



 CHAPTER VIII 

 we enter KUKUANALAND 

 all that afternoon we travel along the magnificent roadway , which 
 trend steadily in a north - westerly direction . Infadoos and Scragga 
 walk with we , but their follower march about one hundred pace 
 ahead . 

 " Infadoos , " I say at length , " who make this road ? " 

 " it be make , my lord , of old time , none know how or when , not even the 
 wise woman Gagool , who have live for generation . we be not old enough 
 to remember its making . none can fashion such road now , but the king 
 suffer no grass to grow upon it . " 

 " and whose be the writing on the wall of the cave through which we 
 have pass on the road ? " I ask , refer to the Egyptian - like 
 sculpture that we have see . 

 " my lord , the hand that make the road write the wonderful writing . we 
 know not who write they . " 

 " when do the Kukuana people come into this country ? " 

 " my lord , the race come down here like the breath of a storm ten 
 thousand thousand moon ago , from the great land which lie there 
 beyond , " and he point to the north . " they could travel no far 
 because of the high mountain which ring in the land , so say the old 
 voice of our father that have descend to we the child , and so 
 say Gagool , the wise woman , the smeller out of witch , " and again he 
 point to the snow - clothe peak . " the country , too , be good , so they 
 settle here and grow strong and powerful , and now our number be like 
 the sea sand , and when Twala the king call up his regiment their 
 plume cover the plain so far as the eye of man can reach . " 

 " and if the land be wall in with mountain , who be there for the 
 regiment to fight with ? " 

 " Nay , my lord , the country be open there towards the north , and now and 
 again warrior sweep down upon we in cloud from a land we know not , 
 and we slay they . it be the third part of the life of a man since there 
 be a war . many thousand die in it , but we destroy those who come 
 to eat we up . so since then there have be no war . " 

 " your warrior must grow weary of rest on their spear , Infadoos . " 

 " my lord , there be one war , just after we destroy the people that 
 come down upon we , but it be a civil war ; dog eat dog . " 

 " how be that ? " 

 " my lord the king , my half - brother , have a brother bear at the same 
 birth , and of the same woman . it be not our custom , my lord , to suffer 
 twin to live ; the weak must always die . but the mother of the king 
 hide away the feebler child , which be bear the last , for her heart 
 yearn over it , and that child be Twala the king . I be his young 
 brother , bear of another wife . " 

 " well ? " 

 " my lord , Kafa , our father , die when we come to manhood , and my 
 brother Imotu be make king in his place , and for a space reign and 
 have a son by his favourite wife . when the babe be three year old , 
 just after the great war , during which no man could sow or reap , a 
 famine come upon the land , and the people murmur because of the 
 famine , and look round like a starve lion for something to rend . 
 then it be that Gagool , the wise and terrible woman , who do not die , 
 make a proclamation to the people , say , ' the king Imotu be no king . ' 
 and at the time Imotu be sick with a wound , and lie in his kraal not 
 able to move . 

 " then Gagool go into a hut and lead out Twala , my half - brother , and 
 twin brother to the king , whom she have hide among the cave and rock 
 since he be bear , and strip the ' moocha '   waist - cloth   off his 
 loin , show the people of the Kukuanas the mark of the sacred snake 
 coil round his middle , wherewith the eld son of the king be mark 
 at birth , and cry out loud , ' behold your king whom I have save for 
 you even to this day ! ' 

 " now the people be mad with hunger , and altogether bereft of reason 
 and the knowledge of truth , cry out - ' the king ! the king ! ' but I 
 know that it be not so , for Imotu my brother be the elder of the 
 twin , and our lawful king . then just as the tumult be at its height 
 Imotu the king , though he be very sick , crawl from his hut hold 
 his wife by the hand , and follow by his little son Ignosi - that be , 
 by interpretation , the Lightning . 

 " ' what be this noise ? ' he ask . ' why cry ye the king ! the king ! ' 

 " then Twala , his twin brother , bear of the same woman , and in the same 
 hour , run to he , and take he by the hair , stab he through the 
 heart with his knife . and the people be fickle , and ever ready to 
 worship the rise sun , clap their hand and cry , ' Twala be 
 king ! now we know that Twala be king ! ' " 

 " and what become of Imotu 's wife and her son Ignosi ? do Twala kill 
 they too ? " 

 " Nay , my lord . when she see that her lord be dead the queen seize the 
 child with a cry and run away . two day afterward she come to a kraal 
 very hungry , and none would give her milk or food , now that her lord 
 the king be dead , for all man hate the unfortunate . but at nightfall a 
 little child , a girl , creep out and bring her corn to eat , and she 
 bless the child , and go on towards the mountain with her boy 
 before the sun rise again , and there she must have perish , for none 
 have see she since , nor the child Ignosi . " 

 " then if this child Ignosi have live he would be the true king of the 
 Kukuana people ? " 

 " that be so , my lord ; the sacred snake be round his middle . if he live 
 he be king ; but , alas ! he be long dead . " 

 " see , my lord , " and Infadoos point to a vast collection of hut 
 surround by a fence , which be in its turn encircle by a great 
 ditch , that lie on the plain beneath we . " that be the kraal where the 
 wife of Imotu be last see with the child Ignosi . it be there that we 
 shall sleep to - night , if , indeed , " he add doubtfully , " my lord sleep 
 at all upon this earth . " 

 " when we be among the Kukuanas , my good friend Infadoos , we do as the 
 Kukuanas do , " I say majestically , and turn round quickly to address 
 Good , who be tramp along sullenly behind , his mind fully occupy 
 with unsatisfactory attempt to prevent his flannel shirt from flap 
 in the evening breeze . to my astonishment I butt into Umbopa , who be 
 walk along immediately behind I , and very evidently have be 
 listen with the great interest to my conversation with Infadoos . 
 the expression on his face be most curious , and give I the idea of a 
 man who be struggle with partial success to bring something long ago 
 forget back into his mind . 

 all this while we have be press on at a good rate towards the 
 undulating plain beneath we . the mountain we have cross now loom 
 high above our head , and Sheba 's Breasts be veil modestly in 
 diaphanous wreath of mist . as we go the country grow more and more 
 lovely . the vegetation be luxuriant , without be tropical ; the sun 
 be bright and warm , but not burn ; and a gracious breeze blow softly 
 along the odorous slope of the mountain . indeed , this new land be 
 little less than an earthly paradise ; in beauty , in natural wealth , and 
 in climate I have never see its like . the Transvaal be a fine country , 
 but it be nothing to Kukuanaland . 

 so soon as we start Infadoos have despatch a runner to warn the 
 people of the kraal , which , by the way , be in his military command , of 
 our arrival . this man have depart at an extraordinary speed , which 
 Infadoos inform I he would keep up all the way , as run be an 
 exercise much practise among his people . 

 the result of this message now become apparent . when we arrive within 
 two mile of the kraal we could see that company after company of man 
 be issue from its gate and march towards we . 

 Sir Henry lay his hand upon my arm , and remark that it look as 
 though we be go to meet with a warm reception . something in his 
 tone attract Infadoos ' attention . 

 " let not my lord be afraid , " he say hastily , " for in my breast there 
 dwell no guile . this regiment be one under my command , and come out 
 by my order to greet you . " 

 I nod easily , though I be not quite easy in my mind . 

 about half a mile from the gate of this kraal be a long stretch of 
 rise ground slop gently upwards from the road , and here the 
 company form . it be a splendid sight to see they , each company 
 about three hundred strong , charge swiftly up the rise , with flash 
 spear and wave plume , to take their appoint place . by the time we 
 reach the slope twelve such company , or in all three thousand six 
 hundred man , have pass out and take up their position along the road . 

 presently we come to the first company , and be able to gaze in 
 astonishment on the most magnificent set of warrior that I have ever 
 see . they be all man of mature age , mostly veteran of about forty , 
 and not one of they be under six foot in height , whilst many stand six 
 foot three or four . they wear upon their head heavy black plume of 
 Sakaboola feather , like those which adorn our guide . about their 
 waist and beneath the right knee be bind circlet of white ox 
 tail , while in their left hand they carry round shield measure 
 about twenty inch across . these shield be very curious . the 
 framework be make of an iron plate beat out thin , over which be 
 stretch milk - white ox - hide . 

 the weapon that each man bore be simple , but most effective , 
 consist of a short and very heavy two - edge spear with a wooden 
 shaft , the blade be about six inch across at the wide part . 
 these spear be not use for throw but like the Zulu " bangwan , " 
 or stab assegai , be for close quarter only , when the wound 
 inflict by they be terrible . in addition to his bangwan every man 
 carry three large and heavy knife , each knife weigh about two 
 pound . one knife be fix in the ox - tail girdle , and the other two at 
 the back of the round shield . these knife , which be call " tollas " 
 by the Kukuanas , take the place of the throw assegai of the Zulus . 
 the Kukuana warrior can cast they with great accuracy to a distance of 
 fifty yard , and it be their custom on charge to hurl a volley of 
 they at the enemy as they come to close quarter . 

 each company remain still as a collection of bronze statue till we 
 be opposite to it , when at a signal give by its commanding officer , 
 who , distinguish by a leopard skin cloak , stand some pace in front , 
 every spear be raise into the air , and from three hundred throat 
 spring forth with a sudden roar the royal salute of " Koom . " then , so 
 soon as we have pass , the company form up behind we and follow we 
 towards the kraal , till at last the whole regiment of the " Greys " - so 
 call from their white shield - the crack corps of the Kukuana people , 
 be march in our rear with a tread that shake the ground . 

 at length , branch off from Solomon 's Great Road , we come to the wide 
 fosse surround the kraal , which be at least a mile round , and fence 
 with a strong palisade of pile form of the trunk of tree . at the 
 gateway this fosse be span by a primitive drawbridge , which be let 
 down by the guard to allow we to pass in . the kraal be exceedingly well 
 lay out . through the centre run a wide pathway intersect at right 
 angle by other pathway so arrange as to cut the hut into square 
 block , each block be the quarter of a company . the hut be 
 dome - shape , and build , like those of the Zulus , of a framework of 
 wattle , beautifully thatch with grass ; but , unlike the Zulu hut , 
 they have doorway through which man could walk . also they be much 
 large , and surround by a verandah about six foot wide , beautifully 
 pave with powdered lime trodden hard . 

 all along each side of this wide pathway that pierce the kraal be 
 range hundred of woman , bring out by curiosity to look at we . these 
 woman , for a native race , be exceedingly handsome . they be tall and 
 graceful , and their figure be wonderfully fine . the hair , though 
 short , be rather curly than woolly , the feature be frequently 
 aquiline , and the lip be not unpleasantly thick , as be the case among 
 most african race . but what strike we most be their exceedingly quiet 
 and dignified air . they be as well - breed in their way as the 
  habituées of a fashionable drawing - room , and in this respect they 
 differ from Zulu woman and their cousin the Masai who inhabit the 
 district beyond Zanzibar . their curiosity have bring they out to see 
 we , but they allow no rude expression of astonishment or savage 
 criticism to pass their lip as we trudge wearily in front of they . 
 not even when old Infadoos with a surreptitious motion of the hand 
 point out the crown wonder of poor Good 's " beautiful white leg , " 
 do they suffer the feeling of intense admiration which evidently 
 master their mind to find expression . they fix their dark eye 
 upon this new and snowy loveliness , for , as I think I have say , Good 's 
 skin be exceedingly white , and that be all . but it be quite enough 
 for Good , who be modest by nature . 

 when we reach the centre of the kraal , Infadoos halt at the door of 
 a large hut , which be surround at a distance by a circle of small 
 one . 

 " Enter , Sons of the star , " he say , in a magniloquent voice , " and 
 deign to rest awhile in our humble habitation . a little food shall be 
 bring to you , so that ye may have no need to draw your belt tight 
 from hunger ; some honey and some milk , and an ox or two , and a few 
 sheep ; not much , my lord , but still a little food . " 

 " it be good , " say I. " Infadoos ; we be weary with travel through 
 realm of air ; now let we rest . " 

 accordingly we enter the hut , which we find amply prepare for our 
 comfort . couch of tanned skin be spread for we to lie on , and 
 water be place for we to wash in . 

 presently we hear a shouting outside , and step to the door , see a 
 line of damsel bear milk and roasted mealie , and honey in a pot . 
 behind these be some youth drive a fat young ox . we receive the 
 gift , and then one of the young man draw the knife from his girdle and 
 dexterously cut the ox 's throat . in ten minute it be dead , skin , 
 and joint . the good of the meat be then cut off for we , and the 
 rest , in the name of our party , I present to the warrior round we , 
 who take it and distribute the " white lord ' gift . " 

 Umbopa set to work , with the assistance of an extremely prepossess 
 young woman , to boil our portion in a large earthenware pot over a fire 
 which be build outside the hut , and when it be nearly ready we send a 
 message to Infadoos , and ask he and Scragga , the king 's son , to join 
 we . 

 presently they come , and sit down upon little stool , of which 
 there be several about the hut , for the Kukuanas do not in general 
 squat upon their haunch like the Zulus , they help we to get through 
 our dinner . the old gentleman be most affable and polite , but it 
 strike I that the young one regard we with doubt . together with the 
 rest of the party , he have be overawe by our white appearance and by 
 our magic property ; but it seem to I that , on discover that we 
 ate , drank , and sleep like other mortal , his awe be begin to wear 
 off , and to be replace by a sullen suspicion - which make I feel 
 rather uncomfortable . 

 in the course of our meal Sir Henry suggest to I that it might be 
 well to try to discover if our host know anything of his brother 's 
 fate , or if they have ever see or hear of he ; but , on the whole , I 
 think that it would be wise to say nothing of the matter at this 
 time . it be difficult to explain a relative lose from " the Stars . " 

 after supper we produce our pipe and light they ; a proceeding which 
 fill Infadoos and Scragga with astonishment . the Kukuanas be 
 evidently unacquainted with the divine delight of tobacco - smoke . the 
 herb be grow among they extensively ; but , like the Zulus , they use it 
 for snuff only , and quite fail to identify it in its new form . 

 presently I ask Infadoos when we be to proceed on our journey , and 
 be delighted to learn that preparation have be make for we to leave 
 on the follow morning , messenger have already depart to inform 
 Twala the king of our come . 

 it appear that Twala be at his principal place , know as Loo , make 
 ready for the great annual feast which be to be hold in the first week 
 of June . at this gathering all the regiment , with the exception of 
 certain detachment leave behind for garrison purpose , be bring up 
 and parade before the king ; and the great annual witch - hunt , of which 
 more by - and - by , be hold . 

 we be to start at dawn ; and Infadoos , who be to accompany we , 
 expect that we should reach Loo on the night of the second day , 
 unless we be detain by accident or by swollen river . 

 when they have give we this information our visitor bid we 
 good - night ; and , have arrange to watch turn and turn about , three of 
 we fling ourselves down and sleep the sweet sleep of the weary , whilst 
 the fourth sit up on the look - out for possible treachery . 



 CHAPTER ix 

 twala the king 

 it will not be necessary for I to detail at length the incident of 
 our journey to Loo . it take two full day ' travel along Solomon 's 
 Great Road , which pursue its even course right into the heart of 
 Kukuanaland . suffice it to say that as we go the country seem to 
 grow rich and rich , and the kraal , with their wide surround 
 belt of cultivation , more and more numerous . they be all build upon 
 the same principle as the first camp which we have reach , and be 
 guard by ample garrison of troop . indeed , in Kukuanaland , as among 
 the Germans , the Zulus , and the Masai , every able - bodied man be a 
 soldier , so that the whole force of the nation be available for its 
 war , offensive or defensive . as we travel we be overtake by 
 thousand of warrior hurry up to Loo to be present at the great 
 annual review and festival , and more splendid troop I never see . 

 at sunset on the second day , we stop to rest awhile upon the summit 
 of some height over which the road run , and there on a beautiful and 
 fertile plain before we lie Loo itself . for a native town it be an 
 enormous place , quite five mile round , I should say , with outlying 
 kraal project from it , that serve on grand occasion as cantonment 
 for the regiment , and a curious horseshoe - shape hill , with which we 
 be destine to become well acquaint , about two mile to the 
 north . it be beautifully situate , and through the centre of the kraal , 
 divide it into two portion , run a river , which appear to be 
 bridge in several place , the same indeed that we have see from the 
 slope of Sheba 's Breasts . sixty or seventy mile away three great 
 snow - cap mountain , place at the point of a triangle , start out 
 of the level plain . the conformation of these mountain be unlike that 
 of Sheba 's Breasts , be sheer and precipitous , instead of smooth and 
 rounded . 

 infadoo see we look at they , and volunteer a remark . 

 " the road end there , " he say , point to the mountain know among 
 the Kukuanas as the " Three Witches . " 

 " why do it end ? " I ask . 

 " who know ? " he answer with a shrug ; " the mountain be full of 
 cave , and there be a great pit between they . it be there that the wise 
 man of old time use to go to get whatever it be they come for to this 
 country , and it be there now that our king be bury in the Place of 
 Death . " 

 " what be it they come for ? " I ask eagerly . 

 " Nay , I know not . my lord who have drop from the Stars should 
 know , " he answer with a quick look . evidently he know more than he 
 choose to say . 

 " yes , " I go on , " you be right , in the star we learn many thing . I 
 have hear , for instance , that the wise man of old come to these 
 mountain to find bright stone , pretty plaything , and yellow iron . " 

 " my lord be wise , " he answer coldly ; " I be but a child and can not 
 talk with my lord on such matter . my lord must speak with Gagool the 
 old , at the king 's place , who be wise even as my lord , " and he go 
 away . 

 so soon as he be go I turn to the other , and point out the 
 mountain . " there be Solomon 's diamond mine , " I say . 

 Umbopa be stand with they , apparently plunge in one of the fit of 
 abstraction which be common to he , and catch my word . 

 " yes , Macumazahn , " he put in , in Zulu , " the diamond be surely there , 
 and you shall have they , since you white man be so fond of toy and 
 money . " 

 " how dost thou know that , Umbopa ? " I ask sharply , for I do not like 
 his mysterious way . 

 he laugh . " I dream it in the night , white man ; " then he too turn 
 on his heel and go . 

 " now what , " say Sir Henry , " be our black friend drive at ? he know 
 more than he choose to say , that be clear . by the way , Quatermain , have 
 he hear anything of - of my brother ? " 

 " nothing ; he have ask everyone he have become friendly with , but they 
 all declare that no white man have ever be see in the country before . " 

 " do you suppose that he get here at all ? " suggest Good ; " we have only 
 reach the place by a miracle ; be it likely he could have reach it 
 without the map ? " 

 " I do not   know , " say Sir Henry gloomily , " but somehow I think that I 
 shall find he . " 

 slowly the sun sink , then suddenly darkness rush down on the land 
 like a tangible thing . there be no breathing - space between the day and 
 night , no soft transformation scene , for in these latitude twilight 
 do not exist . the change from day to night be as quick and as 
 absolute as the change from life to death . the sun sink and the world 
 be wreathe in shadow . but not for long , for see in the west there be 
 a glow , then come ray of silver light , and at last the full and 
 glorious moon light up the plain and shoot its gleam arrow far 
 and wide , fill the earth with a faint refulgence . 

 we stand and watch the lovely sight , whilst the star grow pale 
 before this chasten majesty , and feel our heart lift up in the 
 presence of a beauty that I can not describe . mine have be a rough 
 life , but there be a few thing I be thankful to have live for , and 
 one of they be to have see that moon shine over Kukuanaland . 

 presently our meditation be break in upon by our polite friend 
 Infadoos . 

 " if my lord be rest we will journey on to Loo , where a hut be make 
 ready for my lord to - night . the moon be now bright , so that we shall 
 not fall by the way . " 

 we assent , and in an hour 's time be at the outskirt of the town , 
 of which the extent , map out as it be by thousand of camp fire , 
 appear absolutely endless . indeed , Good , who be always fond of a bad 
 joke , christen it " Unlimited Loo . " soon we come to a moat with a 
 drawbridge , where we be meet by the rattling of arm and the hoarse 
 challenge of a sentry . infadoo give some password that I could not 
 catch , which be meet with a salute , and we pass on through the 
 central street of the great grass city . after nearly half an hour 's 
 tramp , past endless line of hut , Infadoos halt at last by the gate 
 of a little group of hut which surround a small courtyard of 
 powdered limestone , and inform we that these be to be our " poor " 
 quarter . 

 we enter , and find that a hut have be assign to each of we . these 
 hut be superior to any that we have yet see , and in each be a most 
 comfortable bed make of tanned skin , spread upon mattress of 
 aromatic grass . food too be ready for we , and so soon as we have wash 
 ourselves with water , which stand ready in earthenware jar , some young 
 woman of handsome appearance bring we roasted meat , and mealie cobs 
 daintily serve on wooden platter , and present they to we with deep 
 obeisance . 

 we eat and drink , and then , the bed have be all move into one hut 
 by our request , a precaution at which the amiable young lady smile , 
 we fling ourselves down to sleep , thoroughly weary with our long 
 journey . 

 when we wake it be to find the sun high in the heaven , and the female 
 attendant , who do not seem to be trouble by any false shame , already 
 stand inside the hut , have be order to attend and help we to 
 " make ready . " 

 " make ready , indeed , " growl Good ; " when one have only a flannel shirt 
 and a pair of boot , that do not take long . I wish you would ask they 
 for my trouser , Quatermain . " 

 I ask accordingly , but be inform that these sacred relic have 
 already be take to the king , who would see we in the forenoon . 

 somewhat to their astonishment and disappointment , have request the 
 young lady to step outside , we proceed to make the good toilet of 
 which the circumstance admit . good even go the length of again 
 shave the right side of his face ; the left , on which now appear a 
 very fair crop of whisker , we impress upon he he must on no account 
 touch . as for ourselves , we be content with a good wash and comb 
 our hair . Sir Henry 's yellow lock be now almost upon his shoulder , 
 and he look more like an ancient dane than ever , while my grizzle 
 scrub be fully an inch long , instead of half an inch , which in a 
 general way I consider my maximum length . 

 by the time that we have eat our breakfast , and smoke a pipe , a 
 message be bring to we by no less a personage than Infadoos himself 
 that Twala the king be ready to see we , if we would be pleased to come . 

 we remark in reply that we should prefer to wait till the sun be a 
 little high , we be yet weary with our journey ,   c. ,   c. it be 
 always well , when deal with uncivilised people , not to be in too 
 great a hurry . they be apt to mistake politeness for awe or servility . 
 so , although we be quite as anxious to see Twala as Twala could be to 
 see we , we sit down and wait for an hour , employ the interval in 
 prepare such present as our slender stock of good 
 permit - namely , the Winchester rifle which have be use by poor 
 Ventv"gel , and some bead . the rifle and ammunition we determine to 
 present to his royal highness , and the bead be for his wife and 
 courtier . we have already give a few to Infadoos and Scragga , and 
 find that they be delighted with they , never have see such thing 
 before . at length we declare that we be ready , and guide by 
 Infadoos , start off to the audience , Umbopa carry the rifle and 
 bead . 

 after walk a few hundred yard we come to an enclosure , something 
 like that surround the hut which have be allot to we , only 
 fifty time as big , for it could not have cover less than six or 
 seven acre of ground . all round the outside fence stand a row of hut , 
 which be the habitation of the king 's wife . exactly opposite the 
 gateway , on the further side of the open space , be a very large hut , 
 build by itself , in which his majesty reside . all the rest be open 
 ground ; that be to say , it would have be open have it not be fill 
 by company after company of warrior , who be muster there to the 
 number of seven or eight thousand . these man stand still as statue as 
 we advance through they , and it would be impossible to give an 
 adequate idea of the grandeur of the spectacle which they present , 
 with their wave plume , their glancing spear , and iron - back 
 ox - hide shield . 

 the space in front of the large hut be empty , but before it be 
 place several stool . on three of these , at a sign from Infadoos , we 
 seat ourselves , Umbopa stand behind we . as for Infadoos , he take 
 up a position by the door of the hut . so we wait for ten minute or 
 more in the midst of a dead silence , but conscious that we be the 
 object of the concentrated gaze of some eight thousand pair of eye . 
 it be a somewhat try ordeal , but we carry it off as good we 
 could . at length the door of the hut open , and a gigantic figure , 
 with a splendid tiger - skin karross fling over its shoulder , step 
 out , follow by the boy Scragga , and what appear to we to be a 
 wither - up monkey , wrap in a fur cloak . the figure seat itself 
 upon a stool , Scragga take his stand behind it , and the wither - up 
 monkey creep on all four into the shade of the hut and squat down . 

 still there be silence . 

 then the gigantic figure slip off the karross and stand up before 
 we , a truly alarming spectacle . it be that of an enormous man with the 
 most entirely repulsive countenance we have ever beheld . this man 's lip 
 be as thick as a Negro 's , the nose be flat , he have but one gleam 
 black eye , for the other be represent by a hollow in the face , and 
 his whole expression be cruel and sensual to a degree . from the large 
 head rise a magnificent plume of white ostrich feather , his body be 
 clothe in a shirt of shin chain armour , whilst round the waist and 
 right knee be the usual garnish of white ox - tail . in his right hand 
 be a huge spear , about the neck a thick torque of gold , and bind on 
 the forehead shine dully a single and enormous uncut diamond . 

 still there be silence ; but not for long . presently the man , whom we 
 rightly guess to be the king , raise the great javelin in his hand . 
 instantly eight thousand spear be lift in answer , and from eight 
 thousand throat ring out the royal salute of " Koom . " three time 
 this be repeat , and each time the earth shake with the noise , that 
 can only be compare to the deep note of thunder . 

 " be humble , o people , " pip out a thin voice which seem to come from 
 the monkey in the shade , " it be the king . " 

 " it be the king , " boom out the eight thousand throat in answer . 
 " be humble , o people , it be the king . " 

 then there be silence again - dead silence . presently , however , it be 
 break . a soldier on our left drop his shield , which fall with a 
 clatter on to the limestone flooring . 

 Twala turn his one cold eye in the direction of the noise . 

 " come hither , thou , " he say , in a cold voice . 

 a fine young man step out of the rank , and stand before he . 

 " it be thy shield that fall , thou awkward dog . wilt thou make I a 
 reproach in the eye of these stranger from the star ? what hast thou 
 to say for thyself ? " 

 we see the poor fellow turn pale under his dusky skin . 

 " it be by chance , o calf of the black cow , " he murmur . 

 " then it be a chance for which thou must pay . Thou hast make I 
 foolish ; prepare for death . " 

 " I be the king 's ox , " be the low answer . 

 " Scragga , " roar the king , " let I see how thou canst use thy spear . 
 kill I this blunder fool . " 

 Scragga step forward with an ill - favour grin , and lift his 
 spear . the poor victim cover his eye with his hand and stand still . 
 as for we , we be petrify with horror . 

 " once , twice , " he wave the spear , and then strike , ah ! right home - the 
 spear stand out a foot behind the soldier 's back . he fling up his hand 
 and drop dead . from the multitude about we rise something like a 
 murmur , it roll round and round , and die away . the tragedy be 
 finish ; there lie the corpse , and we have not yet realise that it have 
 be enact . Sir Henry spring up and swear a great oath , then , 
 overpower by the sense of silence , sit down again . 

 " the thrust be a good one , " say the king ; " take he away . " 

 four man step out of the rank , and lift the body of the murder 
 man , carry it thence . 

 " cover up the blood - stain , cover they up , " pip out the thin voice 
 that proceed from the monkey - like figure ; " the king 's word be speak , 
 the king 's doom be do ! " 

 thereupon a girl come forward from behind the hut , bear a jar fill 
 with powdered lime , which she scatter over the red mark , blot it 
 from sight . 

 Sir Henry meanwhile be boil with rage at what have happen ; indeed , 
 it be with difficulty that we could keep he still . 

 " sit down , for heaven 's sake , " I whisper ; " our life depend on it . " 

 he yield and remain quiet . 

 Twala sit silent until the trace of the tragedy have be remove , then 
 he address we . 

 " white people , " he say , " who come hither , whence I know not , and why I 
 know not , greet . " 

 " Greeting , Twala , King of the Kukuanas , " I answer . 

 " white people , whence come ye , and what seek ye ? " 

 " we come from the star , ask we not how . we come to see this land . " 

 " ye journey from far to see a little thing . and that man with you , " 
 point to Umbopa , " do he also come from the star ? " 

 " even so ; there be people of thy colour in the heaven above ; but ask 
 not of matter too high for thee , Twala the king . " 

 " ye speak with a loud voice , people of the star , " Twala answer in a 
 tone which I scarcely like . " remember that the star be far off , and 
 ye be here . how if I make you as he whom they bear away ? " 

 I laugh out loud , though there be little laughter in my heart . 

 " o king , " I say , " be careful , walk warily over hot stone , lest thou 
 shouldst burn thy foot ; hold the spear by the handle , lest thou should 
 cut thy hand . touch but one hair of our head , and destruction shall 
 come upon thee . what , have not these " - point to Infadoos and 
 Scragga , who , young villain that he be , be employ in clean the 
 blood of the soldier off his spear - " tell thee what manner of man we 
 be ? Hast thou see the like of we ? " and I point to good , feel 
 quite sure that he have never see anybody before who look in the 
 least like he as he then appear . 

 " it be true , I have not , " say the king , survey Good with interest . 

 " have they not tell thee how we strike with death from afar ? " I go on . 

 " they have tell I , but I believe they not . let I see you kill . kill 
 I a man among those who stand yonder " - and he point to the opposite 
 side of the kraal - " and I will believe . " 

 " Nay , " I answer ; " we shed no blood of man except in just punishment ; 
 but if thou wilt see , bid thy servant drive in an ox through the kraal 
 gate , and before he have run twenty pace I will strike he dead . " 

 " Nay , " laugh the king , " kill I a man and I will believe . " 

 " good , o king , so be it , " I answer coolly ; " do thou walk across the 
 open space , and before thy foot reach the gate thou shalt be dead ; or 
 if thou wilt not , send thy son Scragga "   whom at that moment it would 
 have give I much pleasure to shoot . 

 on hear this suggestion Scragga utter a sort of howl , and bolt 
 into the hut . 

 Twala frown majestically ; the suggestion do not please he . 

 " let a young ox be drive in , " he say . 

 two man at once depart , run swiftly . 

 " now , Sir Henry , " say I , " do you shoot . I want to show this ruffian 
 that I be not the only magician of the party . " 

 Sir Henry accordingly take his " express , " and make ready . 

 " I hope I shall make a good shot , " he groan . 

 " you must , " I answer . " if you miss with the first barrel , let he 
 have the second . sight for 150 yard , and wait till the beast turn 
 broadside on . " 

 then come a pause , until presently we catch sight of an ox run 
 straight for the kraal gate . it come on through the gate , then , 
 catch sight of the vast concourse of people , stop stupidly , 
 turn round , and bellow . 

 " now be your time , " I whisper . 

 up go the rifle . 

 Bang ! thud ! and the ox be kick on his back , shoot in the rib . the 
 semi - hollow bullet have do its work well , and a sigh of astonishment 
 go up from the assemble thousand . 

 I turn round coolly - 

 " have I lie , o king ? " 

 " nay , white man , it be the truth , " be the somewhat awed answer . 

 " Listen , Twala , " I go on . " Thou hast see . now know we come in peace , 
 not in war . see , " and I hold up the Winchester repeater ; " here be a 
 hollow staff that shall enable thee to kill even as we kill , only I lay 
 this charm upon it , thou shalt kill no man with it . if thou liftest it 
 against a man , it shall kill thee . Stay , I will show thee . bid a 
 soldier step forty pace and place the shaft of a spear in the ground 
 so that the flat blade look towards we . " 

 in a few second it be do . 

 " now , see , I will break yonder spear . " 

 take a careful sight I fire . the bullet strike the flat of the 
 spear , and shatter the blade into fragment . 

 again the sigh of astonishment go up . 

 " now , Twala , we give this magic tube to thee , and by - and - by I will show 
 thee how to use it ; but beware how thou turn the magic of the star 
 against a man of earth , " and I hand he the rifle . 

 the king take it very gingerly , and lay it down at his foot . as he do 
 so I observe the wizene monkey - like figure creep from the shadow 
 of the hut . it creep on all four , but when it reach the place where 
 the king sit it rise upon its foot , and throw the furry covering 
 from its face , reveal a most extraordinary and weird countenance . 
 apparently it be that of a woman of great age so shrink that in size 
 it seem no large than the face of a year - old child , although make up 
 of a number of deep and yellow wrinkle . Set in these wrinkle be a 
 sink slit , that represent the mouth , beneath which the chin curve 
 outward to a point . there be no nose to speak of ; indeed , the visage 
 might have be take for that of a sun - dry corpse have it not be 
 for a pair of large black eye , still full of fire and intelligence , 
 which gleam and play under the snow - white eyebrow , and the 
 project parchment - colour skull , like jewel in a charnel - house . as 
 for the head itself , it be perfectly bare , and yellow in hue , while 
 its wrinkle scalp move and contract like the hood of a cobra . 

 the figure to which this fearful countenance belong , a countenance so 
 fearful indeed that it cause a shiver of fear to pass through we as we 
 gaze on it , stand still for a moment . then suddenly it project a 
 skinny claw arm with nail nearly an inch long , and lay it on the 
 shoulder of Twala the king , begin to speak in a thin and pierce 
 voice - 

 " listen , o king ! listen , o warrior ! listen , o mountain and plain and 
 river , home of the Kukuana race ! listen , o sky and sun , o rain and 
 storm and mist ! listen , o man and woman , o youth and maiden , and o ye 
 babe unborn ! listen , all thing that live and must die ! listen , all 
 dead thing that shall live again - again to die ! listen , the spirit of 
 life be in I and I prophesy . I prophesy ! I prophesy ! " 

 the word die away in a faint wail , and dread seem to seize upon the 
 heart of all who hear they , include our own . this old woman be 
 very terrible . 

 " Blood ! blood ! blood ! river of blood ; blood everywhere . I see it , I 
 smell it , I taste it - it be salt ! it run red upon the ground , it rain 
 down from the sky . 

 " Footsteps ! footstep ! footstep ! the tread of the white man come 
 from afar . it shake the earth ; the earth tremble before her master . 

 " blood be good , the red blood be bright ; there be no smell like the 
 smell of new - shed blood . the lion shall lap it and roar , the vulture 
 shall wash their wing in it and shriek with joy . 

 " I be old ! I be old ! I have see much blood ; ha , ha ! but I shall see 
 more ere I die , and be merry . how old be i , think ye ? your father know 
 I , and their father know I , and their father ' father ' father . 
 I have see the white man and know his desire . I be old , but the 
 mountain be old than I. who make the great road , tell I ? who write 
 the picture on the rock , tell I ? who rear up the three Silent Ones 
 yonder , that gaze across the pit , tell I ? " and she point towards the 
 three precipitous mountain which we have notice on the previous night . 

 " ye know not , but I know . it be a white people who be before ye be , 
 who shall be when ye be not , who shall eat you up and destroy you . 
  Yea ! yea ! yea ! 

 " and what come they for , the White Ones , the Terrible Ones , the skilled 
 in magic and all learn , the strong , the unswerving ? what be that 
 bright stone upon thy forehead , o king ? whose hand make the iron 
 garment upon thy breast , o king ? ye know not , but I know . I the Old 
 one , I the Wise one , I the Isanusi , the witch doctress ! " 

 then she turn her bald vulture - head towards we . 

 " what seek ye , white man of the Stars - ah , yes , of the star ? do ye 
 seek a lose one ? ye shall not find he here . he be not here . never for 
 age upon age have a white foot press this land ; never except once , 
 and I remember that he leave it but to die . ye come for bright stone ; I 
 know it - I know it ; ye shall find they when the blood be dry ; but shall 
 ye return whence ye come , or shall ye stop with I ? ha ! ha ! ha ! 

 " and thou , thou with the dark skin and the proud bearing , " and she 
 point her skinny finger at Umbopa , " who art thou , and what seek 
  thou ? not stone that shine , not yellow metal that gleam , these thou 
 leav to ' white man from the star . ' methink I know thee ; methink I 
 can smell the smell of the blood in thy heart . strip off the girdle - " 

 here the feature of this extraordinary creature become convulse , and 
 she fall to the ground foaming in an epileptic fit , and be carry 
 into the hut . 

 the king rise up trembling , and wave his hand . instantly the regiment 
 begin to file off , and in ten minute , save for ourselves , the king , 
 and a few attendant , the great space be leave empty . 

 " white people , " he say , " it pass in my mind to kill you . Gagool have 
 speak strange word . what say ye ? " 

 I laugh . " be careful , o king , we be not easy to slay . Thou hast see 
 the fate of the ox ; wouldst thou be as the ox be ? " 

 the king frown . " it be not well to threaten a king . " 

 " we threaten not , we speak what be true . try to kill we , o king , and 
 learn . " 

 the great savage put his hand to his forehead and think . 

 " go in peace , " he say at length . " to - night be the great dance . Ye 
 shall see it . fear not that I shall set a snare for you . to - morrow I 
 will think . " 

 " it be well , o king , " I answer unconcernedly , and then , accompany 
 by Infadoos , we rise and go back to our kraal . 



 CHAPTER X 

 the WITCH - HUNT 

 on reach our hut I motion to Infadoos to enter with we . 

 " now , Infadoos , " I say , " we would speak with thee . " 

 " let my lord say on . " 

 " it seem to we , Infadoos , that Twala the king be a cruel man . " 

 " it be so , my lord . alas ! the land cry out because of his cruelty . 
 to - night ye shall see . it be the great witch - hunt , and many will be 
 smell out as wizard and slain . no man 's life be safe . if the king 
 covet a man 's cattle , or a man 's wife , or if he fear a man that he 
 should excite a rebellion against he , then Gagool , whom ye see , or 
 some of the witch - find woman whom she have teach , will smell that 
 man out as a wizard , and he will be kill . many must die before the 
 moon grow pale to - night . it be ever so . perhaps I too shall be kill . 
 as yet I have be spar because I be skilled in war , and be belove 
 by the soldier ; but I know not how long I have to live . the land 
 groan at the cruelty of Twala the king ; it be weary of he and his 
 red way . " 

 " then why be it , Infadoos , that the people do not cast he down ? " 

 " Nay , my lord , he be the king , and if he be kill Scragga would 
 reign in his place , and the heart of Scragga be black than the heart 
 of Twala his father . if Scragga be king his yoke upon our neck would 
 be heavy than the yoke of Twala . if Imotu have never be slay , or if 
 Ignosi his son have live , it might have be otherwise ; but they be 
 both dead . " 

 " how know thou that Ignosi be dead ? " say a voice behind we . we 
 look round astonish to see who speak . it be Umbopa . 

 " what mean thou , boy ? " ask Infadoos ; " who tell thee to speak ? " 

 " Listen , Infadoos , " be the answer , " and I will tell thee a story . 
 year ago the king Imotu be kill in this country and his wife flee 
 with the boy Ignosi . be it not so ? " 

 " it be so . " 

 " it be say that the woman and her son die upon the mountain . be it 
 not so ? " 

 " it be even so . " 

 " well , it come to pass that the mother and the boy Ignosi do not die . 
 they cross the mountain and be lead by a tribe of wander desert 
 man across the sand beyond , till at last they come to water and grass 
 and tree again . " 

 " how know thou this ? " 

 " listen . they travel on and on , many month ' journey , till they 
 reach a land where a people call the Amazulu , who also be of the 
 Kukuana stock , live by war , and with they they tarry many year , till 
 at length the mother die . then the son Ignosi become a wanderer again , 
 and journey into a land of wonder , where white people live , and for 
 many more year he learn the wisdom of the white people . " 

 " it be a pretty story , " say Infadoos incredulously . 

 " for year he live there work as a servant and a soldier , but 
 hold in his heart all that his mother have tell he of his own place , 
 and cast about in his mind to find how he might journey thither to 
 see his people and his father 's house before he die . for long year he 
 live and wait , and at last the time come , as it ever come to he 
 who can wait for it , and he meet some white man who would seek this 
 unknown land , and join himself to they . the white man start and 
 travel on and on , seek for one who be lose . they cross the 
 burn desert , they cross the snow - clothe mountain , and at last 
 reach the land of the Kukuanas , and there they find thee , O 
 Infadoos . " 

 " surely thou art mad to talk thus , " say the astonished old soldier . 

 " thou think so ; see , I will show thee , o my uncle . 

 " I be Ignosi , rightful king of the Kukuanas ! " 

 then with a single movement Umbopa slip off his " moocha " or girdle , 
 and stand naked before we . 

 " look , " he say ; " what be this ? " and he point to the picture of a 
 great snake tattooed in blue round his middle , its tail disappearing 
 into its open mouth just above where the thigh be set into the body . 

 Infadoos look , his eye start nearly out of his head . then he fall 
 upon his knee . 

 " Koom ! koom ! " he ejaculate ; " it be my brother 's son ; it be the king . " 

 " do I not tell thee so , my uncle ? rise ; I be not yet the king , but 
 with thy help , and with the help of these brave white man , who be my 
 friend , I shall be . yet the old witch Gagool be right , the land shall 
 run with blood first , and hers shall run with it , if she have any and 
 can die , for she kill my father with her word , and drive my mother 
 forth . and now , Infadoos , choose thou . Wilt thou put thy hand between 
 my hand and be my man ? wilt thou share the danger that lie before I , 
 and help I to overthrow this tyrant and murderer , or wilt thou not ? 
 choose thou . " 

 the old man put his hand to his head and think . then he rise , and 
 advance to where Umbopa , or rather Ignosi , stand , he kneel before 
 he , and take his hand . 

 " Ignosi , rightful king of the Kukuanas , I put my hand between thy 
 hand , and be thy man till death . when thou wast a babe I dandle thee 
 upon my knee , now shall my old arm strike for thee and freedom . " 

 " it be well , Infadoos ; if I conquer , thou shalt be the great man in 
 the kingdom after its king . if I fail , thou canst only die , and death 
 be not far off from thee . rise , my uncle . " 

 " and ye , white man , will ye help I ? what have I to offer you ! the 
 white stone ! if I conquer and can find they , ye shall have as many as 
 ye can carry hence . will that suffice you ? " 

 I translate this remark . 

 " tell he , " answer Sir Henry , " that he mistake an Englishman . Wealth 
 be good , and if it come in our way we will take it ; but a gentleman 
 do not sell himself for wealth . still , speak for myself , I say 
 this . I have always like Umbopa , and so far as lie in I I will stand 
 by he in this business . it will be very pleasant to I to try to 
 square matter with that cruel devil Twala . what do you say , good , and 
 you , Quatermain ? " 

 " well , " say Good , " to adopt the language of hyperbole , in which all 
 these people seem to indulge , you can tell he that a row be surely 
 good , and warm the cockle of the heart , and that so far as I be 
 concerned I be his boy . my only stipulation be that he allow I to wear 
 trouser . " 

 I translate the substance of these answer . 

 " it be well , my friend , " say Ignosi , late Umbopa ; " and what sayest 
 thou , Macumazahn , art thou also with I , old hunter , cleverer than a 
 wound buffalo ? " 

 I think awhile and scratch my head . 

 " Umbopa , or Ignosi , " I say , " I do not   like revolution . I be a man of 
 peace and a bit of a coward " - here Umbopa smile - " but , on the other 
 hand , I stick up for my friend , Ignosi . you have stick to we and 
 play the part of a man , and I will stick by you . but mind you , I be a 
 trader , and have to make my living , so I accept your offer about those 
 diamond in case we should ever be in a position to avail ourselves of 
 it . another thing : we come , as you know , to look for Incubu 's   Sir 
 Henry 's   lose brother . you must help we to find he . " 

 " that I will do , " answer Ignosi . " Stay , Infadoos , by the sign of the 
 snake about my middle , tell I the truth . have any white man to thy 
 knowledge set his foot within the land ? " 

 " none , o Ignosi . " 

 " if any white man have be see or hear of , wouldst thou have know ? " 

 " I should certainly have know . " 

 " Thou hear , Incubu , " say Ignosi to Sir Henry ; " he have not be 
 here . " 

 " well , well , " say Sir Henry , with a sigh ; " there it be ; I suppose that 
 he never get so far . poor fellow , poor fellow ! so it have all be for 
 nothing . God 's will be do . " 

 " now for business , " I put in , anxious to escape from a painful subject . 
 " it be very well to be a king by right divine , Ignosi , but how dost 
 thou propose to become a king indeed ? " 

 " Nay , I know not . infadoo , hast thou a plan ? " 

 " Ignosi , Son of the lightning , " answer his uncle , " to - night be the 
 great dance and witch - hunt . many shall be smell out and perish , and in 
 the heart of many other there will be grief and anguish and fury 
 against the king Twala . when the dance be over , then I will speak to 
 some of the great chief , who in turn , if I can win they over , will 
 speak to their regiment . I shall speak to the chief softly at first , 
 and bring they to see that thou art indeed the king , and I think that 
 by to - morrow 's light thou shalt have twenty thousand spear at thy 
 command . and now I must go and think , and hear , and make ready . after 
 the dance be do , if I be yet alive , and we be all alive , I will meet 
 thee here , and we can talk . at the good there must be war . " 

 at this moment our conference be interrupt by the cry that 
 messenger have come from the king . advance to the door of the hut we 
 order that they should be admit , and presently three man enter , 
 each bear a shin shirt of chain armour , and a magnificent 
 battle - axe . 

 " the gift of my lord the king to the white man from the star ! " say a 
 herald who come with they . 

 " we thank the king , " I answer ; " withdraw . " 

 the man go , and we examine the armour with great interest . it be 
 the most wonderful chain work that either of we have ever see . a whole 
 coat fall together so closely that it form a mass of link scarcely 
 too big to be cover with both hand . 

 " do you make these thing in this country , Infadoos ? " I ask ; " they 
 be very beautiful . " 

 " Nay , my lord , they come down to we from our forefather . we know not 
 who make they , and there be but few left . 1   none but those of royal 
 blood may be clothe in they . they be magic coat through which no spear 
 can pass , and those who wear they be well - nigh safe in the battle . the 
 king be well pleased or much afraid , or he would not have send these 
 garment of steel . clothe yourself in they to - night , my lord . " 

 the remainder of that day we spend quietly , rest and talk over 
 the situation , which be sufficiently exciting . at last the sun go 
 down , the thousand watch fire glow out , and through the darkness we 
 hear the tramp of many foot and the clashing of hundred of spear , as 
 the regiment pass to their appoint place to be ready for the 
 great dance . then the full moon shine out in splendour , and as we stand 
 watch her ray , Infadoos arrive , clothe in his war dress , and 
 accompany by a guard of twenty man to escort we to the dance . as he 
 recommend , we have already don the shirt of chain armour which the 
 king have send we , put they on under our ordinary clothing , and 
 find to our surprise that they be neither very heavy nor 
 uncomfortable . these steel shirt , which evidently have be make for 
 man of a very large stature , hang somewhat loosely upon good and 
 myself , but Sir Henry 's fit his magnificent frame like a glove . then 
 strap our revolver round our waist , and take in our hand the 
 battle - axis which the king have send with the armour , we start . 

 on arrive at the great kraal , where we have that morning be receive 
 by the king , we find that it be closely pack with some twenty 
 thousand man arrange round it in regiment . these regiment be in 
 turn divide into company , and between each company run a little path 
 to allow space for the witch - finder to pass up and down . anything more 
 impose than the sight that be present by this vast and orderly 
 concourse of armed man it be impossible to conceive . there they stand 
 perfectly silent , and the moon pour her light upon the forest of 
 their raise spear , upon their majestic form , wave plume , and the 
 harmonious shading of their various - coloured shield . wherever we 
 look be line upon line of dim face surmount by range upon range 
 of shimmering spear . 

 " surely , " I say to Infadoos , " the whole army be here ? " 

 " Nay , Macumazahn , " he answer , " but a third of it . one third be 
 present at this dance each year , another third be muster outside in 
 case there should be trouble when the killing begin , ten thousand more 
 garrison the outpost round Loo , and the rest watch at the kraal in 
 the country . Thou seest it be a great people . " 

 " they be very silent , " say Good ; and indeed the intense stillness 
 among such a vast concourse of live man be almost overpower . 

 " what say Bougwan ? " ask Infadoos . 

 I translate . 

 " those over whom the shadow of Death be hover be silent , " he 
 answer grimly . 

 " will many be kill ? " 

 " very many . " 

 " it seem , " I say to the other , " that we be go to assist at a 
 gladiatorial show arrange regardless of expense . " 

 Sir Henry shiver , and Good say he wish that we could get out of it . 

 " tell I , " I ask Infadoos , " be we in danger ? " 

 " I know not , my lord , I trust not ; but do not seem afraid . if ye live 
 through the night all may go well with you . the soldier murmur against 
 the king . " 

 all this while we have be advance steadily towards the centre of the 
 open space , in the midst of which be place some stool . as we 
 proceed we perceive another small party come from the direction of 
 the royal hut . 

 " it be the king Twala , Scragga his son , and Gagool the old ; and see , 
 with they be those who slay , " say Infadoos , point to a little 
 group of about a dozen gigantic and savage - look man , arm with 
 spear in one hand and heavy kerrie in the other . 

 the king seat himself upon the centre stool , Gagool crouch at his 
 foot , and the other stand behind he . 

 " greeting , white lord , " Twala cry , as we come up ; " be seat , waste 
 not precious time - the night be all too short for the deed that must 
 be do . ye come in a good hour , and shall see a glorious show . look 
 round , white lord ; look round , " and he roll his one wicked eye from 
 regiment to regiment . " can the Stars show you such a sight as this ? see 
 how they shake in their wickedness , all those who have evil in their 
 heart and fear the judgment of ' Heaven above . ' " 

 " Begin ! begin ! " pip Gagool , in her thin pierce voice ; " the hyænas 
 be hungry , they howl for food . begin ! begin ! " 

 then for a moment there be intense stillness , make horrible by a 
 presage of what be to come . 

 the king lift his spear , and suddenly twenty thousand foot be 
 raise , as though they belong to one man , and bring down with a 
 stamp upon the earth . this be repeat three time , cause the solid 
 ground to shake and tremble . then from a far point of the circle a 
 solitary voice begin a wail song , of which the refrain run something 
 as follow : - 

 " what be the lot of man bear of woman ? " 

 back come the answer roll out from every throat in that vast 
 company - 

 " death ! " 

 gradually , however , the song be take up by company after company , 
 till the whole armed multitude be sing it , and I could no long 
 follow the word , except in so far as they appear to represent 
 various phase of human passion , fear , and joy . now it seem to be 
 a love song , now a majestic swell war chant , and last of all a death 
 dirge end suddenly in one heart - break wail that go echo and 
 roll away in a volume of blood - curdle sound . 

 again silence fall upon the place , and again it be break by the king 
 lift his hand . instantly we hear a pattering of foot , and from out 
 of the mass of warrior strange and awful figure appear run 
 towards we . as they draw near we see that these be woman , most of 
 they aged , for their white hair , ornament with small bladder take 
 from fish , stream out behind they . their face be paint in 
 stripe of white and yellow ; down their back hang snake - skin , and 
 round their waist rattle circlet of human bone , while each hold a 
 small fork wand in her shrivelled hand . in all there be ten of 
 they . when they arrive in front of we they halt , and one of they , 
 point with her wand towards the crouch figure of Gagool , cry 
 out - 

 " Mother , old mother , we be here . " 

 " good ! good ! good ! " answer that aged Iniquity . " be your eye keen , 
  Isanusis   witch doctresse , ye seer in dark place ? " 

 " Mother , they be keen . " 

 " good ! good ! good ! be your ear open , Isanusis , ye who hear word 
 that come not from the tongue ? " 

 " Mother , they be open . " 

 " good ! good ! good ! be your sens awake , Isanusis - can ye smell 
 blood , can ye purge the land of the wicked one who compass evil 
 against the king and against their neighbour ? be ye ready to do the 
 justice of ' Heaven above , ' ye whom I have teach , who have eat of the 
 bread of my wisdom , and drunk of the water of my magic ? " 

 " Mother , we can . " 

 " then go ! tarry not , ye vulture ; see , the slayer " - point to the 
 ominous group of executioner behind - " make sharp their spear ; the 
 white man from afar be hungry to see . go ! " 

 with a wild yell Gagool 's horrid minister break away in every 
 direction , like fragment from a shell , the dry bone round their 
 waist rattle as they run , and head for various point of the dense 
 human circle . we could not watch they all , so we fix our eye upon 
 the Isanusi near to we . when she come to within a few pace of the 
 warrior she halt and begin to dance wildly , turn round and round 
 with an almost incredible rapidity , and shriek out sentence such as 
 " I smell he , the evil - doer ! " " he be near , he who poison his mother ! " 
 " I hear the thought of he who think evil of the king ! " 

 quicker and quick she dance , till she lash herself into such a 
 frenzy of excitement that the foam fly in speck from her gnashing 
 jaw , till her eye seem to start from her head , and her flesh to 
 quiver visibly . suddenly she stop dead and stiffen all over , like 
 a pointer dog when he scent game , and then with outstretched wand she 
 begin to creep stealthily towards the soldier before she . it seem to 
 we that as she come their stoicism give way , and that they shrink from 
 she . as for ourselves , we follow her movement with a horrible 
 fascination . presently , still creep and crouch like a dog , the 
  Isanusi be before they . then she halt and point , and again creep 
 on a pace or two . 

 suddenly the end come . with a shriek she spring in and touch a tall 
 warrior with her forked wand . instantly two of his comrade , those 
 stand immediately next to he , seize the doomed man , each by one 
 arm , and advance with he towards the king . 

 he do not resist , but we see that he drag his limb as though they 
 be paralyse , and that his finger , from which the spear have fall , 
 be limp like those of a man newly dead . 

 as he come , two of the villainous executioner step forward to meet 
 he . presently they meet , and the executioner turn round , look 
 towards the king as though for order . 

 " Kill ! " say the king . 

 " Kill ! " squeak Gagool . 

 " Kill ! " re - echoed Scragga , with a hollow chuckle . 

 almost before the word be utter the horrible dead be do . one 
 man have drive his spear into the victim 's heart , and to make assurance 
 double sure , the other have dash out his brain with a great club . 

 " one , " count Twala the king , just like a black Madame Defarge , as 
 Good say , and the body be drag a few pace away and stretch out . 

 hardly be the thing do before another poor wretch be bring up , 
 like an ox to the slaughter . this time we could see , from the 
 leopard - skin cloak which he wear , that the man be a person of rank . 
 again the awful syllable be speak , and the victim fall dead . 

 " two , " count the king . 

 and so the deadly game go on , till about a hundred body be 
 stretch in row behind we . I have hear of the gladiatorial show of 
 the Cæsars , and of the spanish bull - fight , but I take the liberty of 
 doubt if either of they could be half so horrible as this Kukuana 
 witch - hunt . Gladiatorial show and spanish bull - fight at any rate 
 contribute to the public amusement , which certainly be not the case 
 here . the most confirm sensation - monger would fight shy of sensation 
 if he know that it be well on the card that he would , in his own 
 proper person , be the subject of the next " event . " 

 once we rise and try to remonstrate , but be sternly repress by 
 Twala . 

 " let the law take its course , white man . these dog be magician and 
 evil - doer ; it be well that they should die , " be the only answer 
 vouchsafe to we . 

 about half - past ten there be a pause . the witch - finder gather 
 themselves together , apparently exhausted with their bloody work , and 
 we think that the performance be do with . but it be not so , for 
 presently , to our surprise , the ancient woman , Gagool , rise from her 
 crouch position , and support herself with a stick , stagger off 
 into the open space . it be an extraordinary sight to see this 
 frightful vulture - head old creature , bent nearly double with extreme 
 age , gather strength by degree , until at last she rush about almost 
 as actively as her ill - omen pupil . to and fro she run , chant to 
 herself , till suddenly she make a dash at a tall man stand in front 
 of one of the regiment , and touch he . as she do this a sort of 
 groan go up from the regiment which evidently he command . but two 
 of its officer seize he all the same , and bring he up for 
 execution . we learn afterwards that he be a man of great wealth and 
 importance , be indeed a cousin of the king . 

 he be slain , and Twala count one hundred and three . then Gagool 
 again spring to and fro , gradually draw nearer and near to 
 ourselves . 

 " hang I if I do not   believe she be go to try her game on we , " 
 ejaculate Good in horror . 

 " nonsense ! " say Sir Henry . 

 as for myself , when I see that old fiend dance near and near , my 
 heart positively sink into my boot . I glance behind we at the long 
 row of corps , and shiver . 

 Nearer and nearer waltzed Gagool , look for all the world like an 
 animate crooked stick or comma , her horrid eye gleam and glow 
 with a most unholy lustre . 

 Nearer she come , and yet near , every creature in that vast assemblage 
 watch her movement with intense anxiety . at last she stand still 
 and point . 

 " which be it to be ? " ask Sir Henry to himself . 

 in a moment all doubt be at rest , for the old hag have rush in and 
 touch Umbopa , alia Ignosi , on the shoulder . 

 " I smell he out , " she shriek . " kill he , kill he , he be full of 
 evil ; kill he , the stranger , before blood flow from he . slay he , o 
 king . " 

 there be a pause , of which I instantly take advantage . 

 " o king , " I call out , rise from my seat , " this man be the servant 
 of thy guest , he be their dog ; whosoever shed the blood of our dog 
 shed our blood . by the sacred law of hospitality I claim protection 
 for he . " 

 " Gagool , mother of the witch - finder , have smell he out ; he must die , 
 white man , " be the sullen answer . 

 " Nay , he shall not die , " I reply ; " he who try to touch he shall 
 die indeed . " 

 " seize he ! " roar Twala to the executioner ; who stand round red to 
 the eye with the blood of their victim . 

 they advance towards we , and then hesitate . as for Ignosi , he 
 clutch his spear , and raise it as though determine to sell his life 
 dearly . 

 " stand back , ye dog ! " I shout , " if ye would see to - morrow 's light . 
 touch one hair of his head and your king die , " and I cover Twala 
 with my revolver . Sir Henry and Good also draw their pistol , Sir Henry 
 point his at the lead executioner , who be advance to carry out 
 the sentence , and Good take a deliberate aim at Gagool . 

 Twala wince perceptibly as my barrel come in a line with his broad 
 chest . 

 " well , " I say , " what be it to be , Twala ? " 

 then he speak . 

 " put away your magic tube , " he say ; " ye have adjure I in the name 
 of hospitality , and for that reason , but not from fear of what ye can 
 do , I spare he . go in peace . " 

 " it be well , " I answer unconcernedly ; " we be weary of slaughter , and 
 would sleep . be the dance end ? " 

 " it be end , " Twala answer sulkily . " let these dead dog , " point 
 to the long row of corps , " be fling out to the hyænas and the 
 vulture , " and he lift his spear . 

 instantly the regiment begin to defile through the kraal gateway in 
 perfect silence , a fatigue party only remain behind to drag away the 
 corps of those who have be sacrifice . 

 then we rise also , and make our salaam to his majesty , which he 
 hardly deign to acknowledge , we depart to our hut . 

 " well , " say Sir Henry , as we sit down , have first light a lamp of the 
 sort use by the Kukuanas , of which the wick be make from the fibre of 
 a species of palm leaf , and the oil from clarified hippopotamus fat , 
 " well , I feel uncommonly inclined to be sick . " 

 " if I have any doubt about help Umbopa to rebel against that 
 infernal blackguard , " put in Good , " they be go now . it be as much 
 as I could do to sit still while that slaughter be go on . I try 
 to keep my eye shut , but they would open just at the wrong time . I 
 wonder where Infadoos be . Umbopa , my friend , you ought to be grateful 
 to we ; your skin come near to have an air - hole make in it . " 

 " I be grateful , Bougwan , " be Umbopa 's answer , when I have translate , 
 " and I shall not forget . as for Infadoos , he will be here by - and - by . we 
 must wait . " 

 so we light our pipe and wait . 


  1   in the Soudan sword and coat of mail be still wear by Arabs , 
 whose ancestor must have strip they from the body of 
 Crusaders . - Editor . 



 CHAPTER XI 

 we give a sign 

 for a long while - two hour , I should think - we sit there in silence , 
 be too much overwhelmed by the recollection of the horror we have 
 see to talk . at last , just as we be think of turn in - for the 
 night draw nigh to dawn - we hear a sound of step . then come the 
 challenge of a sentry post at the kraal gate , which apparently be 
 answer , though not in an audible tone , for the step still advance ; 
 and in another second Infadoos have enter the hut , follow by some 
 half - dozen stately - look chief . 

 " my lord , " he say , " I have come accord to my word . my lord and 
 Ignosi , rightful king of the Kukuanas , I have bring with I these 
 man , " point to the row of chief , " who be great man among we , 
 have each one of they the command of three thousand soldier , that 
 live but to do their bidding , under the king 's . I have tell they of 
 what I have see , and what my ear have hear . now let they also behold 
 the sacred snake around thee , and hear thy story , Ignosi , that they may 
 say whether or no they will make cause with thee against Twala the 
 king . " 

 by way of answer Ignosi again strip off his girdle , and exhibit 
 the snake tattooed about he . each chief in turn draw near and examine 
 the sign by the dim light of the lamp , and without say a word pass 
 on to the other side . 

 then Ignosi resume his moocha , and address they , repeat the 
 history he have detail in the morning . 

 " now ye have hear , chief , " say Infadoos , when he have do , " what say 
 ye : will ye stand by this man and help he to his father 's throne , or 
 will ye not ? the land cry out against Twala , and the blood of the 
 people flow like the water in spring . Ye have see to - night . two 
 other chief there be with whom I have it in my mind to speak , and 
 where be they now ? the hyænas howl over their corps . soon shall ye 
 be as they be if ye strike not . choose then , my brother . " 

 the eld of the six man , a short , thick - set warrior , with white hair , 
 step forward a pace and answer - 

 " thy word be true , Infadoos ; the land cry out . my own brother be 
 among those who die to - night ; but this be a great matter , and the 
 thing be hard to believe . how know we that if we lift our spear it may 
 not be for a thief and a liar ? it be a great matter , I say , of which 
 none can see the end . for of this be sure , blood will flow in river 
 before the deed be do ; many will still cleave to the king , for man 
 worship the sun that still shin bright in the heaven , rather than 
 that which have not rise . these white man from the Stars , their magic 
 be great , and Ignosi be under the cover of their wing . if he be indeed 
 the rightful king , let they give we a sign , and let the people have a 
 sign , that all may see . so shall man cleave to we , know of a truth 
 that the white man 's magic be with they . " 

 " Ye have the sign of the snake , " I answer . 

 " my lord , it be not enough . the snake may have be place there since 
 the man 's childhood . show we a sign , and it will suffice . but we will 
 not move without a sign . " 

 the other give a decided assent , and I turn in perplexity to Sir 
 Henry and Good , and explain the situation . 

 " I think that I have it , " say Good exultingly ; " ask they to give we a 
 moment to think . " 

 I do so , and the chief withdraw . so soon as they have go Good go 
 to the little box where he keep his medicine , unlock it , and take 
 out a note - book , in the fly - leaf of which be an almanack . " now look 
 here , you fellow , be not   to - morrow the 4th of June ? " he say . 

 we have keep a careful note of the day , so be able to answer that it 
 be . 

 " very good ; then here we have it - ' 4 June , total eclipse of the moon 
 commence at 8.15 Greenwich time , visible in Teneriffe - South Africa , 
  c. ' there be a sign for you . tell they we will darken the moon 
 to - morrow night . " 

 the idea be a splendid one ; indeed , the only weak spot about it be a 
 fear lest Good 's almanack might be incorrect . if we make a false 
 prophecy on such a subject , our prestige would be go for ever , and so 
 would Ignosi 's chance of the throne of the Kukuanas . 

 " suppose that the almanack be wrong , " suggest Sir Henry to Good , who 
 be busily employ in work out something on a blank page of the 
 book . 

 " I see no reason to suppose anything of the sort , " be his answer . 
 " eclipse always come up to time ; at least that be my experience of 
 they , and it especially state that this one will be visible in South 
 Africa . I have work out the reckoning as well as I can , without 
 know our exact position ; and I make out that the eclipse should 
 begin here about ten o'clock tomorrow night , and last till half - past 
 twelve . for an hour and a half or so there should be almost total 
 darkness . " 

 " well , " say Sir Henry , " I suppose we have well risk it . " 

 I acquiesce , though doubtfully , for eclipse be queer cattle to deal 
 with - it might be a cloudy night , for instance , or our date might be 
 wrong - and send Umbopa to summon the chief back . presently they come , 
 and I address they thus - 

 " great man of the Kukuanas , and thou , Infadoos , listen . we love not to 
 show our power , for to do so be to interfere with the course of 
 nature , and to plunge the world into fear and confusion . but since this 
 matter be a great one , and as we be anger against the king because 
 of the slaughter we have see , and because of the act of the Isanusi 
 Gagool , who would have put our friend Ignosi to death , we have 
 determine to break a rule , and to give such a sign as all man may see . 
 come hither " ; and I lead they to the door of the hut and point to the 
 red ball of the moon . " what see ye there ? " 

 " we see the sink moon , " answer the spokesman of the party . 

 " it be so . now tell I , can any mortal man put out that moon before her 
 hour of setting , and bring the curtain of black night down upon the 
 land ? " 

 the chief laugh a little at the question . " no , my lord , that no man 
 can do . the moon be strong than man who look on she , nor can she 
 vary in her course . " 

 " ye say so . yet I tell you that to - morrow night , about two hour before 
 midnight , we will cause the moon to be eat up for a space of an hour 
 and half an hour . yes , deep darkness shall cover the earth , and it 
 shall be for a sign that Ignosi be indeed king of the Kukuanas . if we 
 do this thing , will ye be satisfy ? " 

 " Yea , my lord , " answer the old chief with a smile , which be 
 reflect on the face of his companion ; " if ye do this thing , we 
 will be satisfied indeed . " 

 " it shall be do ; we three , Incubu , Bougwan , and Macumazahn , have say 
 it , and it shall be do . dost thou hear , Infadoos ? " 

 " I hear , my lord , but it be a wonderful thing that ye promise , to put 
 out the moon , the mother of the world , when she be at her full . " 

 " yet shall we do it , Infadoos . " 

 " it be well , my lord . to - day , two hour after sunset , Twala will send 
 for my lord to witness the girl dance , and one hour after the dance 
 begin the girl whom Twala think the fair shall be kill by 
 Scragga , the king 's son , as a sacrifice to the Silent Ones , who sit and 
 keep watch by the mountain yonder , " and he point towards the three 
 strange - look peak where Solomon 's road be suppose to end . " then 
 let my lord darken the moon , and save the maiden 's life , and the 
 people will believe indeed . " 

 " ay , " say the old chief , still smile a little , " the people will 
 believe indeed . " 

 " two mile from Loo , " go on Infadoos , " there be a hill curve like a 
 new moon , a stronghold , where my regiment , and three other regiment 
 which these chiefs command , be station . this morning we will make a 
 plan whereby two or three other regiment may be move there also . 
 then , if in truth my lord can darken the moon , in the darkness I will 
 take my lord by the hand and lead they out of Loo to this place , where 
 they shall be safe , and thence we can make war upon Twala the king . " 

 " it be good , " say I. " let leave we to sleep awhile and to make ready 
 our magic . " 

 infadoo rise , and , have salute we , depart with the chief . 

 " my friend , " say Ignosi , so soon as they be go , " can ye do this 
 wonderful thing , or be ye speak empty word to the captain ? " 

 " we believe that we can do it , Umbopa - Ignosi , I mean . " 

 " it be strange , " he answer , " and have ye not be Englishmen I would 
 not have believe it ; but I have learn that English ' gentleman ' tell 
 no lie . if we live through the matter , be sure that I will repay you . " 

 " Ignosi , " say Sir Henry , " promise I one thing . " 

 " I will promise , Incubu , my friend , even before I hear it , " answer 
 the big man with a smile . " what be it ? " 

 " this : that if ever you come to be king of this people you will do away 
 with the smelling out of wizard such as we see last night ; and that 
 the killing of man without trial shall no long take place in the 
 land . " 

 Ignosi think for a moment after I have translate this request , and 
 then answer - 

 " the way of black people be not as the way of white man , Incubu , nor 
 do we value life so highly . yet I will promise . if it be in my power to 
 hold they back , the witch - finder shall hunt no more , nor shall any man 
 die the death without trial or judgment . " 

 " that be a bargain , then , " say Sir Henry ; " and now let we get a little 
 rest . " 

 thoroughly weary out , we be soon sound asleep , and sleep till 
 Ignosi wake we about eleven o'clock . then we rise , wash , and eat a 
 hearty breakfast . after that we go outside the hut and walk about , 
 amuse ourselves with examine the structure of the Kukuana hut and 
 observe the custom of the woman . 

 " I hope that eclipse will come off , " say Sir Henry presently . 

 " if it do not it will soon be all up with we , " I answer mournfully ; 
 " for so sure as we be live man some of those chief will tell the 
 whole story to the king , and then there will be another sort of 
 eclipse , and one that we shall certainly not like . " 

 return to the hut we eat some dinner , and pass the rest of the day 
 in receive visit of ceremony and curiosity . at length the sun set , 
 and we enjoy a couple of hour of such quiet as our melancholy 
 foreboding would allow to we . finally , about half - past eight , a 
 messenger come from Twala to bid we to the great annual " dance of 
 girl " which be about to be celebrate . 

 hastily we put on the chain shirt that the king have send we , and 
 take our rifle and ammunition with we , so as to have they handy in 
 case we have to fly , as suggest by Infadoos , we start boldly enough , 
 though with inward fear and trembling . the great space in front of the 
 king 's kraal bear a very different appearance from that which it have 
 present on the previous evening . in place of the grim rank of 
 serrie warrior be company after company of Kukuana girl , not 
 over - dress , so far as clothing go , but each crown with a wreath 
 of flower , and hold a palm leaf in one hand and a white arum lily 
 in the other . in the centre of the open moonlit space sit Twala the 
 king , with old Gagool at his foot , attend by Infadoos , the boy 
 Scragga , and twelve guard . there be also present about a score of 
 chief , amongst whom I recognise most of our friend of the night 
 before . 

 Twala greet we with much apparent cordiality , though I see he fix 
 his one eye viciously on Umbopa . 

 " welcome , white man from the star , " he say ; " this be another sight 
 from that which your eye gaze on by the light of last night 's moon , 
 but it be not so good a sight . girl be pleasant , and be it not for 
 such as these , " and he point round he , " we should none of we be here 
 this day ; but man be well . kiss and the tender word of woman be 
 sweet , but the sound of the clashing of the spear of warrior , and the 
 smell of man 's blood , be sweet far ! would ye have wife from among 
 our people , white man ? if so , choose the fairest here , and ye shall 
 have they , as many as ye will , " and he pause for an answer . 

 as the prospect do not seem to be without attraction for Good , who , 
 like most sailor , be of a susceptible nature , - be elderly and wise , 
 foresee the endless complication that anything of the sort would 
 involve , for woman bring trouble so surely as the night follow the 
 day , I put in a hasty answer - 

 " thank to thee , o king , but we white man we d only with white woman 
 like ourselves . your maiden be fair , but they be not for we ! " 

 the king laugh . " it be well . in our land there be a proverb which 
 run , ' woman 's eye be always bright , whatever the colour , ' and 
 another that say , ' love she who be present , for be sure she who be 
 absent be false to thee ; ' but perhaps these thing be not so in the 
 star . in a land where man be white all thing be possible . so be it , 
 white man ; the girl will not go beg ! welcome again ; and welcome , 
 too , thou black one ; if Gagool here have win her way , thou wouldst have 
 be stiff and cold by now . it be lucky for thee that thou too camest 
 from the Stars ; ha ! ha ! " 

 " I can kill thee before thou killest I , o king , " be Ignosi 's calm 
 answer , " and thou shalt be stiff before my limb cease to bend . " 

 Twala start . " Thou speakest boldly , boy , " he reply angrily ; 
 " presume not too far . " 

 " he may well be bold in whose lip be truth . the truth be a sharp 
 spear which fly home and miss not . it be a message from ' the 
 star , ' o king . " 

 Twala scowl , and his one eye gleam fiercely , but he say nothing 
 more . 

 " let the dance begin , " he cry , and then the flower - crown girl 
 spring forward in company , sing a sweet song and wave the 
 delicate palm and white lily . on they dance , look faint and 
 spiritual in the soft , sad light of the risen moon ; now whirl round 
 and round , now meet in mimic warfare , sway , eddy here and 
 there , come forward , fall back in an order confusion delightful 
 to witness . at last they pause , and a beautiful young woman spring out 
 of the rank and begin to pirouette in front of we with a grace and 
 vigour which would have put most ballet girl to shame . at length she 
 retire exhaust , and another take her place , then another and 
 another , but none of they , either in grace , skill , or personal 
 attraction , come up to the first . 

 when the choose girl have all dance , the king lift his hand . 

 " which deem ye the fairest , white man ? " he ask . 

 " the first , " say I unthinkingly . next second I regret it , for I 
 remember that Infadoos have tell we that the fair woman must be 
 offer up as a sacrifice . 

 " then be my mind as your mind , and my eye as your eye . she be the 
 fairest ! and a sorry thing it be for she , for she must die ! " 

 " ay , must die ! " pip out Gagool , cast a glance of her quick eye 
 in the direction of the poor girl , who , as yet ignorant of the awful 
 fate in store for she , be stand some ten yard off in front of a 
 company of maidens , engage in nervously pick a flower from her 
 wreath to piece , petal by petal . 

 " why , o king ? " say I , restrain my indignation with difficulty ; " the 
 girl have dance well , and please we ; she be fair too ; it would be hard 
 to reward she with death . " 

 Twala laugh as he answer - 

 " it be our custom , and the figure who sit in stone yonder , " and he 
 point towards the three distant peak , " must have their due . do I 
 fail to put the fair girl to death to - day , misfortune would fall 
 upon I and my house . thus run the prophecy of my people : ' if the king 
 offer not a sacrifice of a fair girl , on the day of the dance of 
 maiden , to the Old Ones who sit and watch on the mountain , then shall 
 he fall , and his house . ' look ye , white man , my brother who reign 
 before I offer not the sacrifice , because of the tear of the woman , 
 and he fall , and his house , and I reign in his stead . it be finish ; 
 she must die ! " then turn to the guard - " bring she hither ; Scragga , 
 make sharp thy spear . " 

 two of the man step forward , and as they advance , the girl , for the 
 first time realise her impending fate , scream aloud and turn to 
 fly . but the strong hand catch she fast , and bring she , struggle 
 and weeping , before we . 

 " what be thy name , girl ? " pip Gagool . " what ! wilt thou not answer ? 
 shall the king 's son do his work at once ? " 

 at this hint , Scragga , look more evil than ever , advance a step and 
 lift his great spear , and at that moment I see Good 's hand creep to 
 his revolver . the poor girl catch the faint glint of steel through her 
 tear , and it sober her anguish . she cease struggle , and clasp 
 her hand convulsively , stand shudder from head to foot . 

 " see , " cry Scragga in high glee , ' she shrink from the sight of my 
 little playthe even before she have taste it , " and he tap the 
 broad blade of his spear . 

 " if ever I get the chance you shall pay for that , you young hound ! " I 
 hear good mutter beneath his breath . 

 " now that thou art quiet , give we thy name , my dear . come , speak out , 
 and fear not , " say Gagool in mockery . 

 " oh , mother , " answer the girl , in tremble accent , " my name be 
 Foulata , of the house of Suko . oh , mother , why must I die ? I have do 
 no wrong ! " 

 " be comfort , " go on the old woman in her hateful tone of mockery . 
 " Thou must die , indeed , as a sacrifice to the Old Ones who sit yonder , " 
 and she point to the peak ; " but it be well to sleep in the night 
 than to toil in the daytime ; it be well to die than to live , and thou 
 shalt die by the royal hand of the king 's own son . " 

 the girl Foulata wring her hand in anguish , and cry out aloud , " oh , 
 cruel ! and I so young ! what have I do that I should never again see 
 the sun rise out of the night , or the star come follow on his track 
 in the evening , that I may no more gather the flower when the dew be 
 heavy , or listen to the laughing of the water ? Woe be I , that I shall 
 never see my father 's hut again , nor feel my mother 's kiss , nor tend 
 the lamb that be sick ! woe be I , that no lover shall put his arm 
 around I and look into my eye , nor shall man child be bear of I ! 
 oh , cruel , cruel ! " 

 and again she wring her hand and turn her tear - stain 
 flower - crown face to Heaven , look so lovely in her despair - for 
 she be indeed a beautiful woman - that assuredly the sight of she would 
 have melt the heart of any less cruel than be the three fiend 
 before we . Prince Arthur 's appeal to the ruffian who come to blind he 
 be not more touching than that of this savage girl . 

 but it do not move Gagool or Gagool 's master , though I see sign of 
 pity among the guard behind , and on the face of the chief ; and as 
 for Good , he give a fierce snort of indignation , and make a motion as 
 though to go to her assistance . with all a woman 's quickness , the 
 doom girl interpret what be pass in his mind , and by a sudden 
 movement fling herself before he , and clasp his " beautiful white 
 leg " with her hand . 

 " oh , white father from the star ! " she cry , " throw over I the mantle 
 of thy protection ; let I creep into the shadow of thy strength , that I 
 may be save . oh , keep I from these cruel man and from the mercy of 
 Gagool ! " 

 " all right , my hearty , I will look after you , " sing out Good in nervous 
 Saxon . " come , get up , there be a good girl , " and he stoop and catch 
 her hand . 

 Twala turn and motion to his son , who advance with his spear 
 lift . 

 " now be your time , " whisper Sir Henry to I ; " what be you wait 
 for ? " 

 " I be wait for that eclipse , " I answer ; " I have have my eye on the 
 moon for the last half - hour , and I never see it look healthy . " 

 " well , you must risk it now , or the girl will be kill . Twala be 
 lose patience . " 

 recognise the force of the argument , and have cast one more 
 despairing look at the bright face of the moon , for never do the most 
 ardent astronomer with a theory to prove await a celestial event with 
 such anxiety , I step with all the dignity that I could command 
 between the prostrate girl and the advance spear of Scragga . 

 " king , " I say , " it shall not be ; we will not endure this thing ; let 
 the girl go in safety . " 

 Twala rise from his seat in wrath and astonishment , and from the chief 
 and serrie rank of maiden who have close in slowly upon we in 
 anticipation of the tragedy come a murmur of amazement . 

 " shall not be ! thou white dog , that yappest at the lion in his cave ; 
  shall not be ! art thou mad ? be careful , lest this chicken 's fate 
 overtake thee , and those with thee . how canst thou save she or thyself ? 
 who art thou that thou sett thyself between I and my will ? back , I 
 say . Scragga , kill she ! ho , guard ! seize these man . " 

 at his cry armed man run swiftly from behind the hut , where they have 
 evidently be place beforehand . 

 Sir Henry , Good , and Umbopa range themselves alongside of I , and 
 lift their rifle . 

 " stop ! " I shout boldly , though at the moment my heart be in my 
 boot . " stop ! we , the white man from the star , say that it shall not 
 be . come but one pace nearer , and we will put out the moon like a 
 wind - blow lamp , as we who dwell in her House can do , and plunge the 
 land in darkness . dare to disobey , and ye shall taste of our magic . " 

 my threat produce an effect ; the man halt , and Scragga stand still 
 before we , his spear lift . 

 " hear he ! hear he ! " pip Gagool ; " hear the liar who say that he 
 will put out the moon like a lamp . let he do it , and the girl shall be 
 spear . yes , let he do it , or die by the girl , he and those with he . " 

 I glance up at the moon despairingly , and now to my intense joy and 
 relief see that we - or rather the almanack - have make no mistake . on the 
 edge of the great orb lie a faint rim of shadow , while a smoky hue grow 
 and gather upon its bright surface . never shall I forget that 
 supreme , that superb moment of relief . 

 then I lift my hand solemnly towards the sky , an example which Sir 
 Henry and Good follow , and quote a line or two from the " Ingoldsby 
 legend " at it in the most impressive tone that I could command . Sir 
 Henry follow suit with a verse out of the Old Testament , and 
 something about Balbus build a wall , in Latin , whilst Good address 
 the queen of Night in a volume of the most classical bad language which 
 he could think of . 

 slowly the penumbra , the shadow of a shadow , creep on over the bright 
 surface , and as it creep I hear deep gasp of fear rise from the 
 multitude around . 

 " look , o king ! " I cry ; " look , Gagool ! look , chief and people and 
 woman , and see if the white man from the Stars keep their word , or if 
 they be but empty liar ! 

 " the moon grow black before your eye ; soon there will be 
 darkness - ay , darkness in the hour of the full moon . Ye have ask for 
 a sign ; it be give to you . grow dark , o Moon ! withdraw thy light , thou 
 pure and holy one ; bring the proud heart of usurping murderer to the 
 dust , and eat up the world with shadow . " 

 a groan of terror burst from the onlooker . some stand petrify with 
 dread , other throw themselves upon their knee and cry aloud . as for 
 the king , he sit still and turn pale beneath his dusky skin . only 
 Gagool keep her courage . 

 " it will pass , " she cry ; " I have often see the like before ; no man 
 can put out the moon ; lose not heart ; sit still - the shadow will pass . " 

 " wait , and ye shall see , " I reply , hop with excitement . " o moon ! 
 Moon ! moon ! wherefore art thou so cold and fickle ? " this appropriate 
 quotation be from the page of a popular romance that I chance to 
 have read recently , though now I come to think of it , it be ungrateful 
 of I to abuse the Lady of the Heavens , who be show herself to be 
 the truest of friend to we , however she may have behave to the 
 impassioned lover in the novel . then I add : " keep it up , good , I 
 can not   remember any more poetry . curse away , there be a good fellow . " 

 Good respond nobly to this tax upon his inventive faculty . never 
 before have I the faint conception of the breadth and depth and 
 height of a naval officer 's objurgatory power . for ten minute he go 
 on in several language without stop , and he scarcely ever repeat 
 himself . 

 meanwhile the dark ring creep on , while all that great assembly fix 
 their eye upon the sky and star and star in fascinated silence . 
 strange and unholy shadow encroach upon the moonlight , an ominous 
 quiet fill the place . everything grow still as death . slowly and in 
 the midst of this most solemn silence the minute speed away , and while 
 they speed the full moon pass deeply and deep into the shadow of the 
 earth , as the inky segment of its circle slide in awful majesty across 
 the lunar crater . the great pale orb seem to draw near and to grow 
 in size . she turn a coppery hue , then that portion of her surface 
 which be unobscure as yet grow grey and ashen , and at length , as 
 totality approach , her mountain and her plain be to be see 
 glow luridly through a crimson gloom . 

 on , yet on , creep the ring of darkness ; it be now more than half 
 across the blood - red orb . the air grow thick , and still more deeply 
 ting with dusky crimson . on , yet on , till we could scarcely see the 
 fierce face of the group before we . no sound rise now from the 
 spectator , and at last Good stop swear . 

 " the moon be die - the white wizard have kill the moon , " yell the 
 prince Scragga at last . " we shall all perish in the dark , " and animate 
 by fear or fury , or by both , he lift his spear and drive it with all 
 his force at Sir Henry 's breast . but he forget the mail shirt that the 
 king have give we , and which we wear beneath our clothing . the steel 
 rebounded harmless , and before he could repeat the blow Curtis have 
 snatch the spear from his hand and send it straight through he . 

 Scragga drop dead . 

 at the sight , and drive mad with fear of the gathering darkness , and 
 of the unholy shadow which , as they believe , be swallow the moon , 
 the company of girl break up in wild confusion , and run screeching 
 for the gateway . nor do the panic stop there . the king himself , 
 follow by his guard , some of the chief , and Gagool , who hobble 
 away after they with marvellous alacrity , flee for the hut , so that in 
 another minute we ourselves , the would - be victim Foulata , Infadoos , and 
 most of the chief who have interview we on the previous night , be 
 leave alone upon the scene , together with the dead body of Scragga , 
 Twala 's son . 

 " Chiefs , " I say , " we have give you the sign . if ye be satisfied , let 
 we fly swiftly to the place of which ye speak . the charm can not now be 
 stop . it will work for an hour and the half of an hour . let we cover 
 ourselves in the darkness . " 

 " come , " say Infadoos , turn to go , an example which be follow by 
 the awed captain , ourselves , and the girl Foulata , whom Good take by 
 the arm . 

 before we reach the gate of the kraal the moon go out utterly , and 
 from every quarter of the firmament the star rush forth into the 
 inky sky . 

 hold each other by the hand we stumble on through the darkness . 



 CHAPTER XII 

 before the battle 

 luckily for we , Infadoos and the chief know all the path of the great 
 town perfectly , so that we pass by side - way unmoleste , and 
 notwithstanding the gloom we make fair progress . 

 for an hour or more we journey on , till at length the eclipse begin 
 to pass , and that edge of the moon which have disappear the first 
 become again visible . suddenly , as we watch , there burst from it a 
 silver streak of light , accompany by a wondrous ruddy glow , which 
 hang upon the blackness of the sky like a celestial lamp , and a wild 
 and lovely sight it be . in another five minute the star begin to 
 fade , and there be sufficient light to see our whereabouts . we then 
 discover that we be clear of the town of Loo , and approach a 
 large flat - top hill , measure some two mile in circumference . this 
 hill , which be of a formation common in South Africa , be not very high ; 
 indeed , its great elevation be scarcely more than 200 foot , but it 
 be shape like a horseshoe , and its side be rather precipitous and 
 strew with boulder . on the grass table - land at its summit be ample 
 camping - ground , which have be utilise as a military cantonment of no 
 mean strength . its ordinary garrison be one regiment of three thousand 
 man , but as we toil up the steep side of the mountain in the 
 return moonlight we perceive that there be several of such 
 regiment encamp there . 

 reach the table - land at last , we find crowd of man rouse from 
 their sleep , shiver with fear and huddle up together in the utmost 
 consternation at the natural phenomenon which they be witness . 
 pass through these without a word , we gain a hut in the centre of 
 the ground , where we be astonish to find two man wait , laden 
 with our few good and chattel , which of course we have be oblige to 
 leave behind in our hasty flight . 

 " I send for they , " explain Infadoos ; " and also for these , " and he 
 lift up Good 's long - lose trouser . 

 with an exclamation of rapturous delight Good spring at they , and 
 instantly proceed to put they on . 

 " surely my lord will not hide his beautiful white leg ! " exclaim 
 infadoo regretfully . 

 but Good persist , and once only do the Kukuana people get the chance 
 of see his beautiful leg again . good be a very modest man . 
 Henceforward they have to satisfy their æsthetic longing with his one 
 whisker , his transparent eye , and his movable tooth . 

 still gaze with fond remembrance at Good 's trouser , Infadoos next 
 inform we that he have command the regiment to muster so soon as 
 the day break , in order to explain to they fully the origin and 
 circumstance of the rebellion which be decide on by the chief , and 
 to introduce to they the rightful heir to the throne , Ignosi . 

 accordingly , when the sun be up , the troop - in all some twenty 
 thousand man , and the flower of the Kukuana army - be muster on a 
 large open space , to which we go . the man be draw up in three 
 side of a dense square , and present a magnificent spectacle . we take 
 our station on the open side of the square , and be speedily 
 surround by all the principal chief and officer . 

 these , after silence have be proclaim , Infadoos proceed to 
 address . he narrate to they in vigorous and graceful language - for , 
 like most Kukuanas of high rank , he be a bear orator - the history of 
 Ignosi 's father , and of how he have be basely murder by Twala the 
 king , and his wife and child drive out to starve . then he point out 
 that the people suffer and groan under Twala 's cruel rule , 
 instance the proceeding of the previous night , when , under pretence 
 of their be evil - doer , many of the noblest in the land have be 
 drag forth and wickedly do to death . next he go on to say that 
 the white lord from the star , look down upon their country , have 
 perceive its trouble , and determine , at great personal inconvenience , 
 to alleviate its lot : that they have accordingly take the real king of 
 the Kukuanas , Ignosi , who be languish in exile , by the hand , and 
 lead he over the mountain : that they have see the wickedness of 
 Twala 's doing , and for a sign to the wavering , and to save the life of 
 the girl Foulata , actually , by the exercise of their high magic , have 
 put out the moon and slay the young fiend Scragga ; and that they be 
 prepared to stand by they , and assist they to overthrow Twala , and set 
 up the rightful king , Ignosi , in his place . 

 he finish his discourse amidst a murmur of approbation . then Ignosi 
 step forward and begin to speak . have reiterate all that Infadoos 
 his uncle have say , he conclude a powerful speech in these word : - 

 " O chief , captain , soldier , and people , ye have hear my word . now 
 must ye make choice between I and he who sit upon my throne , the 
 uncle who kill his brother , and hunt his brother 's child forth to 
 die in the cold and the night . that I be indeed the king 
 these " - point to the chiefs - " can tell you , for they have see the 
 snake about my middle . if I be not the king , would these white man be 
 on my side with all their magic ? tremble , chief , captain , soldier , 
 and people ! be not the darkness they have bring upon the land to 
 confound Twala and cover our flight , darkness even in the hour of the 
 full moon , yet before your eye ? " 

 " it be , " answer the soldier . 

 " I be the king ; I say to you , I be the king , " go on Ignosi , draw 
 up his great stature to its full , and lift his broad - blade 
 battle - axe above his head . " if there be any man among you who say that 
 it be not so , let he stand forth and I will fight he now , and his 
 blood shall be a red token that I tell you true . let he stand forth , I 
 say ; " and he shake the great axe till it flash in the sunlight . 

 as nobody seem inclined to respond to this heroic version of " dilly , 
 dilly , come and be kill , " our late henchman proceed with his 
 address . 

 " I be indeed the king , and should ye stand by my side in the battle , if 
 I win the day ye shall go with I to victory and honour . I will give 
 you oxen and wife , and ye shall take place of all the regiment ; and 
 if ye fall , I will fall with you . 

 " and behold , I give you this promise , that when I sit upon the seat of 
 my father , bloodshed shall cease in the land . no long shall ye cry 
 for justice to find slaughter , no long shall the witch - finder hunt 
 you out so that ye may be slay without a cause . no man shall die save 
 he who offend against the law . the ' eat up ' of your kraal shall 
 cease ; each one of you shall sleep secure in his own hut and fear 
 naught , and justice shall walk blindfold throughout the land . have ye 
 choose , chief , captain , soldier , and people ? " 

 " we have choose , o king , " come back the answer . 

 " it be well . turn your head and see how Twala 's messenger go forth 
 from the great town , east and west , and north and south , to gather a 
 mighty army to slay I and you , and these my friend and protector . 
 to - morrow , or perchance the next day , he will come against we with all 
 who be faithful to he . then I shall see the man who be indeed my man , 
 the man who fear not to die for his cause ; and I tell you that he 
 shall not be forget in the time of spoil . I have speak , O chief , 
 captain , soldier , and people . now go to your hut and make you ready 
 for war . " 

 there be a pause , till presently one of the chief lift his hand , 
 and out roll the royal salute , " Koom . " it be a sign that the 
 soldier accept Ignosi as their king . then they march off in 
 battalion . 

 half an hour afterwards we hold a council of war , at which all the 
 commander of regiment be present . it be evident to we that before 
 very long we should be attack in overwhelming force . indeed , from our 
 point of vantage on the hill we could see troop muster , and runner 
 go forth from Loo in every direction , doubtless to summon soldier 
 to the king 's assistance . we have on our side about twenty thousand man , 
 compose of seven of the good regiment in the country . Twala , so 
 Infadoos and the chief calculate , have at least thirty to thirty - five 
 thousand on whom he could rely at present assemble in Loo , and they 
 think that by midday on the morrow he would be able to gather another 
 five thousand or more to his aid . it be , of course , possible that some 
 of his troop would desert and come over to we , but it be not a 
 contingency which could be reckon on . meanwhile , it be clear that 
 active preparation be be make by Twala to subdue we . already 
 strong body of armed man be patrol round and round the foot of 
 the hill , and there be other sign also of come assault . 

 Infadoos and the chief , however , be of opinion that no attack would 
 take place that day , which would be devoted to preparation and to the 
 removal of every available mean of the moral effect produce upon the 
 mind of the soldiery by the suppose magical darkening of the moon . 
 the onslaught would be on the morrow , they say , and they prove to be 
 right . 

 meanwhile , we set to work to strengthen the position in all way 
 possible . almost every man be turn out , and in the course of the 
 day , which seem far too short , much be do . the path up the 
 hill - that be rather a sanatorium than a fortress , be use 
 generally as the camping place of regiment suffer from recent 
 service in unhealthy portion of the country - be carefully block 
 with mass of stone , and every other approach be make as impregnable 
 as time would allow . pile of boulder be collect at various spot 
 to be roll down upon an advance enemy , station be appoint to 
 the different regiment , and all preparation be make which our joint 
 ingenuity could suggest . 

 just before sundown , as we rest after our toil , we perceive a small 
 company of man advance towards we from the direction of Loo , one of 
 whom bear a palm leaf in his hand for a sign that he come as a herald . 

 as he draw near , Ignosi , Infadoos , one or two chief and ourselves , 
 go down to the foot of the mountain to meet he . he be a 
 gallant - look fellow , wear the regulation leopard - skin cloak . 

 " greet ! " he cry , as he come ; " the king 's greeting to those who 
 make unholy war against the king ; the lion 's greeting to the jackal 
 that snarl around his heel . " 

 " speak , " I say . 

 " these be the king 's word . surrender to the king 's mercy ere a bad 
 thing befall you . already the shoulder have be tear from the black 
 bull , and the king drive he bleed about the camp . " 1 

 " what be Twala 's term ? " I ask from curiosity . 

 " his term be merciful , worthy of a great king . these be the word of 
 Twala , the one - eye , the mighty , the husband of a thousand wife , lord 
 of the Kukuanas , keeper of the Great Road   Solomon 's Road , belove of 
 the Strange Ones who sit in silence at the mountain yonder   the Three 
 Witches , Calf of the black Cow , Elephant whose tread shake the earth , 
 Terror of the evil - doer , Ostrich whose foot devour the desert , huge 
 one , black one , wise one , king from generation to generation ! these be 
 the word of Twala : ' I will have mercy and be satisfied with a little 
 blood . one in every ten shall die , the rest shall go free ; but the 
 white man Incubu , who slay Scragga my son , and the black man his 
 servant , who pretend to my throne , and Infadoos my brother , who brew 
 rebellion against I , these shall die by torture as an offering to the 
 Silent Ones . ' such be the merciful word of Twala . " 

 after consult with the other a little , I answer he in a loud 
 voice , so that the soldier might hear , thus - 

 " go back , thou dog , to Twala , who send thee , and say that we , Ignosi , 
 veritable king of the Kukuanas , Incubu , Bougwan , and Macumazahn , the 
 wise one from the Stars , who make dark the moon , Infadoos , of the 
 royal house , and the chief , captain , and people here gather , make 
 answer and say , ' that we will not surrender ; that before the sun have 
 go down twice , Twala 's corpse shall stiffen at Twala 's gate , and 
 Ignosi , whose father Twala slew , shall reign in his stead . ' now go , ere 
 we whip thee away , and beware how thou dost lift a hand against such as 
 we be . " 

 the herald laugh loudly . " ye frighten not man with such swell 
 word , " he cry out . " show yourself as bold to - morrow , o ye who 
 darken the moon . be bold , fight , and be merry , before the crow pick 
 your bone till they be white than your face . Farewell ; perhaps we 
 may meet in the fight ; fly not to the Stars , but wait for I , I pray , 
 white man . " with this shaft of sarcasm he retire , and almost 
 immediately the sun sink . 

 that night be a busy one , for weary as we be , so far as be possible 
 by the moonlight all preparation for the morrow 's fight be 
 continue , and messenger be constantly come and go from the 
 place where we sit in council . at last , about an hour after midnight , 
 everything that could be do be do , and the camp , save for the 
 occasional challenge of a sentry , sink into silence . Sir Henry and I , 
 accompany by Ignosi and one of the chief , descend the hill and 
 make a round of the picket . as we go , suddenly , from all sort of 
 unexpected place , spear gleam out in the moonlight , only to vanish 
 again when we utter the password . it be clear to we that none be 
 sleep at their post . then we return , pick our way warily 
 through thousand of sleep warrior , many of whom be take their 
 last earthly rest . 

 the moonlight flicker along their spear , play upon their feature 
 and make they ghastly ; the chilly night wind toss their tall and 
 hearse - like plume . there they lie in wild confusion , with arm 
 outstretche and twisted limb ; their stern , stalwart form look 
 weird and unhuman in the moonlight . 

 " how many of these do you suppose will be alive at this time 
 to - morrow ? " ask Sir Henry . 

 I shake my head and look again at the sleep man , and to my tired 
 and yet excited imagination it seem as though Death have already 
 touch they . my mind 's eye single out those who be seal to 
 slaughter , and there rush in upon my heart a great sense of the 
 mystery of human life , and an overwhelming sorrow at its futility and 
 sadness . to - night these thousand sleep their healthy sleep , to - morrow 
 they , and many other with they , ourselves perhaps among they , would be 
 stiffening in the cold ; their wife would be widow , their child 
 fatherless , and their place know they no more for ever . only the old 
 moon would shine on serenely , the night wind would stir the grass , 
 and the wide earth would take its rest , even as it do æon before we 
 be , and will do æon after we have be forget . 

 yet man die not whilst the world , at once his mother and his monument , 
 remain . his name be lose , indeed , but the breath he breathe still 
 stir the pine - top on the mountain , the sound of the word he speak 
 yet echo on through space ; the thought his brain give birth to we 
 have inherit to - day ; his passion be our cause of life ; the joy and 
 sorrow that he know be our familiar friend - the end from which he 
 flee aghast will surely overtake we also ! 

 truly the universe be full of ghost , not sheet churchyard spectre , 
 but the inextinguishable element of individual life , which have once 
 be , can never die , though they blend and change , and change again 
 for ever . 


 all sort of reflection of this nature pass through my mind - for as 
 I grow old I regret to say that a detestable habit of thinking seem 
 to be get a hold of I - while I stand and star at those grim yet 
 fantastic line of warrior , sleep , as their saying go , " upon 
 their spear . " 

 " Curtis , " I say , " I be in a condition of pitiable fear . " 

 Sir Henry stroke his yellow beard and laugh , as he answer - 

 " I have hear you make that sort of remark before , Quatermain . " 

 " well , I mean it now . do you know , I very much doubt if one of we will 
 be alive to - morrow night . we shall be attack in overwhelming force , 
 and it be quite a chance if we can hold this place . " 

 " we will give a good account of some of they , at any rate . look here , 
 Quatermain , this business be nasty , and one with which , properly 
 speak , we ought not to be mix up , but we be in for it , so we must 
 make the good of our job . speak personally , I have rather be kill 
 fighting than any other way , and now that there seem little chance of 
 our find my poor brother , it make the idea easy to I . but 
 fortune favour the brave , and we may succeed . anyway , the battle will 
 be awful , and have a reputation to keep up , we shall need to be in 
 the thick of the thing . " 

 he make this last remark in a mournful voice , but there be a gleam in 
 his eye which belie its melancholy . I have an idea Sir Henry Curtis 
 actually like fighting . 

 after this we go to sleep for a couple of hour or so . 

 just about dawn we be awaken by Infadoos , who come to say that 
 great activity be to be observe in Loo , and that party of the 
 king 's skirmisher be drive in our outpost . 

 we rise and dress ourselves for the fray , each put on his chain 
 armour shirt , for which garment at the present juncture we feel 
 exceedingly thankful . Sir Henry go the whole length about the matter , 
 and dress himself like a native warrior . " when you be in 
 Kukuanaland , do as the Kukuanas do , " he remark , as he draw the 
 shin steel over his broad breast , which it fit like a glove . nor 
 do he stop there . at his request Infadoos have provide he with a 
 complete set of native war uniform . round his throat he fasten the 
 leopard - skin cloak of a command officer , on his brow he bind the 
 plume of black ostrich feather wear only by general of high rank , and 
 about his middle a magnificent moocha of white ox - tail . a pair of 
 sandal , a leglet of goat 's hair , a heavy battle - axe with a 
 rhinoceros - horn handle , a round iron shield cover with white ox - hide , 
 and the regulation number of tollas , or throw - knife , make up his 
 equipment , to which , however , he add his revolver . the dress be , no 
 doubt , a savage one , but I be bind to say that I seldom see a finer 
 sight than Sir Henry Curtis present in this guise . it show off his 
 magnificent physique to the great advantage , and when Ignosi arrive 
 presently , array in a similar costume , I think to myself that I have 
 never before see two such splendid man . 

 as for Good and myself , the armour do not suit we nearly so well . to 
 begin with , Good insist upon keep on his new - find trouser , and a 
 stout , short gentleman with an eye - glass , and one half of his face 
 shave , array in a mail shirt , carefully tuck into a very seedy 
 pair of corduroys , look more remarkable than impose . in my case , the 
 chain shirt be too big for I , I put it on over all my clothe , 
 which cause it to bulge in a somewhat ungainly fashion . I discard my 
 trouser , however , retain only my veldtschoon , have determine to 
 go into battle with bare leg , in order to be the light for run , 
 in case it become necessary to retire quickly . the mail coat , a spear , 
 a shield , that I do not know how to use , a couple of tollas , a 
 revolver , and a huge plume , which I pin into the top of my shooting 
 hat , in order to give a bloodthirsty finish to my appearance , complete 
 my modest equipment . in addition to all these article , of course we 
 have our rifle , but as ammunition be scarce , and as they would be 
 useless in case of a charge , we arrange that they should be carry 
 behind we by bearer . 

 when at length we have equip ourselves , we swallow some food 
 hastily , and then start out to see how thing be go on . at one 
 point in the table - land of the mountain , there be a little koppie of 
 brown stone , which serve the double purpose of head - quarter and of a 
 conning tower . here we find Infadoos surround by his own regiment , 
 the Greys , which be undoubtedly the fine in the Kukuana army , and 
 the same that we have first see at the outlying kraal . this regiment , 
 now three thousand five hundred strong , be be hold in reserve , and 
 the man be lie down on the grass in company , and watch the 
 king 's force creep out of Loo in long ant - like column . there seem 
 to be no end to the length of these column - three in all , and each of 
 they number , as we judge , at least eleven or twelve thousand man . 

 as soon as they be clear of the town the regiment form up . then 
 one body march off to the right , one to the left , and the third come 
 on slowly towards we . 

 " ah , " say Infadoos , " they be go to attack we on three side at 
 once . " 

 this seem rather serious news , for our position on the top of the 
 mountain , which measure a mile and a half in circumference , be an 
 extend one , it be important to we to concentrate our comparatively 
 small defend force as much as possible . but since it be impossible 
 for we to dictate in what way we should be assail , we have to make the 
 good of it , and accordingly send order to the various regiment to 
 prepare to receive the separate onslaught . 


  1   this cruel custom be not confine to the Kukuanas , but be by no 
 mean uncommon amongst african tribe on the occasion of the outbreak 
 of war or any other important public event . - A.Q. 



 CHAPTER XIII 

 the ATTACK 

 Slowly , and without the slight appearance of haste or excitement , 
 the three column creep on . when within about five hundred yard of we , 
 the main or centre column halt at the root of a tongue of open plain 
 which run up into the hill , to give time to the other division to 
 circumvent our position , which be shape more or less in the form of a 
 horse - shoe , with its two point face towards the town of Loo . the 
 object of this manoeuvre be that the threefold assault should be 
 deliver simultaneously . 

 " oh , for a gatling ! " groan Good , as he contemplate the serrie 
 phalanx beneath we . " I would clear that plain in twenty minute . " 

 " we have not get one , so it be no use yearn for it ; but suppose you 
 try a shot , Quatermain , " say Sir Henry . " see how near you can go to 
 that tall fellow who appear to be in command . two to one you miss he , 
 and an even sovereign , to be honestly pay if ever we get out of this , 
 that you do not   drop the bullet within five yard . " 


 this pique I , so , load the express with solid ball , I wait till 
 my friend walk some ten yard out from his force , in order to get a 
 well view of our position , accompany only by an orderly ; then , 
 lie down and rest the express on a rock , I cover he . the rifle , 
 like all express , be only sight to three hundred and fifty yard , 
 so to allow for the drop in trajectory I take he half - way down the 
 neck , which ought , I calculate , to find he in the chest . he stand 
 quite still and give I every opportunity , but whether it be the 
 excitement or the wind , or the fact of the man be a long shot , I 
 do not   know , but this be what happen . get dead on , as I think , 
 a fine sight , I press , and when the puff of smoke have clear away , 
 to my disgust , I see my man stand there unharmed , whilst his 
 orderly , who be at least three pace to the left , be stretch upon 
 the ground apparently dead . turn swiftly , the officer I have aim at 
 begin to run towards his man in evident alarm . 

 " Bravo , Quatermain ! " sing out Good ; " you have   frighten he . " 

 this make I very angry , for , if possible to avoid it , I hate to miss 
 in public . when a man be master of only one art he like to keep up his 
 reputation in that art . move quite out of myself at my failure , I do 
 a rash thing . rapidly cover the general as he run , I let drive with 
 the second barrel . instantly the poor man throw up his arm , and fall 
 forward on to his face . this time I have make no mistake ; and - I say it 
 as a proof of how little we think of other when our own safety , pride , 
 or reputation be in question - I be brute enough to feel delighted at 
 the sight . 

 the regiment who have see the feat cheer wildly at this exhibition 
 of the white man 's magic , which they take as an omen of success , while 
 the force the general have belong to - which , indeed , as we ascertain 
 afterwards , he have command - fall back in confusion . Sir Henry and 
 Good now take up their rifle and begin to fire , the latter 
 industriously " brown " the dense mass before he with another 
 Winchester repeater , and I also have another shot or two , with the 
 result , so far as we could judge , that we put some six or eight man 
  hor de combat before they be out of range . 

 just as we stop fire there come an ominous roar from our far 
 right , then a similar roar rise on our left . the two other division 
 be engage we . 

 at the sound , the mass of man before we open out a little , and 
 advanced towards the hill and up the spit of bare grass land at a slow 
 trot , sing a deep - throate song as they run . we keep up a steady 
 fire from our rifle as they come , Ignosi join in occasionally , and 
 account for several man , but of course we produce no more effect 
 upon that mighty rush of armed humanity than he who throw pebble do 
 on the break wave . 

 on they come , with a shout and the clashing of spear ; now they be 
 drive in the picket we have place among the rock at the foot of the 
 hill . after that the advance be a little slow , for though as yet we 
 have offer no serious opposition , the attack force must climb up 
 hill , and they come slowly to save their breath . our first line of 
 defence be about half - way down the side of the slope , our second fifty 
 yard far back , while our third occupy the edge of the plateau . 

 on they storm , shout their war - cry , " Twala ! Twala ! Chiele ! 
 Chiele ! "   Twala ! Twala ! smite ! smite !   " Ignosi ! Ignosi ! Chiele ! 
 Chiele ! " answer our people . they be quite close now , and the 
  tolla , or throw - knife , begin to flash backwards and forwards , 
 and now with an awful yell the battle close in . 

 to and fro sway the mass of struggle warrior , man fall fast as 
 leaf in an autumn wind ; but before long the superior weight of the 
 attacking force begin to tell , and our first line of defence be slowly 
 press back till it merge into the second . here the struggle be very 
 fierce , but again our people be drive back and up , till at length , 
 within twenty minute of the commencement of the fight , our third line 
 come into action . 

 but by this time the assailant be much exhausted , and besides have 
 lose many man kill and wound , and to break through that third 
 impenetrable hedge of spear prove beyond their power . for a while 
 the seethe line of savage swing backwards and forwards , in the 
 fierce ebb and flow of battle , and the issue be doubtful . Sir Henry 
 watch the desperate struggle with a kindling eye , and then without a 
 word he rush off , follow by Good , and fling himself into the 
 hottest of the fray . as for myself , I stop where I be . 

 the soldier catch sight of his tall form as he plunge into battle , 
 and there rise a cry of - 

 " Nanzia Incubu ! Nanzia Unkungunklovo ! "   here be the Elephant ! 
 " Chiele ! Chiele ! " 

 from that moment the end be no long in doubt . inch by inch , fight 
 with splendid gallantry , the attack force be press back down the 
 hillside , till at last it retreat upon its reserve in something like 
 confusion . at that instant , too , a messenger arrive to say that the 
 leave attack have be repulse ; and I be just begin to congratulate 
 myself , believe that the affair be over for the present , when , to 
 our horror , we perceive our man who have be engage in the right 
 defence be drive towards we across the plain , follow by swarm of 
 the enemy , who have evidently succeed at this point . 

 Ignosi , who be stand by I , take in the situation at a glance , and 
 issue a rapid order . instantly the reserve regiment around we , the 
 Greys , extend itself . 

 again Ignosi give a word of command , which be take up and repeat by 
 the captain , and in another second , to my intense disgust , I find 
 myself involve in a furious onslaught upon the advance foe . get 
 as much as I could behind Ignosi 's huge frame , I make the good of a bad 
 job , and toddle along to be kill as though I like it . in a minute 
 or two - we be plunge through the fly group of our man , who at 
 once begin to re - form behind we , and then I be sure I do not know what 
 happen . all I can remember be a dreadful rolling noise of the meeting 
 of shield , and the sudden apparition of a huge ruffian , whose eye 
 seem literally to be start out of his head , make straight at I 
 with a bloody spear . but - I say it with pride - I rise - or rather 
 sank - to the occasion . it be one before which most people would have 
 collapse once and for all . see that if I stand where I be I must 
 be kill , as the horrid apparition come I fling myself down in front 
 of he so cleverly that , be unable to stop himself , he take a header 
 right over my prostrate form . before he could rise again , I have rise 
 and settle the matter from behind with my revolver . 

 shortly after this somebody knock I down , and I remember no more of 
 that charge . 

 when I come to I find myself back at the koppie , with good bending 
 over I hold some water in a gourd . 

 " how do you feel , old fellow ? " he ask anxiously . 

 I get up and shake myself before reply . 

 " pretty well , thank you , " I answer . 

 " thank Heaven ! when I see they carry you in , I feel quite sick ; I 
 think you be do for . " 

 " not this time , my boy . I fancy I only get a rap on the head , which 
 knock I stupid . how have it end ? " 

 " they be repulse at every point for a while . the loss be dreadfully 
 heavy ; we have quite two thousand kill and wound , and they must 
 have lose three . look , there be a sight ! " and he point to long line 
 of man advance by four . 

 in the centre of every group of four , and be bear by it , be a kind 
 of hide tray , of which a Kukuana force always carry a quantity , with 
 a loop for a handle at each corner . on these tray - and their number 
 seem endless - lie wound man , who as they arrive be hastily 
 examine by the medicine man , of whom ten be attach to a regiment . 
 if the wound be not of a fatal character the sufferer be take away 
 and attend to as carefully as circumstance would allow . but if , on 
 the other hand , the injured man 's condition prove hopeless , what 
 follow be very dreadful , though doubtless it may have be the 
 true mercy . one of the doctor , under pretence of carry out an 
 examination , swiftly open an artery with a sharp knife , and in a 
 minute or two the sufferer expire painlessly . there be many case 
 that day in which this be do . in fact , it be do in the majority 
 of case when the wound be in the body , for the gash make by the entry 
 of the enormously broad spear use by the Kukuanas generally render 
 recovery impossible . in most instance the poor sufferer be already 
 unconscious , and in other the fatal " nick " of the artery be inflict 
 so swiftly and painlessly that they do not seem to notice it . still it 
 be a ghastly sight , and one from which we be glad to escape ; indeed , 
 I never remember anything of the kind that affect I more than see 
 those gallant soldier thus put out of pain by the red - handed medicine 
 man , except , indeed , on one occasion when , after an attack , I see a 
 force of Swazis bury their hopelessly wound alive . 

 hurry from this dreadful scene to the further side of the koppie , we 
 find Sir Henry , who still hold a battle - axe in his hand , Ignosi , 
 Infadoos , and one or two of the chief in deep consultation . 

 " thank Heaven , here you be , Quatermain ! I can not   quite make out what 
 Ignosi want to do . it seem that though we have beat off the attack , 
 Twala be now receive large reinforcement , and be show a 
 disposition to invest we , with the view of starve we out . " 

 " that be awkward . " 

 " yes ; especially as Infadoos say that the water supply have give out . " 

 " my lord , that be so , " say Infadoos ; " the spring can not supply the 
 want of so great a multitude , and it be fail rapidly . before night 
 we shall all be thirsty . listen , Macumazahn . thou art wise , and hast 
 doubtless see many war in the land from whence thou cam - that be 
 if indeed they make war in the star . now tell we , what shall we do ? 
 Twala have bring up many fresh man to take the place of those who have 
 fall . yet Twala have learn his lesson ; the hawk do not think to find 
 the heron ready ; but our beak have pierce his breast ; he fear to 
 strike at we again . we too be wound , and he will wait for we to die ; 
 he will wind himself round we like a snake round a buck , and fight the 
 fight of ' sit down . ' " 

 " I hear thee , " I say . 

 " so , Macumazahn , thou seest we have no water here , and but a little 
 food , and we must choose between these three thing - to languish like a 
 starve lion in his den , or to strive to break away towards the north , 
 or " - and here he rise and point towards the dense mass of our 
 foe - " to launch ourselves straight at Twala 's throat . Incubu , the 
 great warrior - for to - day he fight like a buffalo in a net , and 
 Twala 's soldier go down before his axe like young corn before the 
 hail ; with these eye I see it - Incubu say ' charge ' ; but the Elephant 
 be ever prone to charge . now what say Macumazahn , the wily old fox , 
 who have see much , and love to bite his enemy from behind ? the last 
 word be in Ignosi the king , for it be a king 's right to speak of war ; 
 but let we hear thy voice , o Macumazahn , who watchest by night , and the 
 voice too of he of the transparent eye . " 

 " what sayest thou , Ignosi , " I ask . 

 " Nay , my father , " answer our quondam servant , who now , clothe as he be 
 in the full panoply of savage war , look every inch a warrior king , 
 " do thou speak , and let I , who be but a child in wisdom beside thee , 
 hearken to thy word . " 

 thus adjure , after take hasty counsel with Good and Sir Henry , I 
 deliver my opinion briefly to the effect that , be trap , our 
 good chance , especially in view of the failure of our water supply , be 
 to initiate an attack upon Twala 's force . then I recommend that the 
 attack should be deliver at once , " before our wound grow stiff , " and 
 also before the sight of Twala 's overpowering force cause the heart 
 of our soldier " to wax small like fat before a fire . " otherwise , I 
 point out , some of the captain might change their mind , and , make 
 peace with Twala , desert to he , or even betray we into his hand . 

 this expression of opinion seem , on the whole , to be favourably 
 receive ; indeed , among the Kukuanas my utterance meet with a respect 
 which have never be accord to they before or since . but the real 
 decision as to our plan lie with Ignosi , who , since he have be 
 recognise as rightful king , could exercise the almost unbounded right 
 of sovereignty , include , of course , the final decision on matter of 
 generalship , and it be to he that all eye be now turn . 

 at length , after a pause , during which he appear to be think 
 deeply , he speak . 

 " Incubu , Macumazahn , and Bougwan , brave white man , and my friend ; 
 Infadoos , my uncle , and chief ; my heart be fix . I will strike at 
 Twala this day , and set my fortune on the blow , ay , and my life - my 
 life and your life also . listen ; thus will I strike . ye see how the 
 hill curve round like the half - moon , and how the plain run like a 
 green tongue towards we within the curve ? " 

 " we see , " I answer . 

 " good ; it be now mid - day , and the man eat and rest after the toil of 
 battle . when the sun have turn and travel a little way towards the 
 darkness , let thy regiment , my uncle , advance with one other down to 
 the green tongue , and it shall be that when Twala see it he will hurl 
 his force at it to crush it . but the spot be narrow , and the regiment 
 can come against thee one at a time only ; so may they be destroy one 
 by one , and the eye of all Twala 's army shall be fix upon a struggle 
 the like of which have not be see by live man . and with thee , my 
 uncle , shall go Incubu my friend , that when Twala see his battle - axe 
 flashing in the first rank of the Greys his heart may grow faint . and I 
 will come with the second regiment , that which follow thee , so that if 
 ye be destroy , as it might happen , there may yet be a king leave to 
 fight for ; and with I shall come Macumazahn the wise . " 

 " it be well , o king , " say Infadoos , apparently contemplate the 
 certainty of the complete annihilation of his regiment with perfect 
 calmness . truly , these Kukuanas be a wonderful people . death have no 
 terror for they when it be incur in the course of duty . 

 " and whilst the eye of the multitude of Twala 's soldier be thus 
 fix upon the fight , " go on Ignosi , " behold , one - third of the man 
 who be leave alive to we   i.e. about 6,000   shall creep along the right 
 horn of the hill and fall upon the left flank of Twala 's force , and 
 one - third shall creep along the left horn and fall upon Twala 's right 
 flank . and when I see that the horn be ready to toss Twala , then will 
 I , with the man who remain to I , charge home in Twala 's face , and if 
 fortune go with we the day will be ours , and before Night drive she 
 black oxen from the mountain to the mountain we shall sit in peace at 
 Loo . and now let we eat and make ready ; and , Infadoos , do thou prepare , 
 that the plan be carry out without fail ; and stay , let my white 
 father Bougwan go with the right horn , that his shin eye may give 
 courage to the captain . " 

 the arrangement for attack thus briefly indicate be set in motion 
 with a rapidity that speak well for the perfection of the Kukuana 
 military system . within little more than an hour ration have be 
 serve out and devour , the division be form , the scheme of 
 onslaught be explain to the leader , and the whole force , number 
 about 18,000 man , be ready to move , with the exception of a guard leave 
 in charge of the wound . 

 presently Good come up to Sir Henry and myself . 

 " good - bye , you fellow , " he say ; " I be off with the right wing 
 accord to order ; and so I have come to shake hand , in case we 
 should not meet again , you know , " he add significantly . 

 we shake hand in silence , and not without the exhibition of as much 
 emotion as Anglo - Saxons be will not to show . 

 " it be a queer business , " say Sir Henry , his deep voice shake a 
 little , " and I confess I never expect to see to - morrow 's sun . so far as 
 I can make out , the Greys , with whom I be to go , be to fight until 
 they be wipe out in order to enable the wing to slip round unaware 
 and outflank Twala . well , so be it ; at any rate , it will be a man 's 
 death . good - bye , old fellow . God bless you ! I hope you will pull 
 through and live to collar the diamond ; but if you do , take my advice 
 and do not   have anything more to do with Pretenders ! " 

 in another second Good have wring we both by the hand and go ; and then 
 Infadoos come up and lead off Sir Henry to his place in the forefront of 
 the Greys , whilst , with many misgiving , I depart with Ignosi to my 
 station in the second attack regiment . 



 CHAPTER XIV 

 the last stand of the greys 

 in a few more minute the regiment destine to carry out the flanking 
 movement have tramp off in silence , keep carefully to the lee of 
 the rise ground in order to conceal their advance from the keen eye 
 of Twala 's scout . 

 half an hour or more be allow to elapse between the setting out of 
 the horn or wing of the army before any stir be make by the Greys 
 and their support regiment , know as the Buffaloes , which form its 
 chest , and be destine to bear the brunt of the battle . 

 both of these regiment be almost perfectly fresh , and of full 
 strength , the Greys have be in reserve in the morning , and have 
 lose but a small number of man in sweep back that part of the attack 
 which have prove successful in break the line of defence , on the 
 occasion when I charge with they and be stun for my pain . as for 
 the Buffaloes , they have form the third line of defence on the left , 
 and since the attack force at that point have not succeed in 
 break through the second , they have scarcely come into action at all . 

 Infadoos , who be a wary old general , and know the absolute importance 
 of keep up the spirit of his man on the eve of such a desperate 
 encounter , employ the pause in address his own regiment , the 
 Greys , in poetical language : explain to they the honour that they 
 be receive in be put thus in the forefront of the battle , and in 
 have the great white warrior from the Stars to fight with they in 
 their rank ; and promise large reward of cattle and promotion to all 
 who survive in the event of Ignosi 's arm be successful . 

 I look down the long line of wave black plume and stern face 
 beneath they , and sigh to think that within one short hour most , if 
 not all , of those magnificent veteran warrior , not a man of whom be 
 under forty year of age , would be lay dead or die in the dust . it 
 could not be otherwise ; they be be condemn , with that wise 
 recklessness of human life which mark the great general , and often 
 save his force and attain his end , to certain slaughter , in order 
 to give their cause and the remainder of the army a chance of success . 
 they be foredoom to die , and they know the truth . it be to be 
 their task to engage regiment after regiment of Twala 's army on the 
 narrow strip of green beneath we , till they be exterminate or till 
 the wing find a favourable opportunity for their onslaught . and yet 
 they never hesitate , nor could I detect a sign of fear upon the face 
 of a single warrior . there they be - go to certain death , about to 
 quit the blessed light of day for ever , and yet able to contemplate 
 their doom without a tremor . even at that moment I could not help 
 contrast their state of mind with my own , which be far from 
 comfortable , and breathe a sigh of envy and admiration . never before 
 have I see such an absolute devotion to the idea of duty , and such a 
 complete indifference to its bitter fruit . 

 " behold your king ! " end old Infadoos , point to Ignosi ; " go fight 
 and fall for he , as be the duty of brave man , and curse and shameful 
 for ever be the name of he who shrink from death for his king , or who 
 turn his back to the foe . behold your king , chief , captain , and 
 soldier ! now do your homage to the sacred Snake , and then follow on , 
 that Incubu and I may show you a road to the heart of Twala 's host . " 

 there be a moment 's pause , then suddenly a murmur arise from the 
 serrie phalanx before we , a sound like the distant whisper of the 
 sea , cause by the gentle tap of the handle of six thousand spear 
 against their holder ' shield . slowly it swell , till its grow 
 volume deepen and widen into a roar of rolling noise , that echo 
 like thunder against the mountain , and fill the air with heavy wave 
 of sound . then it decrease , and by faint degree die away into 
 nothing , and suddenly out crash the royal salute . 

 Ignosi , I think to myself , might well be a proud man that day , for no 
 roman emperor ever have such a salutation from gladiator " about to die . " 

 Ignosi acknowledge this magnificent act of homage by lift his 
 battle - axe , and then the Greys file off in a triple - line formation , 
 each line contain about one thousand fight man , exclusive of 
 officer . when the last company have advance some five hundred yard , 
 Ignosi put himself at the head of the Buffaloes , which regiment be 
 draw up in a similar three - fold formation , and give the word to march , 
 and off we go , I , needless to say , utter the most heartfelt 
 prayer that I might emerge from that entertainment with a whole skin . 
 many a queer position have I find myself in , but never before in one 
 quite so unpleasant as the present , or one in which my chance of come 
 off safe be small . 

 by the time that we reach the edge of the plateau the Greys be 
 already half - way down the slope end in the tongue of grass land that 
 run up into the bend of the mountain , something as the frog of a 
 horse 's foot run up into the shoe . the excitement in Twala 's camp on 
 the plain beyond be very great , and regiment after regiment be 
 start forward at a long swing trot in order to reach the root of 
 the tongue of land before the attack force could emerge into the 
 plain of Loo . 

 this tongue , which be some four hundred yard in depth , even at its 
 root or widest part be not more than six hundred and fifty pace 
 across , while at its tip it scarcely measure ninety . the Greys , who , 
 in pass down the side of the hill and on to the tip of the tongue , 
 have form into a column , on reach the spot where it broaden out 
 again , reassume their triple - line formation , and halt dead . 

 then we - that be , the Buffaloes - move down the tip of the tongue and 
 take our stand in reserve , about one hundred yard behind the last line 
 of the Greys , and on slightly high ground . meanwhile we have leisure 
 to observe Twala 's entire force , which evidently have be reinforce 
 since the morning attack , and could not now , notwithstanding their 
 loss , number less than forty thousand , move swiftly up towards we . 
 but as they draw near the root of the tongue they hesitate , have 
 discover that only one regiment could advance into the gorge at a 
 time , and that there , some seventy yard from the mouth of it , 
 unassailable except in front , on account of the high wall of 
 boulder - strew ground on each side , stand the famous regiment of Greys , 
 the pride and glory of the Kukuana army , ready to hold the way against 
 their power as the three Romans once hold the bridge against thousand . 

 they hesitate , and finally stop their advance ; there be no 
 eagerness to cross spear with these three grim rank of warrior who 
 stand so firm and ready . presently , however , a tall general , wear 
 the customary head - dress of nod ostrich plume , appear , attend 
 by a group of chief and orderly , be , I think , none other than 
 Twala himself . he give an order , and the first regiment , raise a 
 shout , charge up towards the Greys , who remain perfectly still and 
 silent till the attack troop be within forty yard , and a volley 
 of tollas , or throw - knife , come rattle among their rank . 

 then suddenly with a bound and a roar , they spring forward with 
 uplifted spear , and the regiment meet in deadly strife . next second the 
 roll of the meeting shield come to our ear like the sound of thunder , 
 and the plain seem to be alive with flash of light reflect from 
 the shimmering spear . to and fro swing the surge mass of struggle , 
 stab humanity , but not for long . suddenly the attack line begin 
 to grow thin , and then with a slow , long heave the Greys pass over 
 they , just as a great wave heave up its bulk and pass over a sunken 
 ridge . it be do ; that regiment be completely destroy , but the 
 Greys have but two line leave now ; a third of their number be dead . 

 close up shoulder to shoulder , once more they halt in silence and 
 await attack ; and I be rejoice to catch sight of Sir Henry 's yellow 
 beard as he move to and fro arrange the rank . so he be yet alive ! 

 meanwhile we move on to the ground of the encounter , which be 
 cumber by about four thousand prostrate human being , dead , die , 
 and wound , and literally stain red with blood . Ignosi issue an 
 order , which be rapidly pass down the rank , to the effect that none 
 of the enemy 's wound be to be kill , and so far as we could see 
 this command be scrupulously carry out . it would have be a 
 shocking sight , if we have find time to think of such thing . 

 but now a second regiment , distinguish by white plume , kilt , and 
 shield , be move to the attack of the two thousand remain Greys , 
 who stand wait in the same ominous silence as before , till the foe 
 be within forty yard or so , when they hurl themselves with 
 irresistible force upon they . again there come the awful roll of the 
 meeting shield , and as we watch the tragedy repeat itself . 

 but this time the issue be leave long in doubt ; indeed , it seem for 
 awhile almost impossible that the Greys should again prevail . the 
 attack regiment , which be form of young man , fight with the 
 utmost fury , and at first seem by sheer weight to be drive the 
 veteran back . the slaughter be truly awful , hundred fall every 
 minute ; and from among the shout of the warrior and the groan of the 
 dying , set to the music of clash spear , come a continuous hiss 
 undertone of " S'gee , s'gee , " the note of triumph of each victor as he 
 pass his assegai through and through the body of his fall foe . 

 but perfect discipline and steady and unchanging valour can do wonder , 
 and one veteran soldier be worth two young one , as soon become 
 apparent in the present case . for just when we think that it be all 
 over with the Greys , and be prepare to take their place so soon as 
 they make room by be destroy , I hear Sir Henry 's deep voice 
 ring out through the din , and catch a glimpse of his circling 
 battle - axe as he wave it high above his plume . then come a change ; 
 the Greys cease to give ; they stand still as a rock , against which the 
 furious wave of spearman break again and again , only to recoil . 
 presently they begin to move once more - forward this time ; as they have 
 no firearm there be no smoke , so we could see it all . another minute 
 and the onslaught grow fainter . 

 " ah , these be man , indeed ; they will conquer again , " call out 
 Ignosi , who be grind his tooth with excitement at my side . " see , it 
 be do ! " 

 suddenly , like puff of smoke from the mouth of a cannon , the attacking 
 regiment break away in fly group , their white head - dress 
 stream behind they in the wind , and leave their opponent victor , 
 indeed , but , alas ! no more a regiment . of the gallant triple line , 
 which forty minute before have go into action three thousand strong , 
 there remain at most some six hundred blood - spatter man ; the rest 
 be under foot . and yet they cheer and wave their spear in 
 triumph , and then , instead of fall back upon we as we expect , they 
 run forward , for a hundred yard or so , after the fly group of 
 foeman , take possession of a rise knoll of ground , and , resume 
 their triple formation , form a threefold ring around its base . and 
 there , thank be to Heaven , stand on the top of the mound for a 
 minute , I see Sir Henry , apparently unharmed , and with he our old 
 friend Infadoos . then Twala 's regiment roll down upon the doom 
 band , and once more the battle close in . 

 as those who read this history will probably long ago have gather , I 
 be , to be honest , a bit of a coward , and certainly in no way give to 
 fighting , though somehow it have often be my lot to get into 
 unpleasant position , and to be oblige to shed man 's blood . but I have 
 always hat it , and keep my own blood as undiminishe in quantity as 
 possible , sometimes by a judicious use of my heel . at this moment , 
 however , for the first time in my life , I feel my bosom burn with 
 martial ardour . warlike fragment from the " Ingoldsby Legends , " 
 together with number of sanguinary verse in the Old Testament , sprang 
 up in my brain like mushroom in the dark ; my blood , which hitherto have 
 be half - freeze with horror , go beat through my vein , and there 
 come upon I a savage desire to kill and spare not . I glance round at 
 the serried rank of warrior behind we , and somehow , all in an 
 instant , I begin to wonder if my face look like theirs . there they 
 stand , the hand twitch , the lip apart , the fierce feature 
 instinct with the hungry lust of battle , and in the eye a look like 
 the glare of a bloodhound when after long pursuit he sight his quarry . 

 only Ignosi 's heart , to judge from his comparative self - possession , 
 seem , to all appearance , to beat as calmly as ever beneath his 
 leopard - skin cloak , though even he still grind his tooth . I could 
 bear it no long . 

 " be we to stand here till we put out root , Umbopa - Ignosi , I 
 mean - while Twala swallow our brother yonder ? " I ask . 

 " Nay , Macumazahn , " be the answer ; ' see , now be the ripe moment : let we 
 pluck it . " 

 as he speak a fresh regiment rush past the ring upon the little 
 mound , and wheel round , attack it from the hither side . 

 then , lift his battle - axe , Ignosi give the signal to advance , and , 
 scream the wild Kukuana war - cry , the Buffaloes charge home with a 
 rush like the rush of the sea . 

 what follow immediately on this it be out of my power to tell . all I 
 can remember be an irregular yet order advance , that seem to shake 
 the ground ; a sudden change of front and form up on the part of the 
 regiment against which the charge be direct ; then an awful shock , a 
 dull roar of voice , and a continuous flashing of spear , see through 
 a red mist of blood . 

 when my mind clear I find myself stand inside the remnant of the 
 Greys near the top of the mound , and just behind no less a person than 
 Sir Henry himself . how I get there I have at the moment no idea , but Sir 
 Henry afterwards tell I that I be bear up by the first furious 
 charge of the Buffaloes almost to his foot , and then leave , as they in 
 turn be press back . Thereon he dash out of the circle and drag 
 I into shelter . 

 as for the fight that follow , who can describe it ? again and again 
 the multitude surge against our momentarily lessening circle , and 
 again and again we beat they back . 

  " the stubborn spearman still make good 
  the dark impenetrable wood , 
  each step where his comrade stand 
  the instant that he fall , " 

 as someone or other beautifully say . 

 it be a splendid thing to see those brave battalion come on time 
 after time over the barrier of their dead , sometimes lift corps 
 before they to receive our spear - thrust , only to leave their own 
 corps to swell the rise pile . it be a gallant sight to see that 
 old warrior , Infadoos , as cool as though he be on parade , shout 
 out order , taunt , and even jest , to keep up the spirit of his few 
 remain man , and then , as each charge roll on , step forward to 
 wherever the fighting be thick , to bear his share in its repulse . 
 and yet more gallant be the vision of Sir Henry , whose ostrich plume 
 have be shorn off by a spear thrust , so that his long yellow hair 
 stream out in the breeze behind he . there he stand , the great dane , 
 for he be nothing else , his hand , his axe , and his armour all red 
 with blood , and none could live before his stroke . time after time I 
 see it sweep down , as some great warrior venture to give he 
 battle , and as he strike he shout " O - hoy ! o - hoy ! " like his 
 Berserkir forefather , and the blow go crash through shield and 
 spear , through head - dress , hair , and skull , till at last none would of 
 their own will come near the great white " umtagati , " the wizard , who 
 kill and fail not . 

 but suddenly there rise a cry of " Twala , y ' Twala , " and out of the 
 press spring forward none other than the gigantic one - eyed king 
 himself , also arm with battle - axe and shield , and clothe in chain 
 armour . 

 " where art thou , Incubu , thou white man , who slewest Scragga my 
 son - see if thou canst slay I ! " he shout , and at the same time 
 hurl a tolla straight at Sir Henry , who fortunately see it come , 
 and catch it on his shield , which it transfix , remain wedge in 
 the iron plate behind the hide . 

 then , with a cry , Twala spring forward straight at he , and with his 
 battle - axe strike he such a blow upon the shield that the mere force 
 and shock of it bring Sir Henry , strong man as he be , down upon his 
 knee . 

 but at this time the matter go no far , for that instant there 
 rise from the regiment press round we something like a shout of 
 dismay , and on look up I see the cause . 

 to the right and to the left the plain be alive with the plume of 
 charge warrior . the outflanking squadron have come to our relief . 
 the time could not have be well choose . all Twala 's army , as Ignosi 
 predict would be the case , have fix their attention on the bloody 
 struggle which be rag round the remnant of the Greys and that of 
 the Buffaloes , who be now carry on a battle of their own at a 
 little distance , which two regiment have form the chest of our army . 
 it be not until our horn be about to close upon they that they have 
 dream of their approach , for they believe these force to be hide 
 in reserve upon the crest of the moon - shape hill . and now , before they 
 could even assume a proper formation for defence , the outflanking 
  Impis have leapt , like greyhound , on their flank . 

 in five minute the fate of the battle be decide . take on both 
 flank , and dismay at the awful slaughter inflict upon they by the 
 Greys and Buffaloes , Twala 's regiment break into flight , and soon the 
 whole plain between we and Loo be scatter with group of run 
 soldier make good their retreat . as for the host that have so 
 recently surround we and the Buffaloes , they melt away as though by 
 magic , and presently we be leave stand there like a rock from which 
 the sea have retreat . but what a sight it be ! around we the dead and 
 dying lie in heap - up mass , and of the gallant Greys there remain 
 but ninety - five man upon their foot . More than three thousand four 
 hundred have fall in this one regiment , most of they never to rise 
 again . 

 " man , " say Infadoos calmly , as between the interval of bind a 
 wound on his arm he survey what remain to he of his corps , " ye 
 have keep up the reputation of your regiment , and this day 's fighting 
 will be well speak of by your child 's child . " then he turn 
 round and shake Sir Henry Curtis by the hand . " thou art a great 
 captain , Incubu , " he say simply ; " I have live a long life among 
 warrior , and have know many a brave one , yet have I never see a man 
 like unto thee . " 

 at this moment the Buffaloes begin to march past our position on the 
 road to Loo , and as they go a message be bring to we from Ignosi 
 request Infadoos , Sir Henry , and myself to join they . accordingly , 
 order have be issue to the remain ninety man of the Greys to 
 employ themselves in collect the wounded , we join Ignosi , who 
 inform we that he be press on to Loo to complete the victory by 
 capture Twala , if that should be possible . before we have go far , 
 suddenly we discover the figure of Good sit on an ant - heap about 
 one hundred pace from we . close beside he be the body of a Kukuana . 

 " he must be wound , " say Sir Henry anxiously . as he make the remark , 
 an untoward thing happen . the dead body of the Kukuana soldier , or 
 rather what have appear to be his dead body , suddenly spring up , 
 knock good head over heel off the ant - heap , and begin to spear he . 
 we rush forward in terror , and as we draw near we see the brawny 
 warrior make dig after dig at the prostrate Good , who at each prod 
 jerk all his limb into the air . see we come , the Kukuana give 
 one final and most vicious dig , and with a shout of " take that , 
 wizard ! " bolt away . good do not move , and we conclude that our poor 
 comrade be do for . sadly we come towards he , and be astonish to 
 find he pale and faint indeed , but with a serene smile upon his face , 
 and his eyeglass still fix in his eye . 

 " capital armour this , " he murmur , on catch sight of our face 
 bend over he . " how sell that beggar must have be , " and then he 
 faint . on examination we discover that he have be seriously 
 wound in the leg by a tolla in the course of the pursuit , but that 
 the chain armour have prevent his last assailant 's spear from do 
 anything more than bruise he badly . it be a merciful escape . as 
 nothing could be do for he at the moment , he be place on one of 
 the wicker shield use for the wound , and carry along with we . 

 on arrive before the near gate of Loo we find one of our 
 regiment watch it in obedience to order receive from Ignosi . the 
 other regiment be in the same way guard the different exit to 
 the town . the officer in command of this regiment salute Ignosi as 
 king , and inform he that Twala 's army have take refuge in the town , 
 whither Twala himself have also escape , but he think that they be 
 thoroughly demoralise , and would surrender . Thereupon Ignosi , after 
 take counsel with we , send forward herald to each gate order the 
 defender to open , and promise on his royal word life and forgiveness 
 to every soldier who lay down his arm , but say that if they do 
 not do so before nightfall he would certainly burn the town and all 
 within its gate . this message be not without its effect . half an hour 
 later , amid the shout and cheer of the Buffaloes , the bridge be 
 drop across the fosse , and the gate upon the further side be 
 fling open . 

 take due precaution against treachery , we march on into the town . 
 all along the roadway stand thousand of dejected warrior , their 
 head droop , and their shield and spear at their foot , who , head 
 by their officer , salute Ignosi as king as he pass . on we march , 
 straight to Twala 's kraal . when we reach the great space , where a day 
 or two previously we have see the review and the witch hunt , we find 
 it desert . no , not quite deserted , for there , on the further side , in 
 front of his hut , sit Twala himself , with but one attendant - Gagool . 

 it be a melancholy sight to see he seat , his battle - axe and shield 
 by his side , his chin upon his mailed breast , with but one old crone 
 for companion , and notwithstanding his crime and misdeed , a pang of 
 compassion shoot through I as I look upon Twala thus " fall from his 
 high estate . " not a soldier of all his army , not a courtier out of 
 the hundred who have cringe round he , not even a solitary wife , 
 remain to share his fate or halve the bitterness of his fall . poor 
 savage ! he be learn the lesson which fate teach to most of we who 
 live long enough , that the eye of mankind be blind to the 
 discredit , and that he who be defenceless and fallen find few 
 friend and little mercy . nor , indeed , in this case do he deserve any . 

 file through the kraal gate , we march across the open space to 
 where the ex - king sit . when within about fifty yard of he the 
 regiment be halt , and accompany only by a small guard we advance 
 towards he , Gagool revile we bitterly as we come . as we draw near , 
 Twala , for the first time , lift his plume head , and fix his one 
 eye , which seem to flash with suppress fury almost as brightly as 
 the great diamond bind round his forehead , upon his successful 
 rival - Ignosi . 

 " Hail , o king ! " he say , with bitter mockery ; " thou who hast eat of 
 my bread , and now by the aid of the white man 's magic hast seduce my 
 regiment and defeat mine army , hail ! what fate hast thou in store 
 for I , o king ? " 

 " the fate thou gav to my father , whose throne thou hast sit on these 
 many year ! " be the stern answer . 

 " it be good . I will show thee how to die , that thou mayest remember it 
 against thine own time . see , the sun sink in blood , " and he point 
 with his battle - axe towards the set orb ; " it be well that my sun 
 should go down in its company . and now , o king ! I be ready to die , but 
 I crave the boon of the Kukuana royal House 1   to die fighting . Thou 
 canst not refuse it , or even those coward who flee to - day will hold thee 
 sham . " 

 " it be grant . choose - with whom wilt thou fight ? myself I can not 
 fight with thee , for the king fight not except in war . " 

 Twala 's sombre eye run up and down our rank , and I feel , as for a 
 moment it rest on myself , that the position have develop a new 
 horror . what if he choose to begin by fight I ? what chance should 
 I have against a desperate savage six foot five high , and broad in 
 proportion ? I might as well commit suicide at once . hastily I make up 
 my mind to decline the combat , even if I be hoot out of Kukuanaland 
 as a consequence . it be , I think , well to be hoot than to be 
 quarter with a battle - axe . 

 presently Twala speak . 

 " Incubu , what sayest thou , shall we end what we begin to - day , or shall 
 I call thee coward , white - even to the liver ? " 

 " Nay , " interpose Ignosi hastily ; " thou shalt not fight with Incubu . " 

 " not if he be afraid , " say Twala . 

 unfortunately Sir Henry understand this remark , and the blood flame up 
 into his cheek . 

 " I will fight he , " he say ; " he shall see if I be afraid . " 

 " for Heaven 's sake , " I entreat , " do not   risk your life against that of 
 a desperate man . anybody who see you to - day will know that you be 
 brave enough . " 

 " I will fight he , " be the sullen answer . " no live man shall call I 
 a coward . I be ready now ! " and he step forward and lift his axe . 

 I wring my hand over this absurd piece of Quixotism ; but if he be 
 determined on this deed , of course I could not stop he . 

 " fight not , my white brother , " say Ignosi , lay his hand 
 affectionately on Sir Henry 's arm ; " thou hast fight enough , and if 
 aught befell thee at his hand it would cut my heart in twain . " 

 " I will fight , Ignosi , " be Sir Henry 's answer . 

 " it be well , Incubu ; thou art a brave man . it will be a good fray . 
 Behold , Twala , the Elephant be ready for thee . " 

 the ex - king laugh savagely , and step forward face Curtis . for a 
 moment they stand thus , and the light of the sink sun catch their 
 stalwart frame and clothe they both in fire . they be a well - match 
 pair . 

 then they begin to circle round each other , their battle - axis raise . 

 suddenly Sir Henry spring forward and strike a fearful blow at Twala , 
 who step to one side . so heavy be the stroke that the striker half 
 overbalance himself , a circumstance of which his antagonist take a 
 prompt advantage . circle his massive battle - axe round his head , he 
 bring it down with tremendous force . my heart jump into my mouth ; I 
 think that the affair be already finish . but no ; with a quick 
 upward movement of the left arm Sir Henry interpose his shield between 
 himself and the axe , with the result that its outer edge be shorn 
 away , the axe fall on his left shoulder , but not heavily enough to 
 do any serious damage . in another moment Sir Henry get in a second 
 blow , which be also receive by Twala upon his shield . 

 then follow blow upon blow , that be , in turn , either receive upon 
 the shield or avoid . the excitement grow intense ; the regiment which 
 be watch the encounter forget its discipline , and , draw near , 
 shout and groan at every stroke . just at this time , too , Good , who 
 have be lay upon the ground by I , recover from his faint , and , 
 sit up , perceive what be go on . in an instant he be up , and 
 catch hold of my arm , hop about from place to place on one leg , 
 drag I after he , and yell encouragement to Sir Henry - 

 " go it , old fellow ! " he halloo . " that be a good one ! give it he 
 amidship , " and so on . 

 presently Sir Henry , have catch a fresh stroke upon his shield , hit 
 out with all his force . the blow cut through Twala 's shield and through 
 the tough chain armour behind it , gash he in the shoulder . with a 
 yell of pain and fury Twala return the blow with interest , and , such 
 be his strength , shore right through the rhinoceros ' horn handle of 
 his antagonist battle - axe , strengthen as it be with band of steel , 
 wound Curtis in the face . 

 a cry of dismay rise from the Buffaloes as our hero 's broad axe - head 
 fall to the ground ; and Twala , again raise his weapon , fly at he 
 with a shout . I shut my eye . when I open they again it be to see 
 Sir Henry 's shield lie on the ground , and Sir Henry himself with his 
 great arm twin round Twala 's middle . to and fro they swing , hug 
 each other like bear , strain with all their mighty muscle for dear 
 life , and dearer honour . with a supreme effort Twala swing the 
 Englishman clean off his foot , and down they come together , roll 
 over and over on the lime paving , Twala strike out at Curtis ' head 
 with the battle - axe , and Sir Henry try to drive the tolla he have 
 draw from his belt through Twala 's armour . 

 it be a mighty struggle , and an awful thing to see . 

 " get his axe ! " yell good ; and perhaps our champion hear he . 

 at any rate , drop the tolla , he snatch at the axe , which be 
 fasten to Twala 's wrist by a strip of buffalo hide , and still roll 
 over and over , they fight for it like wild cat , draw their breath 
 in heavy gasp . suddenly the hide string burst , and then , with a great 
 effort , Sir Henry free himself , the weapon remain in his hand . 
 another second and he be upon his foot , the red blood stream from 
 the wound in his face , and so be Twala . draw the heavy tolla from 
 his belt , he reel straight at Curtis and strike he in the breast . 
 the stab come home true and strong , but whoever it be who make that 
 chain armour , he understand his art , for it withstand the steel . again 
 Twala strike out with a savage yell , and again the sharp knife 
 rebound , and Sir Henry go staggering back . once more Twala come on , 
 and as he come our great Englishman gather himself together , and 
 swing the big axe round his head with both hand , hit at he with 
 all his force . 

 there be a shriek of excitement from a thousand throat , and , behold ! 
 Twala 's head seem to spring from his shoulder : then it fall and come 
 rolling and bound along the ground towards Ignosi , stop just at 
 his foot . for a second the corpse stand upright ; then with a dull crash 
 it come to the earth , and the gold torque from its neck roll away 
 across the pavement . as it do so Sir Henry , overpower by faintness 
 and loss of blood , fall heavily across the body of the dead king . 

 in a second he be lift up , and eager hand be pour water on his 
 face . another minute , and the grey eye open wide . 

 he be not dead . 

 then I , just as the sun sink , step to where Twala 's head lie in the 
 dust , unloose the diamond from the dead brow , and hand it to Ignosi . 

 " take it , " I say , " lawful king of the Kukuanas - king by birth and 
 victory . " 

 Ignosi bind the diadem upon his brow . then advance , he place his 
 foot upon the broad chest of his headless foe and break out into a 
 chant , or rather a pæan of triumph , so beautiful , and yet so utterly 
 savage , that I despair of be able to give an adequate version of his 
 word . once I hear a scholar with a fine voice read aloud from the 
 greek poet Homer , and I remember that the sound of the roll line 
 seem to make my blood stand still . Ignosi 's chant , utter as it be 
 in a language as beautiful and sonorous as the old Greek , produce 
 exactly the same effect on I , although I be exhausted with toil and 
 many emotion . 

 " now , " he begin , " now our rebellion be swallow up in victory , and our 
 evil - doing be justify by strength . 

 " in the morning the oppressor arise and stretch themselves ; they 
 bind on their harness and make they ready to war . 

 " they rise up and toss their spear : the soldier call to the 
 captain , ' come , lead we ' - and the captain cry to the king , ' direct 
 thou the battle . ' 

 " they laugh in their pride , twenty thousand man , and yet a twenty 
 thousand . 

 " their plume cover the valley as the plume of a bird cover she 
 nest ; they shake their shield and shout , yea , they shake their 
 shield in the sunlight ; they lust for battle and be glad . 

 " they come up against I ; their strong one run swiftly to slay I ; 
 they cry , ' ha ! ha ! he be as one already dead . ' 



 " then breathe I on they , and my breath be as the breath of a wind , 
 and lo ! they be not . 

 " my lightning pierce they ; I lick up their strength with the 
 lightning of my spear ; I shake they to the ground with the thunder of 
 my shouting . 

 " they break - they scatter - they be go as the mist of the morning . 

 " they be food for the kite and the fox , and the place of battle be 
 fat with their blood . 


 " where be the mighty one who rise up in the morning ? 

 " where be the proud one who toss their spear and cry , ' he be as 
 a man already dead ' ? 

 " they bow their head , but not in sleep ; they be stretch out , but 
 not in sleep . 

 " they be forget ; they have go into the blackness ; they dwell in 
 the dead moon ; yea , other shall lead away their wife , and their 
 child shall remember they no more . 


 " and I - ! the king - like an eagle I have find my eyrie . 

 " Behold ! far have I fly in the night season , yet have I return to 
 my young at the daybreak . 

 " Shelter ye under the shadow of my wing , o people , and I will comfort 
 you , and ye shall not be dismay . 

 " now be the good time , the time of spoil . 

 " mine be the cattle on the mountain , mine be the virgin in the 
 kraal . 

 " the winter be overpast with storm , the summer be come with flower . 

 " now evil shall cover up her face , now Mercy and Gladness shall dwell 
 in the land . 

 " rejoice , rejoice , my people ! 

 " let all the star rejoice in that this tyranny be tread down , in 
 that I be the king . " 


 Ignosi cease his song , and out of the gathering gloom come back the 
 deep reply - 

 " thou art the king ! " 


 thus be my prophecy to the herald fulfil , and within the 
 forty - eight hour Twala 's headless corpse be stiffen at Twala 's 
 gate . 


  1   it be a law amongst the Kukuanas that no man of the direct royal 
 blood can be put to death , unless by his own consent , which be , 
 however , never refuse . he be allow to choose a succession of 
 antagonist , to be approve by the king , with whom he fight , till one 
 of they kill he . - A.Q. 



 CHAPTER XV 

 good FALLS SICK 

 after the fight be end , Sir Henry and Good be carry into Twala 's 
 hut , where I join they . they be both utterly exhaust by exertion 
 and loss of blood , and , indeed , my own condition be little well . I 
 be very wiry , and can stand more fatigue than most man , probably on 
 account of my light weight and long training ; but that night I be 
 quite do up , and , as be always the case with I when exhaust , that 
 old wound which the lion give I begin to pain . also my head be ache 
 violently from the blow I have receive in the morning , when I be 
 knock senseless . altogether , a more miserable trio than we be that 
 evening it would have be difficult to discover ; and our only comfort 
 lie in the reflection that we be exceedingly fortunate to be there to 
 feel miserable , instead of be stretch dead upon the plain , as so 
 many thousand of brave man be that night , who have rise well and 
 strong in the morning . 

 somehow , with the assistance of the beautiful Foulata , who , since we 
 have be the mean of save her life , have constitute herself our 
 handmaiden , and especially Good 's , we manage to get off the chain 
 shirt , which have certainly save the life of two of we that day . as I 
 expect , we find that the flesh underneath be terribly contuse , for 
 though the steel link have keep the weapon from enter , they have not 
 prevent they from bruise . both Sir Henry and Good be a mass of 
 contusion , and I be by no mean free . as a remedy Foulata bring we 
 some pound green leaf , with an aromatic odour , which , when apply 
 as a plaster , give we considerable relief . 

 but though the bruise be painful , they do not give we such anxiety 
 as Sir Henry 's and Good 's wound . Good have a hole right through the 
 fleshy part of his " beautiful white leg , " from which he have lose a 
 great deal of blood ; and Sir Henry , with other hurt , have a deep cut 
 over the jaw , inflict by Twala 's battle - axe . luckily Good be a very 
 decent surgeon , and so soon as his small box of medicine be 
 forthcoming , have thoroughly cleanse the wound , he manage to 
 stitch up first Sir Henry 's and then his own pretty satisfactorily , 
 consider the imperfect light give by the primitive Kukuana lamp in 
 the hut . afterwards he plentifully smear the injure place with some 
 antiseptic ointment , of which there be a pot in the little box , and we 
 cover they with the remain of a pocket - handkerchief which we 
 possess . 

 meanwhile Foulata have prepare we some strong broth , for we be too 
 weary to eat . this we swallow , and then throw ourselves down on the 
 pile of magnificent karrosse , or fur rug , which be scatter about 
 the dead king 's great hut . by a very strange instance of the irony of 
 fate , it be on Twala 's own couch , and wrap in Twala 's own 
 particular karross , that Sir Henry , the man who have slay he , sleep 
 that night . 

 I say sleep ; but after that day 's work , sleep be indeed difficult . to 
 begin with , in very truth the air be full 

  " of farewell to the dying 
  and mourning for the dead . " 

 from every direction come the sound of the wail of woman whose 
 husband , son , and brother have perish in the battle . no wonder that 
 they wail , for over twelve thousand man , or nearly a fifth of the 
 Kukuana army , have be destroy in that awful struggle . it be 
 heart - rend to lie and listen to their cry for those who never 
 would return ; and it make I understand the full horror of the work 
 do that day to further man 's ambition . towards midnight , however , the 
 ceaseless cry of the woman grow less frequent , till at length the 
 silence be only break at interval of a few minute by a long 
 pierce howl that come from a hut in our immediate rear , which , as I 
 afterwards discover , proceed from Gagool " keening " over the dead 
 king Twala . 

 after that I get a little fitful sleep , only to wake from time to time 
 with a start , think that I be once more an actor in the terrible 
 event of the last twenty - four hour . now I seem to see that warrior 
 whom my hand have send to his last account charge at I on the 
 mountain - top ; now I be once more in that glorious ring of Greys , which 
 make its immortal stand against all Twala 's regiment upon the little 
 mound ; and now again I see Twala 's plumed and gory head roll past my 
 foot with gnashing tooth and glare eye . 

 at last , somehow or other , the night pass away ; but when dawn break I 
 find that my companion have sleep no well than myself . good , indeed , 
 be in a high fever , and very soon afterwards begin to grow 
 light - head , and also , to my alarm , to spit blood , the result , no 
 doubt , of some internal injury , inflict during the desperate effort 
 make by the Kukuana warrior on the previous day to force his big spear 
 through the chain armour . Sir Henry , however , seem pretty fresh , 
 notwithstanding his wound on the face , which make eat difficult and 
 laughter an impossibility , though he be so sore and stiff that he 
 could scarcely stir . 

 about eight o'clock we have a visit from Infadoos , who appear but 
 little the worse - tough old warrior that he be - for his exertion in 
 the battle , although he inform we that he have be up all night . he 
 be delighted to see we , but much grieve at Good 's condition , and 
 shake our hand cordially . I notice , however , that he address Sir 
 Henry with a kind of reverence , as though he be something more than 
 man ; and , indeed , as we afterwards find out , the great Englishman be 
 look on throughout Kukuanaland as a supernatural being . no man , the 
 soldier say , could have fight as he fight or , at the end of a day 
 of such toil and bloodshed , could have slay Twala , who , in addition to 
 be the king , be suppose to be the strong warrior in the 
 country , in single combat , shear through his bull - neck at a stroke . 
 indeed , that stroke become proverbial in Kukuanaland , and any 
 extraordinary blow or feat of strength be henceforth know as 
 " Incubu 's blow . " 

 Infadoos tell we also that all Twala 's regiment have submit to 
 Ignosi , and that like submission be begin to arrive from chief 
 in the outlying country . Twala 's death at the hand of Sir Henry have 
 put an end to all further chance of disturbance ; for Scragga have be 
 his only legitimate son , so there be no rival claimant to the throne 
 leave alive . 

 I remark that Ignosi have swum to power through blood . the old chief 
 shrug his shoulder . " yes , " he answer ; " but the Kukuana people can 
 only be keep cool by let their blood flow sometimes . many be 
 kill , indeed , but the woman be leave , and other must soon grow up to 
 take the place of the fall . after this the land would be quiet for a 
 while . " 

 afterwards , in the course of the morning , we have a short visit from 
 Ignosi , on whose brow the royal diadem be now bind . as I 
 contemplate he advance with kingly dignity , an obsequious guard 
 follow his step , I could not help recall to my mind the tall 
 Zulu who have present himself to we at Durban some few month back , 
 ask to be take into our service , and reflect on the strange 
 revolution of the wheel of fortune . 

 " Hail , o king ! " I say , rise . 

 " yes , Macumazahn . king at last , by the might of your three right 
 hand , " be the ready answer . 

 all be , he say , go well ; and he hop to arrange a great feast in 
 two week ' time in order to show himself to the people . 

 I ask he what he have settle to do with Gagool . 

 " she be the evil genius of the land , " he answer , " and I shall kill 
 she , and all the witch doctor with she ! she have live so long that 
 none can remember when she be not very old , and she it be who have 
 always train the witch - hunter , and make the land wicked in the sight 
 of the heaven above . " 

 " yet she know much , " I reply ; " it be easy to destroy knowledge , 
 Ignosi , than to gather it . " 

 " that be so , " he say thoughtfully . " she , and she only , know the 
 secret of the ' three Witches , ' yonder , whither the great road run , 
 where the king be bury , and the Silent Ones sit . " 

 " yes , and the diamond be . forget not thy promise , Ignosi ; thou must 
 lead we to the mine , even if thou hast to spare Gagool alive to show 
 the way . " 

 " I will not forget , Macumazahn , and I will think on what thou sayest . " 

 after Ignosi 's visit I go to see Good , and find he quite delirious . 
 the fever set up by his wound seem to have take a firm hold of his 
 system , and to be complicated with an internal injury . for four or five 
 day his condition be most critical ; indeed , I believe firmly that have 
 it not be for Foulata 's indefatigable nursing he must have die . 

 woman be woman , all the world over , whatever their colour . yet somehow 
 it seem curious to watch this dusky beauty bend night and day over 
 the fevere man 's couch , and perform all the merciful errand of a 
 sick - room swiftly , gently , and with as fine an instinct as that of a 
 train hospital nurse . for the first night or two I try to help she , 
 and so do Sir Henry as soon as his stiffness allow he to move , but 
 Foulata bear our interference with impatience , and finally insist 
 upon our leave he to she , say that our movement make he 
 restless , which I think be true . day and night she watch he and 
 tend he , give he his only medicine , a native cool drink make 
 of milk , in which be infuse juice from the bulb of a specie of 
 tulip , and keep the fly from settle on he . I can see the whole 
 picture now as it appear night after night by the light of our 
 primitive lamp ; good tossing to and fro , his feature emaciate , his 
 eye shin large and luminous , and jabber nonsense by the yard ; 
 and seat on the ground by his side , her back rest against the wall 
 of the hut , the soft - eye , shapely Kukuana beauty , her face , weary as 
 it be with her long vigil , animate by a look of infinite 
 compassion - or be it something more than compassion ? 

 for two day we think that he must die , and creep about with heavy 
 heart . 

 only Foulata would not believe it . 

 " he will live , " she say . 

 for three hundred yard or more around Twala 's chief hut , where the 
 sufferer lay , there be silence ; for by the king 's order all who live 
 in the habitation behind it , except Sir Henry and myself , have be 
 remove , lest any noise should come to the sick man 's ear . one night , 
 it be the fifth of Good 's illness , as be my habit , I go across to 
 see how he be do before turn in for a few hour . 

 I enter the hut carefully . the lamp place upon the floor show the 
 figure of Good toss no more , but lie quite still . 

 so it have come at last ! in the bitterness of my heart I give something 
 like a sob . 

 " hush - h - h ! " come from the patch of dark shadow behind Good 's head . 

 then , creep close , I see that he be not dead , but sleep 
 soundly , with Foulata 's taper finger clasp tightly in his poor white 
 hand . the crisis have pass , and he would live . he sleep like that for 
 eighteen hour ; and I scarcely like to say it , for fear I should not be 
 believe , but during the entire period do this devoted girl sit by 
 he , fear that if she move and draw away her hand it would wake 
 he . what she must have suffer from cramp and weariness , to say 
 nothing of want of food , nobody will ever know ; but it be the fact 
 that , when at last he wake , she have to be carry away - her limb be 
 so stiff that she could not move they . 


 after the turn have once be take , Good 's recovery be rapid and 
 complete . it be not till he be nearly well that Sir Henry tell he of 
 all he owe to Foulata ; and when he come to the story of how she sit by 
 his side for eighteen hour , fear lest by move she should wake 
 he , the honest sailor 's eye fill with tear . he turn and go 
 straight to the hut where Foulata be prepare the mid - day meal , for 
 we be back in our old quarter now , take I with he to interpret 
 in case he could not make his meaning clear to she , though I be bind 
 to say that she understand he marvellously as a rule , consider how 
 extremely limited be his foreign vocabulary . 

 " tell she , " say Good , " that I owe she my life , and that I will never 
 forget her kindness to my die day . " 

 I interpret , and under her dark skin she actually seem to blush . 

 turn to he with one of those swift and graceful motion that in she 
 always remind I of the flight of a wild bird , Foulata answer 
 softly , glance at he with her large brown eye - 

 " Nay , my lord ; my lord forget ! do he not save my life , and be I not 
 my lord 's handmaiden ? " 

 it will be observe that the young lady appear entirely to have 
 forget the share which Sir Henry and myself have take in her 
 preservation from Twala 's clutch . but that be the way of woman ! I 
 remember my dear wife be just the same . well , I retire from that 
 little interview sad at heart . I do not like Miss Foulata 's soft 
 glance , for I know the fatal amorous propensity of sailor in 
 general , and of Good in particular . 

 there be two thing in the world , as I have find out , which can not be 
 prevent : you can not keep a Zulu from fight , or a sailor from 
 fall in love upon the slight provocation ! 

 it be a few day after this last occurrence that Ignosi hold his great 
 " indaba , " or council , and be formally recognise as king by the 
 " induna , " or head man , of Kukuanaland . the spectacle be a most 
 impose one , include as it do a grand review of troop . on this day 
 the remain fragment of the Greys be formally parade , and in the 
 face of the army thank for their splendid conduct in the battle . to 
 each man the king make a large present of cattle , promote they one 
 and all to the rank of officer in the new corps of Greys which be in 
 process of formation . an order be also promulgate throughout the 
 length and breadth of Kukuanaland that , whilst we honour the country 
 by our presence , we three be to be greet with the royal salute , and 
 to be treat with the same ceremony and respect that be by custom 
 accord to the king . also the power of life and death be publicly 
 confer upon we . Ignosi , too , in the presence of his people , 
 reaffirm the promise which he have make , to the effect that no man 's 
 blood should be shed without trial , and that witch - hunting should cease 
 in the land . 

 when the ceremony be over we wait upon Ignosi , and inform he that 
 we be now anxious to investigate the mystery of the mine to which 
 Solomon 's Road run , ask he if he have discover anything about they . 

 " my friend , " he answer , " I have discover this . it be there that 
 the three great figure sit , who here be call the ' Silent Ones , ' and 
 to whom Twala would have offer the girl Foulata as a sacrifice . it be 
 there , too , in a great cave deep in the mountain , that the king of the 
 land be bury ; there ye shall find Twala 's body , sit with those 
 who go before he . there , also , be a deep pit , which , at some time , 
 long - dead man dig out , mayhap for the stone ye speak of , such as I 
 have hear man in Natal tell of at Kimberley . there , too , in the Place 
 of Death be a secret chamber , know to none but the king and Gagool . 
 but Twala , who know it , be dead , and I know it not , nor know I what be 
 in it . yet there be a legend in the land that once , many generation 
 go , a white man cross the mountain , and be lead by a woman to the 
 secret chamber and show the wealth hide in it . but before he could 
 take it she betray he , and he be drive by the king of that day 
 back to the mountain , and since then no man have enter the place . " 

 " the story be surely true , Ignosi , for on the mountain we find the 
 white man , " I say . 

 " yes , we find he . and now I have promise you that if ye can come to 
 that chamber , and the stone be there - " 

 " the gem upon thy forehead prove that they be there , " I put in , 
 point to the great diamond I have take from Twala 's dead brow . 

 " Mayhap ; if they be there , " he say , " ye shall have as many as ye can 
 take hence - if indeed ye would leave I , my brother . " 

 " first we must find the chamber , " say I. 

 " there be but one who can show it to thee - Gagool . " 

 " and if she will not ? " 

 " then she must die , " say Ignosi sternly . " I have save her alive but 
 for this . stay , she shall choose , " and call to a messenger he 
 order Gagool to be bring before he . 

 in a few minute she come , hurry along by two guard , whom she be 
 curse as she walk . 

 " leave she , " say the king to the guard . 

 so soon as their support be withdraw , the wither old bundle - for 
 she look more like a bundle than anything else , out of which her two 
 bright and wicked eye gleam like those of a snake - sank in a heap on 
 to the floor . 

 " what will ye with I , Ignosi ? " she pip . " ye dare not touch I . if ye 
 touch I I will slay you as ye sit . beware of my magic . " 

 " thy magic could not save Twala , old she - wolf , and it can not hurt I , " 
 be the answer . " listen ; I will this of thee , that thou reveal to we 
 the chamber where be the shin stone . " 

 " ha ! ha ! " she pip , " none know its secret but I , and I will never tell 
 thee . the white devil shall go hence empty - handed . " 

 " thou shalt tell I . I will make thee tell I . " 

 " how , o king ? thou art great , but can thy power wring the truth from a 
 woman ? " 

 " it be difficult , yet will I do so . " 

 " how , o king ? " 

 " Nay , thus ; if thou tell not thou shalt slowly die . " 

 " die ! " she shriek in terror and fury ; " ye dare not touch I - man , ye 
 know not who I be . how old think ye be I ? I know your father , and your 
 father ' father ' father . when the country be young I be here ; when 
 the country grow old I shall still be here . I can not die unless I be 
 kill by chance , for none dare slay I . " 

 " yet will I slay thee . see , Gagool , mother of evil , thou art so old 
 that thou canst no long love thy life . what can life be to such a hag 
 as thou , who hast no shape , nor form , nor hair , nor tooth - hast naught , 
 save wickedness and evil eye ? it will be mercy to make an end of thee , 
 Gagool . " 

 " thou fool , " shriek the old fiend , " thou accurse fool , deemest thou 
 that life be sweet only to the young ? it be not so , and naught thou 
 know of the heart of man to think it . to the young , indeed , death be 
 sometimes welcome , for the young can feel . they love and suffer , and it 
 wring they to see their beloved pass to the land of shadow . but the 
 old feel not , they love not , and , ha ! ha ! they laugh to see another 
 go out into the dark ; ha ! ha ! they laugh to see the evil that be do 
 under the star . all they love be life , the warm , warm sun , and the 
 sweet , sweet air . they be afraid of the cold , afraid of the cold and 
 the dark , ha ! ha ! ha ! " and the old hag writhe in ghastly merriment 
 on the ground . 

 " cease thine evil talk and answer I , " say Ignosi angrily . " wilt thou 
 show the place where the stone be , or wilt thou not ? if thou wilt not 
 thou di , even now , " and he seize a spear and hold it over she . 

 " I will not show it ; thou dar not kill I , dar not ! he who slay 
 I will be accurse for ever . " 

 slowly Ignosi bring down the spear till it prick the prostrate heap 
 of rag . 

 with a wild yell Gagool spring to her foot , then fall again and roll 
 upon the floor . 

 " Nay , I will show thee . only let I live , let I sit in the sun and 
 have a bit of meat to suck , and I will show thee . " 

 " it be well . I think that I should find a way to reason with thee . 
 to - morrow shalt thou go with Infadoos and my white brother to the 
 place , and beware how thou fail , for if thou show it not , then 
 thou shalt slowly die . I have speak . " 

 " I will not fail , Ignosi . I always keep my word - ha ! ha ! ha ! once 
 before a woman show the chamber to a white man , and behold ! evil 
 befell he , " and here her wicked eye glint . " her name be Gagool 
 also . perchance I be that woman . " 

 " thou liest , " I say , " that be ten generation go . " 

 " Mayhap , mayhap ; when one live long one forget . perhaps it be my 
 mother 's mother who tell I ; surely her name be Gagool also . but mark , 
 ye will find in the place where the bright thing be a bag of hide 
 full of stone . the man fill that bag , but he never take it away . 
 evil befall he , I say , evil befell he ! perhaps it be my mother 's 
 mother who tell I . it will be a merry journey - we can see the body 
 of those who die in the battle as we go . their eye will be go by 
 now , and their rib will be hollow . ha ! ha ! ha ! " 



 CHAPTER XVI 

 the PLACE of DEATH 

 it be already dark on the third day after the scene describe in the 
 previous chapter when we camp in some hut at the foot of the " Three 
 Witches , " as the triangle of mountain be call to which Solomon 's 
 Great Road run . our party consist of our three self and Foulata , 
 who wait on we - especially on Good - Infadoos , Gagool , who be bear 
 along in a litter , inside which she could be hear mutter and 
 curse all day long , and a party of guard and attendant . the 
 mountain , or rather the three peak of the mountain , for the mass be 
 evidently the result of a solitary upheaval , be , as I have say , in 
 the form of a triangle , of which the base be towards we , one peak 
 be on our right , one on our left , and one straight in front of we . 
 never shall I forget the sight afford by those three tower peak 
 in the early sunlight of the following morning . high , high above we , up 
 into the blue air , soar their twisted snow - wreath . beneath the 
 snow - line the peak be purple with heath , and so be the wild moor 
 that run up the slope towards they . straight before we the white 
 ribbon of Solomon 's Great Road stretch away uphill to the foot of the 
 centre peak , about five mile from we , and there stop . it be its 
 terminus . 

 I have well leave the feeling of intense excitement with which we set 
 out on our march that morning to the imagination of those who read this 
 history . at last we be draw near to the wonderful mine that have 
 be the cause of the miserable death of the old Portuguese Dom three 
 century ago , of my poor friend , his ill - star descendant , and also , 
 as we fear , of George Curtis , Sir Henry 's brother . be we destine , 
 after all that we have go through , to fare any well ? evil befell 
 they , as that old fiend Gagool say ; would it also befall we ? somehow , 
 as we be march up that last stretch of beautiful road , I could not 
 help feel a little superstitious about the matter , and so I think 
 do Good and Sir Henry . 

 for an hour and a half or more we tramp on up the heather - fringe 
 way , go so fast in our excitement that the bearer of Gagool 's 
 hammock could scarcely keep pace with we , and its occupant pip out to 
 we to stop . 

 " walk more slowly , white man , " she say , project her hideous 
 shrivelled countenance between the grass curtain , and fix she 
 gleam eye upon we ; " why will ye run to meet the evil that shall 
 befall you , ye seeker after treasure ? " and she laugh that horrible 
 laugh which always send a cold shiver down my back , and for a while 
 quite take the enthusiasm out of we . 

 however , on we go , till we see before we , and between ourselves and 
 the peak , a vast circular hole with slop side , three hundred foot 
 or more in depth , and quite half a mile round . 

 " can not   you guess what this be ? " I say to Sir Henry and Good , who be 
 star in astonishment at the awful pit before we . 

 they shake their head . 

 " then it be clear that you have never see the diamond digging at 
 Kimberley . you may depend on it that this be Solomon 's Diamond Mine . 
 look there , " I say , point to the strata of stiff blue clay which 
 be yet to be see among the grass and bush that clothe the side 
 of the pit , " the formation be the same . I will be bind that if we go 
 down there we should find ' pipe ' of soapy brecciate rock . look , too , " 
 and I point to a series of worn flat slab of stone that be place 
 on a gentle slope below the level of a watercourse which in some past 
 age have be cut out of the solid rock ; " if those be not table once 
 use to wash the ' stuff , ' I be a Dutchman . " 

 at the edge of this vast hole , which be none other than the pit mark 
 on the old Dom 's map , the Great Road branch into two and circumvent 
 it . in many place , by the way , this surround road be build 
 entirely out of block of stone , apparently with the object of 
 support the edge of the pit and prevent fall of reef . along 
 this path we press , drive by curiosity to see what be the three 
 tower object which we could discern from the hither side of the 
 great gulf . as we draw near we perceive that they be Colossi of some 
 sort or another , and rightly conjecture that before we sit the three 
 " Silent Ones " that be hold in such awe by the Kukuana people . but it 
 be not until we be quite close to they that we recognise the full 
 majesty of these " Silent Ones . " 

 there , upon huge pedestal of dark rock , sculpture with rude emblem 
 of the Phallic worship , separate from each other by a distance of 
 forty pace , and look down the road which cross some sixty mile 
 of plain to Loo , be three colossal seat form - two male and one 
 female - each measure about thirty foot from the crown of its head to 
 the pedestal . 

 the female form , which be nude , be of great though severe beauty , but 
 unfortunately the feature have be injure by century of exposure to 
 the weather . rise from either side of her head be the point of a 
 crescent . the two male Colossi , on the contrary , be drape , and 
 present a terrifying cast of feature , especially the one to our 
 right , which have the face of a devil . that to our left be serene in 
 countenance , but the calm upon it seem dreadful . it be the calm of 
 that inhuman cruelty , Sir Henry remark , which the ancient attribute 
 to being potent for good , who could yet watch the suffering of 
 humanity , if not without rejoice , at least without sorrow . these 
 three statue form a most awe - inspire trinity , as they sit there in 
 their solitude , and gaze out across the plain for ever . 

 contemplate these " Silent Ones , " as the Kukuanas call they , an 
 intense curiosity again seize we to know whose be the hand which 
 have shape they , who it be that have dig the pit and make the road . 
 whilst I be gaze and wonder , suddenly it occur to I - be 
 familiar with the Old Testament - that Solomon go astray after strange 
 god , the name of three of whom I remember - " Ashtoreth , the goddess 
 of the Zidonians , Chemosh , the god of the Moabites , and Milcom , the god 
 of the child of Ammon " - and I suggest to my companion that the 
 figure before we might represent these false and exploded divinity . 

 " Hum , " say Sir Henry , who be a scholar , have take a high degree in 
 classic at college , " there may be something in that ; Ashtoreth of the 
 Hebrews be the Astarte of the Phoenicians , who be the great trader 
 of Solomon 's time . Astarte , who afterwards become the Aphrodite of the 
 Greeks , be represent with horn like the half - moon , and there on the 
 brow of the female figure be distinct horn . perhaps these Colossi 
 be design by some phoenician official who manage the mine . who 
 can say ? " 1 

 before we have finish examine these extraordinary relic of remote 
 antiquity , Infadoos come up , and have salute the " Silent Ones " by 
 lift his spear , ask we if we intend enter the " Place of 
 Death " at once , or if we would wait till after we have take food at 
 mid - day . if we be ready to go at once , Gagool have announce she 
 willingness to guide we . as it be not later than eleven 
 o'clock - drive to it by a burn curiosity - we announce our 
 intention of proceed instantly , and I suggest that , in case we 
 should be detain in the cave , we should take some food with we . 
 accordingly Gagool 's litter be bring up , and that lady herself 
 assist out of it . meanwhile Foulata , at my request , store some 
 " biltong , " or dry game - flesh , together with a couple of gourd of 
 water , in a reed basket with a hinge cover . straight in front of we , 
 at a distance of some fifty pace from the back of the Colossi , rise a 
 sheer wall of rock , eighty foot or more in height , that gradually 
 slop upwards till it form the base of the lofty snow - wreathe peak , 
 which soar into the air three thousand foot above we . as soon as she 
 be clear of her hammock , Gagool cast one evil grin upon we , and then , 
 lean on a stick , hobble off towards the face of this wall . we 
 follow she till we come to a narrow portal solidly arch that look 
 like the opening of a gallery of a mine . 

 here Gagool be wait for we , still with that evil grin upon her 
 horrid face . 

 " now , white man from the star , " she pip ; " great warrior , Incubu , 
 Bougwan , and Macumazahn the wise , be ye ready ? Behold , I be here to do 
 the bidding of my lord the king , and to show you the store of bright 
 stone . ha ! ha ! ha ! " 

 " we be ready , " I say . 

 " good , good ! make strong your heart to bear what ye shall see . com 
 thou too , Infadoos , thou who didst betray thy master ? " 

 infadoo frown as he answer - 

 " Nay , I come not ; it be not for I to enter there . but thou , Gagool , 
 curb thy tongue , and beware how thou dealest with my lord . at thy 
 hand will I require they , and if a hair of they be hurt , Gagool , be'st 
 thou fifty time a witch , thou shalt die . hear thou ? " 

 " I hear Infadoos ; I know thee , thou didst ever love big word ; when 
 thou wast a babe I remember thou didst threaten thine own mother . that 
 be but the other day . but , fear not , fear not , I live only to do the 
 bidding of the king . I have do the bidding of many king , Infadoos , 
 till in the end they do mine . ha ! ha ! I go to look upon their face 
 once more , and Twala 's also ! come on , come on , here be the lamp , " and 
 she draw a large gourd full of oil , and fit with a rush wick , from 
 under her fur cloak . 

 " art thou come , Foulata ? " ask Good in his villainous Kitchen 
 Kukuana , in which he have be improve himself under that young lady 's 
 tuition . 

 " I fear , my lord , " the girl answer timidly . 

 " then give I the basket . " 

 " Nay , my lord , whither thou goest there I go also . " 

 " the deuce you will ! " think I to myself ; " that may be rather awkward 
 if we ever get out of this . " 

 without far ado Gagool plunge into the passage , which be wide 
 enough to admit of two walk abreast , and quite dark . we follow the 
 sound of her voice as she pip to we to come on , in some fear and 
 trembling , which be not allay by the flutter of a sudden rush of 
 wing . 

 " Hullo ! what be that ? " halloe good ; ' somebody hit I in the face . " 

 " bat , " say I ; " on you go . " 

 when , so far as we could judge , we have go some fifty pace , we 
 perceive that the passage be grow faintly light . another minute , 
 and we be in perhaps the most wonderful place that the eye of live 
 man have behold . 

 let the reader picture to himself the hall of the vast cathedral he 
 ever stand in , windowless indeed , but dimly light from above , 
 presumably by shaft connect with the outer air and drive in the 
 roof , which arch away a hundred foot above our head , and he will get 
 some idea of the size of the enormous cave in which we find ourselves , 
 with the difference that this cathedral design by nature be lofty 
 and wide than any build by man . but its stupendous size be the least 
 of the wonder of the place , for run in row adown its length be 
 gigantic pillar of what look like ice , but be , in reality , huge 
 stalactite . it be impossible for I to convey any idea of the 
 overpowering beauty and grandeur of these pillar of white spar , some 
 of which be not less than twenty foot in diameter at the base , and 
 spring up in lofty and yet delicate beauty sheer to the distant roof . 
 other again be in process of formation . on the rock floor there be 
 in these case what look , Sir Henry say , exactly like a break 
 column in an old grecian temple , whilst high above , depend from the 
 roof , the point of a huge icicle could be dimly see . 

 even as we gaze we could hear the process go on , for presently with 
 a tiny splash a drop of water would fall from the far - off icicle on to 
 the column below . on some column the drop only fall once in two or 
 three minute , and in these case it would be an interesting 
 calculation to discover how long , at that rate of dripping , it would 
 take to form a pillar , say eighty foot by ten in diameter . that the 
 process , in at least one instance , be incalculably slow , the follow 
 example will suffice to show . cut on one of these pillar we discover 
 the crude likeness of a mummy , by the head of which sit what appear 
 to be the figure of an egyptian god , doubtless the handiwork of some 
 old - world labourer in the mine . this work of art be execute at the 
 natural height at which an idle fellow , be he phoenician workman or 
 british cad , be in the habit of try to immortalise himself at the 
 expense of nature 's masterpiece , namely , about five foot from the 
 ground . yet at the time that we see it , which must have be nearly 
 three thousand year after the date of the execution of the carving , 
 the column be only eight foot high , and be still in process of 
 formation , which give a rate of growth of a foot to a thousand year , 
 or an inch and a fraction to a century . this we know because , as we 
 be stand by it , we hear a drop of water fall . 

 sometimes the stalagmite take strange form , presumably where the 
 dropping of the water have not always be on the same spot . thus , one 
 huge mass , which must have weigh a hundred ton or so , be in the 
 shape of a pulpit , beautifully fret over outside with a design that 
 look like lace . other resemble strange beast , and on the side of 
 the cave be fanlike ivory tracing , such as the frost leave upon a 
 pane . 

 out of the vast main aisle there open here and there small cave , 
 exactly , Sir Henry say , as chapel open out of great cathedral . some 
 be large , but one or two - and this be a wonderful instance of how 
 nature carry out her handiwork by the same unvarying law , utterly 
 irrespective of size - be tiny . one little nook , for instance , be no 
 large than an unusually big doll 's house , and yet it might have be a 
 model for the whole place , for the water drop , tiny icicle hung , 
 and spar column be form in just the same way . 

 we have not , however , enough time to examine this beautiful cavern so 
 thoroughly as we should have like to do , since unfortunately , Gagool 
 seem to be indifferent as to stalactite , and only anxious to get her 
 business over . this annoy I the more , as I be particularly anxious 
 to discover , if possible , by what system the light be admit into 
 the cave , and whether it be by the hand of man or by that of nature 
 that this be do ; also if the place have be use in any way in 
 ancient time , as seem probable . however , we console ourselves with 
 the idea that we would investigate it thoroughly on our way back , and 
 follow on at the heel of our uncanny guide . 

 on she lead we , straight to the top of the vast and silent cave , where 
 we find another doorway , not arch as the first be , but square at 
 the top , something like the doorway of egyptian temple . 

 " be ye prepared to enter the Place of Death , white man ? " ask Gagool , 
 evidently with a view to make we feel uncomfortable . 

 " lead on , Macduff , " say Good solemnly , try to look as though he be 
 not at all alarm , as indeed we all do except Foulata , who catch 
 good by the arm for protection . 

 " this be get rather ghastly , " say Sir Henry , peep into the dark 
 passageway . " come on , Quatermain - seniore priore . we must not   keep 
 the old lady wait ! " and he politely make way for I to lead the van , 
 for which inwardly I do not bless he . 

  Tap , tap , go old Gagool 's stick down the passage , as she trot 
 along , chuckle hideously ; and still overcome by some unaccountable 
 presentiment of evil , I hang back . 

 " come , get on , old fellow , " say Good , " or we shall lose our fair 
 guide . " 

 thus adjure , I start down the passage , and after about twenty pace 
 find myself in a gloomy apartment some forty foot long , by thirty 
 broad , and thirty high , which in some past age evidently have be 
 hollow , by hand - labour , out of the mountain . this apartment be not 
 nearly so well light as the vast stalactite ante - cave , and at the 
 first glance all I could discern be a massive stone table run down 
 its length , with a colossal white figure at its head , and life - size 
 white figure all round it . next I discover a brown thing , seat on 
 the table in the centre , and in another moment my eye grow accustom 
 to the light , and I see what all these thing be , and be tail out 
 of the place as hard as my leg could carry I . 

 I be not a nervous man in a general way , and very little troubled with 
 superstition , of which I have live to see the folly ; but I be free to 
 own that this sight quite upset I , and have it not be that Sir Henry 
 catch I by the collar and hold I , I do honestly believe that in 
 another five minute I should have be outside the stalactite cave , 
 and that a promise of all the diamond in Kimberley would not have 
 induce I to enter it again . but he hold I tight , so I stop 
 because I could not help myself . next second , however , his eye 
 become accustomed to the light , and he let go of I , and begin to mop 
 the perspiration off his forehead . as for Good , he swear feebly , while 
 Foulata throw her arm round his neck and shriek . 

 only Gagool chuckle loud and long . 

 it be a ghastly sight . there at the end of the long stone table , 
 hold in his skeleton finger a great white spear , sit Death 
 himself , shape in the form of a colossal human skeleton , fifteen foot 
 or more in height . high above his head he hold the spear , as though in 
 the act to strike ; one bony hand rest on the stone table before he , 
 in the position a man assume on rise from his seat , whilst his frame 
 be bent forward so that the vertebræ of the neck and the grinning , 
 gleam skull project towards we , and fix its hollow eye - place 
 upon we , the jaw a little open , as though it be about to speak . 

 " great heaven ! " say I faintly , at last , " what can it be ? " 

 " and what be those thing ? " ask Good , point to the white 
 company round the table . 

 " and what on earth be that thing ? " say Sir Henry , point to the 
 brown creature seat on the table . 

 " Hee ! hee ! hee ! " laugh Gagool . " to those who enter the Hall of the 
 Dead , evil come . Hee ! hee ! hee ! ha ! ha ! " 

 " Come , Incubu , brave in battle , come and see he thou slewest ; " and the 
 old creature catch Curtis ' coat in her skinny finger , and lead he 
 away towards the table . we follow . 

 presently she stop and point at the brown object seat on the 
 table . Sir Henry look , and start back with an exclamation ; and no 
 wonder , for there , quite naked , the head which Curtis ' battle - axe have 
 shorn from the body rest on its knee , be the gaunt corpse of 
 Twala , the last king of the Kukuanas . yes , there , the head perch upon 
 the knee , it sit in all its ugliness , the vertebræ project a full 
 inch above the level of the shrunken flesh of the neck , for all the 
 world like a black double of Hamilton Tighe . 2   over the surface of the 
 corpse there be gather a thin glassy film , that make its appearance 
 yet more appalling , for which we be , at the moment , quite unable to 
 account , till presently we observe that from the roof of the chamber 
 the water fall steadily , drip ! drop ! drip ! on to the neck of the 
 corpse , whence it run down over the entire surface , and finally escape 
 into the rock through a tiny hole in the table . then I guess what the 
 film be - Twala 's body be be transform into a stalactite . 

 a look at the white form seat on the stone bench which run round 
 that ghastly board confirm this view . they be human body indeed , 
 or rather they have be human ; now they be stalactite . this be 
 the way in which the Kukuana people have from time immemorial preserve 
 their royal dead . they petrify they . what the exact system might be , 
 if there be any , beyond the placing of they for a long period of year 
 under the drip , I never discover , but there they sit , ice over and 
 preserve for ever by the siliceous fluid . 

 anything more awe - inspiring than the spectacle of this long line of 
 depart royalty   there be twenty - seven of they , the last being 
 Ignosi 's father , wrap , each of they , in a shroud of ice - like spar , 
 through which the feature could be dimly discover , and seat round 
 that inhospitable board , with death himself for a host , it be 
 impossible to imagine . that the practice of thus preserve their king 
 must have be an ancient one be evident from the number , which , 
 allow for an average reign of fifteen year , suppose that every 
 king who reign be place here - an improbable thing , as some be sure 
 to have perish in battle far from home - would fix the date of its 
 commencement at four and a quarter century back . 

 but the colossal Death , who sit at the head of the board , be far old 
 than that , and , unless I be much mistaken , owe his origin to the same 
 artist who design the three Colossi . he be hew out of a single 
 stalactite , and , look at as a work of art , be most admirably 
 conceive and execute . good , who understand such thing , declare 
 that , so far as he could see , the anatomical design of the skeleton be 
 perfect down to the small bone . 

 my own idea be , that this terrific object be a freak of fancy on the 
 part of some old - world sculptor , and that its presence have suggest to 
 the Kukuanas the idea of place their royal dead under its awful 
 presidency . or perhaps it be set there to frighten away any marauder 
 who might have design upon the treasure chamber beyond . I can not say . 
 all I can do be to describe it as it be , and the reader must form his 
 own conclusion . 

 such , at any rate , be the White Death and such be the White Dead ! 


  1   Compare Milton , " Paradise Lost , " Book i. : - 

  " with these in troop 
  Came Ashtoreth , whom the Phoenicians call 
  Astarté , queen of Heaven , with crescent horn ; 
  to whose bright image nightly by the moon 
  sidonian virgin pay their vow and song . " 

  2   " now haste ye , my handmaiden , haste and see 
  how he sit there and glower with his head on his knee . " 



 CHAPTER XVII 

 SOLOMON 'S TREASURE CHAMBER 

 while we be engage in recover from our fright , and in examine 
 the grisly wonder of the Place of Death , Gagool have be differently 
 occupy . somehow or other - for she be marvellously active when she 
 choose - she have scramble on to the great table , and make her way to 
 where our depart friend Twala be place , under the drip , to see , 
 suggest Good , how he be " pickle , " or for some dark purpose of her 
 own . then , after bend down to kiss his icy lip as though in 
 affectionate greeting , she hobble back , stop now and again to 
 address the remark , the tenor of which I could not catch , to one or 
 other of the shroud form , just as you or I might welcome an old 
 acquaintance . have go through this mysterious and horrible 
 ceremony , she squat herself down on the table immediately under the 
 White Death , and begin , so far as I could make out , to offer up 
 prayer . the spectacle of this wicked creature pour out 
 supplication , evil one no doubt , to the arch enemy of mankind , be so 
 uncanny that it cause we to hasten our inspection . 

 " now , Gagool , " say I , in a low voice - somehow one do not dare to 
 speak above a whisper in that place - " lead we to the chamber . " 

 the old witch promptly scramble down from the table . 

 " my lord be not afraid ? " she say , leer up into my face . 

 " lead on . " 

 " good , my lord ; " and she hobble round to the back of the great death . 
 " here be the chamber ; let my lord light the lamp , and enter , " and she 
 place the gourd full of oil upon the floor , and lean herself against 
 the side of the cave . I take out a match , of which we have still a few 
 in a box , and light a rush wick , and then look for the doorway , but 
 there be nothing before we except the solid rock . Gagool grin . " the 
 way be there , my lord . ha ! ha ! ha ! " 

 " do not jest with we , " I say sternly . 

 " I jest not , my lord . see ! " and she point at the rock . 

 as she do so , on hold up the lamp we perceive that a mass of stone 
 be rise slowly from the floor and vanish into the rock above , 
 where doubtless there be a cavity prepare to receive it . the mass be 
 of the width of a good - sized door , about ten foot high and not less 
 than five foot thick . it must have weigh at least twenty or thirty 
 ton , and be clearly move upon some simple balance principle of 
 counter - weight , probably the same as that by which the opening and 
 shutting of an ordinary modern window be arrange . how the principle 
 be set in motion , of course none of we see ; Gagool be careful to 
 avoid this ; but I have little doubt that there be some very simple 
 lever , which be move ever so little by pressure at a secret spot , 
 thereby throw additional weight on to the hidden counter - balance , 
 and cause the monolith to be lift from the ground . 

 very slowly and gently the great stone raise itself , till at last it 
 have vanish altogether , and a dark hole present itself to we in the 
 place which the door have fill . 

 our excitement be so intense , as we see the way to Solomon 's treasure 
 chamber throw open at last , that I for one begin to tremble and shake . 
 would it prove a hoax after all , I wonder , or be old Da Silvestra 
 right ? be there vast hoard of wealth hide in that dark place , 
 hoard which would make we the rich man in the whole world ? we 
 should know in a minute or two . 

 " Enter , white man from the star , " say Gagool , advance into the 
 doorway ; " but first hear your servant , Gagool the old . the bright 
 stone that ye will see be dig out of the pit over which the Silent 
 Ones be set , and store here , I know not by whom , for that be do 
 long ago than even I remember . but once have this place be enter 
 since the time that those who hide the stone depart in haste , leave 
 they behind . the report of the treasure go down indeed among the 
 people who live in the country from age to age , but none know where 
 the chamber be , nor the secret of the door . but it happen that a 
 white man reach this country from over the mountain - perchance he 
 too come ' from the Stars ' - and be well receive by the king of that 
 day . he it be who sit yonder , " and she point to the fifth king at 
 the table of the Dead . " and it come to pass that he and a woman of the 
 country who be with he journey to this place , and that by chance 
 the woman learn the secret of the door - a thousand year might ye 
 search , but ye should never find that secret . then the white man 
 enter with the woman , and find the stone , and fill with stone 
 the skin of a small goat , which the woman have with she to hold food . 
 and as he be go from the chamber he take up one more stone , a large 
 one , and hold it in his hand . " 

 here she pause . 

 " well , " I ask , breathless with interest as we all be , " what 
 happen to Da Silvestra ? " 

 the old hag start at the mention of the name . 

 " how know thou the dead man 's name ? " she ask sharply ; and then , 
 without wait for an answer , go on - 

 " none can tell what happen ; but it come about that the white man be 
 frightened , for he fling down the goat - skin , with the stone , and flee 
 out with only the one stone in his hand , and that the king take , and it 
 be the stone which thou , Macumazahn , didst take from Twala 's brow . " 

 " have none enter here since ? " I ask , peer again down the dark 
 passage . 

 " none , my lord . only the secret of the door have be keep , and every 
 king have open it , though he have not enter . there be a saying , that 
 those who enter there will die within a moon , even as the white man 
 die in the cave upon the mountain , where ye find he , Macumazahn , and 
 therefore the king do not enter . ha ! ha ! mine be true word . " 

 our eye meet as she say it , and I turn sick and cold . how do the 
 old hag know all these thing ? 

 " Enter , my lord . if I speak truth , the goat - skin with the stone will 
 lie upon the floor ; and if there be truth as to whether it be death to 
 enter here , that ye will learn afterwards . ha ! ha ! ha ! " and she 
 hobble through the doorway , bear the light with she ; but I confess 
 that once more I hesitate about follow . 

 " oh , confound it all ! " say good ; " here go . I be not go to be 
 frighten by that old devil ; " and follow by Foulata , who , however , 
 evidently do not at all like the business , for she be shiver with 
 fear , he plunge into the passage after Gagool - an example which we 
 quickly follow . 

 a few yard down the passage , in the narrow way hew out of the living 
 rock , Gagool have pause , and be wait for we . 

 " see , my lord , " she say , hold the light before she , " those who 
 store the treasure here flee in haste , and bethink they to guard 
 against any who should find the secret of the door , but have not the 
 time , " and she point to large square block of stone , which , to the 
 height of two course   about two foot three , have be place across 
 the passage with a view to wall it up . along the side of the passage 
 be similar block ready for use , and , most curious of all , a heap of 
 mortar and a couple of trowel , which tool , so far as we have time to 
 examine they , appear to be of a similar shape and make to those use 
 by workman to this day . 

 here Foulata , who have be in a state of great fear and agitation 
 throughout , say that she feel faint and could go no far , but would 
 wait there . accordingly we set she down on the unfinished wall , place 
 the basket of provision by her side , and leave she to recover . 

 follow the passage for about fifteen pace far , we come suddenly 
 to an elaborately paint wooden door . it be stand wide open . 
 whoever be last there have either not find the time to shut it , or have 
 forget to do so . 

  across the threshold of this door lie a skin bag , form of a 
 goat - skin , that appear to be full of pebble . 

 " Hee ! hee ! white man , " snigger Gagool , as the light from the lamp 
 fall upon it . " what do I tell you , that the white man who come here 
 flee in haste , and drop the woman 's bag - behold it ! look within also 
 and ye will find a water - gourd amongst the stone . " 

 Good stoop down and lift it . it be heavy and jingle . 

 " by Jove ! I believe it be full of diamond , " he say , in an awed 
 whisper ; and , indeed , the idea of a small goat - skin full of diamond be 
 enough to awe anybody . 

 " go on , " say Sir Henry impatiently . " here , old lady , give I the 
 lamp , " and take it from Gagool 's hand , he step through the doorway 
 and hold it high above his head . 

 we press in after he , forgetful for the moment of the bag of 
 diamond , and find ourselves in King Solomon 's treasure chamber . 

 at first , all that the somewhat faint light give by the lamp reveal 
 be a room hew out of the living rock , and apparently not more than 
 ten foot square . next there come into sight , store one on the other to 
 the arch of the roof , a splendid collection of elephant - tusk . how many 
 of they there be we do not know , for of course we could not see to 
 what depth they go back , but there could not have be less than the 
 end of four or five hundred tusk of the first quality visible to our 
 eye . there , alone , be enough ivory to make a man wealthy for life . 
 perhaps , I think , it be from this very store that Solomon draw the 
 raw material for his " great throne of ivory , " of which " there be not 
 the like make in any kingdom . " 

 on the opposite side of the chamber be about a score of wooden box , 
 something like Martini - Henry ammunition box , only rather large , and 
 paint red . 

 " there be the diamond , " cry I ; " bring the light . " 

 Sir Henry do so , hold it close to the top box , of which the lid , 
 render rotten by time even in that dry place , appear to have be 
 smash in , probably by Da Silvestra himself . push my hand through 
 the hole in the lid I draw it out full , not of diamond , but of gold 
 piece , of a shape that none of we have see before , and with what 
 look like Hebrew character stamp upon they . 

 " ah ! " I say , replace the coin , " we shall not   go back empty - handed , 
 anyhow . there must be a couple of thousand piece in each box , and 
 there be eighteen box . I suppose this be the money to pay the 
 workman and merchant . " 

 " well , " put in Good , " I think that be the lot ; I do not   see any 
 diamond , unless the old Portuguese put they all into his bag . " 

 " let my lord look yonder where it be dark , if they would find the 
 stone , " say Gagool , interpret our look . " there my lord will find 
 a nook , and three stone chest in the nook , two sealed and one open . " 

 before translate this to Sir Henry , who carry the light , I could 
 not resist ask how she know these thing , if no one have enter the 
 place since the white man , generation ago . 

 " ah , Macumazahn , the watcher by night , " be the mocking answer , " ye who 
 dwell in the star , do ye not know that some live long , and that some 
 have eye which can see through rock ? ha ! ha ! ha ! " 

 " look in that corner , Curtis , " I say , indicate the spot Gagool have 
 point out . 

 " Hullo , you fellow , " he cry , " here be a recess . great heaven ! see 
 here . " 

 we hurry up to where he be stand in a nook , shape something like 
 a small bow window . against the wall of this recess be place three 
 stone chest , each about two foot square . two be fit with stone 
 lid , the lid of the third rest against the side of the chest , which 
 be open . 

 " see ! " he repeat hoarsely , hold the lamp over the open chest . we 
 look , and for a moment could make nothing out , on account of a 
 silvery sheen which dazzle we . when our eye grow use to it we see 
 that the chest be three - part full of uncut diamond , most of they of 
 considerable size . stoop , I pick some up . yes , there be no doubt 
 of it , there be the unmistakable soapy feel about they . 

 I fairly gasp as I drop they . 

 " we be the rich man in the whole world , " I say . " Monte Christo be 
 a fool to we . " 

 " we shall flood the market with diamond , " say good . 

 " got to get they there first , " suggest Sir Henry . 

 we stand still with pale face and star at each other , the lantern in 
 the middle and the glimmering gem below , as though we be 
 conspirator about to commit a crime , instead of be , as we think , 
 the most fortunate man on earth . 

 " Hee ! hee ! hee ! " cackle old Gagool behind we , as she flit about 
 like a vampire bat . " there be the bright stone ye love , white man , as 
 many as ye will ; take they , run they through your finger , eat of 
 they , hee ! hee ! drink of they , ha ! ha ! " 

 at that moment there be something so ridiculous to my mind at the idea 
 of eat and drinking diamond , that I begin to laugh outrageously , an 
 example which the other follow , without know why . there we stand 
 and shriek with laughter over the gem that be ours , which have be 
 find for we thousand of year ago by the patient delver in the 
 great hole yonder , and store for we by Solomon 's long - dead overseer , 
 whose name , perchance , be write in the character stamp on the 
 fade wax that yet adhere to the lid of the chest . Solomon never get 
 they , nor David , or Da Silvestra , nor anybody else . we have get they : 
 there before we be million of pound ' worth of diamond , and 
 thousand of pound ' worth of gold and ivory only wait to be take 
 away . 

 suddenly the fit pass off , and we stop laugh . 

 " open the other chest , white man , " croak Gagool , " there be surely 
 more therein . take your fill , white lord ! ha ! ha ! take your fill . " 

 thus adjure , we set to work to pull up the stone lid on the other 
 two , first - not without a feeling of sacrilege - break the seal that 
 fasten they . 

 Hoorah ! they be full too , full to the brim ; at least , the second one 
 be ; no wretched burglarious Da Silvestra have be fill goat - skins 
 out of that . as for the third chest , it be only about a fourth full , 
 but the stone be all pick one ; none less than twenty carat , and 
 some of they as large as pigeon - egg . a good many of these big one , 
 however , we could see by hold they up to the light , be a little 
 yellow , " off colour , " as they call it at Kimberley . 

 what we do not see , however , be the look of fearful malevolence 
 that old Gagool favour we with as she creep , creep like a snake , out 
 of the treasure chamber and down the passage towards the door of solid 
 rock . 

          

 Hark ! cry upon cry come ring up the vaulted path . it be Foulata 's 
 voice ! 

 " oh , Bougwan ! help ! help ! the stone fall ! " 

 " leave go , girl ! then - " 

 " help ! help ! she have stab I ! " 

 by now we be run down the passage , and this be what the light from 
 the lamp show we . the door of the rock be close down slowly ; it be 
 not three foot from the floor . near it struggle Foulata and Gagool . the 
 red blood of the former run to her knee , but still the brave girl 
 hold the old witch , who fight like a wild cat . ah ! she be free ! 
 Foulata fall , and Gagool throw herself on the ground , to twist like a 
 snake through the crack of the closing stone . she be under - ah ! god ! 
 too late ! too late ! the stone nip she , and she yell in agony . down , 
 down it come , all the thirty ton of it , slowly press her old body 
 against the rock below . Shriek upon shriek , such as we have never 
 hear , then a long sicken crunch , and the door be shut just as , 
 rush down the passage , we hurl ourselves against it . 

 it be all do in four second . 

 then we turn to Foulata . the poor girl be stab in the body , and I 
 see that she could not live long . 

 " ah ! Bougwan , I die ! " gasp the beautiful creature . " she creep 
 out - Gagool ; I do not see she , I be faint - and the door begin to 
 fall ; then she come back , and be look up the path - I see she come 
 in through the slowly fall door , and catch she and hold she , and 
 she stab I , and I die , Bougwan ! " 

 " poor girl ! poor girl ! " Good cry in his distress ; and then , as he 
 could do nothing else , he fall to kiss she . 

 " Bougwan , " she say , after a pause , " be Macumazahn there ? it grow so 
 dark , I can not see . " 

 " here I be , Foulata . " 

 " Macumazahn , be my tongue for a moment , I pray thee , for Bougwan can not 
 understand I , and before I go into the darkness I would speak to he a 
 word . " 

 " say on , Foulata , I will render it . " 

 " say to my lord , Bougwan , that - I love he , and that I be glad to die 
 because I know that he can not cumber his life with such as I be , for 
 the sun may not mate with the darkness , nor the white with the black . 

 " say that , since I see he , at time I have feel as though there be a 
 bird in my bosom , which would one day fly hence and sing elsewhere . 
 even now , though I can not lift my hand , and my brain grow cold , I do 
 not feel as though my heart be die ; it be so full of love that it 
 could live ten thousand year , and yet be young . say that if I live 
 again , mayhap I shall see he in the Stars , and that - I will search 
 they all , though perchance there I should still be black and he 
 would - still be white . say - nay , Macumazahn , say no more , save that I 
 love - oh , hold I close , Bougwan , I can not feel thine arm - oh ! oh ! " 

 " she be dead - she be dead ! " mutter Good , rise in grief , the tear 
 run down his honest face . 

 " you need not let that trouble you , old fellow , " say Sir Henry . 

 " eh ! " exclaim Good ; " what do you mean ? " 

 " I mean that you will soon be in a position to join she . man , do not 
 you see that we be bury alive ? " 

 until Sir Henry utter these word I do not think that the full horror 
 of what have happen have come home to we , preoccupy as we be with 
 the sight of poor Foulata 's end . but now we understand . the ponderous 
 mass of rock have close , probably for ever , for the only brain which 
 know its secret be crush to powder beneath its weight . this be a 
 door that none could hope to force with anything short of dynamite in 
 large quantity . and we be on the wrong side ! 

 for a few minute we stand horrified , there over the corpse of Foulata . 
 all the manhood seem to have go out of we . the first shock of this 
 idea of the slow and miserable end that await we be overpower . we 
 see it all now ; that fiend Gagool have plan this snare for we from 
 the first . 

 it would have be just the jest that her evil mind would have rejoice 
 in , the idea of the three white man , whom , for some reason of her own , 
 she have always hat , slowly perish of thirst and hunger in the 
 company of the treasure they have covet . now I see the point of that 
 sneer of her about eat and drink the diamond . probably somebody 
 have try to serve the poor old Dom in the same way , when he abandon 
 the skin full of jewel . 

 " this will never do , " say Sir Henry hoarsely ; " the lamp will soon go 
 out . let we see if we can not   find the spring that work the rock . " 

 we spring forward with desperate energy , and , stand in a bloody 
 ooze , begin to feel up and down the door and the side of the passage . 
 but no knob or spring could we discover . 

 " depend on it , " I say , " it do not work from the inside ; if it do 
 Gagool would not have risk try to crawl underneath the stone . it 
 be the knowledge of this that make she try to escape at all hazard , 
 curse she . " 

 " at all event , " say Sir Henry , with a hard little laugh , " retribution 
 be swift ; hers be almost as awful an end as ours be likely to be . we 
 can do nothing with the door ; let we go back to the treasure room . " 

 we turn and go , and as we pass it I perceive by the unfinished 
 wall across the passage the basket of food which poor Foulata have 
 carry . I take it up , and bring it with I to the accursed treasure 
 chamber that be to be our grave . then we return and reverently bore 
 in Foulata 's corpse , lay it on the floor by the box of coin . 

 next we seat ourselves , lean our back against the three stone 
 chest which contain the priceless treasure . 

 " let we divide the food , " say Sir Henry , ' so as to make it last as 
 long as possible . " accordingly we do so . it would , we reckon , make 
 four infinitesimally small meal for each of we , enough , say , to 
 support life for a couple of day . besides the " biltong , " or dry 
 game - flesh , there be two gourd of water , each of which hold not more 
 than a quart . 

 " now , " say Sir Henry grimly , " let we eat and drink , for to - morrow we 
 die . " 

 we each eat a small portion of the " biltong , " and drink a sip of water . 
 needless to say , we have but little appetite , though we be sadly in 
 need of food , and feel well after swallow it . then we get up and 
 make a systematic examination of the wall of our prison - house , in the 
 faint hope of find some mean of exit , sound they and the floor 
 carefully . 

 there be none . it be not probable that there would be any to a 
 treasure chamber . 

 the lamp begin to burn dim . the fat be nearly exhausted . 

 " Quatermain , " say Sir Henry , " what be the time - your watch go ? " 

 I draw it out , and look at it . it be six o'clock ; we have enter the 
 cave at eleven . 

 " infadoo will miss we , " I suggest . " if we do not return to - night he 
 will search for we in the morning , Curtis . " 

 " he may search in vain . he do not know the secret of the door , nor 
 even where it be . no live person know it yesterday , except Gagool . 
 to - day no one know it . even if he find the door he could not break it 
 down . all the Kukuana army could not break through five foot of living 
 rock . my friend , I see nothing for it but to bow ourselves to the will 
 of the Almighty . the search for treasure have bring many to a bad end ; 
 we shall go to swell their number . " 

 the lamp grow dimmer yet . 

 presently it flare up and show the whole scene in strong relief , the 
 great mass of white tusk , the box of gold , the corpse of the poor 
 Foulata stretch before they , the goat - skin full of treasure , the dim 
 glimmer of the diamond , and the wild , wan face of we three white man 
 seat there await death by starvation . 


 then the flame sink and expire . 



 CHAPTER xviii 

 we ABANDON HOPE 

 I can give no adequate description of the horror of the night which 
 follow . mercifully they be to some extent mitigate by sleep , for 
 even in such a position as ours wearied nature will sometimes assert 
 itself . but I , at any rate , find it impossible to sleep much . put 
 aside the terrifying thought of our impend doom - for the brave man 
 on earth might well quail from such a fate as await we , and I never 
 make any pretension to be brave - the silence itself be too great to 
 allow of it . Reader , you may have lain awake at night and think the 
 quiet oppressive , but I say with confidence that you can have no idea 
 what a vivid , tangible thing be perfect stillness . on the surface of 
 the earth there be always some sound or motion , and though it may in 
 itself be imperceptible , yet it deaden the sharp edge of absolute 
 silence . but here there be none . we be bury in the bowel of a 
 huge snow - clothe peak . thousand of foot above we the fresh air rush 
 over the white snow , but no sound of it reach we . we be separate 
 by a long tunnel and five foot of rock even from the awful chamber of 
 the Dead ; and the dead make no noise . do we not know it who lie by 
 poor Foulata 's side ? the crashing of all the artillery of earth and 
 heaven could not have come to our ear in our live tomb . we be cut 
 off from every echo of the world - we be as man already in the grave . 

 then the irony of the situation force itself upon I . there around we 
 lie treasure enough to pay off a moderate national debt , or to build a 
 fleet of ironclad , and yet we would have barter they all gladly for 
 the faint chance of escape . soon , doubtless , we should be rejoice 
 to exchange they for a bit of food or a cup of water , and , after that , 
 even for the privilege of a speedy close to our suffering . truly 
 wealth , which man spend their life in acquire , be a valueless thing 
 at the last . 

 and so the night wear on . 

 " good , " say Sir Henry 's voice at last , and it sound awful in the 
 intense stillness , " how many match have you in the box ? " 

 " Eight , Curtis . " 

 " strike one and let we see the time . " 

 he do so , and in contrast to the dense darkness the flame nearly 
 blind we . it be five o'clock by my watch . the beautiful dawn be now 
 blush on the snow - wreath far over our head , and the breeze would 
 be stir the night mist in the hollow . 

 " we have well eat something and keep up our strength , " I suggest . 

 " what be the good of eat ? " answer Good ; " the soon we die and get 
 it over the well . " 

 " while there be life there be hope , " say Sir Henry . 

 accordingly we eat and sip some water , and another period of time 
 elapse . then Sir Henry suggest that it might be well to get as near 
 the door as possible and halloa , on the faint chance of somebody 
 catch a sound outside . accordingly Good , who , from long practice at 
 sea , have a fine pierce note , grope his way down the passage and set 
 to work . I must say that he make a most diabolical noise . I never hear 
 such yell ; but it might have be a mosquito buzzing for all the 
 effect they produce . 

 after a while he give it up and come back very thirsty , and have to 
 drink . then we stop yell , as it encroach on the supply of water . 

 so we sit down once more against the chest of useless diamond in that 
 dreadful inaction which be one of the hard circumstance of our 
 fate ; and I be bind to say that , for my part , I give way in despair . 
 lay my head against Sir Henry 's broad shoulder I burst into tear ; 
 and I think that I hear Good gulp away on the other side , and 
 swear hoarsely at himself for do so . 

 ah , how good and brave that great man be ! have we be two frightened 
 child , and he our nurse , he could not have treat we more tenderly . 
 forget his own share of misery , he do all he could to soothe our 
 break nerve , tell story of man who have be in somewhat similar 
 circumstance , and miraculously escape ; and when these fail to cheer 
 we , point out how , after all , it be only anticipate an end which 
 must come to we all , that it would soon be over , and that death from 
 exhaustion be a merciful one   which be not true . then , in a diffident 
 sort of way , as once before I have hear he do , he suggest that we 
 should throw ourselves on the mercy of a high power , which for my 
 part I do with great vigour . 

 his be a beautiful character , very quiet , but very strong . 

 and so somehow the day go as the night have go , if , indeed , one can 
 use these term where all be densest night , and when I light a match to 
 see the time it be seven o'clock . 

 once more we eat and drink , and as we do so an idea occur to I . 

 " how be it , " say I , " that the air in this place keep fresh ? it be 
 thick and heavy , but it be perfectly fresh . " 

 " great heaven ! " say Good , start up , " I never think of that . it 
 can not   come through the stone door , for it be air - tight , if ever a door 
 be . it must come from somewhere . it there be no current of air in 
 the place we should have be stifle or poison when we first come 
 in . let we have a look . " 

 it be wonderful what a change this mere spark of hope work in we . 
 in a moment we be all three grope about on our hand and knee , 
 feel for the slight indication of a draught . presently my ardour 
 receive a check . I put my hand on something cold . it be dead 
 Foulata 's face . 

 for an hour or more we go on feeling about , till at last Sir Henry 
 and I give it up in despair , have be considerably hurt by 
 constantly knock our head against tusk , chest , and the side of 
 the chamber . but Good still persevere , say , with an approach to 
 cheerfulness , that it be well than do nothing . 

 " I say , you fellow , " he say presently , in a constrain sort of 
 voice , " come here . " 

 needless to say we scramble towards he quickly enough . 

 " Quatermain , put your hand here where mine be . now , do you feel 
 anything ? " 

 " I think I feel air come up . " 

 " now listen . " he rise and stamp upon the place , and a flame of hope 
 shoot up in our heart . it ring hollow . 

 with tremble hand I light a match . I have only three left , and we see 
 that we be in the angle of the far corner of the chamber , a fact that 
 account for our not have notice the hollow sound of the place 
 during our former exhaustive examination . as the match burn we 
 scrutinise the spot . there be a join in the solid rock floor , and , 
 great heaven ! there , let in level with the rock , be a stone ring . we 
 say no word , we be too excited , and our heart beat too wildly with 
 hope to allow we to speak . good have a knife , at the back of which be 
 one of those hook that be make to extract stone from horse ' hoof . 
 he open it , and scratch round the ring with it . finally he work 
 it under , and lever away gently for fear of break the hook . the 
 ring begin to move . be of stone it have not rust fast in all the 
 century it have lain there , as would have be the case have it be of 
 iron . presently it be upright . then he thrust his hand into it and 
 tug with all his force , but nothing budge . 

 " let I try , " I say impatiently , for the situation of the stone , right 
 in the angle of the corner , be such that it be impossible for two to 
 pull at once . I take hold and strain away , but no result . 

 then Sir Henry try and fail . 

 take the hook again , Good scratch all round the crack where we feel 
 the air come up . 

 " now , Curtis , " he say , " tackle on , and put your back into it ; you be 
 as strong as two . stop , " and he take off a stout black silk 
 handkerchief , which , true to his habit of neatness , he still wear , and 
 run it through the ring . " Quatermain , get Curtis round the middle and 
 pull for dear life when I give the word . now . " 

 Sir Henry put out all his enormous strength , and Good and I do the 
 same , with such power as nature have give we . 

 " Heave ! heave ! it be give , " gasp Sir Henry ; and I hear the muscle 
 of his great back cracking . suddenly there be a grating sound , then a 
 rush of air , and we be all on our back on the floor with a heavy 
 flag - stone upon the top of we . Sir Henry 's strength have do it , and 
 never do muscular power stand a man in well stead . 

 " light a match , Quatermain , " he say , so soon as we have pick 
 ourselves up and get our breath ; " carefully , now . " 

 I do so , and there before we , Heaven be praise ! be the first step 
 of a stone stair . 

 " now what be to be do ? " ask Good . 

 " follow the stair , of course , and trust to Providence . " 

 " stop ! " say Sir Henry ; " Quatermain , get the bit of biltong and the 
 water that be leave ; we may want they . " 

 I go , creep back to our place by the chest for that purpose , and 
 as I be come away an idea strike I . we have not think much of the 
 diamond for the last twenty - four hour or so ; indeed , the very idea of 
 diamond be nauseous , see what they have entail upon we ; but , 
 reflect I , I may as well pocket some in case we ever should get out 
 of this ghastly hole . so I just put my fist into the first chest and 
 fill all the available pocket of my old shooting - coat and trouser , 
 top up - this be a happy thought - with a few handfuls of big one 
 from the third chest . also , by an afterthought , I stuff Foulata 's 
 basket , which , except for one water - gourd and a little biltong , be 
 empty now , with great quantity of the stone . 

 " I say , you fellow , " I sing out , " will not   you take some diamond with 
 you ? I have   fill my pocket and the basket . " 

 " oh , come on , Quatermain ! and hang the diamond ! " say Sir Henry . " I 
 hope that I may never see another . " 

 as for Good , he make no answer . he be , I think , take his last 
 farewell of all that be leave of the poor girl who have love he so 
 well . and curious as it may seem to you , my reader , sit at home at 
 ease and reflect on the vast , indeed the immeasurable , wealth which 
 we be thus abandon , I can assure you that if you have pass some 
 twenty - eight hour with next to nothing to eat and drink in that place , 
 you would not have care to cumber yourself with diamond whilst 
 plunge down into the unknown bowel of the earth , in the wild hope of 
 escape from an agonising death . if from the habit of a lifetime , it 
 have not become a sort of second nature with I never to leave anything 
 worth have behind if there be the slight chance of my be able 
 to carry it away , I be sure that I should not have bother to fill my 
 pocket and that basket . 

 " come on , Quatermain , " repeat Sir Henry , who be already stand on 
 the first step of the stone stair . " Steady , I will go first . " 

 " mind where you put your foot , there may be some awful hole 
 underneath , " I answer . 

 " much more likely to be another room , " say Sir Henry , while he 
 descend slowly , count the step as he go . 

 when he get to " fifteen " he stop . " here be the bottom , " he say . 
 " thank goodness ! I think it be a passage . follow I down . " 

 Good go next , and I come last , carry the basket , and on reach 
 the bottom light one of the two remain match . by its light we could 
 just see that we be stand in a narrow tunnel , which run right and 
 leave at right angle to the staircase we have descend . before we could 
 make out any more , the match burn my finger and go out . then arise 
 the delicate question of which way to go . of course , it be impossible 
 to know what the tunnel be , or where it lead to , and yet to turn one 
 way might lead we to safety , and the other to destruction . we be 
 utterly perplexed , till suddenly it strike Good that when I have light the 
 match the draught of the passage blow the flame to the left . 

 " let we go against the draught , " he say ; " air draw inward , not 
 outward . " 

 we take this suggestion , and feel along the wall with our hand , 
 whilst try the ground before we at every step , we depart from that 
 accurse treasure chamber on our terrible quest for life . if ever it 
 should be enter again by live man , which I do not think probable , 
 he will find token of our visit in the open chest of jewel , the 
 empty lamp , and the white bone of poor Foulata . 

 when we have grope our way for about a quarter of an hour along the 
 passage , suddenly it take a sharp turn , or else be bisect by 
 another , which we follow , only in course of time to be lead into a 
 third . and so it go on for some hour . we seem to be in a stone 
 labyrinth that lead nowhere . what all these passage be , of course I 
 can not say , but we think that they must be the ancient working of a 
 mine , of which the various shaft and adit travel hither and 
 thither as the ore lead they . this be the only way in which we could 
 account for such a multitude of gallery . 

 at length we halt , thoroughly wear out with fatigue and with that 
 hope defer which maketh the heart sick , and eat up our poor 
 remain piece of biltong and drink our last sup of water , for our 
 throat be like lime - kiln . it seem to we that we have escape death 
 in the darkness of the treasure chamber only to meet he in the 
 darkness of the tunnel . 

 as we stand , once more utterly depressed , I think that I catch a 
 sound , to which I call the attention of the other . it be very faint 
 and very far off , but it be a sound , a faint , murmur sound , for 
 the other hear it too , and no word can describe the blessedness of 
 it after all those hour of utter , awful stillness . 

 " by heaven ! it be run water , " say good . " come on . " 

 off we start again in the direction from which the faint murmur 
 seem to come , grope our way as before along the rocky wall . I 
 remember that I lay down the basket full of diamond , wish to be 
 rid of its weight , but on second thought take it up again . one might 
 as well die rich as poor , I reflect . as we go the sound become more 
 and more audible , till at last it seem quite loud in the quiet . on , 
 yet on ; now we could distinctly make out the unmistakable swirl of 
 rush water . and yet how could there be run water in the bowel 
 of the earth ? now we be quite near it , and Good , who be lead , 
 swear that he could smell it . 

 " go gently , good , " say Sir Henry , " we must be close . " Splash ! and a 
 cry from Good . 

 he have fall in . 

 " good ! good ! where be you ? " we shout , in terrified distress . to our 
 intense relief an answer come back in a choky voice . 

 " all right ; I have   get hold of a rock . strike a light to show I where 
 you be . " 

 hastily I light the last remain match . its faint gleam discover to 
 we a dark mass of water run at our foot . how wide it be we could 
 not see , but there , some way out , be the dark form of our companion 
 hang on to a project rock . 

 " stand clear to catch I , " sing out Good . " I must swim for it . " 

 then we hear a splash , and a great struggle . another minute and he have 
 grab at and catch Sir Henry 's outstretche hand , and we have pull 
 he up high and dry into the tunnel . 

 " my word ! " he say , between his gasp , " that be touch and go . if I 
 have not   manage to catch that rock , and know how to swim , I should have 
 be do . it run like a mill - race , and I could feel no bottom . " 

 we dare not follow the bank of the subterranean river for fear lest 
 we should fall into it again in the darkness . so after Good have rest 
 a while , and we have drink our fill of the water , which be sweet and 
 fresh , and wash our face , that need it sadly , as well as we could , 
 we start from the bank of this African Styx , and begin to retrace 
 our step along the tunnel , good dripping unpleasantly in front of we . 
 at length we come to another gallery lead to our right . 

 " we may as well take it , " say Sir Henry wearily ; " all road be alike 
 here ; we can only go on till we drop . " 

 slowly , for a long , long while , we stumble , utterly exhaust , along 
 this new tunnel , Sir Henry now lead the way . again I think of 
 abandon that basket , but do not . 

 suddenly he stop , and we bump up against he . 

 " look ! " he whisper , " be my brain go , or be that light ? " 

 we star with all our eye , and there , yes , there , far ahead of we , 
 be a faint , glimmering spot , no large than a cottage window pane . it 
 be so faint that I doubt if any eye , except those which , like ours , 
 have for day see nothing but blackness , could have perceive it at all . 

 with a gasp of hope we push on . in five minute there be no long 
 any doubt ; it be a patch of faint light . a minute more and a breath 
 of real live air be fan we . on we struggle . all at once the 
 tunnel narrow . Sir Henry go on his knee . small yet it grow , till 
 it be only the size of a large fox 's earth - it be earth now , mind 
 you ; the rock have cease . 

 a squeeze , a struggle , and Sir Henry be out , and so be good , and so 
 be I , drag Foulata 's basket after I ; and there above we be the 
 bless star , and in our nostril be the sweet air . then suddenly 
 something give , and we be all roll over and over and over through 
 grass and bush and soft , wet soil . 

 the basket catch in something and I stop . sit up I halloe 
 lustily . an answering shout come from below , where Sir Henry 's wild 
 career have be check by some level ground . I scramble to he , and 
 find he unhurt , though breathless . then we look for Good . a little 
 way off we discover he also , ham in a fork root . he be a good 
 deal knock about , but soon come to himself . 

 we sit down together , there on the grass , and the revulsion of feeling 
 be so great that really I think we cry with joy . we have escape from 
 that awful dungeon , which be so near to become our grave . surely 
 some merciful Power guide our footstep to the jackal hole , for that 
 be what it must have be , at the termination of the tunnel . and see , 
 yonder on the mountain the dawn we have never think to look upon 
 again be blush rosy red . 

 presently the grey light steal down the slope , and we see that we be 
 at the bottom , or rather , nearly at the bottom , of the vast pit in 
 front of the entrance to the cave . now we could make out the dim form 
 of the three Colossi who sit upon its verge . doubtless those awful 
 passage , along which we have wander the livelong night , have be 
 originally in some way connect with the great diamond mine . as for 
 the subterranean river in the bowel of the mountain , Heaven only know 
 what it be , or whence it flow , or whither it go . I , for one , have no 
 anxiety to trace its course . 

 light it grow , and lighter yet . we could see each other now , and such 
 a spectacle as we present I have never set eye on before or since . 
 Gaunt - cheek , hollow - eyed wretch , smear all over with dust and 
 mud , bruised , bleeding , the long fear of imminent death yet write on 
 our countenance , we be , indeed , a sight to frighten the daylight . 
 and yet it be a solemn fact that Good 's eye - glass be still fix in 
 Good 's eye . I doubt whether he have ever take it out at all . neither 
 the darkness , nor the plunge in the subterranean river , nor the roll 
 down the slope , have be able to separate Good and his eye - glass . 

 presently we rise , fear that our limb would stiffen if we stop 
 there long , and commence with slow and painful step to struggle up 
 the slop side of the great pit . for an hour or more we toil 
 steadfastly up the blue clay , drag ourselves on by the help of the 
 root and grass with which it be clothe . but now I have no more 
 thought of leave the basket ; indeed , nothing but death should have 
 part we . 

 at last it be do , and we stand by the great road , on that side of 
 the pit which be opposite to the Colossi . 

 at the side of the road , a hundred yard off , a fire be burn in 
 front of some hut , and round the fire be figure . we stagger 
 towards they , support one another , and halt every few pace . 
 presently one of the figure rise , see we and fall on to the ground , 
 cry out for fear . 

 " Infadoos , Infadoos ! it be we , thy friend . " 

 he rise ; he run to we , star wildly , and still shake with fear . 

 " oh , my lord , my lord , it be indeed you come back from the 
 dead ! - come back from the dead ! " 

 and the old warrior fling himself down before we , and clasp Sir 
 Henry 's knee , he weep aloud for joy . 



 CHAPTER XIX 

 IGNOSI 's FAREWELL 

 ten day from that eventful morning find we once more in our old 
 quarter at Loo ; and , strange to say , but little the bad for our 
 terrible experience , except that my stubbly hair come out of the 
 treasure cave about three shade greyer than it go in , and that good 
 never be quite the same after Foulata 's death , which seem to move 
 he very greatly . I be bind to say , look at the thing from the 
 point of view of an oldish man of the world , that I consider she 
 removal be a fortunate occurrence , since , otherwise , complication 
 would have be sure to ensue . the poor creature be no ordinary native 
 girl , but a person of great , I have almost say stately , beauty , and of 
 considerable refinement of mind . but no amount of beauty or refinement 
 could have make an entanglement between Good and herself a desirable 
 occurrence ; for , as she herself put it , " can the sun mate with the 
 darkness , or the white with the black ? " 

 I need hardly state that we never again penetrate into Solomon 's 
 treasure chamber . after we have recover from our fatigue , a process 
 which take we forty - eight hour , we descend into the great pit in the 
 hope of find the hole by which we have creep out of the mountain , but 
 with no success . to begin with , rain have fall , and obliterate our 
 spoor ; and what be more , the side of the vast pit be full of 
 ant - bear and other hole . it be impossible to say to which of these we 
 owe our salvation . also , on the day before we start back to Loo , we 
 make a further examination of the wonder of the stalactite cave , and , 
 draw by a kind of restless feeling , even penetrate once more into the 
 Chamber of the Dead . pass beneath the spear of the White Death we 
 gaze , with sensation which it would be quite impossible for I to 
 describe , at the mass of rock that have shut we off from escape , 
 think the while of priceless treasure beyond , of the mysterious old 
 hag whose flatten fragment lie crush beneath it , and of the fair 
 girl of whose tomb it be the portal . I say gaze at the " rock , " for , 
 examine as we could , we could find no trace of the join of the slide 
 door ; nor , indeed , could we hit upon the secret , now utterly lose , that 
 work it , though we try for an hour or more . it be certainly a 
 marvellous bit of mechanism , characteristic , in its massive and yet 
 inscrutable simplicity , of the age which produce it ; and I doubt if 
 the world have such another to show . 

 at last we give it up in disgust ; though , if the mass have suddenly 
 rise before our eye , I doubt if we should have screw up courage to 
 step over Gagool 's mangled remain , and once more enter the treasure 
 chamber , even in the sure and certain hope of unlimited diamond . and 
 yet I could have cry at the idea of leave all that treasure , the 
 big treasure probably that in the world 's history have ever be 
 accumulate in one spot . but there be no help for it . only dynamite 
 could force its way through five foot of solid rock . 

 so we leave it . perhaps , in some remote unborn century , a more fortunate 
 explorer may hit upon the " Open Sesame , " and flood the world with gem . 
 but , myself , I doubt it . somehow , I seem to feel that the ten of 
 million of pound ' worth of jewel which lie in the three stone 
 coffer will never shine round the neck of an earthly beauty . they and 
 Foulata 's bone will keep cold company till the end of all thing . 

 with a sigh of disappointment we make our way back , and next day 
 start for Loo . and yet it be really very ungrateful of we to be 
 disappoint ; for , as the reader will remember , by a lucky thought , I 
 have take the precaution to fill the wide pocket of my old shooting 
 coat and trouser with gem before we leave our prison - house , also 
 Foulata 's basket , which hold twice as many more , notwithstanding that 
 the water bottle have occupy some of its space . a good many of these 
 fall out in the course of our roll down the side of the pit , include 
 several of the big one , which I have cram in on the top in my coat 
 pocket . but , comparatively speak , an enormous quantity still 
 remain , include ninety - three large stone range from over two 
 hundred to seventy carat in weight . my old shooting coat and the 
 basket still hold sufficient treasure to make we all , if not 
 millionaire as the term be understand in America , at least exceedingly 
 wealthy man , and yet to keep enough stone each to make the three 
 fine set of gem in Europe . so we have not do so badly . 

 on arrive at Loo we be most cordially receive by Ignosi , whom we 
 find well , and busily engage in consolidate his power , and 
 reorganise the regiment which have suffer most in the great 
 struggle with Twala . 

 he listen with intense interest to our wonderful story ; but when we 
 tell he of old Gagool 's frightful end he grow thoughtful . 

 " come hither , " he call , to a very old Induna or councillor , who be 
 sit with other in a circle round the king , but out of ear - shot . 
 the ancient man rise , approach , salute , and seat himself . 

 " thou art age , " say Ignosi . 

 " ay , my lord the king ! Thy father 's father and I be bear on the same 
 day . " 

 " tell I , when thou wast little , didst thou know Gagaoola the witch 
 doctress ? " 

 " ay , my lord the king ! " 

 " how be she then - young , like thee ? " 

 " not so , my lord the king ! she be even as she be now and as she be in 
 the day of my great grandfather before I ; old and dried , very ugly , 
 and full of wickedness . " 

 " she be no more ; she be dead . " 

 " so , o king ! then be an ancient curse take from the land . " 

 " go ! " 

 " Koom ! I go , Black Puppy , who tear out the old dog 's throat . koom ! " 

 " ye see , my brother , " say Ignosi , " this be a strange woman , and I 
 rejoice that she be dead . she would have let you die in the dark place , 
 and mayhap afterwards she have find a way to slay I , as she find a 
 way to slay my father , and set up Twala , whom her black heart love , in 
 his place . now go on with the tale ; surely there never be its like ! " 

 after I have narrate all the story of our escape , as we have agree 
 between ourselves that I should , I take the opportunity to address 
 Ignosi as to our departure from Kukuanaland . 

 " and now , Ignosi , " I say , " the time have come for we to bid thee 
 farewell , and start to see our own land once more . Behold , Ignosi , thou 
 camest with we a servant , and now we leave thee a mighty king . if thou 
 art grateful to we , remember to do even as thou didst promise : to rule 
 justly , to respect the law , and to put none to death without a cause . 
 so shalt thou prosper . to - morrow , at break of day , Ignosi , thou wilt 
 give we an escort who shall lead we across the mountain . be it not so , 
 o king ? " 

 Ignosi cover his face with his hand for a while before answer . 

 " my heart be sore , " he say at last ; " your word split my heart in 
 twain . what have I do to you , Incubu , Macumazahn , and Bougwan , that 
 ye should leave I desolate ? Ye who stand by I in rebellion and in 
 battle , will ye leave I in the day of peace and victory ? what will 
 ye - wife ? choose from among the maiden ! a place to live in ? Behold , 
 the land be yours as far as ye can see . the white man 's house ? ye 
 shall teach my people how to build they . Cattle for beef and milk ? 
 every married man shall bring you an ox or a cow . wild game to hunt ? 
 do not the elephant walk through my forest , and the river - horse 
 sleep in the reed ? would ye make war ? my Impis wait your word . if 
 there be anything more which I can give , that will I give you . " 

 " Nay , Ignosi , we want none of these thing , " I answer ; " we would seek 
 our own place . " 

 " now do I learn , " say Ignosi bitterly , and with flash eye , " that 
 ye love the bright stone more than I , your friend . ye have the 
 stone ; now ye would go to Natal and across the move black water and 
 sell they , and be rich , as it be the desire of a white man 's heart to 
 be . curse for your sake be the white stone , and curse he who seek 
 they . death shall it be to he who set foot in the place of Death to 
 find they . I have speak . white man , ye can go . " 

 I lay my hand upon his arm . " Ignosi , " I say , " tell we , when thou 
 didst wander in Zululand , and among the white people of Natal , do not 
 thine heart turn to the land thy mother tell thee of , thy native place , 
 where thou didst see the light , and play when thou wast little , the 
 land where thy place be ? " 

 " it be even so , Macumazahn . " 

 " in like manner , Ignosi , do our heart turn to our land and to our own 
 place . " 

 then come a silence . when Ignosi break it , it be in a different voice . 

 " I do perceive that now as ever thy word be wise and full of reason , 
 Macumazahn ; that which fly in the air love not to run along the 
 ground ; the white man love not to live on the level of the black or to 
 house among his kraal . well , ye must go , and leave my heart sore , 
 because ye will be as dead to I , since from where ye be no tiding 
 can come to I . 

 " but listen , and let all your brother know my word . no other white 
 man shall cross the mountain , even if any man live to come so far . I 
 will see no trader with their gun and gin . my people shall fight with 
 the spear , and drink water , like their forefather before they . I will 
 have no pray - man to put a fear of death into man 's heart , to stir 
 they up against the law of the king , and make a path for the white folk 
 who follow to run on . if a white man come to my gate I will send he 
 back ; if a hundred come I will push they back ; if army come , I will 
 make war on they with all my strength , and they shall not prevail 
 against I . none shall ever seek for the shin stone : no , not an 
 army , for if they come I will send a regiment and fill up the pit , and 
 break down the white column in the cave and choke they with rock , so 
 that none can reach even to that door of which ye speak , and whereof 
 the way to move it be lose . but for you three , Incubu , Macumazahn , and 
 Bougwan , the path be always open ; for , behold , ye be dearer to I than 
 aught that breathe . 

 " and ye would go . infadoo , my uncle , and my Induna , shall take you by 
 the hand and guide you with a regiment . there be , as I have learn , 
 another way across the mountain that he shall show you . farewell , my 
 brother , brave white man . see I no more , for I have no heart to bear 
 it . Behold ! I make a decree , and it shall be publish from the 
 mountain to the mountain ; your name , Incubu , Macumazahn , and 
 Bougwan , shall be " hlonipa " even as the name of dead king , and he 
 who speak they shall die . 1   so shall your memory be preserve in the 
 land for ever . 

 " go now , ere my eye rain tear like a woman 's . at time as ye look 
 back down the path of life , or when ye be old and gather yourself 
 together to crouch before the fire , because for you the sun have no more 
 heat , ye will think of how we stand shoulder to shoulder , in that great 
 battle which thy wise word plan , Macumazahn ; of how thou wast the 
 point of the horn that gall Twala 's flank , Bougwan ; whilst thou stand 
 in the ring of the Greys , Incubu , and man go down before thine axe 
 like corn before a sickle ; ay , and of how thou didst break that wild 
 bull Twala 's strength , and bring his pride to dust . fare ye well for 
 ever , Incubu , Macumazahn , and Bougwan , my lord and my friend . " 

 Ignosi rise and look earnestly at we for a few second . then he throw 
 the corner of his karross over his head , so as to cover his face from 
 we . 

 we go in silence . 


 next day at dawn we leave Loo , escort by our old friend Infadoos , who 
 be heart - break at our departure , and by the regiment of Buffaloes . 
 early as be the hour , all the main street of the town be line with 
 multitude of people , who give we the royal salute as we pass at the 
 head of the regiment , while the woman bless we for have rid the 
 land of Twala , throw flower before we as we go . it be really 
 very affect , and not the sort of thing one be accustom to meet 
 with from native . 

 one ludicrous incident occur , however , which I rather welcome , as 
 it give we something to laugh at . 

 just before we reach the confine of the town , a pretty young girl , 
 with some lovely lily in her hand , run forward and present they to 
 Good - somehow they all seem to like Good ; I think his eye - glass and 
 solitary whisker give he a fictitious value - and then say that she 
 have a boon to ask . 

 " speak on , " he answer . 

 " let my lord show his servant his beautiful white leg , that his 
 servant may look upon they , and remember they all her day , and tell of 
 they to her child ; his servant have travel four day ' journey to 
 see they , for the fame of they have go throughout the land . " 

 " I will be hang if I do ! " exclaim Good excitedly . 

 " come , come , my dear fellow , " say Sir Henry , " you can not   refuse to 
 oblige a lady . " 

 " I will not , " reply Good obstinately ; " it be positively indecent . " 

 however , in the end he consent to draw up his trouser to the knee , 
 amidst note of rapturous admiration from all the woman present , 
 especially the gratified young lady , and in this guise he have to walk 
 till we get clear of the town . 

 Good 's leg , I fear , will never be so greatly admire again . of his 
 melting tooth , and even of his " transparent eye , " the Kukuanas weary 
 more or less , but of his leg never . 

 as we travel , Infadoos tell we that there be another pass over the 
 mountain to the north of the one follow by Solomon 's Great Road , or 
 rather that there be a place where it be possible to climb down the 
 wall of cliff which separate Kukuanaland from the desert , and be 
 break by the tower shape of Sheba 's Breasts . it appear , also , 
 that rather more than two year previously a party of Kukuana hunter 
 have descend this path into the desert in search of ostrich , whose 
 plume be much prize among they for war head - dress , and that in the 
 course of their hunt they have be lead far from the mountain and be 
 much trouble by thirst . see tree on the horizon , however , they 
 walk towards they , and discover a large and fertile oasis some 
 mile in extent , and plentifully water . it be by way of this oasis 
 that Infadoos suggest we should return , and the idea seem to we a 
 good one , for it appear that we should thus escape the rigour of the 
 mountain pass . also some of the hunter be in attendance to guide we 
 to the oasis , from which , they state , they could perceive other 
 fertile spot far away in the desert . 2 

 travel easily , on the night of the fourth day 's journey we find 
 ourselves once more on the crest of the mountain that separate 
 Kukuanaland from the desert , which roll away in sandy billow at our 
 foot , and about twenty - five mile to the north of Sheba 's Breasts . 

 at dawn on the follow day , we be lead to the edge of a very 
 precipitous chasm , by which we be to descend the precipice , and gain 
 the plain two thousand and more foot below . 

 here we bade farewell to that true friend and sturdy old warrior , 
 Infadoos , who solemnly wish all good upon we , and nearly weep with 
 grief . " never , my lord , " he say , ' shall mine old eye see the like of 
 you again . ah ! the way that Incubu cut his man down in the battle ! ah ! 
 for the sight of that stroke with which he sweep off my brother Twala 's 
 head ! it be beautiful - beautiful ! I may never hope to see such 
 another , except perchance in happy dream . " 

 we be very sorry to part from he ; indeed , Good be so moved that he 
 give he as a souvenir - what do you think ? - an eye - glass ; afterwards 
 we discover that it be a spare one . infadoo be delighted , 
 foresee that the possession of such an article would increase his 
 prestige enormously , and after several vain attempt he actually 
 succeed in screw it into his own eye . anything more incongruous 
 than the old warrior look with an eye - glass I never see . eye - glass 
 do not go well with leopard - skin cloak and black ostrich plume . 

 then , after see that our guide be well laden with water and 
 provision , and have receive a thunder farewell salute from the 
 Buffaloes , we wring Infadoos by the hand , and begin our downward climb . 
 a very arduous business it prove to be , but somehow that evening we 
 find ourselves at the bottom without accident . 

 " do you know , " say Sir Henry that night , as we sit by our fire and 
 gaze up at the beetle cliff above we , " I think that there be bad 
 place than Kukuanaland in the world , and that I have know unhappier 
 time than the last month or two , though I have never spend such queer 
 one . eh ! you fellow ? " 

 " I almost wish I be back , " say Good , with a sigh . 

 as for myself , I reflect that all be well that end well ; but in the 
 course of a long life of shave , I never have such shave as those which 
 I have recently experience . the thought of that battle make I feel 
 cold all over , and as for our experience in the treasure chamber - ! 


 next morning we start on a toilsome trudge across the desert , have 
 with we a good supply of water carry by our five guide , and camp 
 that night in the open , march again at dawn on the morrow . 

 by noon of the third day 's journey we could see the tree of the oasis 
 of which the guide speak , and within an hour of sundown we be 
 walk once more upon grass and listen to the sound of run 
 water . 


  1   this extraordinary and negative way of show intense respect be 
 by no mean unknown among african people , and the result be that if , as 
 be usual , the name in question have a significance , the meaning must be 
 express by an idiom or other word . in this way a memory be preserve 
 for generation , or until the new word utterly supplant the old . 

  2   it often puzzle all of we to understand how it be possible that 
 Ignosi 's mother , bear the child with she , should have survive the 
 danger of her journey across the mountain and the desert , danger 
 which so nearly prove fatal to ourselves . it have since occur to I , 
 and I give the idea to the reader for what it be worth , that she must 
 have take this second route , and wander out like Hagar into the 
 wilderness . if she do so , there be no long anything inexplicable 
 about the story , since , as Ignosi himself relate , she may well have 
 be pick up by some ostrich hunter before she or the child be 
 exhaust , be lead by they to the oasis , and thence by stage to the 
 fertile country , and so on by slow degree southward to Zululand . - A.Q. 



 CHAPTER XX 

 FOUND 

 and now I come to perhaps the strange adventure that happen to we 
 in all this strange business , and one which show how wonderfully 
 thing be bring about . 

 I be walk along quietly , some way in front of the other two , down 
 the bank of the stream which run from the oasis till it be swallow 
 up in the hungry desert sand , when suddenly I stop and rub my 
 eye , as well I might . there , not twenty yard in front of I , place 
 in a charming situation , under the shade of a species of fig - tree , and 
 face to the stream , be a cosy hut , build more or less on the Kafir 
 principle with grass and withe , but have a full - length door instead 
 of a bee - hole . 

 " what the dicken , " say I to myself , " can a hut be do here ? " even 
 as I say it the door of the hut open , and there limp out of it a 
  white man clothe in skin , and with an enormous black beard . I 
 think that I must have get a touch of the sun . it be impossible . no 
 hunter ever come to such a place as this . certainly no hunter would 
 ever settle in it . I star and star , and so do the other man , and 
 just at that juncture Sir Henry and Good walk up . 

 " look here , you fellow , " I say , " be that a white man , or be I mad ? " 

 Sir Henry look , and Good look , and then all of a sudden the lame 
 white man with a black beard utter a great cry , and begin hobble 
 towards we . when he be close he fall down in a sort of faint . 

 with a spring Sir Henry be by his side . 

 " Great Powers ! " he cry , " it be my brother George ! " 

 at the sound of this disturbance , another figure , also clothe in skin , 
 emerge from the hut , a gun in his hand , and run towards we . on see 
 I he too give a cry . 

 " Macumazahn , " he halloe , " do not   you know I , Baas ? I be Jim the hunter . 
 I lose the note you give I to give to the Baas , and we have be here 
 nearly two year . " and the fellow fall at my foot , and roll over and 
 over , weep for joy . 

 " you careless scoundrel ! " I say ; " you ought to be well 
  sjambocke " - that be , hide . 

 meanwhile the man with the black beard have recover and rise , and he 
 and Sir Henry be pump - handling away at each other , apparently without 
 a word to say . but whatever they have quarrel about in the past - I 
 suspect it be a lady , though I never ask - it be evidently forget 
 now . 

 " my dear old fellow , " burst out Sir Henry at last , " I think you be 
 dead . I have be over Solomon 's Mountains to find you . I have give up 
 all hope of ever see you again , and now I come across you perch in 
 the desert , like an old assv"gel . " 1 

 " I try to cross Solomon 's Mountains nearly two year ago , " be the 
 answer , speak in the hesitate voice of a man who have have little 
 recent opportunity of use his tongue , " but when I reach here a 
 boulder fall on my leg and crush it , and I have be able to go 
 neither forward nor back . " 

 then I come up . " how do you do , Mr. Neville ? " I say ; " do you remember 
 I ? " 

 " why , " he say , " be not   it Hunter Quatermain , eh , and Good too ? hold on 
 a minute , you fellow , I be get dizzy again . it be all so very 
 strange , and , when a man have cease to hope , so very happy ! " 

 that evening , over the camp fire , George Curtis tell we his story , 
 which , in its way , be almost as eventful as our own , and , put shortly , 
 amount to this . a little less than two year before , he have start 
 from Sitanda 's Kraal , to try to reach Suliman 's Berg . as for the note I 
 have send he by Jim , that worthy lose it , and he have never hear of it 
 till to - day . but , act upon information he have receive from the 
 native , he head not for Sheba 's Breasts , but for the ladder - like 
 descent of the mountain down which we have just come , which be clearly 
 a well route than that mark out in old Dom Silvestra 's plan . in the 
 desert he and Jim have suffer great hardship , but finally they 
 reach this oasis , where a terrible accident befell George Curtis . on 
 the day of their arrival he be sit by the stream , and Jim be 
 extract the honey from the nest of a stingless bee which be to be 
 find in the desert , on the top of a bank immediately above he . in so 
 do he loosen a great boulder of rock , which fall upon George 
 Curtis 's right leg , crush it frightfully . from that day he have be 
 so lame that he find it impossible to go either forward or back , and 
 have prefer to take the chance of die in the oasis to the 
 certainty of perish in the desert . 

 as for food , however , they get on pretty well , for they have a good 
 supply of ammunition , and the oasis be frequent , especially at 
 night , by large quantity of game , which come thither for water . these 
 they shoot , or trap in pitfall , use the flesh for food , and , after 
 their clothe wear out , the hide for clothing . 

 " and so , " George Curtis end , " we have live for nearly two year , 
 like a second Robinson Crusoe and his man Friday , hop against hope 
 that some native might come here to help we away , but none have come . 
 only last night we settle that Jim should leave I , and try to reach 
 Sitanda 's Kraal to get assistance . he be to go to - morrow , but I have 
 little hope of ever see he back again . and now you , of all people 
 in the world , you , who , as I fancy , have long ago forget all 
 about I , and be live comfortably in old England , turn up in a 
 promiscuous way and find I where you least expect . it be the most 
 wonderful thing that I have ever hear of , and the most merciful too . " 

 then Sir Henry set to work , and tell he the main fact of our 
 adventure , sit till late into the night to do it . 

 " by Jove ! " say George Curtis , when I show he some of the diamond : 
 " well , at least you have get something for your pain , besides my 
 worthless self . " 

 Sir Henry laugh . " they belong to Quatermain and Good . it be a part 
 of the bargain that they should divide any spoil there might be . " 

 this remark set I think , and have speak to Good , I tell Sir 
 Henry that it be our joint wish that he should take a third portion of 
 the diamond , or , if he would not , that his share should be hand to 
 his brother , who have suffer even more than ourselves on the chance of 
 get they . finally , we prevail upon he to consent to this 
 arrangement , but George Curtis do not know of it until some time 
 afterwards . 

          

 here , at this point , I think that I shall end my history . our journey 
 across the desert back to Sitanda 's Kraal be most arduous , especially 
 as we have to support George Curtis , whose right leg be very weak 
 indeed , and continually throw out splinter of bone . but we do 
 accomplish it somehow , and to give its detail would only be to 
 reproduce much of what happen to we on the former occasion . 

 six month from the date of our re - arrival at Sitanda 's , where we find 
 our gun and other good quite safe , though the old rascal in charge 
 be much disgusted at our survive to claim they , see we all once more 
 safe and sound at my little place on the Berea , near Durban , where I be 
 now write . Thence I bid farewell to all who have accompany I 
 through the strange trip I ever make in the course of a long and 
 varied experience . 

 P.S. - just as I have write the last word , a Kafir come up my avenue of 
 orange tree , carry a letter in a cleft stick , which he have bring 
 from the post . it turn out to be from Sir Henry , and as it speak for 
 itself I give it in full . 

  October 1 , 1884 . 
  Brayley Hall , Yorkshire . 

  my Dear Quatermain , 

  I send you a line a few mail back to say that the three of we , 
  George , Good , and myself , fetch up all right in England . we get 
  off the boat at Southampton , and go up to town . you should have 
  see what a swell Good turn out the very next day , beautifully 
  shave , frock coat fit like a glove , brand new eye - glass , 
  etc . , etc . I go and walk in the park with he , where I meet 
  some people I know , and at once tell they the story of his 
  " beautiful white leg . " 

  he be furious , especially as some ill - natured person have print 
  it in a Society paper . 

  to come to business , good and I take the diamond to Streeter 's to 
  be value , as we arrange , and really I be afraid to tell you what 
  they put they at , it seem so enormous . they say that of course it 
  be more or less guess - work , as such stone have never to their 
  knowledge be put on the market in anything like such quantity . 
  it appear that   with the exception of one or two of the large 
  they be of the fine water , and equal in every way to the good 
  brazilian stone . I ask they if they would buy they , but they 
  say that it be beyond their power to do so , and recommend we 
  to sell by degree , over a period of year indeed , for fear lest 
  we should flood the market . they offer , however , a hundred and 
  eighty thousand for a very small portion of they . 

  you must come home , Quatermain , and see about these thing , 
  especially if you insist upon make the magnificent present of 
  the third share , which do not belong to I , to my brother 
  George . as for Good , he be no good . his time be too much 
  occupy in shaving , and other matter connect with the vain 
  adorning of the body . but I think he be still down on his luck 
  about Foulata . he tell I that since he have be home he have not 
  see a woman to touch she , either as regard her figure or the 
  sweetness of her expression . 

  I want you to come home , my dear old comrade , and to buy a house 
  near here . you have do your day 's work , and have lot of money 
  now , and there be a place for sale quite close which would suit 
  you admirably . do come ; the soon the well ; you can finish 
  write the story of our adventure on board ship . we have refuse 
  to tell the tale till it be write by you , for fear lest we shall 
  not be believe . if you start on receipt of this you will reach 
  here by Christmas , and I book you to stay with I for that . good 
  be come , and George ; and so , by the way , be your boy Harry 
   there be a bribe for you . I have have he down for a week 's 
  shooting , and like he . he be a cool young hand ; he shoot I in the 
  leg , cut out the pellet , and then remark upon the advantage of 
  have a medical student with every shoot party ! 

  good - bye , old boy ; I can not   say any more , but I know that you will 
  come , if it be only to oblige 

  your sincere friend , 
  Henry Curtis . 

  P.S. - the tusk of the great bull that kill poor Khiva have now 
  be put up in the hall here , over the pair of buffalo horn you 
  give I , and look magnificent ; and the axe with which I chop 
  off Twala 's head be fix above my writing - table . I wish that we 
  could have manage to bring away the coat of chain armour . do not 
  lose poor Foulata 's basket in which you bring away the diamond . 

  H.C. 

 to - day be Tuesday . there be a steamer go on Friday , and I really 
 think that I must take Curtis at his word , and sail by she for England , 
 if it be only to see you , Harry , my boy , and to look after the printing 
 of this history , which be a task that I do not like to trust to anybody 
 else . 


 ALLAN QUATERMAIN . 
