SHE 

 by H. Rider Haggard 
 in EARTH and SKIE and SEA 

 strange thyng THER be 

 Doggerel couplet from the 

 Sherd of Amenartas 



 I inscribe this history to 

 ANDREW lang 

 in token of personal regard 

 and of 

 my sincere admiration for his learning and his work 

 introduction 

 in give to the world the record of what , look at as an adventure 
 only , be I suppose one of the most wonderful and mysterious experience 
 ever undergo by mortal man , I feel it incumbent on I to explain what 
 my exact connection with it be . and so I may as well say at once that I 
 be not the narrator but only the editor of this extraordinary history , 
 and then go on to tell how it find its way into my hand . 

 some year ago I , the editor , be stop with a friend , " vir 
 doctissimus et amicus neus , " at a certain University , which for the 
 purpose of this history we will call Cambridge , and be one day much 
 strike with the appearance of two person whom I see go arm - in - arm 
 down the street . one of these gentleman be I think , without exception , 
 the handsome young fellow I have ever see . he be very tall , very 
 broad , and have a look of power and a grace of bearing that seem as 
 native to he as it be to a wild stag . in addition his face be almost 
 without flaw - a good face as well as a beautiful one , and when he lift 
 his hat , which he do just then to a pass lady , I see that his head 
 be cover with little golden curl grow close to the scalp . 

 " good gracious ! " I say to my friend , with whom I be walk , " why , 
 that fellow look like a statue of Apollo come to life . what a splendid 
 man he be ! " 

 " yes , " he answer , " he be the handsome man in the University , and one 
 of the nice too . they call he ' the greek god ' ; but look at the other 
 one , he be Vincey 's   that be the god 's name   guardian , and suppose to be 
 full of every kind of information . they call he ' Charon . ' " I look , 
 and find the old man quite as interesting in his way as the glorify 
 speciman of humanity at his side . he appear to be about forty year 
 of age , and be I think as ugly as his companion be handsome . to begin 
 with , he be shortish , rather bow - legge , very deep cheste , and with 
 unusually long arm . he have dark hair and small eye , and the hair grow 
 right down on his forehead , and his whisker grow right up to his hair , 
 so that there be uncommonly little of his countenance to be see . 
 altogether he remind I forcibly of a gorilla , and yet there be 
 something very pleasing and genial about the man 's eye . I remember 
 say that I should like to know he . 

 " all right , " answer my friend , " nothing easy . I know Vincey ; 
 I will introduce you , " and he do , and for some minute we stand 
 chat - about the Zulu people , I think , for I have just return from 
 the Cape at the time . presently , however , a stoutish lady , whose name 
 I do not remember , come along the pavement , accompany by a pretty 
 fair - haired girl , and these two Mr. Vincey , who clearly know they well , 
 at once join , walk off in their company . I remember be rather 
 amuse because of the change in the expression of the eld man , whose 
 name I discover be Holly , when he see the lady advance . he 
 suddenly stop short in his talk , cast a reproachful look at his 
 companion , and , with an abrupt nod to myself , turn and march off 
 alone across the street . I hear afterwards that he be popularly 
 suppose to be as much afraid of a woman as most people be of a mad 
 dog , which account for his precipitate retreat . I can not say , however , 
 that young Vincey show much aversion to feminine society on this 
 occasion . indeed I remember laugh , and remark to my friend at 
 the time that he be not the sort of man whom it would be desirable to 
 introduce to the lady one be go to marry , since it be exceedingly 
 probable that the acquaintance would end in a transfer of her 
 affection . he be altogether too good - look , and , what be more , 
 he have none of that consciousness and conceit about he which usually 
 afflict handsome man , and make they deservedly dislike by their 
 fellow . 

 that same evening my visit come to an end , and this be the last I see 
 or hear of " Charon " and " the greek god " for many a long day . indeed , I 
 have never see either of they from that hour to this , and do not think 
 it probable that I shall . but a month ago I receive a letter and two 
 packet , one of manuscript , and on open the first find that it be 
 sign by " Horace Holly , " a name that at the moment be not familiar to 
 I . it run as follow : - 

 " - - College , Cambridge , May 1 , 18 - 

 " my dear Sir , - you will be surprised , consider the very slight nature 
 of our acquaintance , to get a letter from I . indeed , I think I have 
 well begin by remind you that we once meet , now some five year ago , 
 when I and my ward Leo Vincey be introduce to you in the street at 
 Cambridge . to be brief and come to my business . I have recently 
 read with much interest a book of yours describe a central african 
 adventure . I take it that this book be partly true , and partly an effort 
 of the imagination . however this may be , it have give I an idea . it 
 happen , how you will see in the accompany manuscript   which together 
 with the Scarab , the ' Royal Son of the Sun , ' and the original sherd , I 
 be send to you by hand , that my ward , or rather my adopt son Leo 
 Vincey and myself have recently pass through a real african adventure , 
 of a nature so much more marvellous than the one which you describe , 
 that to tell the truth I be almost ashamed to submit it to you lest you 
 should disbelieve my tale . you will see it state in this manuscript 
 that I , or rather we , have make up our mind not to make this history 
 public during our joint life . nor should we alter our determination 
 be it not for a circumstance which have recently arise . we be for 
 reason that , after peruse this manuscript , you may be able to guess , 
 go away again this time to Central Asia where , if anywhere upon this 
 earth , wisdom be to be find , and we anticipate that our sojourn there 
 will be a long one . possibly we shall not return . under these alter 
 condition it have become a question whether we be justify in 
 withholding from the world an account of a phenomenon which we believe 
 to be of unparalleled interest , merely because our private life be 
 involve , or because we be afraid of ridicule and doubt be cast 
 upon our statement . I hold one view about this matter , and Leo 
 hold another , and finally , after much discussion , we have come to a 
 compromise , namely , to send the history to you , give you full leave to 
 publish it if you think fit , the only stipulation be that you shall 
 disguise our real name , and as much concern our personal identity as 
 be consistent with the maintenance of the bona fide of the narrative . 

 " and now what be I to say far ? I really do not know beyond once more 
 repeat that everything be describe in the accompany manuscript 
 exactly as it happen . as regard she herself I have nothing to add . 
 day by day we give great occasion to regret that we do not well 
 avail ourselves of our opportunity to obtain more information from 
 that marvellous woman . who be she ? how do she first come to the Caves 
 of K"r , and what be her real religion ? we never ascertain , and now , 
 alas ! we never shall , at least not yet . these and many other question 
 arise in my mind , but what be the good of ask they now ? 

 " will you undertake the task ? we give you complete freedom , and as a 
 reward you will , we believe , have the credit of present to the world 
 the most wonderful history , as distinguish from romance , that its 
 record can show . read the manuscript   which I have copy out fairly 
 for your benefit , and let I know . 

 " believe I , very truly your , " L. Horace Holly .   

 " P.S. - of course , if any profit result from the sale of the writing 
 should you care to undertake its publication , you can do what you 
 like with it , but if there be a loss I will leave instruction with my 
 lawyer , Messrs. Geoffrey and Jordan , to meet it . we entrust the sherd , 
 the scarab , and the parchment to your keeping , till such time as we 
 demand they back again . - L. H. H. " 

      this name be varied throughout in accordance with the 
  writer 's request . - Editor . 

 this letter , as may be imagine , astonish I considerably , but when I 
 come to look at the MS . , which the pressure of other work prevent I 
 from do for a fortnight , I be still more astonished , as I think the 
 reader will be also , and at once make up my mind to press on with the 
 matter . I write to this effect to Mr. Holly , but a week afterwards 
 receive a letter from that gentleman 's lawyer , return my own , with 
 the information that their client and Mr. Leo Vincey have already leave 
 this country for Thibet , and they do not at present know their address . 

 well , that be all I have to say . of the history itself the reader must 
 judge . I give it he , with the exception of a very few alteration , 
 make with the object of conceal the identity of the actor from the 
 general public , exactly as it come to I . personally I have make up my 
 mind to refrain from comment . at first I be inclined to believe that 
 this history of a woman on whom , clothe in the majesty of she almost 
 endless year , the shadow of Eternity itself lay like the dark wing 
 of Night , be some gigantic allegory of which I could not catch the 
 meaning . then I think that it might be a bold attempt to portray the 
 possible result of practical immortality , inform the substance of 
 a mortal who yet draw her strength from Earth , and in whose human bosom 
 passion yet rise and fall and beat as in the undying world around she 
 the wind and the tide rise and fall and beat unceasingly . but as I 
 go on I abandon that idea also . to I the story seem to bear the 
 stamp of truth upon its face . its explanation I must leave to other , 
 and with this slight preface , which circumstance make necessary , I 
 introduce the world to Ayesha and the Caves of K"r . - the Editor . 

 P.S. - there be on consideration one circumstance that , after a reperusal 
 of this history , strike I with so much force that I can not resist 
 call the attention of the reader to it . he will observe that so far 
 as we be make acquainted with he there appear to be nothing in the 
 character of Leo Vincey which in the opinion of most people would have 
 be likely to attract an intellect so powerful as that of Ayesha . he be 
 not even , at any rate to my view , particularly interesting . indeed , one 
 might imagine that Mr. Holly would under ordinary circumstance have 
 easily outstrip he in the favour of she . can it be that extreme 
 meet , and that the very excess and splendour of her mind lead she by 
 mean of some strange physical reaction to worship at the shrine of 
 matter ? be that ancient Kallikrates nothing but a splendid animal 
 love for his hereditary greek beauty ? or be the true explanation what 
 I believe it to be - namely , that Ayesha , see far than we can 
 see , perceive the germ and smoulder spark of greatness which lie hid 
 within her lover 's soul , and well know that under the influence of her 
 gift of life , water by her wisdom , and shine upon with the sunshine 
 of her presence , it would bloom like a flower and flash out like a star , 
 fill the world with light and fragrance ? 

 here also I be not able to answer , but must leave the reader to form his 
 own judgment on the fact before he , as detail by Mr. Holly in the 
 follow page . 



 I 

 MY VISITOR 

 there be some event of which each circumstance and surround detail 
 seem to be grave on the memory in such fashion that we can not forget 
 it , and so it be with the scene that I be about to describe . it rise 
 as clearly before my mind at this moment as though it have happen but 
 yesterday . 

 it be in this very month something over twenty year ago that I , Ludwig 
 Horace Holly , be sit one night in my room at Cambridge , grind 
 away at some mathematical work , I forget what . I be to go up for my 
 fellowship within a week , and be expect by my tutor and my college 
 generally to distinguish myself . at last , weary out , I fling my book 
 down , and , go to the mantelpiece , take down a pipe and fill it . 
 there be a candle burn on the mantelpiece , and a long , narrow glass 
 at the back of it ; and as I be in the act of light the pipe I catch 
 sight of my own countenance in the glass , and pause to reflect . the 
 light match burn away till it scorch my finger , force I to drop 
 it ; but still I stand and star at myself in the glass , and reflect . 

 " well , " I say aloud , at last , " it be to be hop that I shall be able 
 to do something with the inside of my head , for I shall certainly never 
 do anything by the help of the outside . " 

 this remark will doubtless strike anybody who read it as be slightly 
 obscure , but I be in reality allude to my physical deficiency . 
 Most man of twenty - two be endow at any rate with some share of the 
 comeliness of youth , but to I even this be deny . short , thick - set , 
 and deep - cheste almost to deformity , with long sinewy arm , heavy 
 feature , deep - set grey eye , a low brow half overgrown with a mop of 
 thick black hair , like a deserted clearing on which the forest have once 
 more begin to encroach ; such be my appearance nearly a quarter of a 
 century ago , and such , with some modification , it be to this day . 
 like Cain , I be brand - brand by Nature with the stamp of abnormal 
 ugliness , as I be gift by Nature with iron and abnormal strength and 
 considerable intellectual power . so ugly be I that the spruce 
 young man of my College , though they be proud enough of my feat of 
 endurance and physical prowess , do not even care to be see walk 
 with I . be it wonderful that I be misanthropic and sullen ? be it 
 wonderful that I brood and work alone , and have no friend - at least , 
 only one ? I be set apart by Nature to live alone , and draw comfort 
 from her breast , and her only . woman hat the sight of I . only a week 
 before I have hear one call I a " monster " when she think I be out 
 of hearing , and say that I have convert she to the monkey theory . once , 
 indeed , a woman pretend to care for I , and I lavish all the pen - up 
 affection of my nature upon she . then money that be to have come to I 
 go elsewhere , and she discard I . I plead with she as I have never 
 plead with any living creature before or since , for I be catch by 
 her sweet face , and love she ; and in the end by way of answer she take 
 I to the glass , and stand side by side with I , and look into it . 

 " now , " she say , " if I be Beauty , who be you ? " that be when I be only 
 twenty . 

 and so I stand and star , and feel a sort of grim satisfaction in the 
 sense of my own loneliness ; for I have neither father , nor mother , nor 
 brother ; and as I do so there come a knock at my door . 

 I listen before I go to open it , for it be nearly twelve o'clock at 
 night , and I be in no mood to admit any stranger . I have but one friend 
 in the College , or , indeed , in the world - perhaps it be he . 

 just then the person outside the door cough , and I hasten to open 
 it , for I know the cough . 

 a tall man of about thirty , with the remain of great personal beauty , 
 come hurry in , stagger beneath the weight of a massive iron box 
 which he carry by a handle with his right hand . he place the box upon 
 the table , and then fall into an awful fit of cough . he cough and 
 cough till his face become quite purple , and at last he sink into 
 a chair and begin to spit up blood . I pour out some whisky into a 
 tumbler , and give it to he . he drink it , and seem well ; though his 
 well be very bad indeed . 

 " why do you keep I stand there in the cold ? " he ask pettishly . 
 " you know the draught be death to I . " 

 " I do not know who it be , " I answer . " you be a late visitor . " 

 " yes ; and I verily believe it be my last visit , " he answer , with a 
 ghastly attempt at a smile . " I be do for , Holly . I be do for . I do 
 not believe that I shall see to - morrow . " 

 " nonsense ! " I say . " let I go for a doctor . " 

 he wave I back imperiously with his hand . " it be sober sense ; but I 
 want no doctor . I have study medicine and I know all about it . no 
 doctor can help I . my last hour have come ! for a year past I have 
 only live by a miracle . now listen to I as you have never listen to 
 anybody before ; for you will not have the opportunity of get I to 
 repeat my word . we have be friend for two year ; now tell I how 
 much do you know about I ? " 

 " I know that you be rich , and have have a fancy to come to College long 
 after the age that most man leave it . I know that you have be marry , 
 and that your wife die ; and that you have be the good , indeed almost 
 the only friend I ever have . " 

 " do you know that I have a son ? " 

 " no . " 

 " I have . he be five year old . he cost I his mother 's life , and I have 
 never be able to bear to look upon his face in consequence . holly , 
 if you will accept the trust , I be go to leave you that boy 's sole 
 guardian . " 

 I spring almost out of my chair . " I ! " I say . 

 " yes , you . I have not study you for two year for nothing . I have 
 know for some time that I could not last , and since I realise the fact 
 I have be search for some one to whom I could confide the boy and 
 this , " and he tap the iron box . " you be the man , Holly ; for , like a 
 rugged tree , you be hard and sound at core . listen ; the boy will be the 
 only representative of one of the most ancient family in the world , 
 that be , so far as family can be trace . you will laugh at I when 
 I say it , but one day it will be prove to you beyond a doubt , that my 
 sixty - fifth or sixty - sixth lineal ancestor be an egyptian priest 
 of isis , though he be himself of grecian extraction , and be call 
 Kallikrates .     his father be one of the greek mercenary raise 
 by Hak - Hor , a Mendesian Pharaoh of the twenty - ninth dynasty , and his 
 grandfather or great - grandfather , I believe , be that very kallikrate 
 mention by Herodotus .     in or about the year 339 before Christ , just 
 at the time of the final fall of the Pharaohs , this Kallikrates   the 
 priest   break his vow of celibacy and flee from Egypt with a Princess 
 of Royal blood who have fall in love with he , and be finally wreck 
 upon the coast of Africa , somewhere , as I believe , in the neighbourhood 
 of where Delagoa Bay now be , or rather to the north of it , he and his 
 wife be save , and all the remainder of their company destroy in 
 one way or another . here they endure great hardship , but be at last 
 entertain by the mighty queen of a savage people , a white woman of 
 peculiar loveliness , who , under circumstance which I can not enter into , 
 but which you will one day learn , if you live , from the content of 
 the box , finally murder my ancestor Kallikrates . his wife , however , 
 escape , how , I know not , to Athens , bear a child with she , whom she 
 name tisisthene , or the Mighty Avenger . five hundred year or more 
 afterwards , the family migrate to Rome under circumstance of which no 
 trace remain , and here , probably with the idea of preserve the idea 
 of vengeance which we find set out in the name of tisisthene , they 
 appear to have pretty regularly assume the cognoman of Vindex , or 
 Avenger . here , too , they remain for another five century or more , 
 till about 770 A.D. , when Charlemagne invade Lombardy , where they be 
 then settle , whereon the head of the family seem to have attach 
 himself to the great Emperor , and to have return with he across the 
 Alps , and finally to have settle in Brittany . eight generation later 
 his lineal representative cross to England in the reign of Edward 
 the Confessor , and in the time of William the Conqueror be advanced to 
 great honour and power . from that time to the present day I can trace 
 my descent without a break . not that the Vinceys - for that be the final 
 corruption of the name after its bearer take root in english soil - have 
 be particularly distinguish - they never come much to the fore . 
 sometimes they be soldier , sometimes merchant , but on the whole they 
 have preserve a dead level of respectability , and a still dead level 
 of mediocrity . from the time of Charles II . till the beginning of the 
 present century they be merchant . about 1790 by grandfather make a 
 considerable fortune out of brewing , and retire . in 1821 he die , and 
 my father succeed he , and dissipate most of the money . ten year ago 
 he die also , leave I a net income of about two thousand a year . then 
 it be that I undertake an expedition in connection with that , " and he 
 point to the iron chest , " which end disastrously enough . on my way 
 back I travel in the South of Europe , and finally reach Athens . 
 there I meet my beloved wife , who might well also have be call the 
 ' beautiful , ' like my old greek ancestor . there I marry she , and there , 
 a year afterwards , when my boy be bear , she die . " 

      the Strong and beautiful , or , more accurately , the 
  Beautiful in strength . 

      the Kallikrates here refer to by my friend be a 
  Spartan , speak of by Herodotus   Herod . ix . 72   as be 
  remarkable for his beauty . he fall at the glorious battle of 
  Platæa   September 22 , B.C. 479 , when the Lacedæmonians 
  and Athenians under Pausanias rout the Persians , put 
  nearly 300,000 of they to the sword . the following be a 
  translation of the passage , " for Kallikrates die out of the 
  battle , he come to the army the most beautiful man of the 
  Greeks of that day - not only of the Lacedæmonians 
  themselves , but of the other Greeks also . he when Pausanias 
  be sacrifice be wound in the side by an arrow ; and 
  then they fight , but on be carry off he regret his 
  death , and say to Arimnestus , a Platæan , that he do not 
  grieve at die for Greece , but at not have strike a blow , 
  or , although he desire so to do , perform any deed worthy 
  of himself . " this Kallikrates , who appear to have be as 
  brave as he be beautiful , be subsequently mention by 
  Herodotus as have be bury among the ἰρένες 
   young commander , apart from the other Spartans and the 
  Helots . - L. H. H. 

 he pause a while , his head sink upon his hand , and then continue - 

 " my marriage have divert I from a project which I can not enter into 
 now . I have no time , Holly - I have no time ! one day , if you accept my 
 trust , you will learn all about it . after my wife 's death I turn my 
 mind to it again . but first it be necessary , or , at least , I conceive 
 that it be necessary , that I should attain to a perfect knowledge of 
 eastern dialect , especially Arabic . it be to facilitate my study 
 that I come here . very soon , however , my disease develop itself , and 
 now there be an end of I . " and as though to emphasise his word he 
 burst into another terrible fit of cough . 

 I give he some more whisky , and after rest he go on - 

 " I have never see my boy , Leo , since he be a tiny baby . I never could 
 bear to see he , but they tell I that he be a quick and handsome child . 
 in this envelope , " and he produce a letter from his pocket address 
 to myself , " I have jot down the course I wish follow in the boy 's 
 education . it be a somewhat peculiar one . at any rate , I could not 
 entrust it to a stranger . once more , will you undertake it ? " 

 " I must first know what I be to undertake , " I answer . 

 " you be to undertake to have the boy , Leo , to live with you till he be 
 twenty - five year of age - not to send he to school , remember . on his 
 twenty - fifth birthday your guardianship will end , and you will then , 
 with the key that I give you now "   and he place they on the table 
 " open the iron box , and let he see and read the content , and say 
 whether or no he be willing to undertake the quest . there be no 
 obligation on he to do so . now , as regard term . my present income be 
 two thousand two hundred a year . half of that income I have secure 
 to you by will for life , contingently on your undertaking the 
 guardianship - that is , one thousand a year remuneration to yourself , for 
 you will have to give up your life to it , and one hundred a year to 
 pay for the board of the boy . the rest be to accumulate till Leo be 
 twenty - five , so that there may be a sum in hand should he wish to 
 undertake the quest of which I speak . " 

 " and suppose I be to die ? " I ask . 

 " then the boy must become a ward of Chancery and take his chance . only 
 be careful that the iron chest be pass on to he by your will . listen , 
 Holly , do not   refuse I . believe I , this be to your advantage . you be 
 not fit to mix with the world - it would only embitter you . in a few 
 week you will become a fellow of your College , and the income that you 
 will derive from that combine with what I have leave you will enable you 
 to live a life of learn leisure , alternate with the sport of which 
 you be so fond , such as will exactly suit you . " 

 he pause and look at I anxiously , but I still hesitate . the charge 
 seem so very strange . 

 " for my sake , Holly . we have be good friend , and I have no time to 
 make other arrangement . " 

 " very well , " I say , " I will do it , provide there be nothing in this 
 paper to make I change my mind , " and I touch the envelope he have put 
 upon the table by the key . 

 " thank you , Holly , thank you . there be nothing at all . swear to I by 
 God that you will be a father to the boy , and follow my direction to 
 the letter . " 

 " I swear it , " I answer solemnly . 

 " very well , remember that perhaps one day I shall ask for the account of 
 your oath , for though I be dead and forget , yet I shall live . there 
 be no such thing as death , Holly , only a change , and , as you may perhaps 
 learn in time to come , I believe that even that change could under 
 certain circumstance be indefinitely postpone , " and again he break 
 into one of his dreadful fit of coughing . 

 " there , " he say , " I must go , you have the chest , and my will will be 
 find among my paper , under the authority of which the child will be 
 hand over to you . you will be well pay , Holly , and I know that you 
 be honest , but if you betray my trust , by Heaven , I will haunt you . " 

 I say nothing , be , indeed , too bewildered to speak . 

 he hold up the candle , and look at his own face in the glass . it have 
 be a beautiful face , but disease have wreck it . " food for the worm , " 
 he say . " curious to think that in a few hour I shall be stiff and 
 cold - the journey do , the little game play out . ah I , Holly ! life 
 be not worth the trouble of life , except when one be in love - at least , 
 mine have not be ; but the boy Leo 's may be if he have the courage and 
 the faith . good - bye , my friend ! " and with a sudden access of tenderness 
 he fling his arm about I and kiss I on the forehead , and then turn 
 to go . 

 " look here , Vincey , " I say , " if you be as ill as you think , you have 
 well let I fetch a doctor . " 

 " no , no , " he say earnestly . " promise I that you will not . I be go to 
 die , and , like a poison rat , I wish to die alone . " 

 " I do not   believe that you be go to do anything of the sort , " I 
 answer . he smile , and , with the word " remember " on his lip , be 
 go . as for myself , I sit down and rub my eye , wonder if I have 
 be asleep . as this supposition would not bear investigation I give it 
 up and begin to think that Vincey must have be drink . I know that 
 he be , and have be , very ill , but still it seem impossible that he 
 could be in such a condition as to be able to know for certain that he 
 would not outlive the night . have he be so near dissolution surely he 
 would scarcely have be able to walk , and carry a heavy iron box with 
 he . the whole story , on reflection , seem to I utterly incredible , 
 for I be not then old enough to be aware how many thing happen in 
 this world that the common sense of the average man would set down as 
 so improbable as to be absolutely impossible . this be a fact that I have 
 only recently master . be it likely that a man would have a son five 
 year of age whom he have never see since he be a tiny infant ? no . be 
 it likely that he could foretell his own death so accurately ? no . be 
 it likely that he could trace his pedigree for more than three 
 century before Christ , or that he would suddenly confide the absolute 
 guardianship of his child , and leave half his fortune , to a college 
 friend ? most certainly not . clearly Vincey be either drunk or mad . that 
 be so , what do it mean ? and what be in the sealed iron chest ? 

 the whole thing baffle and puzzle I to such an extent that at last I 
 could stand it no long , and determine to sleep over it . so I jump 
 up , and have put the key and the letter that Vincey have leave away 
 into my despatch - box , and stow the iron chest in a large portmanteau , 
 I turn in , and be soon fast asleep . 

 as it seem to I , I have only be asleep for a few minute when I be 
 awaken by somebody call I . I sit up and rub my eye ; it be 
 broad daylight - eight o'clock , in fact . 

 " why , what be the matter with you , John ? " I ask of the gyp who wait 
 on Vincey and myself . " you look as though you have see a ghost ! " 

 " yes , sir , and so I have , " he answer , " leastway I have   see a corpse , 
 which be bad . I have   be in to call Mr. Vincey , as usual , and there he 
 lie stark and dead ! " 



 II 

 the year ROLL by 

 as might be expect , poor Vincey 's sudden death create a great stir 
 in the College ; but , as he be know to be very ill , and a satisfactory 
 doctor 's certificate be forthcoming , there be no inquest . they be 
 not so particular about inquest in those day as they be now ; indeed , 
 they be generally dislike , because of the scandal . under all these 
 circumstance , be ask no question , I do not feel call upon to 
 volunteer any information about our interview on the night of Vincey 's 
 decease , beyond say that he have come into my room to see I , as he 
 often do . on the day of the funeral a lawyer come down from London and 
 follow my poor friend 's remain to the grave , and then go back with 
 his paper and effect , except , of course , the iron chest which have be 
 leave in my keeping . for a week after this I hear no more of the matter , 
 and , indeed , my attention be amply occupy in other way , for I be 
 up for my Fellowship , a fact that have prevent I from attend the 
 funeral or see the lawyer . at last , however , the examination be 
 over , and I come back to my room and sink into an easy chair with a 
 happy consciousness that I have get through it very fairly . 

 soon , however , my thought , relieve of the pressure that have crush 
 they into a single groove during the last few day , turn to the event 
 of the night of poor Vincey 's death , and again I ask myself what it 
 all mean , and wonder if I should hear anything more of the matter , 
 and if I do not , what it would be my duty to do with the curious iron 
 chest . I sit there and think and think till I begin to grow quite 
 disturb over the whole occurrence : the mysterious midnight visit , the 
 prophecy of death so shortly to be fulfil , the solemn oath that I have 
 take , and which Vincey have call on I to answer to in another world 
 than this . have the man commit suicide ? it look like it . and what 
 be the quest of which he speak ? the circumstance be uncanny , so 
 much so that , though I be by no mean nervous , or apt to be alarm 
 at anything that may seem to cross the bound of the natural , I grow 
 afraid , and begin to wish I have nothing to do with they . how much more 
 do I wish it now , over twenty year afterwards ! 

 as I sit and think , there come a knock at the door , and a letter , in a 
 big blue envelope , be bring in to I . I see at a glance that it be 
 a lawyer 's letter , and an instinct tell I that it be connect with my 
 trust . the letter , which I still have , run thus : - 

 " Sir , - our client , the late M. L. Vincey , Esq . , who die on the 9th 
 instant in - - College , Cambridge , have leave behind he a Will , of which 
 you will please find copy enclose and of which we be the executor . 
 under this will you will perceive that you take a life - interest in about 
 half of the late Mr. Vincey 's property , now invest in Consols , subject 
 to your acceptance of the guardianship of his only son , Leo Vincey , at 
 present an infant , aged five . have we not ourselves draw up the document 
 in question in obedience to Mr. Vincey 's clear and precise instruction , 
 both personal and write , and have he not then assure we that he have 
 very good reason for what he be do , we be bind to tell you that 
 its provision seem to we of so unusual a nature , that we should have 
 bind to call the attention of the Court of Chancery to they , in order 
 that such step might be take as seem desirable to it , either by 
 contest the capacity of the testator or otherwise , to safeguard 
 the interest of the infant . as it be , know that the testator be 
 a gentleman of the high intelligence and acuman , and that he have 
 absolutely no relation live to whom he could have confide the 
 guardianship of the child , we do not feel justified in take this 
 course . 

 " await such instruction as you please to send we as regard 
 the delivery of the infant and the payment of the proportion of the 
 dividend due to you , 

 " we remain , Sir , faithfully your , 

 " Geoffrey and Jordan . 

 " Horace L. Holly , Esq . " 


 I put down the letter , and run my eye through the will , which appear , 
 from its utter unintelligibility , to have be draw on the strict 
 legal principle . so far as I could discover , however , it exactly bear 
 out what my friend Vincey have tell I on the night of his death . so 
 it be true after all . I must take the boy . suddenly I remember the 
 letter which Vincey have leave with the chest . I fetch and open it . 
 it only contain such direction as he have already give to I as to 
 open the chest on Leo 's twenty - fifth birthday , and lay down the 
 outline of the boy 's education , which be to include Greek , the high 
 Mathematics , and Arabic . at the end there be a postscript to the 
 effect that if the boy die under the age of twenty - five , which , 
 however , he do not believe would be the case , I be to open the chest , 
 and act on the information I obtain if I see fit . if I do not see 
 fit , I be to destroy all the content . on no account be I to pass they 
 on to a stranger . 

 as this letter add nothing material to my knowledge , and certainly 
 raise no further objection in my mind to enter on the task I have 
 promise my dead friend to undertake , there be only one course open 
 to I - namely , to write to Messrs. Geoffrey and Jordan , and express my 
 acceptance of the trust , state that I should be willing to commence 
 my guardianship of Leo in ten day ' time . this do I go to the 
 authority of my college , and , have tell they as much of the story 
 as I consider desirable , which be not very much , after considerable 
 difficulty succeed in persuade they to stretch a point , and , in the 
 event of my have obtain a fellowship , which I be pretty certain 
 I have do , allow I to have the child to live with I . their consent , 
 however , be only grant on the condition that I vacate my room 
 in college and take lodging . this I do , and with some difficulty 
 succeed in obtain very good apartment quite close to the college 
 gate . the next thing be to find a nurse . and on this point I come to a 
 determination . I would have no woman to lord it over I about the child , 
 and steal his affection from I . the boy be old enough to do 
 without female assistance , so I set to work to hunt up a suitable male 
 attendant . with some difficulty I succeed in hire a most respectable 
 round - faced young man , who have be a helper in a hunting - stable , but 
 who say that he be one of a family of seventeen and well - accustomed to 
 the way of child , and profess himself quite willing to undertake 
 the charge of Master Leo when he arrive . then , have take the iron 
 box to town , and with my own hand deposit it at my banker 's , I buy 
 some book upon the health and management of child and read they , 
 first to myself , and then aloud to Job - that be the young man 's 
 name - and wait . 

 at length the child arrive in the charge of an elderly person , who weep 
 bitterly at part with he , and a beautiful boy he be . indeed , I do 
 not think that I ever see such a perfect child before or since . his eye 
 be grey , his forehead be broad , and his face , even at that early age , 
 clean cut as a cameo , without be pinch or thin . but perhaps his 
 most attractive point be his hair , which be pure gold in colour and 
 tightly curl over his shapely head . he cry a little when his nurse 
 finally tear herself away and leave he with we . never shall I forget the 
 scene . there he stand , with the sunlight from the window playing upon 
 his golden curl , his fist screw over one eye , whilst he take we in 
 with the other . I be seat in a chair , and stretch out my hand to 
 he to induce he to come to I , while Job , in the corner , be make a 
 sort of cluck noise , which , argue from his previous experience , or 
 from the analogy of the hen , he judge would have a soothe effect , and 
 inspire confidence in the youthful mind , and run a wooden horse of 
 peculiar hideousness backwards and forwards in a way that be little 
 short of inane . this go on for some minute , and then all of a sudden 
 the lad stretch out both his little arm and run to I . 

 " I like you , " he say : " you be ugly , but you be good . " 

 ten minute afterwards he be eat large slice of bread and butter , 
 with every sign of satisfaction ; Job want to put jam on to they , but 
 I sternly remind he of the excellent work that we have read , and 
 forbid it . 

 in a very little while   for , as I expect , I get my fellowship   the 
 boy become the favourite of the whole College - where , all order and 
 regulation to the contrary notwithstanding , he be continually in 
 and out - a sort of chartered libertine , in whose favour all rule be 
 relaxed . the offering make at his shrine be simply without number , 
 and I have serious difference of opinion with one old resident fellow , 
 now long dead , who be usually suppose to be the crustiest man in the 
 University , and to abhor the sight of a child . and yet I discover , 
 when a frequently recur fit of sickness have force Job to keep a 
 strict look - out , that this unprincipled old man be in the habit of 
 entice the boy to his room and there feed he upon unlimited 
 quantity of brandy - ball , and make he promise to say nothing about 
 it . Job tell he that he ought to be ashamed of himself , " at his age , 
 too , when he might have be a grandfather if he have do what be 
 right , " by which Job understand have get marry , and thence arise the 
 row . 

 but I have no space to dwell upon those delightful year , around which 
 memory still fondly hover . one by one they go by , and as they pass 
 we two grow dearer and yet more dear to each other . few son have 
 be love as I love Leo , and few father know the deep and continuous 
 affection that Leo bear to I . 

 the child grow into the boy , and the boy into the young man , while one 
 by one the remorseless year fly by , and as he grow and increase so 
 do his beauty and the beauty of his mind grow with he . when he be 
 about fifteen they use to call he Beauty about the College , and I 
 they nickname the Beast . Beauty and the Beast be what they call we 
 when we go out walk together , as we use to do every day . once Leo 
 attack a great strap butcher 's man , twice his size , because he 
 sing it out after we , and thrash he , too - thrash he fairly . I 
 walk on and pretend not to see , till the combat get too exciting , 
 when I turn round and cheer he on to victory . it be the chaff of 
 the College at the time , but I could not help it . then when he be a 
 little old the undergraduate find fresh name for we . they call I 
 Charon , and Leo the greek god ! I will pass over my own appellation with 
 the humble remark that I be never handsome , and do not grow more so as 
 I grow old . as for his , there be no doubt about its fitness . Leo at 
 twenty - one might have stand for a statue of the youthful Apollo . I never 
 see anybody to touch he in look , or anybody so absolutely unconscious 
 of they . as for his mind , he be brilliant and keen - witted , but not a 
 scholar . he have not the dulness necessary for that result . we follow 
 out his father 's instruction as regard his education strictly enough , 
 and on the whole the result , especially in the matter of greek and 
 Arabic , be satisfactory . I learn the latter language in order to help 
 to teach it to he , but after five year of it he know it as well as I 
 do - almost as well as the professor who instruct we both . I always 
 be a great sportsman - it be my one passion - and every autumn we go 
 away somewhere shoot or fishing , sometimes to Scotland , sometimes 
 to Norway , once even to Russia . I be a good shot , but even in this he 
 learn to excel I . 

 when Leo be eighteen I move back into my room , and enter he at my 
 own College , and at twenty - one he take his degree - a respectable degree , 
 but not a very high one . then it be that I , for the first time , tell 
 he something of his own story , and of the mystery that loom ahead . 
 of course he be very curious about it , and of course I explain to 
 he that his curiosity could not be gratify at present . after that , to 
 pass the time away , I suggest that he should get himself call to the 
 Bar ; and this he do , read at Cambridge , and only go up to London 
 to eat his dinner . 

 I have only one trouble about he , and that be that every young woman 
 who come across he , or , if not every one , nearly so , would insist on 
 fall in love with he . hence arise difficulty which I need not 
 enter into here , though they be troublesome enough at the time . on the 
 whole , he behave fairly well ; I can not say more than that . 

 and so the time go by till at last he reach his twenty - fifth 
 birthday , at which date this strange and , in some way , awful history 
 really begin . 



 III 

 the SHERD of amenartas 

 on the day precede Leo 's twenty - fifth birthday we both journey to 
 London , and extract the mysterious chest from the bank where I have 
 deposit it twenty year before . it be , I remember , bring up by the 
 same clerk who have take it down . he perfectly remember have hide 
 it away . have he not do so , he say , he should have have difficulty in 
 find it , it be so cover up with cobwebs . 

 in the evening we return with our precious burden to Cambridge , and I 
 think that we might both of we have give away all the sleep we get that 
 night and not have be much the poor . at daybreak Leo arrive in my 
 room in a dressing - gown , and suggest that we should at once proceed to 
 business . I scout the idea as show an unworthy curiosity . the chest 
 have wait twenty year , I say , so it could very well continue to wait 
 until after breakfast . accordingly at nine - an unusually sharp nine - we 
 breakfast ; and so occupied be I with my own thought that I regret to 
 state that I put a piece of bacon into Leo 's tea in mistake for a lump 
 of sugar . Job , too , to whom the contagion of excitement have , of course , 
 spread , manage to break the handle off my Sèvres china tea - cup , the 
 identical one I believe that Marat have be drink from just before he 
 be stab in his bath . 

 at last , however , breakfast be clear away , and Job , at my request , 
 fetch the chest , and place it upon the table in a somewhat gingerly 
 fashion , as though he mistrust it . then he prepare to leave the room . 

 " stop a moment , Job , " I say . " if Mr. Leo have no objection , I should 
 prefer to have an independent witness to this business , who can be 
 rely upon to hold his tongue unless he be ask to speak . " 

 " certainly , Uncle Horace , " answer Leo ; for I have bring he up to 
 call I uncle - though he vary the appellation somewhat disrespectfully 
 by call I " old fellow , " or even " my avuncular relative . " 

 Job touch his head , not have a hat on . 

 " lock the door , Job , " I say , " and bring I my despatch - box . " 

 he obey , and from the box I take the key that poor Vincey , Leo 's 
 father , have give I on the night of his death . there be three of 
 they ; the large a comparatively modern key , the second an exceedingly 
 ancient one , and the third entirely unlike anything of the sort that we 
 have ever see before , be fashion apparently from a strip of solid 
 silver , with a bar place across to serve as a handle , and leave 
 some nick cut in the edge of the bar . it be more like a model of an 
 antediluvian railway key than anything else . 

 " now be you both ready ? " I say , as people do when they be go to 
 fire a mine . there be no answer , so I take the big key , rub some 
 salad oil into the ward , and after one or two bad shot , for my hand 
 be shake , manage to fit it , and shoot the lock . Leo bend over and 
 catch the massive lid in both his hand , and with an effort , for the 
 hinge have rust , force it back . its removal reveal another case 
 cover with dust . this we extract from the iron chest without any 
 difficulty , and remove the accumulate filth of year from it with a 
 clothe - brush . 

 it be , or appear to be , of ebony , or some such close - grain black 
 wood , and be bind in every direction with flat band of iron . its 
 antiquity must have be extreme , for the dense heavy wood be in part 
 actually commence to crumble from age . 

 " now for it , " I say , insert the second key . 

 Job and Leo bend forward in breathless silence . the key turn , and 
 I fling back the lid , and utter an exclamation , and no wonder , for 
 inside the ebony case be a magnificent silver casket , about twelve 
 inch square by eight high . it appear to be of egyptian workmanship , 
 and the four leg be form of Sphinxes , and the dome - shape cover be 
 also surmount by a Sphinx . the casket be of course much tarnish and 
 dinte with age , but otherwise in fairly sound condition . 

 I draw it out and set it on the table , and then , in the midst of the 
 most perfect silence , I insert the strange - look silver key , and 
 press this way and that until at last the lock yield , and the casket 
 stand before we . it be fill to the brim with some brown shred 
 material , more like vegetable fibre than paper , the nature of which I 
 have never be able to discover . this I carefully remove to the depth 
 of some three inch , when I come to a letter enclose in an ordinary 
 modern - look envelope , and address in the handwriting of my dead 
 friend Vincey . 

 " to my son Leo , should he live to open this casket . " 

 I hand the letter to Leo , who glance at the envelope , and then put it 
 down upon the table , make a motion to I to go on empty the casket . 

 the next thing that I find be a parchment carefully roll up . I 
 unroll it , and see that it be also in Vincey 's handwriting , and 
 head , " translation of the Uncial Greek writing on the Potsherd , " put 
 it down by the letter . then follow another ancient roll of parchment , 
 that have become yellow and crinkle with the passage of year . this I 
 also unroll . it be likewise a translation of the same greek original , 
 but into black - letter Latin , which at the first glance from the style 
 and character appear to I to date from somewhere about the beginning 
 of the sixteenth century . immediately beneath this roll be something 
 hard and heavy , wrap up in yellow linen , and repose upon another 
 layer of the fibrous material . slowly and carefully we unroll the 
 linen , expose to view a very large but undoubtedly ancient potsherd 
 of a dirty yellow colour ! this potsherd have in my judgment , once be 
 a part of an ordinary amphora of medium size . for the rest , it measure 
 ten and a half inch in length by seven in width , be about a quarter 
 of an inch thick , and densely cover on the convex side that lay 
 towards the bottom of the box with write in the later uncial greek 
 character , fade here and there , but for the most part perfectly 
 legible , the inscription have evidently be execute with the 
 great care , and by mean of a reed pen , such as the ancient 
 often use . I must not forget to mention that in some remote age this 
 wonderful fragment have be break in two , and rejoin by mean of 
 cement and eight long rivet . also there be numerous inscription on 
 the inner side , but these be of the most erratic character , and have 
 clearly be make by different hand and in many different age , and 
 of they , together with the writing on the parchment , I shall have to 
 speak presently . 

   plate 1 

  FACSIMILE of the SHERD of AMENARTAS 

  one 1 2 size 

  great length of the original 10   inch 
  great breadth 7 inch 
  Weight 1 lb 5   oz 

   plate 2 

  FACSIMILE of the SHERD of AMENARTAS 

  one 1 2 size 

 " be there anything more ? " ask Leo , in a kind of excited whisper . 

 I grope about , and produce something hard , do up in a little linen 
 bag . out of the bag we take first a very beautiful miniature do 
 upon ivory , and secondly , a small chocolate - colour composition 
  scarabæus , mark thus : - 

  sketch omit 

 symbol which , we have since ascertain , mean " Suten se Ra , " which be 
 be translate the " Royal Son of Ra or the Sun . " the miniature be a 
 picture of Leo 's greek mother - a lovely , dark - eyed creature . on the back 
 of it be write , in poor Vincey 's handwriting , " my beloved wife . " 

 " that be all , " I say . 

 " very well , " answer Leo , put down the miniature , at which he 
 have be gaze affectionately ; " and now let we read the letter , " and 
 without further ado he break the seal , and read aloud as follow : - 

 " my Son Leo , - when you open this , if you ever live to do so , you will 
 have attain to manhood , and I shall have be long enough dead to 
 be absolutely forget by nearly all who know I . yet in read it 
 remember that I have be , and for anything you know may still be , and 
 that in it , through this link of pen and paper , I stretch out my hand 
 to you across the gulf of death , and my voice speak to you from the 
 silence of the grave . though I be dead , and no memory of I remain 
 in your mind , yet be I with you in this hour that you read . since your 
 birth to this day I have scarcely see your face . forgive I this . your 
 life supplant the life of one whom I love well than woman be often 
 love , and the bitterness of it endureth yet . have I live I should in 
 time have conquer this foolish feeling , but I be not destine to live . 
 my suffering , physical and mental , be more than I can bear , and when 
 such small arrangement as I have to make for your future well - being be 
 complete it be my intention to put a period to they . may God forgive I 
 if I do wrong . at the good I could not live more than another year . " 

 " so he kill himself , " I exclaim . " I think so . " 

 " and now , " Leo go on , without reply , " enough of myself . what have to 
 be say belong to you who live , not to I , who be dead , and almost as 
 much forget as though I have never be . Holly , my friend   to whom , if 
 he will accept the trust , it be my intention to confide you , will have 
 tell you something of the extraordinary antiquity of your race . in 
 the content of this casket you will find sufficient to prove it . the 
 strange legend that you will find inscribe by your remote ancestress 
 upon the potsherd be communicate to I by my father on his deathbed , 
 and take a strong hold in my imagination . when I be only nineteen year 
 of age I determine , as , to his misfortune , do one of our ancestor 
 about the time of Elizabeth , to investigate its truth . into all that 
 befell I I can not enter now . but this I see with my own eye . on the 
 coast of Africa , in a hitherto unexplored region , some distance to the 
 north of where the Zambesi fall into the sea , there be a headland , 
 at the extremity of which a peak tower up , shape like the head of a 
 negro , similar to that of which the writing speak . I land there , 
 and learn from a wandering native , who have be cast out by his people 
 because of some crime which he have commit , that far inland be great 
 mountain , shape like cup , and cave surround by measureless swamp . 
 I learn also that the people there speak a dialect of Arabic , and be 
 rule over by a beautiful white woman who be seldom see by they , but 
 who be report to have power over all thing live and dead . two 
 day after I have ascertain this the man die of fever contract 
 in cross the swamp , and I be force by want of provision and by 
 symptom of an illness which afterwards prostrate I to take to my dhow 
 again . 

 " of the adventure that befell I after this I need not now speak . I be 
 wreck upon the coast of Madagascar , and rescue some month afterwards 
 by an english ship that bring I to Aden , whence I start for 
 England , intend to prosecute my search as soon as I have make 
 sufficient preparation . on my way I stop in Greece , and there , for 
 ' Omnia vincit amor , ' I meet your beloved mother , and marry she , and 
 there you be bear and she die . then it be that my last illness 
 seize I , and I return hither to die . but still I hop against hope , 
 and set myself to work to learn Arabic , with the intention , should I 
 ever get well , of return to the coast of Africa , and solve 
 the mystery of which the tradition have live so many century in our 
 family . but I have not get well , and , so far as I be concern , the 
 story be at an end . 

 " for you , however , my son , it be not at an end , and to you I hand on 
 these the result of my labour , together with the hereditary proof of 
 its origin . it be my intention to provide that they shall not be put 
 into your hand until you have reach an age when you will be able to 
 judge for yourself whether or no you will choose to investigate what , if 
 it be true , must be the great mystery in the world , or to put it by 
 as an idle fable , originate in the first place in a woman 's disorder 
 brain . 

 " I do not believe that it be a fable ; I believe that if it can only 
 be re - discover there be a spot where the vital force of the world 
 visibly exist . life exist ; why therefore should not the mean of 
 preserve it indefinitely exist also ? but I have no wish to prejudice 
 your mind about the matter . read and judge for yourself . if you be 
 inclined to undertake the search , I have so provide that you will not 
 lack for mean . if , on the other hand , you be satisfied that the whole 
 thing be a chimera , then , I adjure you , destroy the potsherd and the 
 writing , and let a cause of troubling be remove from our race for 
 ever . perhaps that will be wise . the unknown be generally take to be 
 terrible , not as the proverb would infer , from the inherent superstition 
 of man , but because it so often be terrible . he who would tamper with 
 the vast and secret force that animate the world may well fall a victim 
 to they . and if the end be attain , if at last you emerge from the 
 trial ever beautiful and ever young , defy time and evil , and lift 
 above the natural decay of flesh and intellect , who shall say that the 
 awesome change would prove a happy one ? Choose , my son , and may the 
 Power who rule all thing , and who say ' thus far shalt thou go , and 
 thus much shalt thou learn , ' direct the choice to your own happiness 
 and the happiness of the world , which , in the event of your success , 
 you would one day certainly rule by the pure force of accumulated 
 experience . - farewell ! " 

 thus the letter , which be unsigned and undated , abruptly end . 

 " what do you make of that , Uncle Holly , " say Leo , with a sort of gasp , 
 as he replace it on the table . " we have be look for a mystery , and 
 we certainly seem to have find one . " 

 " what do I make of it ? why , that your poor dear father be off his head , 
 of course , " I answer , testily . " I guess as much that night , twenty 
 year ago , when he come into my room . you see he evidently hurry his 
 own end , poor man . it be absolute balderdash . " 

 " that be it , sir ! " say Job , solemnly . Job be a most matter - of - fact 
 speciman of a matter - of - fact class . 

 " well , let us see what the potsherd have to say , at any rate , " say Leo , 
 take up the translation in his father 's writing , and commence to 
 read : - 

 " I , Amenartas , of the Royal House of the Pharaohs of Egypt , wife of 
 Kallikrates   the Beautiful in Strength , a Priest of Isis whom the 
 god cherish and the demon obey , be about to die , to my little son 
 tisisthene   the Mighty Avenger . I flee with thy father from Egypt in 
 the day of Nectanebes ,     cause he through love to break the vow 
 that he have vow . we flee southward , across the water , and we wander 
 for twice twelve moon on the coast of Libya   Africa   that look towards 
 the rise sun , where by a river be a great rock carven like the head 
 of an Ethiopian . four day on the water from the mouth of a mighty river 
 be we cast away , and some be drown and some die of sickness . but 
 we wild man take through waste and marsh , where the sea fowl hide the 
 sky , bear we ten day ' journey till we come to a hollow mountain , 
 where a great city have be and fall , and where there be cave of 
 which no man hath see the end ; and they bring we to the Queen of the 
 people who place pot upon the head of stranger , who be a magician 
 have a knowledge of all thing , and life and loveliness that do not 
 die . and she cast eye of love upon thy father , Kallikrates , and would 
 have slay I , and take he to husband , but he love I and fear she , 
 and would not . then do she take we , and lead we by terrible way , by 
 mean of dark magic , to where the great pit be , in the mouth of which 
 the old philosopher lie dead , and show to we the rolling Pillar of 
 life that die not , whereof the voice be as the voice of thunder ; and 
 she do stand in the flame , and come forth unharmed , and yet more 
 beautiful . then do she swear to make thy father undye even as she be , 
 if he would but slay I , and give himself to she , for I she could 
 not slay because of the magic of my own people that I have , and that 
 prevail thus far against she . and he hold his hand before his eye to 
 hide her beauty , and would not . then in her rage do she smite he by 
 her magic , and he die ; but she weep over he , and bear he thence with 
 lamentation : and be afraid , I she send to the mouth of the great 
 river where the ship come , and I be carry far away on the ship 
 where I give thee birth , and hither to Athens I come at last after many 
 wandering . now I say to thee , my son , tisisthene , seek out the woman , 
 and learn the secret of Life , and if thou mayest find a way slay she , 
 because of thy father Kallikrates ; and if thou dost fear or fail , this 
 I say to all thy seed who come after thee , till at last a brave man be 
 find among they who shall bathe in the fire and sit in the place of the 
 Pharaohs . I speak of those thing , that though they be past belief , yet 
 I have know , and I lie not . " 

      Nekht - nebf , or Nectanebo II . , the last native Pharaoh of 
  Egypt , flee from Ochus to Ethiopia , B.C. 339 . - Editor . 

 " may the Lord forgive she for that , " groan Job , who have be listen 
 to this marvellous composition with his mouth open . 

 as for myself , I say nothing : my first idea be that my poor friend , 
 be demente , have compose the whole thing , though it scarcely seem 
 likely that such a story could have be invent by anybody . it be too 
 original . to solve my doubt I take up the potsherd and begin to read 
 the close uncial greek writing on it ; and very good Greek of the period 
 it be , consider that it come from the pen of an Egyptian bear . here 
 be an exact transcript of it : - 


 ΑΜΕΝΑΡΤΑΣΤΟΥΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΟΥΓΕΝΟΥΣΤΟΥΑΙΓΥΠΤΙΟΥΗΤΟΥΚΑΛΛΙΚΡΑΤΟΥΣΙΣΙΔΟΣΙΕΡΕΩΣΗΝΟ 
 ΙΜΕΝéΕΟΙΤΡΕΦΟΥΣΙΤΑΔΕΔΑΙΜΟΝΙΑΥΠΟΤΑΣΣΕΤΑΙΗΔΗΤΕΛΕΥΤΩΣΑΤΙΣΙΣéΕΝΕΙΤΩΠΑΙΔΙΕΠ 
 ΙΣΤΕΛΛΕΙΤΑΔΕΣΥΝΕΦΥΓΟΝΓΑΡΠΟΤΕΕΚΤΗΣΑΙΓΥΠΤΙΑΣΕΠΙΝΕΚΤΑΝΕΒΟΥΜΕΤΑΤΟΥΣΟΥΠΑΤΡΟ 
 ΣΔΙΑΤΟΝΕΡΩΤΑΤΟΝΕΜΟΝΕΠΙΟΡΚΗΣΑΝΤΟΣΦΥΓΟΝΤΕΣΔΕΠΡΟΣΝΟΤΟΝΔΙΑΠΟΝΤΙΟΙΚΑΙΚΔΜΗΝΑ 
 σκαταταπαραéαλασσιατησλιβυησταπροσηλιουανατολασπλανηéεντεσενéαπερπετρα 
 ΤΙΣΜΕΓΑΛΗΓΛΥΠΤΟΝΟΜΟΙΩΜΑΑΙéΙΟΠΟΣΚΕΦΑΛΗΣΕΙΤΑΗΜΕΡΑΣΔΑΠΟΣΤΟΜΑΤΟΣΠΟΤΑΜΟΥΜΕΓ 
 ΑΛΟΥΕΚΠΕΣΟΝΤΕΣΟΙΜΕΝΚΑΤΕΠΟΝΤΙΣéΗΜΕΝΟΙΔΕΝΟΣΩΙΑΠΕéΑΝΟΜΕΝΤΕΛΟΣΔΕΥΠΑΓΡΙΩΝΑΝ 
 éρωπωνεφερομεéαδιαελεωντεκαιτεναγεωνενéαπερπτηνωνπληéοσαποκρυπτειτονου 
 ΡΑΝΟΝΗΜΕΡΑΣΙΕΩΣΗΛéΟΜΕΝΕΙΣΚΟΙΛΟΝΤΙΟΡΟΣΕΝéΑΠΟΤΕΜΕΓΑΛΗΜΕΝΠΟΛΙΣΗΝΑΝΤΡΑΔΕΑΠ 
 ειροναηγαγονδεωσβασιλειαντηντωνξενουσχυτραισστεφανουντωνητισμαγειαμενε 
 χρητοεπιστημηδεπαντωνκαιδηκαικαλλοσκαιρωμηναγηρωσηνηδεκαλλικρατουστους 
 ΟΥΠΑΤΡΟΣΕΡΑΣéΕΙΣΑΤΟΜΕΝΠΡΩΤΟΝΣΥΝΟΙΚΕΙΝΕΒΟΥΛΕΤΟΕΜΕΔΕΑΝΕΛΕΙΝΕΠΕΙΤΑΩΣΟΥΚΑΝ 
 ΕΠΕΙéΕΝΕΜΕΓΑΡΥΠΕΡΕΦΙΛΕΙΚΑΙΤΗΝΞΕΝΗΝΕΦΟΒΕΙΤΟΑΠΗΓΑΓΕΝΗΜΑΣΥΠΟΜΑΓΕΙΑΣΚΑéΟΔΟ 
 ΥΣΣΦΑΛΕΡΑΣΕΝéΑΤΟΒΑΡΑéΡΟΝΤΟΜΕΓΑΟΥΚΑΤΑΣΤΟΜΑΕΚΕΙΤΟΟΓΕΡΩΝΟΦΙΛΟΣΟΦΟΣΤΕéΝΕΩΣ 
 ΑΦΙΚΟΜΕΝΟΙΣΔΕΔΕΙΞΕΦΩΣΤΟΥΒΙΟΥΕΥéΥΟΙΟΝΚΙΟΝΑΕΛΙΣΣΟΜΕΝΟΝΦΩΝΗΝΙΕΝΤΑΚΑéΑΠΕΡΒ 
 ΡΟΝΤΗΣΕΙΤΑΔΙΑΠΥΡΟΣΒΕΒΗΚΥΙΑΑΒΛΑΒΗΣΚΑΙΕΤΙΚΑΛΛΙΩΝΑΥΤΗΕΑΥΤΗΣΕΞΕΦΑΝΗΕΚΔΕΤΟΥ 
 τωνωμοσεκαιτονσονπατερααéανατοναποδειξεινεισυνοικεινοιβουλοιτοεμεδεανε 
 ΛΕΙΝΟΥΓΑΡΟΥΝΑΥΤΗΑΝΕΛΕΙΝΙΣΧΥΕΝΥΠΟΤΩΝΗΜΕΔΑΠΩΝΗΝΚΑΙΑΥΤΗΕΧΩΜΑΓΕΙΑΣΟΔΟΥΔΕΝΤ 
 ιμαλλονηéελετωχειρετωνομματωνπροισχωνιναδητοτησγυναικοσκαλλοσμηορωηεπε 
 ΙΤΑΟΡΓΙΣéΕΙΣΑΚΑΤΕΓΟΗΤΕΥΣΕΜΕΝΑΥΤΟΝΑΠΟΛΟΜΕΝΟΝΜΕΝΤΟΙΚΛΑΟΥΣΑΚΑΙΟΔΥΡΟΜΕΝΗΕΚ 
 ειéεναπηνεγκενεμεδεφοβωιαφηκενεισστοματουμεγαλουποταμουτουναυσιπορουπο 
 ρρωδεναυσινεφωνπερπλεουσαετεκονσεαποπλευσασαμολισποτεδευροαéηναζεκατηγ 
 ΑΓΟΜΗΝΣΥΔΕΩΤΙΣΙΣéΕΝΕΣΩΝΕΠΙΣΤΕΛΛΩΜΗΟΛΙΓΩΡΕΙΔΕΙΓΑΡΤΗΝΓΥΝΑΙΚΑΑΝΑΖΗΤΕΙΝΗΝΠ 
 ΩΣΤΟΤΟΥΒΙΟΥΜΥΣΤΗΡΙΟΝΑΝΕΥΡΗΣΚΑΙΑΝΑΙΡΕΙΝΗΝΠΟΥΠΑΡΑΣΧΗΔΙΑΤΟΝΣΟΝΠΑΤΕΡΑΚΑΛΛΙ 
 κρατηνειδεφοβουμενοσηδιααλλοτιαυτοσλειπειτουεργουπασιτοισυστεροναυτοτο 
 υτοεπιστελλωεωσποτεαγαéοστισγενομενοστωπυριλουσασéαιτολμησεικαιτααριστ 
 ΕΙΑΕΧΩΝΒΑΣΙΛΕΥΣΑΙΤΩΝΑΝéΡΩΠΩΝΑΠΙΣΤΑΜΕΝΔΗΤΑΤΟΙΑΥΤΑΛΕΓΩΟΜΩΣΔΕΑΑΥΤΗΕΓΝΩΚΑΟ 
 ΥΚΕΨΕΥΣΑΜΗΝ 

 the general convenience in reading , I have here accurately transcribe 
 this inscription into the cursive character . 

 Ἀμενάρτας , τοῦ βασικοῦ γένους 
 τοῦ Αἰγυπτίου , ἡ τοῦ Καλλικράτους 
 Ἴσιδος ἱερέως , ἣν οἱ μὲν éεοὶ 
 τρέφουσι τὰ δὲ δαιμονια ὑποτάσσεται , 
 ἤδη τελευτῶσα Τισισéένει τῷ παιδὶ 
 ἐπιστέλλει τάδε   συνέφυγον γάρ ποτε 
 ἐκ τῆς Αἰγυπτίας ἐπὶ Νεκτανέβου 
 μετὰ τοῦ σοῦ πατρός , διὰ τὸν ἔρωτα 
 τὸν ἐμὸν ἐπιορκήσαντος . φυγόντες δὲ 
 πρὸς νότον διαπόντιοι καὶ κ δ   μῆνας 
 κατὰ τὰ παραéαλάσσια τῆς Αιβύης τὰ 
 πρός ἡλίου ἀνατολὰς πλανηéέντες , 
 ἔνéαπερ πέτρα τις μελάλη , γλυπτὸν 
 ὁμοίωμα Αἰéίοπος κεφαλῆς , εἶτα 
 ἡμέρας δ   ἀπὸ στόματος ποταμοῦ 
 μεγάλου ἐκπεσόντες , οἱ μέν 
 κατεποντίσéημεν , οἱ δὲ νόσῳ 
 ἀπεéάνομεν   τέλος δὲ ὑπ   ἀλρίων 
 ἀνéρώπων ἐφερόμεéα διὰ ἐλέων τε 
 καὶ τεναλέων ἔνéαπερ πτηνῶν πλῆéος 
 ἀποκρύπτει τὸν οὐρανὸν , ἡμέρας ί , 
 ἕως ἤλéομεν εἰς κοῖλόν τι ὄρος , ἔνéα 
 ποτὲ μεγάλη μὲν πόλις ἦν , ἄντρα δὲ 
 ἀπείρονα   ἤγαγον δὲ ὡς βασίλειαν 
 τὴν τῶν ξένους χύτραις στεφανούντων , 
 ἥτις μαλεία μὲν ἐχρῆτο ἐπιστήμη δὲ 
 πάντων καὶ δὴ καὶ κάλλός καὶ ῥώμην 
 ἀλήρως ἦν   ἡ δὲ Καλλικράτους τοῦ 
 πατρὸς ἐρασéεῖδα τὸ μὲν πρῶτον 
 συνοικεῖν ἐβούλετο ἐμὲ δὲ ἀνελεῖν 
 ἔπειτα , ὡς οὐκ ἀνέπειéεν , ἐμὲ γὰρ 
 ὑπερεφίλει καὶ τὴν ξένην ἐφοβεῖτο , 
 ἀπήγαγεν ἡμᾶς ὑπὸ μαγείας καé 
 ὁδοὺς σφαλερὰς ἔνéα τὸ βάραéρον τὸ 
 μέγα , οὗ κατὰ στόμα ἔκειτο ὁ γέρων 
 ὁ φιλόσοφος τεéνεώς , ἀφικομένοις 
 δ   ἔδειξε φῶς τοῦ βίου εὐéύ , οἷον 
 κίονα ἑλισσόμενον φώνην ἱέντα 
 καéάπερ βροντῆς , εἶτα διὰ πυρὸς 
 βεβηκυῖα ἀβλαβὴς καὶ ἔτι καλλίων 
 αὐτὴ ἑαυτῆς ἐξεφάνη . ἐκ δὲ τούτων 
 ὤμοσε καὶ τὸν σὸν πατέρα ἀéάνατον 
 ἀποδείξειν , εἰ συνοικεῖν οἱ 
 βούλοιτο ἐμὲ δε ὰνελεῖν , οὐ γὰρ 
 οὖν αὐτὴ ἀνελεῖν ἴσχυεν ὑπὸ τῶν 
 ἡμεδαπῶν ἣν καὶ αὐτὴ ἔχω μαγείας . 
 ὁ δ   οὐδέν τι μᾶλλον ἤéελε , τὼ χεῖρε 
 τῶν ὀμμάτων προίσχων ἵνα δὴ τὸ τῆς 
 γυναικὸς κάλλος μὴ ὁρῴη   ἔπειτα 
 ὀργισéεῖσα κατεγοήτευσε μὲν αὐτόν , 
 ἀπολόμενον μέντοι κλάουσα καὶ 
 ὀδυρμένη ἐκεῖéεν ἀπήνεγκεν , ἐμὲ δὲ 
 φόβῳ ἀφῆκεν εἰς στόμα τοῦ μεγάλου 
 ποταμοῦ τοῦ ναυσιπόρου , πόδδω δὲ 
 ναυσίν , ἐφ   ὧνπερ πλέουσα ἔτεκόν 
 σε , ἀποπλεύσασα μόλις ποτὲ δεῦρο 
 Ἀéηνάζε κατηγαγόν . σὺ δέ , ὦ 
 Τισίσéενες , ὧν ἐπιστέλλω μὴ 
 ὀλιγώρει   δεῖ γὰρ τῆν γυναῖκα 
 ἀναζητεῖν ἤν πως τῦ βίου μυστήριον 
 ἀνεύρῃς , καὶ ἀναιρεῖν , ἤν 
 που παρασχῇ , διὰ τὸν πατέρα 
 Καλλικράτους . εἐ δὲ φοβούμενος ἢ διὰ 
 ἄλλο τι αὐτὸς λείπει τοῦ ἔργου , πᾶσι 
 τοῖς ὕστερον αὐτὸ τοῦτο ἐπιστέλλω , 
 ἕως ποτὲ ἀγαéός τις γενόμενος τῷ 
 πυρὶ λούσασéαι τολμήσει καὶ τὰ 
 ἀριστεῖα ἔχων βασιλεῦσαι τῶν 
 ἀνéρώπων   ἄπιστα μὲν δὴ τὰ τοιαῦτα 
 λέγω , ὅμως δὲ ἃ αὐτὴ ἔγνωκα οὐκ 
 ἐψευσάμην . 

 the english translation be , as I discover on further investigation , 
 and as the reader may easily see by comparison , both accurate and 
 elegant . 

 besides the uncial writing on the convex side of the sherd at the top , 
 paint in dull red , on what have once be the lip of the amphora , be 
 the cartouche already mention as be on the scarabæus , which we 
 have also find in the casket . the hieroglyphic or symbol , however , 
 be reverse , just as though they have be press on wax . whether this 
 be the cartouche of the original Kallikrates ,     or of some Prince or 
 Pharaoh from whom his wife Amenartas be descend , I be not sure , nor 
 can I tell if it be draw upon the sherd at the same time that the 
 uncial Greek be inscribe , or copy on more recently from the Scarab 
 by some other member of the family . nor be this all . at the foot of 
 the writing , paint in the same dull red , be the faint outline of a 
 somewhat rude drawing of the head and shoulder of a Sphinx wear 
 two feather , symbol of majesty , which , though common enough upon the 
 effigy of sacred bull and god , I have never before meet with on a 
 Sphinx . 

      the cartouche , if it be a true cartouche , can not have 
  be that of Kallikrates , as Mr. Holly suggest . kallikrate 
  be a priest and not entitle to a cartouche , which be the 
  prerogative of egyptian royalty , though he might have 
  inscribe his name or title upon an oval . - Editor . 

 also on the right - hand side of this surface of the sherd , paint 
 obliquely in red on the space not cover by the uncial character , and 
 sign in blue paint , be the follow quaint inscription : - 

 in EARTH and SKIE and SEA 

 strange thynges THER be . 

 HOC FECIT 

 DOROTHEA VINCEY . 

 perfectly bewilder , I turn the relic over . it be cover from top 
 to bottom with note and signature in Greek , Latin , and English . the 
 first in uncial Greek be by tisisthene , the son to whom the writing 
 be address . it be , " I could not go . tisisthene to his son , 
 kallikrate . " here it be in fac - simile with its cursive equivalent : - 


 ΟΥΚΑΝΔΥΝΑΙΜΗΝΠΟΡΕΥΕϹéΑΙΤΙϹΙϹéΕΝΗϹΚΑΛΛΙΚΡΑΤΕΙΤΩΙΠΑΙΔΙ 

 οὐκ ἂν δυναίμην πορεύεσéαι . 
 Τισισéένης Καλλικράτει τῷ παιδί. 

 this Kallikrates   probably , in the greek fashion , so name after his 
 grandfather   evidently make some attempt to start on the quest , for his 
 entry write in very faint and almost illegible uncial be , " I cease 
 from my going , the god be against I . Kallikrates to his son . " here 
 it be also : - 


 ΤΩΝéΕΩΝΑΝΤΙΣΤΑΝΤΩΝΕΠΑΥΣΑΜΗΝΤΗΣΠΟΡΕΙΑΣΑΛΛΙΚΡΑΤΗΣΤΩΙΠΑΙΔΙ 

 τῶν éεῶν ἀντιστάντων ἐπαυσάμην τῆς 
 πορείας . καλλικράτης τῷ παιδί. 

 between these two ancient writing , the second of which be inscribe 
 upside down and be so faint and wear that , have it not be for the 
 transcript of it execute by Vincey , I should scarcely have be able to 
 read it , since , owe to its have be write on that portion of the 
 tile which have , in the course of age , undergo the most handling , it 
 be nearly rub out - be the bold , modern - look signature of one 
 Lionel Vincey , " ætate sua 17 , " which be write thereon , I think , by 
 Leo 's grandfather . to the right of this be the initial " J. B. V. , " 
 and below come a variety of greek signature , in uncial and cursive 
 character , and what appear to be some carelessly execute repetition 
 of the sentence τῷ παιδί   to my son , show that the relic 
 be religiously pass on from generation to generation . 

 the next legible thing after the greek signature be the word 
 " Romae , A.U.C. , " show that the family have now migrate to Rome . 
 unfortunately , however , with the exception of its termination   evi   the 
 date of their settlement there be for ever lose , for just where it have 
 be place a piece of the potsherd be break away . 

 then follow twelve latin signature , jot about here and there , 
 wherever there be a space upon the tile suitable to their inscription . 
 these signature , with three exception only , end with the name 
 " Vindex " or " the Avenger , " which seem to have be adopt by the 
 family after its migration to Rome as a kind of equivalent to the greek 
 " tisisthene , " which also mean an avenger . ultimately , as might be 
 expect , this latin cognoman of Vindex be transform first into De 
 Vincey , and then into the plain , modern Vincey . it be very curious 
 to observe how the idea of revenge , inspire by an Egyptian who live 
 before the time of Christ , be thus , as it be , embalm in an English 
 family name . 

 a few of the roman name inscribe upon the sherd I have actually since 
 find mention in history and other record . they be , if I remember 
 right , 

 MVSSIVS . VINDEX 

 SEX . VARIVS MARVLLVS 

 C. FVFIDIVS . C. F. VINDEX 

 and 

 LABERIA POMPEIANA . CONIVX . MACRINI . vindicis 

 this last being , of course , the name of a roman lady . 

 the follow list , however , comprise all the latin name upon the 
 sherd : - 

  C. CAECILIVS VINDEX 
  M. aimilivs VINDEX 
  SEX . VARIVS . MARVLLVS 
  Q. SOSIVS PRISCVS SENECIO VINDEX 
  L. valerivs COMINIVS VINDEX 
  SEX . OTACILIVS . M. F. 
  L. ATTIVS . VINDEX 
  MVSSIVS VINDEX 
  C. FVFIDIVS . C. F. VINDEX 
  LICINIVS FAVSTVS 
  LABERIA pompeiana CONIVX MACRINI vindicis 
  MANILIA LVCILLA CONIVX MARVLLI vindicis 

 after the roman name there be evidently a gap of very many century . 
 nobody will ever know now what be the history of the relic during those 
 dark age , or how it come to have be preserve in the family . my 
 poor friend Vincey have , it will be remember , tell I that his roman 
 ancestor finally settle in Lombardy , and when Charlemagne invade 
 it , return with he across the Alps , and make their home in Brittany , 
 whence they cross to England in the reign of Edward the Confessor . how 
 he know this I be not aware , for there be no reference to lombardy or 
 Charlemagne upon the tile , though , as will presently be see , there be a 
 reference to Brittany . to continue : the next entry on the sherd , if I 
 may except a long splash either of blood or red colour matter of 
 some sort , consist of two cross draw in red pigment , and probably 
 represent Crusaders ' sword , and a rather neat monogram   " D. V. " 
 in scarlet and blue , perhaps execute by that same Dorothea Vincey who 
 write , or rather paint , the doggrel couplet . to the left of this , 
 inscribe in faint blue , be the initial A. V. , and after they a date , 
 1800 . 

 then come what be perhaps as curious an entry as anything upon this 
 extraordinary relic of the past . it be execute in black letter , write 
 over the cross or Crusaders ' sword , and date fourteen hundred and 
 forty - five . as the good plan will be to allow it to speak for itself , I 
 here give the black - letter fac - simile , together with the original Latin 
 without the contraction , from which it will be see that the writer 
 be a fair mediæval latinist . also we discover what be still more 
 curious , an english version of the black - letter Latin . this , also 
 write in black letter , we find inscribe on a second parchment that 
 be in the coffer , apparently somewhat old in date than that on which 
 be inscribe the mediæval latin translation of the uncial Greek of 
 which I shall speak presently . this I also give in full . 

  Fac - simile of Black - Letter Inscription on the Sherd of Amenartas . 

 " Iſta reliq ia eſt valde miſticu   et myrificu   op s q d maiore 
 mei ex Armorica ſſ Brittania mi ore ſecu   co veheba t et q dm 
 ſc s cleric s ſe per p ri meo in manu ferebat q d pe itus illvd 
 deſtrueret , affirma s q d eſſet ab ipſo ſathana co flatu 
 preſtigioſa et dyabolica arte q re p ter mevs co fregit illvd 
 I   dvas p tes q s q dm ego Johs   de Vi ceto ſalvas ſervavi et 
 adaptavi ſicut ap paret die lu e p r   poſt feſt beate Mrie vir g 
 anni gr e mccccxlv . " 

  Expanded Version of the above Black - Letter Inscription . 

 " ista reliquia est valde misticum et myrificum opus , quod majores mei 
 ex Armorica , scilicet Britannia Minore , secum convehebant ; et et quidam 
 sanctus clericus semper patri meo in manu ferebat quod penitus illud 
 destrueret , affirmans quod esset ab ipso Sathana conflatum prestigiosa 
 et dyabolica arte , quare pater meus confregit illud in duas parte , quas 
 quidem ego Johannes de Vinceto salvas servavi et adaptavi sicut apparet 
 die lune proximo post festum beate Marie Virginis anni gratie MCCCCXLV . " 

  Fac - simile of the Old English Black - Letter Translation of the above 
 Latin Inscription from the Sherd of Amenartas find inscribe upon a 
 parchment . 

 " Thys rellike ys a ryghte mistycall worke    a marvaylous yᵉ whyche 
 myne auncetere afore tyme dyd conveigh hider wᵗ yᵐ ffrom Armoryke 
 whᵉ ys to ſeien Britaine yᵉ leſſe    a certayne holye clerke 
 ſhoulde allweye beare my ffadir on honde yᵗ he owghte uttirly ffor 
 to ffruſſhe yᵉ ſame affyrmynge yᵗ yt be ffourmyd    confflatyd 
 off ſathanas hym ſelffe by arte magike    dyvellyſſhe wherefore my 
 ffadir dyd take yᵉ ſame    to braſt yt yn tweyne but I John de Vincey 
 dyd ſave whool yᵉ tweye p tes therof    topeecyd yᵐ togydder agayne 
 ſoe as yee ſe on y s   daye mondaye next ffolowynge after yᵉ ffeeste 
 of ſeynte Marye yᵉ bleſſed vyrgyne yn yᵉ yeere of ſalvacioun 
 ffowertene hundreth    ffyve    ffowrti . " 

  Modernised Version of the above Black - Letter Translation . 

 " Thys rellike ys a ryghte mistycall worke and a marvaylous , ye whyche 
 myne auncetere aforetyme dyd conveigh hider with they from Armoryke 
 which ys to seien Britaine ye Lesse and a certayne holye clerke should 
 allweye beare my fadir on honde that he owghte uttirly for to frusshe 
 ye same , affyrmynge that yt be fourme and conflatye of Sathanas hym 
 selfe by arte magike and dyvellysshe wherefore my fadir dyd take ye same 
 and tobrast yt yn tweyne , but I , John de Vincey , dyd save whool ye tweye 
 part therof and topeecyd they togydder agayne soe as yee se , on this 
 daye mondaye next followynge after ye feeste of Seynte Marye ye bless 
 Vyrgyne yn ye yeere of Salvacioun fowertene hundreth and fyve and 
 fowerti . " 

 the next and , save one , last entry be Elizabethan , and date 1564 . " a 
 most strange historie , and one that do cost my father his life ; for in 
 seekynge for the place upon the east coast of Africa , his pinnance 
 be sink by a portuguese galleon off Lorenzo Marquez , and he himself 
 perish . - John Vincey . " 

 then come the last entry , apparently , to judge by the style of 
 writing , make by some representative of the family in the middle of the 
 eighteenth century . it be a misquotation of the well - know line in 
 Hamlet , and run thus : " there be more thing in Heaven and earth than 
 be dream of in your philosophy , Horatio . "   

      another thing that make I fix the date of this entry 
  at the middle of the eighteenth century be that , curiously 
  enough , I have an act copy of " Hamlet , " write about 
  1740 , in which these two line be misquote almost exactly 
  in the same way , and I have little doubt but that the Vincey 
  who write they on the potsherd hear they so misquoted at 
  that date . of course , the line really run : - 

  there be more thing in heaven and earth , Horatio , 
  than be dream of in your philosophy . - L. H. H. 

 and now there remain but one more document to be examine - namely , the 
 ancient black - letter transcription into mediæval Latin of the uncial 
 inscription on the sherd . as will be see , this translation be execute 
 and subscribe in the year 1495 , by a certain " learn man , " Edmundus 
 de Prato   Edmund Pratt   by name , licentiate in Canon Law , of Exeter 
 College , Oxford , who have actually be a pupil of Grocyn , the first 
 scholar who teach Greek in England .     no doubt , on the fame of this 
 new learning reach his ear , the Vincey of the day , perhaps that same 
 John de Vincey who year before have save the relic from destruction and 
 make the black - letter entry on the sherd in 1445 , hurry off to 
 Oxford to see if perchance it might avail to dissolve the secret of 
 the mysterious inscription . nor be he disappoint , for the learn 
 Edmundus be equal to the task . indeed his rendering be so excellent 
 an example of mediæval learning and latinity that , even at the risk of 
 sate the learn reader with too many antiquity , I have make up my 
 mind to give it in fac - simile , together with an expand version for the 
 benefit of those who find the contraction troublesome . the translation 
 have several peculiarity on which this be not the place to dwell , but I 
 would in pass call the attention of scholar to the passage " duxerunt 
 autem nos ad reginam advenaslasaniscoronantium , " which strike I as 
 a delightful rendering of the original , " ἤγαγον δὲ ὡς 
 βασίλειαν τὴν τῶν ξένους χύτραις 
 στεφανούντων . " 

      Grocyn , the instructor of Erasmus , study Greek under 
  Chalcondylas the Byzantine at Florence , and first lecture 
  in the Hall of Exeter College , Oxford , in 1491 . - Editor . 

  Mediæval Black - Letter Latin Translation of the Uncial 
  Inscription on the Sherd of Amenartas 

 Amenartas e gen . reg . egyptii uxor Callicratis ſacerdot   Iſidis 
 qua   dei fove t demonia atte du t filiol   ſuo Tiſiſtheni ia 
 moribu da ita ma dat : Effugi quo da   ex Egypto regna te Nectanebo 
 cu   patre tuo , p pter mei amore   pejerato . fugie tes aute   v ſus 
 Notu   trans mare et xxiiij I ſe p r litora Libye v ſus 
 orie te   errant   ubi eſt petra queda   m gna ſculpta inſtar 
 Ethiop   capit , deinde die iiij ab oſt   flum   m gni eiecti 
 p tim ſubmerſi ſumus p tim morbo mortui ſum : in fine aute   a 
 fer   ho I bs portabamur p r palud   et vada . ubi aviu   m titudo 
 celu   obu brat die x. donec advenim   ad cavu   que da   monte , 
 ubi olim m gna urb erat , caverne quoq   I m e ſe : duxeru t aute 
 nos ad regina   Advenaſlaſaniſcorona tiu   que magic   utebat 
 et peritia omniu   rer   et ſalte   pulcrit   et vigore 
 I ſe eſcibil   erat . Hec m gno patr   tui amore p culſa 
 p mu   q de   ei con ubiu   michi morte   parabat . poſtea v ro 
 recuſa te Callicrate amore mei et timore regine affecto nos p r 
 magica   abduxit p r vias horribil   ubi eſt puteus ille p fu dus , 
 cuius iuxta aditu   iacebat ſenior   philoſophi cadaver , et 
 adve ie tib   mo ſtravit flam a   Vite erecta , I star columne 
 voluta tis , voce emitte te   q ſi tonitrus : tu c p r igne 
 I petu nociuo exper tra ſiit et ia   ipsa ſeſe formoſior viſa 
 eſt . 

 Quib   fact   iuravit ſe patre   tuu   quoq   I m ortale 
 oſte ſura   eſſe , ſi I prius occiſa regine co tuberniu 
 mallet ; neq   eni   ipſa I occidere valuit , p pter noſtratu 
 m gica   cuius egomet p tem habeo . ille vero nichil huius geñ maluit , 
 manib ante ocul   paſſis ne mulier   formoſitate   adſpiceret : 
 poſtea eu   m gica p cuſſit arte , at mortuu   efferebat I de 
 cu   fletib   et vagitib , I p r timore   expulit ad oſtiu   m gni 
 flumiñ veliuoli porro in nave in qua te peperi , uix poſt die hvc 
 Athenas invecta ſu . at tu , O Tiſiſtheñ , ne q d quoru   ma do 
 nauci fac : neceſſe eni   eſt muliere   exquirere ſi qva Vite 
 myſteriu   I petre et vi dicare , qua tu   in te eſt , patre 
 tuu   Callierat   in regine morte . sin timore ſue aliq   cavſa re 
 reli quis I fecta , hoc ipſu   oi b   poſter   ma do du   bonvs 
 q s inveniatur qvi ignis lauacru   no   p rhorreſcet et p tentia 
 digñ do I abit   ho I u . 

 Talia dico incredibilia q de   at min e ñcta de reb   michi cognitis . 

 Hec Grece scripta Latine reddidit vir doctus Edm ds de Prato , in 
 Decretis Licenciatus e Coll . Exon : Oxon : doctiſſimi Grocyni quondam e 
 pupilli , Id. Apr. Aᵒ. Dn i. MCCCCLXXXXV . 

  Expanded Version of the above Mediæval Latin Translation 

 Amenartas , e genere regio Egyptii , uxor Callicratis , sacerdotis Isidis , 
 quam dei fovent demonia attendunt , filiolo suo Tisistheni jam moribunda 
 ita mandat : Effugi quodam ex Egypto , regnante Nectanebo , cum patre tuo , 
 propter mei amorem pejerato . fugiente autem versus Notum trans mare , 
 et viginti quatuor mense per litora Libye versus Orientem errante , 
 ubi est petra quedam magna sculpta instar Ethiopis capitis , deinde die 
 quatuor ab ostio fluminis magni ejecti partim submersi sumus partim 
 morbo mortui sumus : in fine autem a feris hominibus portabamur per 
 palude et vada , ubi avium multitudo celum obumbrat , die decem , donec 
 advenimus ad cavum quendam montem , ubi olim magna urb erat , caverne 
 quoque immense ; duxerunt autem nos ad reginam Advenaslasaniscoronantium , 
 que magicâ utebatur et peritiá omnium rerum , et saltem pulcritudine et 
 vigore insenescibilis erat . Hec magno patris tui amore perculsa , 
 primum quidem ei connubium michi mortem parabat ; postea vero , recusante 
 Callicrate , amore mei et timore regine affecto , nos per magicam abduxit 
 per via horribile ubi est puteus ille profundus , cuju juxta aditum 
 jacebat senioris philosophi cadaver , et advenientibus monstravit 
 flammam Vite erectam , instar columne voluntantis , vox emittentem quasi 
 tonitrus : tunc per ignem impetu nocivo expers transiit et jam ipsa sese 
 formosior visa est . 

 Quibus factis juravit se patrem tuum quoque immortalem ostensuram 
 esse , si me prius occisa regine contubernium mallet ; neque enim ipsa I 
 occidere valuit , propter nostratum magicam cuju egomet partem habeo . 
 Ille vero nichil hujus generis malebat , manibus ante oculo passis , ne 
 mulieris formositatem adspiceret : postea illum magica percussit arte , 
 at mortuum efferebat inde cum fletibus et vagitibus , et I per timorem 
 expulit ad ostium magni flumini , velivoli , porro in nave , in qua te 
 peperi , vix post die huc Athenas vecta sum . at tu , o tisisthene , ne 
 quid quorum mando nauci fac : necesse enim est mulierem exquirere si qua 
 Vite mysterium impetre et vindicare , quautum in te est , patrem tuum 
 Callieratem in regine morte . sin timore sue aliqua causa rem reliquis 
 infectam , hoc ipsum omnibus posteris mando , dum bonus quis inveniatur 
 qui ignis lavacrum non perhorrescet , et potentia dignus dominabitur 
 hominum . 

 Talia dico incredibilia quidem at minime ficta de rebus michi cognitis . 

 Hec Grece scripta Latine reddidit vir doctus Edmundus de Prato , in 
 Descretis Licenciatus , e Collegio Exoniensi Oxoniensi doctissimi Grocyni 
 quondam e pupilli , Idibus Aprilis Anno Domini MCCCCLXXXXV . 

 " well , " I say , when at length I have read out and carefully examine 
 these writing and paragraph , at least those of they that be still 
 easily legible , " that be the conclusion of the whole matter , Leo , and 
 now you can form your own opinion on it . I have already form mine . " 

 " and what be it ? " he ask , in his quick way . 

 " it be this . I believe that potsherd to be perfectly genuine , and that , 
 wonderful as it may seem , it have come down in your family from since 
 the fourth century before Christ . the entry absolutely prove it , and 
 therefore , however improbable it may seem , it must be accept . but 
 there I stop . that your remote ancestress , the egyptian princess , or 
 some scribe under her direction , write that which we see on the sherd 
 I have no doubt , nor have I the slight doubt but that her suffering 
 and the loss of her husband have turn her head , and that she be not 
 right in her mind when she do write it . " 

 " how do you account for what my father see and hear there ? " ask Leo . 

 " Coincidence . no doubt there be bluff on the coast of Africa that 
 look something like a man 's head , and plenty of people who speak bastard 
 Arabic . also , I believe that there be lot of swamp . another thing 
 be , Leo , and I be sorry to say it , but I do not believe that your poor 
 father be quite right when he write that letter . he have meet with 
 a great trouble , and also he have allow this story to prey on his 
 imagination , and he be a very imaginative man . anyway , I believe that 
 the whole thing be the most unmitigated rubbish . I know that there be 
 curious thing and force in nature which we rarely meet with , and , when 
 we do meet they , can not understand . but until I see it with my own eye , 
 which I be not likely to , I never will believe that there be any mean 
 of avoid death , even for a time , or that there be or be a white 
 sorceress live in the heart of an african swamp . it be bosh , my boy , 
 all bosh ! - what do you say , Job ? " 

 " I say , sir , that it be a lie , and , if it be true , I hope Mr. Leo will not 
 meddle with no such thing , for no good can not   come of it . " 

 " perhaps you be both right , " say Leo , very quietly . " I express no 
 opinion . but I say this . I be go to set the matter at rest once and 
 for all , and if you will not   come with I I will go by myself . " 

 I look at the young man , and see that he mean what he say . when Leo 
 mean what he say he always put on a curious look about the mouth . it 
 have be a trick of his from a child . now , as a matter of fact , I have no 
 intention of allow Leo to go anywhere by himself , for my own sake , if 
 not for his . I be far too attached to he for that . I be not a man 
 of many tie or affection . circumstance have be against I in this 
 respect , and man and woman shrink from I , or at least , I fancy that 
 they do , which come to the same thing , think , perhaps , that my 
 somewhat forbidding exterior be a key to my character . rather than 
 endure this , I have , to a great extent , seclude myself from the world , 
 and cut myself off from those opportunity which with most man result 
 in the formation of relation more or less intimate . therefore Leo be 
 all the world to I - brother , child , and friend - and until he weary of 
 I , where he go there I should go too . but , of course , it would not do 
 to let he see how great a hold he have over I ; so I cast about for some 
 mean whereby I might let myself down easy . 

 " yes , I shall go , Uncle ; and if I do not   find the ' rolling Pillar of 
 Life , ' at any rate I shall get some first - class shooting . " 

 here be my opportunity , and I take it . 

 " shooting ? " I say . " ah ! yes ; I never think of that . it must be a very 
 wild stretch of country , and full of big game . I have always want to 
 kill a buffalo before I die . do you know , my boy , I do not   believe in the 
 quest , but I do believe in big game , and really on the whole , if , after 
 think it over , you make up your mind to go , I will take a holiday , 
 and come with you . " 

 " ah , " say Leo , " I think that you would not lose such a chance . but 
 how about money ? we shall want a good lot . " 

 " you need not trouble about that , " I answer . " there be all your income 
 that have be accumulate for year , and besides that I have save 
 two - third of what your father leave to I , as I consider , in trust for 
 you . there be plenty of cash . " 

 " very well , then , we may as well stow these thing away and go up to 
 town to see about our gun . by the way , Job , be you come too ? it be 
 time you begin to see the world . " 

 " well , sir , " answer Job , stolidly , " I do not   hold much with foreign 
 part , but if both you gentleman be go you will want somebody to 
 look after you , and I be not the man to stop behind after serve you 
 for twenty year . " 

 " that be right , Job , " say I. " you will not   find out anything wonderful , but 
 you will get some good shooting . and now look here , both of you . I will not 
 have a word say to a live soul about this nonsense , " and I point 
 to the potsherd . " if it get out , and anything happen to I , my next of 
 kin would dispute my will on the ground of insanity , and I should become 
 the laugh stock of Cambridge . " 

 that day three month we be on the ocean , bind for Zanzibar . 



 IV 

 the SQUALL 

 how different be the scene that I have now to tell from that which have 
 just be tell ! go be the quiet college room , go the wind - sway 
 english elm , the caw rook , and the familiar volume on the shelf , 
 and in their place there rise a vision of the great calm ocean gleaming 
 in shade silver light beneath the beam of the full african moon . a 
 gentle breeze fill the huge sail of our dhow , and draw we through 
 the water that ripple musically against her side . Most of the man be 
 sleep forward , for it be near midnight , but a stout swarthy Arab , 
 mahome by name , stand at the tiller , lazily steer by the star . 
 three mile or more to our starboard be a low dim line . it be the 
 eastern shore of Central Africa . we be run to the southward , before 
 the North East Monsoon , between the mainland and the reef that for 
 hundred of mile fringe this perilous coast . the night be quiet , so 
 quiet that a whisper can be hear fore and aft the dhow ; so quiet that a 
 faint boom sound roll across the water to we from the distant land . 

 the Arab at the tiller hold up his hand , and say one word : - " simba 
  lion ! " 

 we all sit up and listen . then it come again , a slow , majestic sound , 
 that thrill we to the marrow . 

 " to - morrow by ten o'clock , " I say , " we ought , if the Captain be not out 
 in his reckoning , which I think very probable , to make this mysterious 
 rock with a man 's head , and begin our shooting . " 

 " and begin our search for the ruin city and the Fire of Life , " 
 correct Leo , take his pipe from his mouth , and laugh a little . 

 " nonsense ! " I answer . " you be air your Arabic with that man at 
 the tiller this afternoon . what do he tell you ? he have be trade 
  slave - trading , probably   up and down these latitude for half of his 
 iniquitous life , and once land on this very ' man ' rock . do he ever 
 hear anything of the ruin city or the cave ? " 

 " no , " answer Leo . " he say that the country be all swamp behind , and 
 full of snake , especially python , and game , and that no man live 
 there . but then there be a belt of swamp all along the east African 
 coast , so that do not go for much . " 

 " yes , " I say , " it do - it go for malaria . you see what sort of an 
 opinion these gentry have of the country . not one of they will go with 
 we . they think that we be mad , and upon my word I believe that they be 
 right . if ever we see old England again I shall be astonish . however , 
 it do not greatly matter to I at my age , but I be anxious for you , 
 Leo , and for Job . it be a Tom Fool 's business , my boy . " 

 " all right , Uncle Horace . so far as I be concern , I be willing to take 
 my chance . look ! what be that cloud ? " and he point to a dark blotch 
 upon the starry sky , some mile astern of we . 

 " go and ask the man at the tiller , " I say . 

 he rise , stretch his arm , and go . presently he return . 

 " he say it be a squall , but it will pass far on one side of we . " 

 just then Job come up , look very stout and english in his 
 shooting - suit of brown flannel , and with a sort of perplexed appearance 
 upon his honest round face that have be very common with he since he 
 get into these strange water . 

 " please , sir , " he say , touch his sun hat , which be stick on to the 
 back of his head in a somewhat ludicrous fashion , " as we have get all 
 those gun and thing in the whale - boat astern , to say nothing of the 
 provision in the locker , I think it would be good if I get down and 
 sleep in she . I do not   like the look "   here he drop his voice to a 
 portentous whisper   " of these black gentry ; they have such a wonderful 
 thievish way about they . suppose now that some of they be to slip 
 into the boat at night and cut the cable , and make off with she ? that 
 would be a pretty go , that would . " 

 the whale - boat , I may explain , be one specially build for we at Dundee , 
 in Scotland . we have bring it with we , as we know that this coast be a 
 network of creek , and that we might require something to navigate 
 they with . she be a beautiful boat , thirty - foot in length , with a 
 centre - board for sailing , copper - bottomed to keep the worm out of she , 
 and full of water - tight compartment . the Captain of the dhow have tell 
 we that when we reach the rock , which he know , and which appear to 
 be identical with the one describe upon the sherd and by Leo 's father , 
 he would probably not be able to run up to it on account of the shallow 
 and breaker . therefore we have employ three hour that very morning , 
 whilst we be totally becalm , the wind have drop at sunrise , 
 in transfer most of our good and chattel to the whale - boat , 
 and place the gun , ammunition , and preserve provision in the 
 water - tight locker specially prepared for they , so that when we do 
 sight the fabled rock we should have nothing to do but step into the 
 boat , and run she ashore . another reason that induce we to take this 
 precautionary step be that arab captain be apt to run past the point 
 that they be make , either from carelessness or owe to a mistake in 
 its identity . now , as sailor know , it be quite impossible for a dhow 
 which be only rig to run before the monsoon to beat back against it . 
 therefore we get our boat ready to row for the rock at any moment . 

 " well , Job , " I say , " perhaps it would be as well . there be lot of 
 blanket there , only be careful to keep out of the moon , or it may turn 
 your head or blind you . " 

 " Lord , sir ! I do not   think it would much matter if it do ; it be that 
 turn already with the sight of these blackamoor and their filthy , 
 thieving way . they be only fit for muck , they be ; and they smell bad 
 enough for it already . " 

 Job , it will be perceive , be no admirer of the manner and custom of 
 our dark - skin brother . 

 accordingly we haul up the boat by the tow - rope till it be right 
 under the stern of the dhow , and Job bundle into she with all the grace 
 of a fall sack of potato . then we return and sit down on the deck 
 again , and smoke and talk in little gust and jerk . the night be so 
 lovely , and our brain be so full of suppress excitement of one sort 
 and another , that we do not feel inclined to turn in . for nearly an 
 hour we sit thus , and then , I think , we both doze off . at least I have 
 a faint recollection of Leo sleepily explain that the head be not a 
 bad place to hit a buffalo , if you could catch he exactly between the 
 horn , or send your bullet down his throat , or some nonsense of the 
 sort . 

 then I remember no more ; till suddenly - a frightful roar of wind , a 
 shriek of terror from the awakening crew , and a whip - like sting of water 
 in our face . some of the man run to let go the haulyard and lower the 
 sail , but the parrel jam and the yard would not come down . I spring 
 to my foot and hang on to a rope . the sky aft be dark as pitch , but the 
 moon still shine brightly ahead of we and light up the blackness . beneath 
 its sheen a huge white - top breaker , twenty foot high or more , be 
 rush on to we . it be on the break - the moon shine on its crest and 
 tip its foam with light . on it rush beneath the inky sky , drive by 
 the awful squall behind it . suddenly , in the twinkling of an eye , I see 
 the black shape of the whale - boat cast high into the air on the crest of 
 the break wave . then - a shock of water , a wild rush of boiling foam , 
 and I be cling for my life to the shroud , ay , sweep straight out 
 from it like a flag in a gale . 

 we be poope . 

 the wave pass . it seem to I that I be under water for 
 minute - really it be second . I look forward . the blast have tear out 
 the great sail , and high in the air it be flutter away to leeward 
 like a huge wound bird . then for a moment there be comparative calm , 
 and in it I hear Job 's voice yell wildly , " come here to the boat . " 

 Bewildered and half - drown as I be , I have the sense to rush aft . I 
 feel the dhow sink under I - she be full of water . under her counter 
 the whale - boat be toss furiously , and I see the Arab Mahomed , who 
 have be steer , leap into she . I give one desperate pull at the 
 tow - rope to bring the boat alongside . wildly I spring also , Job catch 
 I by the arm and I roll into the bottom of the boat . down go the 
 dhow bodily , and as she do so Mahomed draw his curved knife and sever 
 the fibre - rope by which we be fast to she , and in another second we 
 be drive before the storm over the place where the dhow have be . 

 " Great God ! " I shriek , " where be Leo ? Leo ! Leo ! " 

 " he be go , sir , God help he ! " roar Job into my ear ; and such be the 
 fury of the squall that his voice sound like a whisper . 

 I wring my hand in agony . Leo be drown , and I be leave alive to 
 mourn he . 

 " look out , " yell Job ; " here come another . " 

 I turn ; a second huge wave be overtake we . I half hop that it 
 would drown I . with a curious fascination I watch its awful advent . 
 the moon be nearly hide now by the wreath of the rush storm , but 
 a little light still catch the crest of the devouring breaker . there 
 be something dark on it - a piece of wreckage . it be on we now , and 
 the boat be nearly full of water . but she be build in air - tight 
 compartment - Heaven bless the man who invent they ! - and lift up 
 through it like a swan . through the foam and turmoil I see the black 
 thing on the wave hurry right at I . I put out my right arm to ward 
 it from I , and my hand close on another arm , the wrist of which my 
 finger grip like a vice . I be a very strong man , and have something 
 to hold to , but my arm be nearly tear from its socket by the strain and 
 weight of the float body . have the rush last another two second I 
 might either have let go or go with it . but it pass , leave we up 
 to our knee in water . 

 " bail out ! bail out ! " shout Job , suit the action to the word . 

 but I could not bail just then , for as the moon go out and leave we in 
 total darkness , one faint , fly ray of light light upon the face of the 
 man I have grip , who be now half lie , half float in the bottom 
 of the boat . 

 it be Leo . Leo bring back by the wave - back , dead or alive , from the 
 very jaw of Death . 

 " bail out ! bail out ! " yell Job , " or we shall founder . " 

 I seize a large tin bowl with a handle to it , which be fix under one 
 of the seat , and the three of we bail away for dear life . the furious 
 tempest drive over and round we , fling the boat this way and that , 
 the wind and the storm wreath and the sheet of sting spray blind 
 and bewilder we , but through it all we work like demon with the 
 wild exhilaration of despair , for even despair can exhilarate . one 
 minute ! three minute ! six minute ! the boat begin to lighten , and no 
 fresh wave swamp we . five minute more , and she be fairly clear . 
 then , suddenly , above the awful shrieking of the hurricane come a 
 duller , deep roar . Great Heavens ! it be the voice of breaker ! 

 at that moment the moon begin to shine forth again - this time behind the 
 path of the squall . out far across the torn bosom of the ocean shoot the 
 ragged arrow of her light , and there , half a mile ahead of we , be a 
 white line of foam , then a little space of open - mouthed blackness , and 
 then another line of white . it be the breaker , and their roar grow 
 clear and yet more clear as we speed down upon they like a swallow . 
 there they be , boil up in snowy spout of spray , smite and 
 gnash together like the gleam tooth of hell . 

 " take the tiller , Mahomed ! " I roar in Arabic . " we must try and shoot 
 they . " at the same moment I seize an oar , and get it out , motion to 
 Job to do likewise . 

 mahome clamber aft , and get hold of the tiller , and with some 
 difficulty Job , who have sometimes pull a tub upon the homely cam , get 
 out his oar . in another minute the boat 's head be straight on to the 
 ever - near foam , towards which she plunge and tear with the speed 
 of a racehorse . just in front of we the first line of breaker seem 
 a little thin than to the right or leave - there be a cap of rather 
 deep water . I turn and point to it . 

 " steer for your life , Mahomed ! " I yell . he be a skilful steersman , 
 and well acquaint with the danger of this most perilous coast , and I 
 see he grip the tiller , bend his heavy frame forward , and stare at the 
 foaming terror till his big round eye look as though they would start 
 out of his head . the send of the sea be drive the boat 's head round 
 to starboard . if we strike the line of breaker fifty yard to starboard 
 of the gap we must sink . it be a great field of twisting , spouting 
 wave . Mahomed plant his foot against the seat before he , and , 
 glance at he , I see his brown toe spread out like a hand with the 
 weight he put upon they as he take the strain of the tiller . she come 
 round a bit , but not enough . I roar to Job to back water , whilst I 
 drag and labour at my oar . she answer now , and none too soon . 

 Heavens , we be in they ! and then follow a couple of minute of 
 heart - break excitement such as I can not hope to describe . all that I 
 remember be a shriek sea of foam , out of which the billow rise here , 
 there , and everywhere like avenge ghost from their ocean grave . once 
 we be turn right round , but either by chance , or through Mahomed 's 
 skilful steering , the boat 's head come straight again before a breaker 
 fill we . one more - a monster . we be through it or over it - more 
 through than over - and then , with a wild yell of exultation from the 
 Arab , we shoot out into the comparative smooth water of the mouth of sea 
 between the tooth - like line of gnashing wave . 

 but we be nearly full of water again , and not more than half a mile 
 ahead be the second line of breaker . again we set to and bail 
 furiously . fortunately the storm have now quite go by , and the moon 
 shine brightly , reveal a rocky headland run half a mile or more 
 out into the sea , of which this second line of breaker appear to be 
 a continuation . at any rate , they boil around its foot . probably the 
 ridge that form the headland run out into the ocean , only at a low 
 level , and make the reef also . this headland be terminate by a curious 
 peak that seem not to be more than a mile away from we . just as we get 
 the boat pretty clear for the second time , Leo , to my immense relief , 
 open his eye and remark that the clothe have tumble off the bed , 
 and that he suppose it be time to get up for chapel . I tell he to 
 shut his eye and keep quiet , which he do without in the slight 
 degree realize the position . as for myself , his reference to chapel 
 make I reflect , with a sort of sick longing , on my comfortable room 
 at Cambridge . why have I be such a fool as to leave they ? this be a 
 reflection that have several time recur to I since , and with an 
 ever - increase force . 

 but now again we be drift down on the breaker , though with 
 lessen speed , for the wind have fall , and only the current or the 
 tide   it afterwards turn out to be the tide   be drive we . 

 another minute , and with a sort of howl to Allah from the Arab , a pious 
 ejaculation from myself , and something that be not pious from Job , 
 we be in they . and then the whole scene , down to our final escape , 
 repeat itself , only not quite so violently . Mahomed 's skilful steering 
 and the air - tight compartment save our life . in five minute we be 
 through , and drift - for we be too exhausted to do anything to 
 help ourselves except keep her head straight - with the most startling 
 rapidity round the headland which I have describe . 

 round we go with the tide , until we get well under the lee of the 
 point , and then suddenly the speed slacken , we cease to make way , 
 and finally appear to be in dead water . the storm have entirely pass , 
 leave a clean - washed sky behind it ; the headland intercept the heavy 
 sea that have be occasion by the squall , and the tide , which have 
 be run so fiercely up the river   for we be now in the mouth of a 
 river , be sluggish before it turn , so we float quietly , and before 
 the moon go down manage to bail out the boat thoroughly and get she 
 a little ship - shape . Leo be sleep profoundly , and on the whole I 
 think it wise not to wake he . it be true he be sleep in wet 
 clothe , but the night be now so warm that I think   and so do Job 
 that they be not likely to injure a man of his unusually vigorous 
 constitution . besides , we have no dry one at hand . 

 presently the moon go down , and leave we float on the water , now 
 only heave like some troubled woman 's breast , with leisure to reflect 
 upon all that we have go through and all that we have escape . Job 
 station himself at the bow , Mahomed keep his post at the tiller , and I 
 sit on a seat in the middle of the boat close to where Leo be lie . 

 the moon go slowly down in chastened loveliness ; she depart like 
 some sweet bride into her chamber , and long veil - like shadow creep up 
 the sky through which the star peep shyly out . soon , however , they 
 too begin to pale before a splendour in the east , and then the quivering 
 footstep of the dawn come rush across the new - bear blue , and shake 
 the high star from their place . quieter and yet more quiet grow the 
 sea , quiet as the soft mist that brood on her bosom , and cover up 
 her troubling , as the illusive wreath of sleep brood upon a pain - rack 
 mind , cause it to forget its sorrow . from the east to the west 
 speed the angel of the Dawn , from sea to sea , from mountain - top to 
 mountain - top , scatter light with both their hand . on they speed out 
 of the darkness , perfect , glorious , like spirit of the just breaking 
 from the tomb ; on , over the quiet sea , over the low coastline , and the 
 swamp beyond , and the mountain above they ; over those who sleep in 
 peace and those who wake in sorrow ; over the evil and the good ; over the 
 living and the dead ; over the wide world and all that breathe or have 
 breathe thereon . 

 it be a wonderfully beautiful sight , and yet sad , perhaps , from the 
 very excess of its beauty . the arise sun ; the set sun ! there we 
 have the symbol and the type of humanity , and all thing with which 
 humanity have to do . the symbol and the type , yes , and the earthly 
 beginning , and the end also . and on that morning this come home to I 
 with a peculiar force . the sun that rise to - day for we have set last 
 night for eighteen of our fellow - voyager ! - have set everlastingly for 
 eighteen whom we know ! 

 the dhow have go down with they , they be toss about among the 
 rock and seaweed , so much human drift on the great ocean of Death ! and 
 we four be save . but one day a sunrise will come when we shall be 
 among those who be lose , and then other will watch those glorious 
 ray , and grow sad in the midst of beauty , and dream of death in the 
 full glow of arise life ! 

 for this be the lot of man . 



 V 

 the head of the ETHIOPIAN 

 at length the herald and forerunner of the royal sun have do their 
 work , and , search out the shadow , have cause they to flee away . 
 then up he come in glory from his ocean - bed , and flood the earth 
 with warmth and light . I sit there in the boat listen to the gentle 
 lapping of the water and watch he rise , till presently the slight 
 drift of the boat bring the odd - shaped rock , or peak , at the end of 
 the promontory which we have weather with so much peril , between I 
 and the majestic sight , and blot it from my view . I still continue , 
 however , to stare at the rock , absently enough , till presently it become 
 edge with the fire of the grow light behind it , and then I start , 
 as well I might , for I perceive that the top of the peak , which be 
 about eighty foot high by one hundred and fifty foot thick at its base , 
 be shape like a negro 's head and face , whereon be stamp a most 
 fiendish and terrifying expression . there be no doubt about it ; there 
 be the thick lip , the fat cheek , and the squat nose stand out 
 with startling clearness against the flame background . there , too , be 
 the round skull , wash into shape perhaps by thousand of year of 
 wind and weather , and , to complete the resemblance , there be a scrubby 
 growth of weed or lichen upon it , which against the sun look for all 
 the world like the wool on a colossal negro 's head . it certainly be 
 very odd ; so odd that now I believe it be not a mere freak of nature but 
 a gigantic monument fashion , like the well - know Egyptian Sphinx , by a 
 forget people out of a pile of rock that lend itself to their 
 design , perhaps as an emblem of warning and defiance to any enemy who 
 approach the harbour . unfortunately we be never able to ascertain 
 whether or not this be the case , inasmuch as the rock be difficult of 
 access both from the land and the waterside , and we have other thing 
 to attend to . myself , consider the matter by the light of what we 
 afterwards see , I believe that it be fashion by man , but whether or 
 not this be so , there it stand , and sullenly stare from age to age out 
 across the change sea - there it stand two thousand year and more 
 ago , when Amenartas , the egyptian princess , and the wife of Leo 's remote 
 ancestor Kallikrates , gaze upon its devilish face - and there I have no 
 doubt it will still stand when as many century as be number between 
 her day and our own be add to the year that bear we to oblivion . 

 " what do you think of that , Job ? " I ask of our retainer , who be 
 sit on the edge of the boat , try to get as much sunshine as 
 possible , and generally look uncommonly wretche , and I point to 
 the fiery and demonical head . 

 " oh Lord , sir , " answer Job , who now perceive the object for the first 
 time , " I think that the old geneleman must have be sit for his 
 portrait on they rock . " 

 I laugh , and the laugh wake up Leo . 

 " Hullo , " he say , " what be the matter with I ? I be all stiff - where be 
 the dhow ? give I some brandy , please . " 

 " you may be thankful that you be not stiff , my boy , " I answer . " the 
 dhow be sink , everybody on board she be drown with the exception of 
 we four , and your own life be only save by a miracle " ; and whilst Job , 
 now that it be light enough , search about in a locker for the brandy 
 for which Leo ask , I tell he the history of our night 's adventure . 

 " Great Heavens ! " he say faintly ; " and to think that we should have be 
 choose to live through it ! " 

 by this time the brandy be forthcoming , and we all have a good pull at 
 it , and thankful enough we be for it . also the sun be begin to 
 get strength , and warm our chilled bone , for we have be wet through 
 for five hour or more . 

 " why , " say Leo , with a gasp as he put down the brandy bottle , " there 
 be the head the writing talk of , the ' rock carven like the head of an 
 Ethiopian . ' " 

 " yes , " I say , " there it be . " 

 " well , then , " he answer , " the whole thing be true . " 

 " I do not   see at all that that follow , " I answer . " we know this head 
 be here : your father see it . very likely it be not the same head that 
 the writing talk of ; or if it be , it prove nothing . " 

 Leo smile at I in a superior way . " you be an unbelieve Jew , Uncle 
 Horace , " he say . " those who live will see . " 

 " exactly so , " I answer , " and now perhaps you will observe that we be 
 drift across a sandbank into the mouth of the river . get hold of your 
 oar , Job , and we will row in and see if we can find a place to land . " 

 the river mouth which we be enter do not appear to be a very wide 
 one , though as yet the long bank of steam mist that clung about 
 its shore have not lift sufficiently to enable we to see its exact 
 measure . there be , as be the case with nearly every east african river , 
 a considerable bar at the mouth , which , no doubt , when the wind be on 
 shore and the tide run out , be absolutely impassable even for a 
 boat draw only a few inch . but as thing be it be manageable 
 enough , and we do not ship a cupful of water . in twenty minute we be 
 well across it , with but slight assistance from ourselves , and be 
 carry by a strong though somewhat variable breeze well up the harbour . 
 by this time the mist be be suck up by the sun , which be get 
 uncomfortably hot , and we see that the mouth of the little estuary be 
 here about half a mile across , and that the bank be very marshy , and 
 crowd with crocodile lie about on the mud like log . about a mile 
 ahead of we , however , be what appear to be a strip of firm land , and 
 for this we steer . in another quarter of an hour we be there , and 
 make the boat fast to a beautiful tree with broad shin leaf , and 
 flower of the magnolia species , only they be rise - colour and 
 not white ,     which hang over the water , we disembark . this do we 
 undressed , wash ourselves , and spread our clothe , together with the 
 content of the boat , in the sun to dry , which they very quickly do . 
 then , take shelter from the sun under some tree , we make a hearty 
 breakfast off a " Paysandu " potted tongue , of which we have bring a good 
 quantity with we , congratulate ourselves loudly on our good fortune 
 in have load and provision the boat on the previous day before the 
 hurricane destroy the dhow . by the time that we have finish our meal 
 our clothe be quite dry , and we hasten to get into they , feel 
 not a little refresh . indeed , with the exception of weariness and 
 a few bruise , none of we be the bad for the terrifying adventure 
 which have be fatal to all our companion . Leo , it be true , have be 
 half - drown , but that be no great matter to a vigorous young athlete of 
 five - and - twenty . 

      there be a know specie of magnolia with pink flower . 
  it be indigenous in Sikkim , and know as Magnolia 
  Campbellii . - Editor . 

 after breakfast we start to look about we . we be on a strip of dry 
 land about two hundred yard broad by five hundred long , border on one 
 side by the river , and on the other three by endless desolate swamp , 
 that stretch as far as the eye could reach . this strip of land be 
 raise about twenty - five foot above the plain of the surround swamp 
 and the river level : indeed it have every appearance of have be make 
 by the hand of man . 

 " this place have be a wharf , " say Leo , dogmatically . 

 " nonsense , " I answer . " who would be stupid enough to build a wharf 
 in the middle of these dreadful marsh in a country inhabit by 
 savage - that be , if it be inhabit at all ? " 

 " perhaps it be not always marsh , and perhaps the people be not 
 always savage , " he say drily , look down the steep bank , for we be 
 stand by the river . " look there , " he go on , point to a spot 
 where the hurricane of the previous night have tear up one of the 
 magnolia tree by the root , which have grow on the extreme edge of the 
 bank just where it slop down to the water , and lift a large cake of 
 earth with they . " be not that stonework ? if not , it be very like it . " 

 " nonsense , " I say again , but we clamber down to the spot , and get 
 between the upturned root and the bank . 

 " well ? " he say . 

 but I do not answer this time . I only whistle . for there , lay bare by 
 the removal of the earth , be an undoubted facing of solid stone lay in 
 large block and bind together with brown cement , so hard that I could 
 make no impression on it with the file in my shooting - knife . nor be 
 this all ; see something project through the soil at the bottom of 
 the bared patch of wall , I remove the loose earth with my hand , and 
 reveal a huge stone ring , a foot or more in diameter , and about three 
 inch thick . this fairly stagger I . 

 " look rather like a wharf where good - sized vessel have be moor , 
 do it not , Uncle Horace ? " say Leo , with an excited grin . 

 I try to say " nonsense " again , but the word stick in my throat - the 
 ring speak for itself . in some past age vessel have be moor there , 
 and this stone wall be undoubtedly the remnant of a solidly construct 
 wharf . probably the city to which it have belong lie bury beneath the 
 swamp behind it . 

 " begin to look as though there be something in the story after all , 
 Uncle Horace , " say the exultant Leo ; and reflect on the mysterious 
 negro 's head and the equally mysterious stonework , I make no direct 
 reply . 

 " a country like Africa , " I say , " be sure to be full of the relic 
 of long dead and forget civilisation . nobody know the age of the 
 egyptian civilisation , and very likely it have offshoot . then there be 
 the Babylonians and the Phœnicians , and the Persians , and all manner 
 of people , all more or less civilised , to say nothing of the Jews whom 
 everybody ' want ' nowadays . it be possible that they , or any one of 
 they , may have have colony or trading station about here . remember 
 those bury persian city that the consul show we at Kilwa . "   

     Near Kilwa , on the East Coast of Africa , about 400 mile south of 
 Zanzibar , be a cliff which have be recently wash by the wave . on the 
 top of this cliff be persian tomb know to be at least seven century 
 old by the date still legible upon they . beneath these tomb be a layer 
 of débris represent a city . far down the cliff be a second 
 layer represent an old city , and far down still a third layer , 
 the remain of yet another city of vast and unknown antiquity . 
 beneath the bottom city be recently find some specimen of glaze 
 earthenware , such as be occasionally to be meet with on that coast to 
 this day . I believe that they be now in the possession of Sir John 
 Kirk . - Editor . 

 " quite so , " say Leo , " but that be not what you say before . " 

 " well , what be to be do now ? " I ask , turn the conversation . 

 as no answer be forthcoming we walk to the edge of the swamp , and 
 look over it . it be apparently boundless , and vast flock of 
 every sort of waterfowl fly from its recess , till it be sometimes 
 difficult to see the sky . now that the sun be get high it draw thin 
 sickly look cloud of poisonous vapour from the surface of the marsh 
 and from the scummy pool of stagnant water . 

 " two thing be clear to I , " I say , address my three companion , 
 who star at this spectacle in dismay : " first , that we can not   go across 
 there "   I point to the swamp , " and , secondly , that if we stop here we 
 shall certainly die of fever . " 

 " that be as clear as a haystack , sir , " say Job . 

 " very well , then ; there be two alternative before we . one be to 'bout 
 ship , and try and run for some port in the whale - boat , which would be 
 a sufficiently risky proceeding , and the other to sail or row on up the 
 river , and see where we come to . " 

 " I do not   know what you be go to do , " say Leo , set his mouth , 
 " but I be go up that river . " 

 Job turn up the white of his eye and groan , and the Arab murmur 
 " Allah , " and groan also . as for I , I remark sweetly that as we 
 seem to be between the devil and the deep sea , it do not much matter 
 where we go . but in reality I be as anxious to proceed as Leo . the 
 colossal negro 's head and the stone wharf have excite my curiosity to an 
 extent of which I be secretly ashamed , and I be prepared to gratify it 
 at any cost . accordingly , have carefully fit the mast , restowe 
 the boat , and get out our rifle , we embark . fortunately the wind 
 be blow on shore from the ocean , so we be able to hoist the sail . 
 indeed , we afterwards find out that as a general rule the wind set on 
 shore from daybreak for some hour , and off shore again at sunset , and 
 the explanation that I offer of this be , that when the earth be cool 
 by the dew and the night the hot air rise , and the draught rush in 
 from the sea till the sun have once more heat it through . at least that 
 appear to be the rule here . 

 take advantage of this favour wind , we sail merrily up the river 
 for three or four hour . once we come across a school of hippopotami , 
 which rise , and bellow dreadfully at we within ten or a dozen fathom 
 of the boat , much to Job 's alarm , and , I will confess , to my own . these 
 be the first hippopotami that we have ever see , and , to judge by their 
 insatiable curiosity , I should judge that we be the first white man 
 that they have ever see . upon my word , I once or twice think that they 
 be come into the boat to gratify it . Leo want to fire at they , 
 but I dissuade he , fear the consequence . also , we see hundred of 
 crocodile bask on the muddy bank , and thousand upon thousand 
 of water - fowl . some of these we shoot , and among they be a wild goose , 
 which , in addition to the sharp - curved spur on its wing , have a spur 
 about three - quarter of an inch long grow from the skull just between 
 the eye . we never shoot another like it , so I do not know if it be 
 a ' sport " or a distinct specie . in the latter case this incident may 
 interest naturalist . Job name it the Unicorn Goose . 

 about midday the sun grow intensely hot , and the stench draw up by it 
 from the marsh which the river drain be something too awful , and 
 cause we instantly to swallow precautionary dos of quinine . shortly 
 afterwards the breeze die away altogether , and as row our heavy boat 
 against stream in the heat be out of the question , we be thankful 
 enough to get under the shade of a group of tree - a species of 
 willow - that grow by the edge of the river , and lie there and gasp till 
 at length the approach of sunset put a period to our misery . see 
 what appear to be an open space of water straight ahead of we , we 
 determine to row there before settle what to do for the night . just 
 as we be about to loosen the boat , however , a beautiful waterbuck , 
 with great horn curve forward , and a white stripe across the rump , 
 come down to the river to drink , without perceive we hide away 
 within fifty yard under the willow . Leo be the first to catch sight 
 of it , and , be an ardent sportsman , thirst for the blood of 
 big game , about which he have be dream for month , he instantly 
 stiffen all over , and point like a setter dog . see what be the 
 matter , I hand he his express rifle , at the same time take my own . 

 " now then , " I whisper , " mind you do not   miss . " 

 " Miss ! " he whisper back contemptuously ; " I could not miss it if I 
 try . " 

 he lift the rifle , and the roan - colour buck , have drink his fill , 
 raise his head and look out across the river . he be stand right 
 against the sunset sky on a little eminence , or ridge of ground , which 
 run across the swamp , evidently a favourite path for game , and there 
 be something very beautiful about he . indeed , I do not think that if 
 I live to a hundred I shall ever forget that desolate and yet most 
 fascinating scene ; it be stamp upon my memory . to the right and 
 leave be wide stretch of lonely death - breeding swamp , unbroken and 
 unrelieve so far as the eye could reach , except here and there by pond 
 of black and peaty water that , mirror - like , flash up the red ray 
 of the set sun . behind we and before stretch the vista of the 
 sluggish river , end in glimpse of a reed - fringe lagoon , on the 
 surface of which the long light of the evening play as the faint 
 breeze stir the shadow . to the west loom the huge red ball of the 
 sink sun , now vanish down the vapoury horizon , and fill the 
 great heaven , high across whose arch the crane and wildfowl stream 
 in line , square , and triangle , with flash of fly gold and the lurid 
 stain of blood . and then ourselves - three modern Englishmen in a 
 modern english boat - seem to jar upon and look out of tone with that 
 measureless desolation ; and in front of we the noble buck limn out 
 upon a background of ruddy sky . 

  Bang ! away he go with a mighty bound . Leo have miss he . Bang ! 
 right under he again . now for a shot . I must have one , though he be 
 go like an arrow , and a hundred yard away and more . by Jove ! over 
 and over and over ! " well , I think I have   wipe your eye there , Master 
 Leo , " I say , struggle against the ungenerous exultation that in such 
 a supreme moment of one 's existence will rise in the well - mannered 
 sportsman 's breast . 

 " confound you , yes , " growl Leo ; and then , with that quick smile that 
 be one of his charm light up his handsome face like a ray of light , 
 " I beg your pardon , old fellow . I congratulate you ; it be a lovely 
 shot , and mine be vile . " 

 we get out of the boat and run to the buck , which be shoot through the 
 spine and stone dead . it take we a quarter of an hour or more to clean 
 it and cut off as much of the good meat as we could carry , and , 
 have pack this away , we have barely light enough to row up into the 
 lagoon - like space , into which , there be a hollow in the swamp , the 
 river here expand . just as the light vanish we cast anchor about 
 thirty fathom from the edge of the lake . we do not dare to go ashore , 
 not know if we should find dry ground to camp on , and greatly fear 
 the poisonous exhalation from the marsh , from which we think we 
 should be free on the water . so we light a lantern , and make our 
 evening meal off another potted tongue in the good fashion that we 
 could , and then prepare to go to sleep , only , however , to find that 
 sleep be impossible . for , whether they be attract by the lantern , 
 or by the unaccustomed smell of a white man for which they have be 
 wait for the last thousand year or so , I know not ; but certainly we 
 be presently attack by ten of thousand of the most blood - thirsty , 
 pertinacious , and huge mosquito that I ever see or read of . in cloud 
 they come , and ping and buzz and bit till we be nearly mad . 
 Tobacco smoke only seem to stir they into a merry and more active 
 life , till at length we be drive to cover ourselves with blanket , 
 head and all , and sit to slowly stew and continually scratch and 
 swear beneath they . and as we sit , suddenly roll out like thunder 
 through the silence come the deep roar of a lion , and then of a second 
 lion , move among the reed within sixty yard of we . 

 " I say , " say Leo , stick his head out from under his blanket , " lucky 
 we be not   on the bank , eh , Avuncular ? "   Leo sometimes address I in 
 this disrespectful way .   " curse it ! a mosquito have bite I on the 
 nose , " and the head vanish again . 

 shortly after this the moon come up , and notwithstanding every variety 
 of roar that echo over the water to we from the lion on the bank , we 
 begin , think ourselves perfectly secure , to gradually doze off . 

 I do not quite know what it be that make I poke my head out of the 
 friendly shelter of the blanket , perhaps because I find that the 
 mosquito be bite right through it . anyhow , as I do so I hear Job 
 whisper , in a frightened voice - 

 " oh , my star , look there ! " 

 instantly we all of we look , and this be what we see in the 
 moonlight . near the shore be two wide and ever - widen circle of 
 concentric ring ripple away across the surface of the water , and in 
 the heart and centre of the circle be two dark moving object . 

 " what be it ? " ask I. 

 " it be those damned lion , sir , " answer Job , in a tone which be 
 an odd mixture of a sense of personal injury , habitual respect , and 
 acknowledge fear , " and they be swim here to heat we , " he add , 
 nervously pick up an " h " in his agitation . 

 I look again : there be no doubt about it ; I could catch the glare of 
 their ferocious eye . attract either by the smell of the newly kill 
 waterbuck meat or of ourselves , the hungry beast be actually storm 
 our position . 

 Leo already have his rifle in his hand . I call to he to wait till they 
 be near , and meanwhile grab my own . some fifteen foot from we 
 the water shallow on a bank to the depth of about fifteen inch , and 
 presently the first of they - it be the lioness - get on to it , shake 
 herself , and roar . at that moment Leo fire , the bullet go right 
 down her open mouth and out at the back of her neck , and down she 
 drop , with a splash , dead . the other lion - a full - grow male - be 
 some two pace behind she . at this second he get his forepaw on to the 
 bank , when a strange thing happen . there be a rush and disturbance 
 of the water , such as one see in a pond in England when a pike take a 
 little fish , only a thousand time fiercer and large , and suddenly the 
 lion give a most terrific snarling roar and spring forward on to the 
 bank , drag something black with he . 

 " Allah ! " shout Mahomed , " a crocodile have get he by the leg ! " and sure 
 enough he have . we could see the long snout with its gleam line of 
 tooth and the reptile body behind it . 

 and then follow an extraordinary scene indeed . the lion manage to 
 get well on to the bank , the crocodile half stand and half swimming , 
 still nip his hind leg . he roar till the air quiver with the 
 sound , and then , with a savage , shriek snarl , turn round and claw 
 hold of the crocodile 's head . the crocodile shift his grip , have , 
 as we afterwards discover , have one of his eye tear out , and slightly 
 turn over ; instantly the lion get he by the throat and hold on , and 
 then over and over they roll upon the bank struggle hideously . it 
 be impossible to follow their movement , but when next we get a clear 
 view the table have turn , for the crocodile , whose head seem to be 
 a mass of gore , have get the lion 's body in his iron jaw just above the 
 hip , and be squeeze he and shake he to and fro . for his part , 
 the torture brute , roar in agony , be claw and bite madly 
 at his enemy 's scaly head , and fix his great hind claw in the 
 crocodile 's , comparatively speak , soft throat , rip it open as one 
 would rip a glove . 

 then , all of a sudden , the end come . the lion 's head fall forward on the 
 crocodile 's back , and with an awful groan he die , and the crocodile , 
 after stand for a minute motionless , slowly roll over on to his 
 side , his jaw still fix across the carcase of the lion , which , we 
 afterwards find , he have bite almost in half . 

 this duel to the death be a wonderful and a shocking sight , and one 
 that I suppose few man have see - and thus it end . 

 when it be all over , leave Mahomed to keep a look out , we manage to 
 spend the rest of the night as quietly as the mosquito would allow . 



 VI 

 an early christian CEREMONY 

 next morning , at the early light of dawn , we rise , perform such 
 ablution as circumstance would allow , and generally make ready to 
 start . I be bind to say that when there be sufficient light to enable 
 we to see each other 's face I , for one , burst out into a roar of 
 laughter . Job 's fat and comfortable countenance be swell out to 
 nearly twice its natural size from mosquito bite , and Leo 's condition 
 be not much well . indeed , of the three I have come off much the good , 
 probably owe to the toughness of my dark skin , and to the fact that 
 a good deal of it be cover by hair , for since we have start from 
 England I have allow my naturally luxuriant beard to grow at its 
 own sweet will . but the other two be , comparatively speak , clean 
 shave , which of course give the enemy a large extent of open country 
 to operate on , though in Mahomed 's case the mosquito , recognise the 
 taste of a true believer , would not touch he at any price . how often , 
 I wonder , during the next week or so do we wish that we be flavour 
 like an Arab ! 

 by the time that we have do laugh as heartily as our swollen lip 
 would allow , it be daylight , and the morning breeze be come up from 
 the sea , cut lane through the dense marsh mist , and here and there 
 roll they before it in great ball of fleecy vapour . so we set 
 our sail , and have first take a look at the two dead lion and the 
 alligator , which we be of course unable to skin , be destitute of 
 mean of cure the pelt , we start , and , sail through the lagoon , 
 follow the course of the river on the farth side . at midday , when 
 the breeze drop , we be fortunate enough to find a convenient piece 
 of dry land on which to camp and light a fire , and here we cook two 
 wild - duck and some of the waterbuck 's flesh - not in a very appetising 
 way , it be true , but still sufficiently . the rest of the buck 's flesh 
 we cut into strip and hang in the sun to dry into " biltong , " as , I 
 believe , the south african Dutch call flesh thus prepare . on this 
 welcome patch of dry land we stop till the follow dawn , and , as 
 before , spend the night in warfare with the mosquito , but without 
 other trouble . the next day or two pass in similar fashion , and 
 without noticeable adventure , except that we shoot a speciman of a 
 peculiarly graceful hornless buck , and see many variety of water - lily 
 in full bloom , some of they blue and of exquisite beauty , though few 
 of the flower be perfect , owe to the prevalence of a white 
 water - maggot with a green head that feed upon they . 

 it be on the fifth day of our journey , when we have travel , so far 
 as we could reckon , about one hundred and thirty - five to a hundred and 
 forty mile westward from the coast , that the first event of any real 
 importance occur . on that morning the usual wind fail we about 
 eleven o'clock , and after pull a little way we be force to halt , 
 more or less exhausted , at what appear to be the junction of our 
 stream with another of a uniform width of about fifty foot . some tree 
 grow near at hand - the only tree in all this country be along the 
 bank of the river , and under these we rest , and then , the land be 
 fairly dry just here , walk a little way along the edge of the river to 
 prospect , and shoot a few waterfowl for food . before we have go fifty 
 yard we perceive that all hope of get far up the stream in 
 the whale - boat be at an end , for not two hundred yard above where 
 we have stop be a succession of shallow and mudbank , with not six 
 inch of water over they . it be a watery cul de sac . 

 turn back , we walk some way along the bank of the other river , and 
 soon come to the conclusion , from various indication , that it be not 
 a river at all , but an ancient canal , like the one which be to be see 
 above Mombasa , on the Zanzibar coast , connect the Tana River with 
 the Ozy , in such a way as to enable the shipping come down the Tana 
 to cross to the Ozy , and reach the sea by it , and thus avoid the very 
 dangerous bar that block the mouth of the Tana . the canal before we 
 have evidently be dig out by man at some remote period of the world 's 
 history , and the result of his digging still remain in the shape of 
 the raise bank that have no doubt once form towing - path . except here 
 and there , where they have be hollow out by the water or fall in , 
 these bank of stiff bind clay be at a uniform distance from each 
 other , and the depth of the stream also appear to be uniform . current 
 there be little or none , and , as a consequence , the surface of the 
 canal be choke with vegetable growth , intersect by little path 
 of clear water , make , I suppose , by the constant passage of waterfowl , 
 iguana , and other vermin . now , as it be evident that we could not 
 proceed up the river , it become equally evident that we must either try 
 the canal or else return to the sea . we could not stop where we be , 
 to be bake by the sun and eat up by the mosquito , till we die of 
 fever in that dreary marsh . 

 " well , I suppose that we must try it , " I say ; and the other assent 
 in their various way - Leo , as though it be the good joke in the 
 world ; Job , in respectful disgust ; and Mahomed , with an invocation to 
 the Prophet , and a comprehensive curse upon all unbeliever and their 
 way of thought and travel . 

 accordingly , as soon as the sun get low , have little or nothing more 
 to hope for from our friendly wind , we start . for the first hour or so 
 we manage to row the boat , though with great labour ; but after that the 
 weed get too thick to allow of it , and we be oblige to resort to the 
 primitive and most exhausting resource of tow she . for two hour we 
 labour , Mahomed , Job , and I , who be suppose to be strong enough to 
 pull against the two of they , on the bank , while Leo sit in the bow of 
 the boat , and brush away the weed which collect round the cutwater 
 with Mahomed 's sword . at dark we halt for some hour to rest and enjoy 
 the mosquito , but about midnight we go on again , take advantage 
 of the comparative cool of the night . at dawn we rest for three hour , 
 and then start once more , and labour on till about ten o'clock , when 
 a thunderstorm , accompany by a deluge of rain , overtake we , and we 
 spend the next six hour practically under water . 

 I do not know that there be any necessity for I to describe the next 
 four day of our voyage in detail , far than to say that they be , 
 on the whole , the most miserable that I ever spend in my life , form 
 one monotonous record of heavy labour , heat , misery , and mosquito . all 
 that dreary way we pass through a region of almost endless swamp , and 
 I can only attribute our escape from fever and death to the constant 
 dos of quinine and purgative which we take , and the unceasing toil 
 which we be force to undergo . on the third day of our journey up the 
 canal we have sight a round hill that loom dimly through the vapour 
 of the marsh , and on the evening of the fourth night , when we camp , 
 this hill seem to be within five - and - twenty or thirty mile of we . we 
 be by now utterly exhaust , and feel as though our blister hand 
 could not pull the boat a yard far , and that the good thing that 
 we could do would be to lie down and die in that dreadful wilderness of 
 swamp . it be an awful position , and one in which I trust no other white 
 man will ever be place ; and as I throw myself down in the boat to sleep 
 the sleep of utter exhaustion , I bitterly curse my folly in ever have 
 be a party to such a mad undertaking , which could , I see , only end in 
 our death in this ghastly land . I think , I remember , as I slowly sink 
 into a doze , of what the appearance of the boat and her unhappy crew 
 would be in two or three month ' time from that night . there she would 
 lie , with gap seam and half fill with fœtid water , which , when 
 the mist - laden wind stir she , would wash backwards and forwards 
 through our mouldering bone , and that would be the end of she , and of 
 those in she who would follow after myth and seek out the secret of 
 Nature . 

 already I seem to hear the water ripple against the desiccated bone 
 and rattle they together , roll my skull against Mahomed 's , and 
 his against mine , till at last Mahomed 's stand straight up upon its 
 vertebræ , and glare at I through its empty eyehole , and curse I 
 with its grinning jaw , because I , a dog of a Christian , disturb the 
 last sleep of a true believer . I open my eye , and shudder at the 
 horrid dream , and then shudder again at something that be not a 
 dream , for two great eye be gleam down at I through the misty 
 darkness . I struggle up , and in my terror and confusion shriek , and 
 shriek again , so that the other spring up too , reel , and drunken 
 with sleep and fear . and then all of a sudden there be a flash of cold 
 steel , and a great spear be hold against my throat , and behind it other 
 spear gleam cruelly . 

 " peace , " say a voice , speak in Arabic , or rather in some dialect 
 into which Arabic enter very largely ; " who be ye who come hither 
 swimming on the water ? speak or ye die , " and the steel press sharply 
 against my throat , send a cold chill through I . 

 " we be traveller , and have come hither by chance , " I answer in my 
 good Arabic , which appear to be understand , for the man turn his 
 head , and , address a tall form that tower up in the background , 
 say , " Father , shall we slay ? " 

 " what be the colour of the man ? " say a deep voice in answer . 

 " White be their colour . " 

 " slay not , " be the reply . " four sun since be the word bring to I 
 from ' She - who - must - be - obeyed , ' ' white man come ; if white man 
 come , slay they not . ' let they be bring to the house of 
 ' she - who - must - be - obey . ' bring forth the man , and let that which they 
 have with they be bring forth also . " 

 " come , " say the man , half lead and half drag I from the boat , 
 and as he do so I perceive other man do the same kind office to my 
 companion . 

 on the bank be gather a company of some fifty man . in that light all 
 I could make out be that they be arm with huge spear , be very 
 tall , and strongly build , comparatively light in colour , and nude , save 
 for a leopard skin tie round the middle . 

 presently Leo and Job be bundle out and place beside I . 

 " what on earth be up ? " say Leo , rub his eye . 

 " oh , Lord ! sir , here be a rum go , " ejaculated Job ; and just at that 
 moment a disturbance ensue , and Mahomed come tumble between we , 
 follow by a shadowy form with an uplifted spear . 

 " Allah ! Allah ! " howl Mahomed , feel that he have little to hope from 
 man , " protect I ! protect I ! " 

 " Father , it be a black one , " say a voice . " what say 
 ' she - who - must - be - obey ' about the black one ? " 

 " she say naught ; but slay he not . come hither , my son . " 

 the man advance , and the tall shadowy form bend forward and whisper 
 something . 

 " yes , yes , " say the other , and chuckle in a rather blood - curdle 
 tone . 

 " be the three white man there ? " ask the form . 

 " yes , they be there . " 

 " then bring up that which be make ready for they , and let the man take 
 all that can be bring from the thing which float . " 

 hardly have he speak when man come run up , carry on their 
 shoulder neither more nor less than palanquin - four bearer and two 
 spare man to a palanquin - and in these it be promptly indicate we be 
 expect to stow ourselves . 

 " well ! " say Leo , " it be a blessing to find anybody to carry we after 
 have to carry ourselves so long . " 

 Leo always take a cheerful view of thing . 

 there be no help for it , after see the other into theirs I 
 tumble into my own litter , and very comfortable I find it . it appear 
 to be manufacture of cloth weave from grass - fibre , which stretch and 
 yield to every motion of the body , and , be bind top and bottom to 
 the bear pole , give a grateful support to the head and neck . 

 Scarcely have I settle myself when , accompany their step with a 
 monotonous song , the bearer start at a swing trot . for half an 
 hour or so I lie still , reflect on the very remarkable experience 
 that we be go through , and wonder if any of my eminently 
 respectable fossil friend down at Cambridge would believe I if I be 
 to be miraculously set at the familiar dinner - table for the purpose 
 of relate they . I do not want to convey any disrespectful notion or 
 slight when I call those good and learn man fossil , but my experience 
 be that people be apt to fossilise even at a university if they follow 
 the same path too persistently . I be get fossilise myself , but 
 of late my stock of idea have be very much enlarge . well , I lay and 
 reflect , and wonder what on earth would be the end of it all , till 
 at last I cease to wonder , and go to sleep . 

 I suppose I must have sleep for seven or eight hour , get the first 
 real rest that I have have since the night before the loss of the 
 dhow , for when I wake the sun be high in the heaven . we be still 
 journey on at a pace of about four mile an hour . peep out through 
 the mist - like curtain of the litter , which be ingeniously fix to 
 the bear pole , I perceive to my infinite relief that we have pass 
 out of the region of eternal swamp , and be now travel over 
 swell grassy plain towards a cup - shape hill . whether or not it be 
 the same hill that we have see from the canal I do not know , and have 
 never since be able to discover , for , as we afterwards find out , 
 these people will give little information upon such point . next I 
 glance at the man who be bear I . they be of a magnificent 
 build , few of they be under six foot in height , and yellowish in 
 colour . generally their appearance have a good deal in common with that 
 of the east African Somali , only their hair be not frizz up , but hung 
 in thick black lock upon their shoulder . their feature be aquiline , 
 and in many case exceedingly handsome , the tooth be especially 
 regular and beautiful . but notwithstanding their beauty , it strike I 
 that , on the whole , I have never see a more evil - look set of face . 
 there be an aspect of cold and sullen cruelty stamp upon they 
 that revolt I , and which in some case be almost uncanny in its 
 intensity . 

 another thing that strike I about they be that they never seem to 
 smile . sometimes they sing the monotonous song of which I have speak , 
 but when they be not sing they remain almost perfectly silent , 
 and the light of a laugh never come to brighten their sombre and evil 
 countenance . of what race could these people be ? their language be a 
 bastard Arabic , and yet they be not Arabs ; I be quite sure of that . 
 for one thing they be too dark , or rather yellow . I could not say why , 
 but I know that their appearance fill I with a sick fear of which 
 I feel ashamed . while I be still wonder another litter come up 
 alongside of mine . in it - for the curtain be draw - sit an old man , 
 clothe in a whitish robe , make apparently from coarse linen , that hung 
 loosely about he , who , I at once jump to the conclusion , be 
 the shadowy figure that have stand on the bank and be address as 
 " Father . " he be a wonderful - look old man , with a snowy beard , so 
 long that the end of it hang over the side of the litter , and he have 
 a hooked nose , above which flash out a pair of eye as keen as a 
 snake 's , while his whole countenance be instinct with a look of wise 
 and sardonic humour impossible to describe on paper . 

 " art thou awake , strange ? " he say in a deep and low voice . 

 " surely , my father , " I answer courteously , feel certain that I 
 should do well to conciliate this ancient Mammon of Unrighteousness . 

 he stroke his beautiful white beard , and smile faintly . 

 " from whatever country thou camest , " he say , " and by the way it must 
 be from one where somewhat of our language be know , they teach their 
 child courtesy there , my strange son . and now wherefore com thou 
 unto this land , which scarce an alien foot have press from the time 
 that man knoweth ? art thou and those with thee weary of life ? " 

 " we come to find new thing , " I answer boldly . " we be tired of 
 the old thing ; we have come up out of the sea to know that which 
 be unknown . we be of a brave race who fear not death , my very much 
 respected father - that be , if we can get a little information before we 
 die . " 

 " Humph ! " say the old gentleman , " that may be true ; it be rash to 
 contradict , otherwise I should say that thou wast lying , my son . 
 however , I dare to say that ' she - who - must - be - obeyed ' will meet thy 
 wish in the matter . " 

 " who be ' She - who - must - be - obey ' ? " I ask , curiously . 

 the old man glance at the bearer , and then answer , with a little 
 smile that somehow send my blood to my heart - 

 " surely , my strange son , thou wilt learn soon enough , if it be her 
 pleasure to see thee at all in the flesh . " 

 " in the flesh ? " I answer . " what may my father wish to convey ? " 

 but the old man only laugh a dreadful laugh , and make no reply . 

 " what be the name of my father 's people ? " I ask . 

 " the name of my people be Amahagger "   the People of the Rocks . 

 " and if a son might ask , what be the name of my father ? " 

 " my name be billali . " 

 " and whither go we , my father ? " 

 " that shalt thou see , " and at a sign from he his bearer start 
 forward at a run till they reach the litter in which Job be repose 
  with one leg hang over the side . apparently , however , he could not 
 make much out of Job , for presently I see his bearer trot forward to 
 Leo 's litter . 

 and after that , as nothing fresh occur , I yield to the pleasant 
 sway motion of the litter , and go to sleep again . I be dreadfully 
 tired . when I wake I find that we be pass through a rocky defile 
 of a lava formation with precipitous side , in which grow many beautiful 
 tree and flower shrub . 

 presently this defile take a turn , and a lovely sight unfold itself 
 to my eye . before we be a vast cup of green from four to six mile in 
 extent , in the shape of a roman amphitheatre . the side of this great 
 cup be rocky , and clothe with bush , but the centre be of the rich 
 meadow land , stud with single tree of magnificent growth , and 
 water by meander brook . on this rich plain graze herd of goat 
 and cattle , but I see no sheep . at first I could not imagine what this 
 strange spot could be , but presently it flash upon I that it must 
 represent the crater of some long - extinct volcano which have afterwards 
 be a lake , and be ultimately drain in some unexplained way . and 
 here I may state that from my subsequent experience of this and a much 
 large , but otherwise similar spot , which I shall have occasion to 
 describe by - and - by , I have every reason to believe that this conclusion 
 be correct . what puzzle I , however , be , that although there be 
 people move about herd the goat and cattle , I see no sign of any 
 human habitation . where do they all live ? I wonder . my curiosity be 
 soon destine to be gratify . turn to the leave the string of litter 
 follow the cliffy side of the crater for a distance of about half 
 a mile , or perhaps a little less , and then halt . see the old 
 gentleman , my adopt " father , " Billali , emerge from his litter , I do 
 the same , and so do Leo and Job . the first thing I see be our wretched 
 arab companion , Mahomed , lie exhausted on the ground . it appear that 
 he have not be provide with a litter , but have be force to run the 
 entire distance , and , as he be already quite wear out when we start , 
 his condition now be one of great prostration . 

 on look round we discover that the place where we have halt be 
 a platform in front of the mouth of a great cave , and pile upon this 
 platform be the entire content of the whale - boat , even down to the 
 oar and sail . round the cave stand group of the man who have escort 
 we , and other man of a similar stamp . they be all tall and all 
 handsome , though they vary in their degree of darkness of skin , some 
 be as dark as Mahomed , and some as yellow as a Chinese . they be 
 naked , except for the leopard - skin round the waist , and each of they 
 carry a huge spear . 

 there be also some woman among they , who , instead of the leopard - skin , 
 wear a tanned hide of a small red buck , something like that of the 
 oribé , only rather dark in colour . these woman be , as a class , 
 exceedingly good - look , with large , dark eye , well - cut feature , and 
 a thick bush of curl hair - not crisp like a negro 's - range from 
 black to chestnut in hue , with all shade of intermediate colour . some , 
 but very few of they , wear a yellowish linen garment , such as I have 
 describe as wear by Billali , but this , as we afterwards discover , be 
 a mark of rank , rather than an attempt at clothing . for the rest , their 
 appearance be not quite so terrifying as that of the man , and they 
 sometimes , though rarely , smile . as soon as we have alight they 
 gather round we and examine we with curiosity , but without 
 excitement . Leo 's tall , athletic form and clear - cut grecian face , 
 however , evidently excite their attention , and when he politely lift 
 his hat to they , and show his curl yellow hair , there be a slight 
 murmur of admiration . nor do it stop there ; for , after regard he 
 critically from head to foot , the handsome of the young woman - one 
 wear a robe , and with hair of a shade between brown and 
 chestnut - deliberately advanced to he , and , in a way that would have 
 be win have it not be so determined , quietly put her arm round 
 his neck , bend forward , and kiss he on the lip . 

 I give a gasp , expect to see Leo instantly spear ; and Job 
 ejaculate , " the hussy - well , I never ! " as for Leo , he look slightly 
 astonish ; and then , remark that we have clearly get into a country 
 where they follow the custom of the early Christians , deliberately 
 return the embrace . 

 again I gasp , think that something would happen ; but , to my 
 surprise , though some of the young woman show trace of vexation , the 
 old one and the man only smile slightly . when we come to understand 
 the custom of this extraordinary people the mystery be explain . it 
 then appear that , in direct opposition to the habit of almost every 
 other savage race in the world , woman among the Amahagger be not only 
 upon term of perfect equality with the man , but be not hold to they by 
 any bind tie . descent be trace only through the line of the 
 mother , and while individual be as proud of a long and superior female 
 ancestry as we be of our family in Europe , they never pay attention 
 to , or even acknowledge , any man as their father , even when their male 
 parentage be perfectly well know . there be but one titular male parent 
 of each tribe , or , as they call it , " household , " and he be its elected 
 and immediate ruler , with the title of " Father . " for instance , the man 
 Billali be the father of this " household , " which consist of about 
 seven thousand individual all tell , and no other man be ever call 
 by that name . when a woman take a fancy to a man she signify she 
 preference by advance and embrace he publicly , in the same way that 
 this handsome and exceedingly prompt young lady , who be call Ustane , 
 have embrace Leo . if he kiss she back it be a token that he accept 
 she , and the arrangement continue until one of they weary of it . I 
 be bind , however , to say that the change of husband be not nearly so 
 frequently as might have be expect . nor do quarrel arise out 
 of it , at least among the man , who , when their wife desert they 
 in favour of a rival , accept the whole thing much as we accept the 
 income - tax or our marriage law , as something not to be dispute , and as 
 tend to the good of the community , however disagreeable they may in 
 particular instance prove to the individual . 

 it be very curious to observe how the custom of mankind on this matter 
 vary in different country , make morality an affair of latitude , and 
 what be right and proper in one place wrong and improper in another . it 
 must , however , be understand that , since all civilised nation appear to 
 accept it as an axiom that ceremony be the touchstone of morality , there 
 be , even accord to our canon , nothing immoral about this Amahagger 
 custom , see that the interchange of the embrace answer to our 
 ceremony of marriage , which , as we know , justify most thing . 



 VII 

 USTANE sing 

 when the kissing operation be finish - by the way , none of the young 
 lady offer to pet I in this fashion , though I see one hover 
 round Job , to that respectable individual 's evident alarm - the old man 
 Billali advance , and graciously wave we into the cave , whither we 
 go , follow by Ustane , who do not seem inclined to take the hint I 
 give she that we like privacy . 

 before we have go five pace it strike I that the cave that we be 
 enter be none of Nature 's handiwork , but , on the contrary , have be 
 hollow by the hand of man . so far as we could judge it appear to 
 be about one hundred foot in length by fifty wide , and very lofty , 
 resemble a cathedral aisle more than anything else . from this main 
 aisle open passage at a distance of every twelve or fifteen foot , 
 lead , I suppose , to small chamber . about fifty foot from the 
 entrance of the cave , just where the light begin to get dim , a fire be 
 burn , which throw huge shadow upon the gloomy wall around . here 
 Billali halt , and ask we to be seat , say that the people would 
 bring we food , and accordingly we squat ourselves down upon the 
 rug of skin which be spread for we , and wait . presently the food , 
 consist of goat 's flesh boil , fresh milk in an earthenware pot , and 
 boil cobs of indian corn , be bring by young girl . we be almost 
 starving , and I do not think that I ever in my life before eat with 
 such satisfaction . indeed , before we have finish we literally eat up 
 everything that be set before we . 

 when we have do , our somewhat saturnine host , Billali , who have be 
 watch we in perfect silence , rise and address we . he say that it 
 be a wonderful thing that have happen . no man have ever know or hear 
 of white stranger arrive in the country of the People of the Rocks . 
 sometimes , though rarely , black man have come here , and from they they 
 have hear of the existence of man much whiter than themselves , who 
 sail on the sea in ship , but for the arrival of such there be no 
 precedent . we have , however , be see drag the boat up the canal , 
 and he tell we frankly that he have at once give order for our 
 destruction , see that it be unlawful for any stranger to enter here , 
 when a message have come from " She - who - must - be - obeyed , " say that our 
 life be to be spar , and that we be to be bring hither . 

 " pardon I , my father , " I interrupt at this point ; " but if , as I 
 understand , ' she - who - must - be - obey ' life yet far off , how could 
 she have know of our approach ? " 

 Billali turn , and see that we be alone - for the young lady , 
 Ustane , have withdraw when he have begin to speak - say , with a curious 
 little laugh - 

 " be there none in your land who can see without eye and hear without 
 ear ? ask no question ; she know . " 

 I shrug my shoulder at this , and he proceed to say that no further 
 instruction have be receive on the subject of our disposal , and this 
 be so he be about to start to interview " She - who - must - be - obey , " 
 generally speak of , for the sake of brevity , as " Hiya " or she simply , 
 who he give we to understand be the Queen of the Amahagger , and learn 
 her wish . 

 I ask he how long he propose to be away , and he say that by 
 travel hard he might be back on the fifth day , but there be many 
 mile of marsh to cross before he come to where she be . he then say 
 that every arrangement would be make for our comfort during his absence , 
 and that , as he personally have take a fancy to we , he sincerely trust 
 that the answer he should bring from she would be one favourable to 
 the continuation of our existence , but at the same time he do not wish 
 to conceal from we that he think this doubtful , as every stranger 
 who have ever come into the country during his grandmother 's life , his 
 mother 's life , and his own life , have be put to death without mercy , 
 and in a way he would not harrow our feeling by describe ; and this 
 have be do by the order of she herself , at least he suppose that 
 it be by her order . at any rate , she never interfere to save they . 

 " why , " I say , " but how can that be ? you be an old man , and the time 
 you talk of must reach back three man 's life . how therefore could she 
 have order the death of anybody at the beginning of the life of your 
 grandmother , see that herself she would not have be bear ? " 

 again he smile - that same faint , peculiar smile , and with a deep bow 
 depart , without make any answer ; nor do we see he again for five 
 day . 

 when he have go we discuss the situation , which fill I with 
 alarm . I do not at all like the account of this mysterious Queen , 
 " She - who - must - be - obey , " or more shortly she , who apparently 
 order the execution of any unfortunate stranger in a fashion so 
 unmerciful . Leo , too , be depressed about it , but console himself by 
 triumphantly point out that this she be undoubtedly the person 
 refer to in the writing on the potsherd and in his father 's letter , 
 in proof of which he advance Billali 's allusion to her age and power . 
 I be by this time too overwhelmed with the whole course of event that 
 I have not even the heart leave to dispute a proposition so absurd , so I 
 suggest that we should try to go out and get a bath , of which we all 
 stand sadly in need . 

 accordingly , have indicate our wish to a middle - aged individual of 
 an unusually saturnine cast of countenance , even among this saturnine 
 people , who appear to be depute to look after we now that the Father 
 of the hamlet have depart , we start in a body - have first light 
 our pipe . outside the cave we find quite a crowd of people evidently 
 watch for our appearance , but when they see we come out smoke they 
 vanish this way and that , call out that we be great magician . 
 indeed , nothing about we create so great a sensation as our tobacco 
 smoke - not even our firearm .     after this we succeed in reach 
 a stream that have its source in a strong ground spring , and take our 
 bath in peace , though some of the woman , not except Ustane , show a 
 decide inclination to follow we even there . 

      we find tobacco grow in this country as it do in 
  every other part of Africa , and , although they be so 
  absolutely ignorant of its other blessed quality , the 
  Amahagger use it habitually in the form of snuff and also 
  for medicinal purpose . - L. H. H. 

 by the time that we have finish this most refreshing bath the sun be 
 set ; indeed , when we get back to the big cave it have already set . 
 the cave itself be full of people gather round fire - for several 
 more have now be light - and eat their evening meal by their lurid 
 light , and by that of various lamp which be set about or hang upon 
 the wall . these lamp be of a rude manufacture of bake earthenware , 
 and of all shape , some of they graceful enough . the large one be 
 form of big red earthenware pot , fill with clarify melt fat , 
 and have a reed wick stick through a wooden disk which fill the top 
 of the pot . this sort of lamp require the most constant attention to 
 prevent its go out whenever the wick burn down , as there be no 
 mean of turn it up . the small hand lamp , however , which be also 
 make of baked clay , be fit with wick manufacture from the pith 
 of a palm - tree , or sometimes from the stem of a very handsome variety 
 of fern . this kind of wick be pass through a round hole at the end of 
 the lamp , to which a sharp piece of hard wood be attach wherewith to 
 pierce and draw it up whenever it show sign of burn low . 

 for a while we sit down and watch this grim people eat their 
 evening meal in silence as grim as themselves , till at length , get 
 tired of contemplate they and the huge moving shadow on the rocky 
 wall , I suggest to our new keeper that we should like to go to bed . 

 without a word he rise , and , take I politely by the hand , advance 
 with a lamp to one of the small passage that I have notice opening 
 out of the central cave . this we follow for about five pace , when it 
 suddenly widen out into a small chamber , about eight foot square , and 
 hew out of the live rock . on one side of this chamber be a stone 
 slab , about three foot from the ground , and run its entire length 
 like a bunk in a cabin , and on this slab he intimate that I be to 
 sleep . there be no window or air - hole to the chamber , and no furniture ; 
 and , on look at it more closely , I come to the disturbing conclusion 
  in which , as I afterwards discover , I be quite right   that it 
 have originally serve for a sepulchre for the dead rather than a 
 sleep - place for the living , the slab be design to receive the 
 corpse of the depart . the thought make I shudder in spite of myself ; 
 but , see that I must sleep somewhere , I get over the feeling as well 
 I might , and return to the cavern to get my blanket , which have be 
 bring up from the boat with the other thing . there I meet Job , who , 
 have be induct to a similar apartment , have flatly decline to stop 
 in it , say that the look of the place give he the horror , and that 
 he might as well be dead and bury in his grandfather 's brick grave 
 at once , and express his determination of sleep with I if I would 
 allow he . this , of course , I be only too glad to do . 

 the night pass very comfortably on the whole . I say on the whole , 
 for personally I go through a most horrible nightmare of be bury 
 alive , induced , no doubt , by the sepulchral nature of my surrounding . 
 at dawn we be arouse by a loud trumpeting sound , produce , as we 
 afterwards discover , by a young Amahagger blow through a hole 
 bored in its side into a hollowed elephant tusk , which be keep for the 
 purpose . 

 take the hint , we get up and go down to the stream to wash , after 
 which the morning meal be serve . at breakfast one of the woman , no 
 long quite young , advanced and publicly kiss Job . I think it be in 
 its way the most delightful thing   put its impropriety aside for 
 a moment   that I ever see . never shall I forget the respectable Job 's 
 abject terror and disgust . Job , like myself , be a bit of a misogynist - I 
 fancy chiefly owe to the fact of his have be one of a family 
 of seventeen - and the feeling express upon his countenance when 
 he realise that he be not only be embrace publicly , and without 
 authorisation on his own part , but also in the presence of his master , 
 be too mixed and painful to admit of accurate description . he spring 
 to his foot , and push the woman , a buxom person of about thirty , from 
 he . 

 " well , I never ! " he gasp , whereupon probably think that he be only 
 coy , she embrace he again . 

 " be off with you ! get away , you minx ! " he shout , wave the wooden 
 spoon , with which he be eat his breakfast , up and down before the 
 lady 's face . " beg your pardon , gentleman , I be sure I have not   encourage 
 she . oh , Lord ! she be come for I again . hold she , Mr. Holly ! please 
 hold she ! I can not   stand it ; I can not , indeed . this have never happen to 
 I before , gentleman , never . there be nothing against my character , " and 
 here he break off , and run as hard as he could go down the cave , and for 
 once I see the Amahagger laugh . as for the woman , however , she do 
 not laugh . on the contrary , she seem to bristle with fury , which the 
 mockery of the other woman about only serve to intensify . she stand 
 there literally snarl and shake with indignation , and , see she , 
 I wish Job 's scruple have be at Jericho , form a shrewd guess that 
 his admirable behaviour have endanger our throat . nor , as the sequel 
 show , be I wrong . 

 the lady have retreat , Job return in a great state of nervousness , 
 and keep his weather eye fix upon every woman who come near he . I 
 take an opportunity to explain to our host that Job be a married man , 
 and have have very unhappy experience in his domestic relation , which 
 account for his presence here and his terror at the sight of woman , 
 but my remark be receive in grim silence , it be evident that our 
 retainer 's behaviour be consider as a slight to the " household " 
 at large , although the woman , after the manner of some of their most 
 civilised sister , make merry at the rebuff of their companion . 

 after breakfast we take a walk and inspect the Amahagger herd , and 
 also their cultivate land . they have two breed of cattle , one large 
 and angular , with no horn , but yield beautiful milk ; and the other , 
 a red breed , very small and fat , excellent for meat , but of no value for 
 milking purpose . this last breed closely resemble the Norfolk red - pole 
 strain , only it have horn which generally curve forward over the head , 
 sometimes to such an extent that they have to be cut to prevent they 
 from grow into the bone of the skull . the goat be long - haired , and 
 be use for eat only , at least I never see they milk . as for the 
 Amahagger cultivation , it be primitive in the extreme , be all do 
 by mean of a spade make of iron , for these people smell and work iron . 
 this spade be shape more like a big spear - head than anything else , and 
 have no shoulder to it on which the foot can be set . as a consequence , 
 the labour of digging be very great . it be , however , all do by the 
 man , the woman , contrary to the habit of most savage race , be 
 entirely exempt from manual toil . but then , as I think I have say 
 elsewhere , among the Amahagger the weak sex have establish its 
 right . 

 at first we be much puzzled as to the origin and constitution of 
 this extraordinary race , point upon which they be singularly 
 uncommunicative . as the time go on - for the next four day pass 
 without any striking event - we learn something from Leo 's lady friend 
 Ustane , who , by the way , stick to that young gentleman like his own 
 shadow . as to origin , they have none , at least , so far as she be 
 aware . there be , however , she inform we , mound of masonry and many 
 pillar , near the place where she live , which be call K"r , and 
 which the wise say have once be house wherein man live , and it be 
 suggest that they be descend from these man . no one , however , 
 dare go near these great ruin , because they be haunt : they only 
 look on they from a distance . other similar ruin be to be see , she 
 have hear , in various part of the country , that is , wherever one of 
 the mountain rise above the level of the swamp . also the cave in which 
 they live have be hollow out of the rock by man , perhaps the same 
 who build the city . they themselves have no write law , only custom , 
 which be , however , quite as binding as law . if any man offend 
 against the custom , he be put to death by order of the Father of the 
 " Household . " I ask how he be put to death , and she only smile and 
 say that I might see one day soon . 

 they have a queen , however . she be their Queen , but she be very 
 rarely see , perhaps once in two or three year , when she come forth to 
 pass sentence on some offender , and when see be muffle up in a big 
 cloak , so that nobody could look upon her face . those who wait upon 
 she be deaf and dumb , and therefore could tell no tale , but it be 
 report that she be lovely as no other woman be lovely , or ever have 
 be . it be rumour also that she be immortal , and have power over 
 all thing , but she , Ustane , could say nothing of all that . what she 
 believe be that the Queen choose a husband from time to time , and as 
 soon as a female child be bear , this husband , who be never again see , 
 be put to death . then the female child grow up and take the place of 
 the queen when its mother die , and have be bury in the great cave . 
 but of these matter none could speak with certainty . only she be 
 obey throughout the length and breadth of the land , and to question 
 her command be instant death . she keep a guard , but have no regular 
 army , and to disobey she be to die . 

 I ask what size the land be , and how many people live in it . she 
 answer that there be ten " Households , " like this that she know 
 of , include the big " household , " where the Queen be , that all the 
 " Households " live in cave , in place resemble this stretch of raised 
 country , dot about in a vast extent of swamp , which be only to be 
 thread by secret path . often the " Households " make war on each other 
 until she send word that it be to stop , and then they instantly 
 cease . that and the fever which they catch in cross the swamp 
 prevent their number from increase too much . they have no connection 
 with any other race , indeed none live near they , or be able to thread 
 the vast swamp . once an army from the direction of the great river 
  presumably the Zambesi   have attempt to attack they , but they get lose 
 in the marsh , and at night , see the great ball of fire that move 
 about there , try to come to they , think that they mark the enemy 
 camp , and half of they be drown . as for the rest , they soon die of 
 fever and starvation , not a blow be strike at they . the marsh , she 
 tell we , be absolutely impassable except to those who know the path , 
 add , what I could well believe , that we should never have reach 
 this place where we then be have we not be bring thither . 

 these and many other thing we learn from Ustane during the four day ' 
 pause before our real adventure begin , and , as may be imagine , they 
 give we considerable cause for thought . the whole thing be exceedingly 
 remarkable , almost incredibly so , indeed , and the oddest part of it be 
 that so far it do more or less correspond to the ancient writing on the 
 sherd . and now it appear that there be a mysterious queen clothe by 
 rumour with dread and wonderful attribute , and commonly know by the 
 impersonal , but , to my mind , rather awesome title of she . altogether , 
 I could not make it out , nor could Leo , though of course he be 
 exceedingly triumphant over I because I have persistently mock at the 
 whole thing . as for Job , he have long since abandon any attempt to call 
 his reason his own , and leave it to drift upon the sea of circumstance . 
 Mahomed , the Arab , who be , by the way , treat civilly indeed , but 
 with chilling contempt , by the Amahagger , be , I discover , in a great 
 fright , though I could not quite make out what he be frightened about . 
 he would sit crouch up in a corner of the cave all day long , call 
 upon Allah and the Prophet to protect he . when I press he about it , 
 he say that he be afraid because these people be not man or woman at 
 all , but devil , and that this be an enchanted land ; and , upon my word , 
 once or twice since then I have be incline to agree with he . and 
 so the time go on , till the night of the fourth day after Billali have 
 leave , when something happen . 

 we three and Ustane be sit round a fire in the cave just before 
 bedtime , when suddenly the woman , who have be brood in silence , 
 rise , and lay her hand upon Leo 's golden curl , and address he . even 
 now , when I shut my eye , I can see her proud , imperial form , clothe 
 alternately in dense shadow and the red flickering of the fire , as she 
 stand , the wild centre of as weird a scene as I ever witness , and 
 deliver herself of the burden of her thought and foreboding in a 
 kind of rhythmical speech that run something as follow : - 

  Thou art my choose - I have wait for thee from the beginning ! 
  Thou art very beautiful . who hath hair like unto thee , or skin so 
  white ? 
  who hath so strong an arm , who be so much a man ? 
  thine eye be the sky , and the light in they be the star . 
  thou art perfect and of a happy face , and my heart turn itself 
  towards thee . 
  ay , when mine eye fall upon thee I do desire thee , - 
  then do I take thee to I - oh , thou Beloved , 
  and hold thee fast , lest harm should come unto thee . 
  ay , I do cover thine head with mine hair , lest the sun should 
  strike it ; 
  and altogether be I thine , and thou wast altogether mine . 
  and so it go for a little space , till Time be in labour with 
  an evil day ; 
  and then what befell on that day ? alas ! my Beloved , I know not ! 
  but I , I see thee no more - I , I be lose in the blackness . 
  and she who be strong do take thee ; ay , she who be fair than 
  Ustane . 
  yet didst thou turn and call upon I , and let thine eye wander in 
  the darkness . 
  but , nevertheless , she prevail by Beauty , and lead thee down 
  horrible place , 
  and then , ah ! then my Beloved - - 

 here this extraordinary woman break off her speech , or chant , which be 
 so much musical gibberish to we , for all that we understand of what she 
 be talk about , and seem to fix her flash eye upon the deep 
 shadow before she . then in a moment they acquire a vacant , terrified 
 stare , as though they be strive to realise some half - see horror . 
 she lift her hand from Leo 's head , and point into the darkness . we 
 all look , and could see nothing ; but she see something , or think she 
 do , and something evidently that affect even her iron nerve , for , 
 without another sound , down she fall senseless between we . 

 Leo , who be grow really attach to this remarkable young person , 
 be in a great state of alarm and distress , and I , to be perfectly 
 candid , be in a condition not far remove from superstitious fear . the 
 whole scene be an uncanny one . 

 presently , however , she recover , and sit up with an extraordinary 
 convulsive shudder . 

 " what didst thou mean , Ustane ? " ask Leo , who , thank to year of 
 tuition , speak Arabic very prettily . 

 " Nay , my choose , " she answer , with a little force laugh . " I do but 
 sing unto thee after the fashion of my people . surely , I mean nothing . 
 how could I speak of that which be not yet ? " 

 " and what didst thou see , Ustane ? " I ask , look she sharply in the 
 face . 

 " Nay , " she answer again , " I see naught . ask I not what I see . why 
 should I fright ye ? " and then , turn to Leo with a look of the most 
 utter tenderness that I ever see upon the face of a woman , civilised 
 or savage , she take his head between her hand , and kiss he on the 
 forehead as a mother might . 

 " when I be go from thee , my choose , " she say ; " when at night thou 
 stretchest out thine hand and canst not find I , then shouldst thou 
 think at time of I , for of a truth I love thee well , though I be not 
 fit to wash thy foot . and now let we love and take that which be give 
 we , and be happy ; for in the grave there be no love and no warmth , nor 
 any touching of the lip . nothing perchance , or perchance but bitter 
 memory of what might have be . to - night the hour be our own , how 
 know we to whom they shall belong to - morrow ? " 



 VIII 

 the FEAST , and after ! 

 on the day follow this remarkable scene - a scene calculate to make 
 a deep impression upon anybody who behold it , more because of what it 
 suggest and seem to foreshadow than of what it reveal - it be 
 announce to we that a feast would be hold that evening in our honour . 
 I do my good to get out of it , say that we be modest people , and 
 care little for feast , but my remark be receive with the silence 
 of displeasure , I think it wisest to hold my tongue . 

 accordingly , just before sundown , I be inform that everything be 
 ready , and , accompany by Job , go into the cave , where I meet Leo , 
 who be , as usual , follow by Ustane . these two have be out walk 
 somewhere , and know nothing of the project festivity till that moment . 
 when Ustane hear of it I see an expression of horror spring up upon her 
 handsome feature . turn she catch a man who be pass up the cave 
 by the arm , and ask he something in an imperious tone . his answer 
 seem to reassure she a little , for she look relieve , though far 
 from satisfied . next she appear to attempt some remonstrance with the 
 man , who be a person in authority , but he speak angrily to she , and 
 shake she off , and then , change his mind , lead she by the arm , and sit 
 she down between himself and another man in the circle round the fire , 
 and I perceive that for some reason of her own she think it well to 
 submit . 

 the fire in the cave be an unusually big one that night , and in a 
 large circle round it be gather about thirty - five man and two woman , 
 Ustane and the woman to avoid whom Job have play the r"le of another 
 Scriptural character . the man be sit in perfect silence , as be 
 their custom , each with his great spear stick upright behind he , in 
 a socket cut in the rock for that purpose . only one or two wear the 
 yellowish linen garment of which I have speak , the rest have nothing on 
 except the leopard 's skin about the middle . 

 " what be up now , sir , " say Job , doubtfully . " bless we and save we , 
 there be that woman again . now , surely , she can not   be after I , see 
 that I have give she no encouragement . they give I the creep , the 
 whole lot of they , and that be a fact . why look , they have ask Mahomed 
 to dine , too . there , that lady of mine be talk to he in as nice and 
 civil a way as possible . well , I be glad it be not   I , that be all . " 

 we look up , and sure enough the woman in question have rise , and be 
 escort the wretched Mahomed from his corner , where , overcome by some 
 acute prescience of horror , he have be seat , shiver , and call 
 on Allah . he appear unwilling enough to come , if for no other reason 
 perhaps because it be an unaccustomed honour , for hitherto his food have 
 be give to he apart . anyway I could see that he be in a state of 
 great terror , for his tottering leg would scarcely support his 
 stout , bulky form , and I think it be rather owe to the resource 
 of barbarism behind he , in the shape of a huge Amahagger with a 
 proportionately huge spear , than to the seduction of the lady who lead 
 he by the hand , that he consent to come at all . 

 " well , " I say to the other , " I do not   at all like the look of thing , 
 but I suppose we must face it out . have you fellow get your revolver 
 on ? because , if so , you have well see that they be load . " 

 " I have , sir , " say Job , tap his Colt , " but Mr. Leo have only get his 
 hunting knife , though that be big enough , surely . " 

 feel that it would not do to wait while the miss weapon be 
 fetched , we advance boldly , and seat ourselves in a line , with our 
 back against the side of the cave . 

 as soon as we be seat , an earthenware jar be pass round 
 contain a ferment fluid , of by no mean unpleasant taste , though 
 apt to turn upon the stomach , make from crushed grain - not indian corn , 
 but a small brown grain that grow upon its stem in cluster , not unlike 
 that which in the southern part of Africa be know by the name of Kafir 
 corn . the vase which contain this liquor be very curious , and as 
 it more or less resemble many hundred of other in use among the 
 Amahagger I may as well describe it . these vas be of a very ancient 
 manufacture , and of all size . none such can have be make in the 
 country for hundred , or rather thousand , of year . they be find 
 in the rock tomb , of which I shall give a description in their proper 
 place , and my own belief be that , after the fashion of the Egyptians , 
 with whom the former inhabitant of this country may have have some 
 connection , they be use to receive the viscera of the dead . Leo , 
 however , be of opinion that , as in the case of Etruscan amphoræ , they 
 be place there for the spiritual use of the deceased . they be mostly 
 two - handle , and of all size , some be nearly three foot in height , 
 and run from that down to as many inch . in shape they vary , but 
 all be exceedingly beautiful and graceful , be make of a very fine 
 black ware , not lustrous , but slightly rough . on this groundwork be 
 inlay figure much more graceful and lifelike than any other that 
 I have see on antique vas . some of these inlay picture represent 
 love - scene with a childlike simplicity and freedom of manner which 
 would not commend itself to the taste of the present day . other again 
 give picture of maidens dancing , and yet other of hunting - scene . for 
 instance , the very vase from which we be then drink have on one side 
 a most spirited drawing of man , apparently white in colour , attack a 
 bull - elephant with spear , while on the reverse be a picture , not quite 
 so well do , of a hunter shoot an arrow at a run antelope , I 
 should say from the look of it either an eland or a koodoo . 

 this be a digression at a critical moment , but it be not too long for 
 the occasion , for the occasion itself be very long . with the exception 
 of the periodical passing of the vase , and the movement necessary to 
 throw fuel on to the fire , nothing happen for the good part of a whole 
 hour . nobody speak a word . there we all sit in perfect silence , star 
 at the glare and glow of the large fire , and at the shadow throw by 
 the flickering earthenware lamp   which , by the way , be not ancient . 
 on the open space between we and the fire lie a large wooden tray , 
 with four short handle to it , exactly like a butcher 's tray , only not 
 hollow out . by the side of the tray be a great pair of long - handle 
 iron pincer , and on the other side of the fire be a similar pair . 
 somehow I do not at all like the appearance of this tray and the 
 accompany pincer . there I sit and star at they and at the silent 
 circle of the fierce moody face of the man , and reflect that it 
 be all very awful , and that we be absolutely in the power of this 
 alarming people , who , to I at any rate , be all the more formidable 
 because their true character be still very much of a mystery to we . 
 they might be well than I think they , or they might be bad . I 
 fear that they be bad , and I be not wrong . it be a curious sort 
 of a feast , I reflect , in appearance indeed , an entertainment of the 
 Barmecide stamp , for there be absolutely nothing to eat . 

 at last , just as I be begin to feel as though I be be 
 mesmerise , a move be make . without the slight warning , a man from 
 the other side of the circle call out in a loud voice - 

 " where be the flesh that we shall eat ? " 

 Thereon everybody in the circle answer in a deep measure tone , and 
 stretch out the right arm towards the fire as he speak - 

 " the flesh will come . " 

 " be it a goat ? " say the same man . 

 " it be a goat without horn , and more than a goat , and we shall slay 
 it , " they answer with one voice , and turn half round they one and 
 all grasp the handle of their spear with the right hand , and then 
 simultaneously let they go . 

 " be it an ox ? " say the man again . 

 " it be an ox without horn , and more than an ox , and we shall slay 
 it , " be the answer , and again the spear be grasp , and again let 
 go . 

 then come a pause , and I notice , with horror and a rise of the hair , 
 that the woman next to Mahomed begin to fondle he , pat his cheek 
 and call he by name of endearment while her fierce eye play up 
 and down his trembling form . I do not know why the sight frighten I 
 so , but it do frighten we all dreadfully , especially Leo . the caressing 
 be so snake - like , and so evidently a part of some ghastly formula that 
 have to be go through .     I see Mahomed turn white under his brown 
 skin , sickly white with fear . 

      we afterwards learn that its object be to pretend to 
  the victim that he be the object of love and admiration , 
  and so to sooth his injure feeling , and cause he to 
  expire in a happy and contented frame of mind . - L. H. H. 

 " be the meat ready to be cook ? " ask the voice , more rapidly . 

 " it be ready ; it be ready . " 

 " be the pot hot to cook it ? " it continue , in a sort of scream that 
 echo painfully down the great recess of the cave . 

 " it be hot ; it be hot . " 

 " great heaven ! " roar Leo , " remember the writing , ' the people who 
 place pot upon the head of stranger . ' " 

 as he say the word , before we could stir , or even take the matter in , 
 two great ruffian jump up , and , seize the long pincer , thrust they 
 into the heart of the fire , and the woman who have be caress mahome 
 suddenly produce a fibre noose from under her girdle or moocha , and , 
 slip it over his shoulder , run it tight , while the man next to he 
 seize he by the leg . the two man with the pincer give a heave , and , 
 scatter the fire this way and that upon the rocky floor , lift 
 from it a large earthenware pot , heat to a white heat . in an instant , 
 almost with a single movement , they have reach the spot where Mahomed 
 be struggle . he fight like a fiend , shriek in the abandonment of 
 his despair , and notwithstanding the noose round he , and the effort 
 of the man who hold his leg , the advance wretch be for the moment 
 unable to accomplish their purpose , which , horrible and incredible as it 
 seem , be to put the red - hot pot upon his head . 

 I spring to my foot with a yell of horror , and draw my revolver fire 
 it by a sort of instinct straight at the diabolical woman who have be 
 caress Mahomed , and be now grip he in her arm . the bullet 
 strike she in the back and kill she , and to this day I be glad that 
 it do , for , as it afterwards transpire , she have avail herself of the 
 anthropophagous custom of the Amahagger to organise the whole thing in 
 revenge of the slight put upon she by Job . she sink down dead , and as 
 she do so , to my terror and dismay , mahome , by a superhuman effort , 
 burst from his tormenter , and , spring high into the air , fall die 
 upon her corpse . the heavy bullet from my pistol have drive through 
 the body of both , at once strike down the murderess , and save she 
 victim from a death a hundred time more horrible . it be an awful and 
 yet a most merciful accident . 

 for a moment there be a silence of astonishment . the Amahagger have 
 never hear the report of a firearm before , and its effect dismay 
 they . but the next a man close to we recover himself , and seize his 
 spear preparatory to make a lunge with it at Leo , who be the near 
 to he . 

 " run for it ! " I shout , set the example by start up the cave as 
 hard as my leg would carry I . I would have make for the open air if 
 it have be possible , but there be man in the way , and , besides , I 
 have catch sight of the form of a crowd of people stand out clear 
 against the skyline beyond the entrance to the cave . up the cave I go , 
 and after I come the other , and after they thunder the whole crowd 
 of cannibal , mad with fury at the death of the woman . with a bound I 
 clear the prostrate form of Mahomed . as I fly over he I feel the 
 heat from the red - hot pot , which be lie close by , strike upon my 
 leg , and by its glow see his hand - for he be not quite dead - still 
 feebly move . at the top of the cave be a little platform of rock 
 three foot or so high by about eight deep , on which two large lamp be 
 place at night . whether this platform have be leave as a seat , or as a 
 raise point afterwards to be cut away when it have serve its purpose 
 as a stand place from which to carry on the excavation , I do not 
 know - at least , I do not then . at any rate , we all three reach it , 
 and , jump on it , prepare to sell our life as dearly as we could . 
 for a few second the crowd that be press on our heel hang back 
 when they see we face round upon they . Job be on one side of the rock 
 to the left , Leo in the centre , and I to the right . behind we be 
 the lamp . Leo bend forward , and look down the long lane of shadow , 
 terminate in the fire and lighted lamp , through which the quiet 
 form of our would - be murderer flit to and fro with the faint light 
 glinting on their spear , for even their fury be silent as a bulldog 's . 
 the only other thing visible be the red - hot pot still glow angrily 
 in the gloom . there be a curious light in Leo 's eye , and his 
 handsome face be set like a stone . in his right hand be his heavy 
 hunting - knife . he shift its thong a little up his wrist and then put 
 his arm round I and give I a good hug . 

 " good - bye , old fellow , " he say , " my dear friend - my more than father . 
 we have no chance against those scoundrel ; they will finish we in a 
 few minute , and eat we afterwards , I suppose . good - bye . I lead you into 
 this . I hope you will forgive I . good - bye , Job . " 

 " God 's will be do , " I say , set my tooth , as I prepare for the 
 end . at that moment , with an exclamation , Job lift his revolver and 
 fire , and hit a man - not the man he have aim at , by the way : anything 
 that Job shoot at be perfectly safe . 

 on they come with a rush , and I fire too as fast as I could , and 
 check they - between we , Job and I , besides the woman , kill or 
 mortally wound five man with our pistol before they be empty . 
 but we have no time to reload , and they still come on in a way that be 
 almost splendid in its recklessness , see that they do not know but 
 that we could go on fire for ever . 

 a great fellow bound up upon the platform , and Leo strike he dead 
 with one blow of his powerful arm , send the knife right through he . 
 I do the same by another , but Job miss his stroke , and I see a brawny 
 Amahagger grip he by the middle and whirl he off the rock . the knife 
 not be secure by a thong fall from Job 's hand as he do so , and , by 
 a most happy accident for he , light upon its handle on the rock , just as 
 the body of the Amahagger , who be undermost , strike upon its point and 
 be transfix upon it . what happen to Job after that I be sure I do 
 not know , but my own impression be that he lie still upon the corpse of 
 his deceased assailant , " play ' possum " as the Americans say . as for 
 myself , I be soon involve in a desperate encounter with two ruffian , 
 who , luckily for I , have leave their spear behind they ; and for the 
 first time in my life the great physical power with which Nature have 
 endow I stand I in good stead . I have hack at the head of one man 
 with my hunting - knife , which be almost as big and heavy as a short 
 sword , with such vigour , that the sharp steel have split his skull 
 down to the eye , and be hold so fast by it that as he suddenly fall 
 sideway the knife be twist right out of my hand . 

 then it be that the two other spring upon I . I see they come , and 
 get an arm round the waist of each , and down we all fall upon the floor 
 of the cave together , roll over and over . they be strong man , but 
 I be mad with rage , and that awful lust for slaughter which will creep 
 into the heart of the most civilised of we when blow be fly , and 
 life and death tremble on the turn . my arm be round the two swarthy 
 demon , and I hug they till I hear their rib crack and crunch up 
 beneath my grip . they twist and writhe like snake , and claw and 
 batter at I with their fist , but I hold on . lie on my back there , 
 so that their body might protect I from spear thrust from above , I 
 slowly crush the life out of they , and as I do so , strange as it may 
 seem , I think of what the amiable Head of my College at Cambridge   who 
 be a member of the Peace Society   and my brother Fellows would say if by 
 clairvoyance they could see I , of all man , play such a bloody game . 
 soon my assailant grow faint , and almost cease to struggle , their 
 breath have fail they , and they be die , but still I dare not leave 
 they , for they die very slowly . I know that if I relax my grip they 
 would revive . the other ruffian probably think - for we be all three 
 lie in the shadow of the ledge - that we be all dead together , at any 
 rate they do not interfere with our little tragedy . 

 I turn my head , and as I lay gasp in the throe of that awful 
 struggle I could see that Leo be off the rock now , for the lamplight 
 fall full upon he . he be still on his foot , but in the centre of a 
 surge mass of struggle man , who be strive to pull he down as 
 wolf pull down a stag . up above they tower his beautiful pale face 
 crown with its bright curl   for Leo be six foot two high , and I see 
 that he be fight with a desperate abandonment and energy that be 
 at once splendid and hideous to behold . he drive his knife through one 
 man - they be so close to and mix up with he that they could not 
 get at he to kill he with their big spear , and they have no knife or 
 stick . the man fall , and then somehow the knife be wrench from his 
 hand , leave he defenceless , and I think the end have come . but no ; 
 with a desperate effort he break loose from they , seize the body of the 
 man he have just slay , and lift it high in the air hurl it right at 
 the mob of his assailant , so that the shock and weight of it sweep 
 some five or six of they to the earth . but in a minute they be all up 
 again , except one , whose skull be smash , and have once more fasten 
 upon he . and then slowly , and with infinite labour and struggle , 
 the wolf bear the lion down . once even then he recover himself , and 
 fell an Amahagger with his fist , but it be more than man could do to 
 hold his own for long against so many , and at last he come crash down 
 upon the rock floor , fall as an oak fall , and bear with he to 
 the earth all those who clung about he . they grip he by his arm 
 and leg , and then clear off his body . 

 " a spear , " cry a voice - " a spear to cut his throat , and a vessel to 
 catch his blood . " 

 I shut my eye , for I see the man come with a spear , and myself , I 
 could not stir to Leo 's help , for I be grow weak , and the two man on 
 I be not yet dead , and a deadly sickness overcome I . 

 then suddenly there be a disturbance , and involuntarily I open my 
 eye again , and look towards the scene of murder . the girl Ustane have 
 throw herself on Leo 's prostrate form , cover his body with her body , 
 and fasten her arm about his neck . they try to drag she from 
 he , but she twist her leg round his , and hang on like a bulldog , or 
 rather like a creeper to a tree , and they could not . then they try to 
 stab he in the side without hurt she , but somehow she shield he , 
 and he be only wound . 

 at last they lose patience . 

 " drive the spear through the man and the woman together , " say a voice , 
 the same voice that have ask the question at that ghastly feast , ' so 
 of a verity shall they be we d. " 

 then I see the man with the weapon straighten himself for the effort . I 
 see the cold steel gleam on high , and once more I shut my eye . 

 as I do so I hear the voice of a man thunder out in tone that ring 
 and echo down the rocky way - 

 " Cease ! " 

 then I faint , and as I do so it flash through my darken mind 
 that I be pass down into the last oblivion of death . 



 ix 

 a little foot 

 when I open my eye again I find myself lie on a skin mat not far 
 from the fire round which we have be gather for that dreadful feast . 
 near I lie Leo , still apparently in a swoon , and over he be bend 
 the tall form of the girl Ustane , who be wash a deep spear wound 
 in his side with cold water preparatory to bind it up with linen . 
 lean against the wall of the cave behind she be Job , apparently 
 uninjured , but bruised and tremble . on the other side of the fire , 
 toss about this way and that , as though they have throw themselves 
 down to sleep in some moment of absolute exhaustion , be the body of 
 those whom we have kill in our frightful struggle for life . I count 
 they : there be twelve besides the woman , and the corpse of poor 
 Mahomed , who have die by my hand , which , the fire - stain pot at its 
 side , be place at the end of the irregular line . to the left a body of 
 man be engage in bind the arm of the survivor of the cannibal 
 behind they , and then fasten they two and two . the villain be 
 submit with a look of sulky indifference upon their face which 
 accord ill with the baffled fury that gleam in their sombre eye . 
 in front of these man , direct the operation , stand no other than our 
 friend Billali , look rather tired , but particularly patriarchal 
 with his flow beard , and as cool and unconcerned as though he be 
 superintend the cutting up of an ox . 

 presently he turn , and perceive that I be sit up advanced 
 to I , and with the utmost courtesy say that he trust that I feel 
 well . I answer that at present I scarcely know how I feel , except 
 that I ache all over . 

 then he bend down and examine Leo 's wound . 

 " it be an evil cut , " he say , " but the spear have not pierce the 
 entrail . he will recover . " 

 " thank to thy arrival , my father , " I answer . " in another minute we 
 should all have be beyond the reach of recovery , for those devil of 
 thine would have slay we as they would have slay our servant , " and I 
 point towards Mahomed . 

 the old man grind his tooth , and I see an extraordinary expression of 
 malignity light up his eye . 

 " fear not , my son , " he answer . " Vengeance shall be take on they such 
 as would make the flesh twist upon the bone merely to hear of it . to 
  she shall they go , and her vengeance shall be worthy of her greatness . 
 that man , " point to Mahomed , " I tell thee that man would have die a 
 merciful death to the death these hyæna - man shall die . tell I , I pray 
 of thee , how it come about . " 

 in a few word I sketch what have happen . 

 " ah , so , " he answer . " Thou seest , my son , here there be a custom that 
 if a stranger come into this country he may be slay by ' the pot , ' and 
 eat . " 

 " it be hospitality turn upside down , " I answer feebly . " in our 
 country we entertain a stranger , and give he food to eat . here ye eat 
 he , and be entertain . " 

 " it be a custom , " he answer , with a shrug . " myself I think it an evil 
 one ; but then , " he add by an afterthought , " I do not like the taste 
 of stranger , especially after they have wander through the swamp and 
 live on wild - fowl . when She - who - must - be - obey send order that ye 
 be to be save alive she say naught of the black man , therefore , 
 be hyæna , these man lust after his flesh , and the woman it be , 
 whom thou didst rightly slay , who put it into their evil heart to 
 hot - pot he . well , they will have their reward . well for they would it 
 be if they have never see the light than that they should stand before 
  she in her terrible anger . Happy be those of they who die by your 
 hand . " 

 " ah , " he go on , " it be a gallant fight that ye fight . know thou 
 that , long - arm old baboon that thou art , thou hast crush in the rib 
 of those two who be lay out there as though they be but as the shell 
 on an egg ? and the young one , the lion , it be a beautiful stand that 
 he make - one against so many - three do he slay outright , and that one 
 there " - and he point to a body that be still move a little - " will 
 die anon , for his head be crack across , and other of those who be 
 bind be hurt . it be a gallant fight , and thou and he have make a 
 friend of I by it , for I love to see a well - fight fray . but tell I , 
 my son , the baboon - and now I think of it thy face , too , be hairy , and 
 altogether like a baboon 's - how be it that ye slay those with a hole in 
 they ? - Ye make a noise , they say , and slay they - they fall down on the 
 face at the noise ? " 

 I explain to he as well as I could , but very shortly - for I be 
 terribly weary , and only persuade to talk at all through fear 
 of offend one so powerful if I refuse to do so - what be the 
 property of gunpowder , and he instantly suggest that I should 
 illustrate what I say by operate on the person of one of the 
 prisoner . one , he say , never would be count , and it would not only 
 be very interesting to he , but would give I the opportunity of an 
 instalment of revenge . he be greatly astounded when I tell he that it 
 be not our custom to avenge ourselves in cold blood , and that we leave 
 vengeance to the law and a high power , of which he know nothing . I 
 add , however , that when I recover I would take he out shoot 
 with we , and he should kill an animal for himself , and at this he be as 
 pleased as a child at the promise of a new toy . 

 just then Leo open his eye beneath the stimulus of some brandy   of 
 which we still have a little   that Job have pour down his throat , and 
 our conversation come to an end . 

 after this we manage to get Leo , who be in a very poor way indeed , and 
 only half conscious , safely off to bed , support by Job and that brave 
 girl Ustane , to whom , have I not be afraid that she might resent it , I 
 would certainly have give a kiss for her splendid behaviour in save 
 my boy 's life at the risk of her own . but Ustane be not the sort of 
 young person with whom one would care to take liberty unless one be 
 perfectly certain that they would not be misunderstood , so I repress 
 my inclination . then , bruise and batter , but with a sense of safety 
 in my breast to which I have for some day be a stranger , I creep off 
 to my own little sepulchre , not forget before I lay down in it to 
 thank Providence from the bottom of my heart that it be not a sepulchre 
 indeed , as , save for a merciful combination of event that I can only 
 attribute to its protection , it would certainly have be for I that 
 night . few man have be near their end and yet escape it than we 
 be on that dreadful day . 

 I be a bad sleeper at the good of time , and my dream that night when 
 at last I get to rest be not of the pleasantest . the awful vision of 
 poor Mahomed struggle to escape the red - hot pot would haunt they , and 
 then in the background , as it be , a veiled form be always hover , 
 which , from time to time , seem to draw the covering from its body , 
 reveal now the perfect shape of a lovely bloom woman , and now 
 again the white bone of a grinning skeleton , and which , as it veil 
 and unveil , utter the mysterious and apparently meaningless 
 sentence : - 

 " that which be alive and hath know death , and that which be dead yet 
 can never die , for in the Circle of the Spirit life be naught and death 
 be naught . yea , all thing live for ever , though at time they sleep and 
 be forget . " 

 the morning come at last , but when it come I find that I be too stiff 
 and sore to rise . about seven Job arrive , limp terribly , and with 
 his face the colour of a rotten apple , and tell I that Leo have sleep 
 fairly , but be very weak . two hour afterwards Billali   Job call 
 he " Billy - goat , " to which , indeed , his white beard give he some 
 resemblance , or more familiarly , " Billy "   come too , bear a lamp in 
 his hand , his tower form reach nearly to the roof of the little 
 chamber . I pretend to be asleep , and through the crack of my eyelid 
 watch his sardonic but handsome old face . he fix his hawk - like eye 
 upon I , and stroke his glorious white beard , which , by the way , 
 would have be worthy a hundred a year to any London barber as an 
 advertisement . 

 " ah ! " I hear he mutter   Billali have a habit of mutter to himself , 
 " he be ugly - ugly as the other be beautiful - a very Baboon , it be a 
 good name . but I like the man . strange now , at my age , that I should 
 like a man . what say the proverb - ' Mistrust all man , and slay he whom 
 thou mistrustest overmuch ; and as for woman , flee from they , for they 
 be evil , and in the end will destroy thee . ' it be a good proverb , 
 especially the last part of it : I think that it must have come down from 
 the ancient . nevertheless I like this Baboon , and I wonder where they 
 teach he his trick , and I trust that she will not bewitch he . poor 
 Baboon ! he must be weary after that fight . I will go lest I should 
 awake he . " 

 I wait till he have turn and be nearly through the entrance , walk 
 softly on tiptoe , and then I call after he . 

 " my father , " I say , " be it thou ? " 

 " yes , my son , it be I ; but let I not disturb thee . I do but come to 
 see how thou didst fare , and to tell thee that those who would have 
 slay thee , my Baboon , be by now far on their road to she . she say 
 that ye also be to come at once , but I fear ye can not yet . " 

 " Nay , " I say , " not till we have recover a little ; but have I bear 
 out into the daylight , I pray thee , my father . I love not this place . " 

 " ah , no , " he answer , " it hath a sad air . I remember when I be a boy I 
 find the body of a fair woman lie where thou liest now , yes , on that 
 very bench . she be so beautiful that I be will not to creep in hither with 
 a lamp and gaze upon she . have it not be for her cold hand , almost 
 could I think that she sleep and would one day awake , so fair and 
 peaceful be she in her robe of white . White be she , too , and her 
 hair be yellow and lie down she almost to the foot . there be many such 
 still in the tomb at the place where she be , for those who set they 
 there have a way I know naught of , whereby to keep their beloved out of 
 the crumble hand of Decay , even when Death have slay they . ay , day 
 by day I come hither , and gaze on she till at last - laugh not at I , 
 strange , for I be but a silly lad - I learn to love that dead form , 
 that shell which once have hold a life that no more be . I would creep 
 up to she and kiss her cold face , and wonder how many man have live and 
 die since she be , and who have love she and embrace she in the day 
 that long have pass away . and , my Baboon , I think I learn wisdom from 
 that dead one , for of a truth it teach I of the littleness of life , 
 and the length of death , and how all thing that be under the sun go 
 down one path , and be for ever forget . and so I muse , and it seem 
 to I that wisdom flow into I from the dead , till one day my mother , 
 a watchful woman , but hasty - minded , see I be change , follow I , 
 and see the beautiful white one , and fear that I be bewitch , as , 
 indeed , I be . so half in dread , and half in anger , she take up the 
 lamp , and stand the dead woman up against the wall even there , set 
 fire to her hair , and she burn fiercely , even down to the foot , for 
 those who be thus keep burn excellently well . 

 " see , my son , there on the roof be yet the smoke of her burning . " 

 I look up doubtfully , and there , sure enough , on the roof of the 
 sepulchre , be a peculiarly unctuous and sooty mark , three foot or more 
 across . Doubtless it have in the course of year be rub off the 
 side of the little cave , but on the roof it remain , and there be no 
 mistake its appearance . 

 " she burn , " he go on in a meditative way , " even to the foot , but the 
 foot I come back and save , cut the burn bone from they , and 
 hide they under the stone bench there , wrap up in a piece of linen . 
 surely , I remember it as though it be but yesterday . perchance they 
 be there , if none have find they , even to this hour . of a truth I have 
 not enter this chamber from that time to this very day . stay , I will 
 look , " and , kneel down , he grope about with his long arm in the 
 recess under the stone bench . presently his face brighten , and with an 
 exclamation he pull something forth which be cake in dust ; which he 
 shake on to the floor . it be cover with the remain of a rotting rag , 
 which he undo , and reveal to my astonished gaze a beautifully shape 
 and almost white woman 's foot , look as fresh and firm as though it 
 have but now be place there . 

 " Thou seest , my son , the Baboon , " he say , in a sad voice , " I spake the 
 truth to thee , for here be yet one foot remain . take it , my son , and 
 gaze upon it . " 

 I take this cold fragment of mortality in my hand and look at it in 
 the light of the lamp with feeling which I can not describe , so mixed 
 up be they between astonishment , fear , and fascination . it be light , 
 much light I should say than it have be in the live state , and the 
 flesh to all appearance be still flesh , though about it there clung a 
 faintly aromatic odour . for the rest it be not shrink or shrivel , or 
 even black and unsightly , like the flesh of egyptian mummy , but plump 
 and fair , and , except where it have be slightly burn , perfect as on 
 the day of death - a very triumph of embalming . 

 poor little foot ! I set it down upon the stone bench where it have lie 
 for so many thousand year , and wonder whose be the beauty that 
 it have upborne through the pomp and pageantry of a forgotten 
 civilisation - first as a merry child 's , then as a blushing maid 's , and 
 lastly as a perfect woman 's . through what hall of Life have its soft 
 step echo , and in the end , with what courage have it trodden down the 
 dusty way of death ! to whose side have it steal in the hush of night 
 when the black slave sleep upon the marble floor , and who have listen 
 for its stealing ? shapely little foot ! well might it have be set upon 
 the proud neck of a conqueror bent at last to woman 's beauty , and 
 well might the lip of noble and of king have be press upon its 
 jewel whiteness . 

 I wrap up this relic of the past in the remnant of the old linen rag 
 which have evidently form a portion of its owner 's grave - clothe , for 
 it be partially burn , and put it away in my Gladstone bag - a strange 
 combination , I think . then with Billali 's help I stagger off to see 
 Leo . I find he dreadfully bruise , bad even than myself , perhaps 
 owe to the excessive whiteness of his skin , and faint and weak with 
 the loss of blood from the flesh wound in his side , but for all that 
 cheerful as a cricket , and ask for some breakfast . Job and Ustane 
 get he on to the bottom , or rather the sacking of a litter , which be 
 remove from its pole for that purpose , and with the aid of old Billali 
 carry he out into the shade at the mouth of the cave , from which , by 
 the way , every trace of the slaughter of the previous night have now be 
 remove , and there we all breakfast , and indeed spend that day , and 
 most of the two follow one . 

 on the third morning Job and myself be practically recover . Leo also 
 be so much well that I yield to Billali 's often express entreaty , 
 and agree to start at once upon our journey to K"r , which we be tell 
 be the name of the place where the mysterious she live , though I 
 still fear for its effect upon Leo , and especially lest the motion 
 should cause his wound , which be scarcely skin over , to break open 
 again . indeed , have it not be for Billali 's evident anxiety to get off , 
 which lead we to suspect that some difficulty or danger might threaten we 
 if we do not comply with it , I would not have consent to go . 



 x 

 speculation 

 within an hour of our finally decide to start five litter be 
 bring up to the door of the cave , each accompany by four regular 
 bearer and two spare hand , also a band of about fifty armed Amahagger , 
 who be to form the escort and carry the baggage . three of these 
 litter , of course , be for we , and one for Billali , who , I be 
 immensely relieve to hear , be to be our companion , while the fifth I 
 presume be for the use of Ustane . 

 " do the lady go with we , my father ? " I ask of Billali , as he stand 
 superintend thing in general . 

 he shrug his shoulder as he answer - 

 " if she will . in this country the woman do what they please . we worship 
 they , and give they their way , because without they the world could not 
 go on ; they be the source of life . " 

 " ah , " I say , the matter never have strike I quite in that light 
 before . 

 " we worship they , " he go on , " up to a point , till at last they get 
 unbearable , which , " he add , " they do about every second generation . " 

 " and then what do you do ? " I ask , with curiosity . 

 " then , " he answer , with a faint smile , " we rise , and kill the old 
 one as an example to the young one , and to show they that we be the 
 strong . my poor wife be kill in that way three year ago . it be 
 very sad , but to tell thee the truth , my son , life have be happy 
 since , for my age protect I from the young one . " 

 " in short , " I reply , quote the saying of a great man whose wisdom 
 have not yet lighten the darkness of the Amahagger , " thou hast find 
 thy position one of great freedom and less responsibility . " 

 this phrase puzzle he a little at first from its vagueness , though I 
 think my translation hit off its sense very well , but at last he see it , 
 and appreciate it . 

 " yes , yes , my Baboon , " he say , " I see it now , but all the 
 ' responsibility ' be kill , at least some of they be , and that be 
 why there be so few old woman about just now . well , they bring it on 
 themselves . as for this girl , " he go on , in a graver tone , " I know 
 not what to say . she be a brave girl , and she love the Lion   Leo ; thou 
 saw how she cling to he , and save his life . also , she be , accord 
 to our custom , we d to he , and have a right to go where he go , unless , " 
 he add significantly , " she would say she no , for her word override 
 all right . " 

 " and if she bid she leave he , and the girl refuse ? what then ? " 

 " if , " he say , with a shrug , " the hurricane bid the tree to bend , and 
 it will not ; what happen ? " 

 and then , without wait for an answer , he turn and walk to his 
 litter , and in ten minute from that time we be all well under way . 

 it take we an hour and more to cross the cup of the volcanic plain , 
 and another half - hour or so to climb the edge on the farth side . once 
 there , however , the view be a very fine one . before we be a long steep 
 slope of grassy plain , break here and there by clump of tree mostly 
 of the thorn tribe . at the bottom of this gentle slope , some nine or ten 
 mile away , we could make out a dim sea of marsh , over which the foul 
 vapour hang like smoke about a city . it be easy go for the bearer 
 down the slope , and by midday we have reach the border of the dismal 
 swamp . here we halt to eat our midday meal , and then , follow a 
 winding and devious path , plunge into the morass . presently the path , 
 at any rate to our unaccustomed eye , grow so faint as to be almost 
 indistinguishable from those make by the aquatic beast and bird , and 
 it be to this day a mystery to I how our bearer find their way across 
 the marsh . ahead of the cavalcade march two man with long pole , 
 which they now and again plunge into the ground before they , the reason 
 of this be that the nature of the soil frequently change from cause 
 with which I be not acquaint , so that place which might be safe 
 enough to cross one month would certainly swallow the wayfarer the next . 
 never do I see a more dreary and depressing scene . mile on mile of 
 quagmire , varied only by bright green strip of comparatively solid 
 ground , and by deep and sullen pool fringe with tall rush , in which 
 the bittern boom and the frog croak incessantly : mile on mile of 
 it without a break , unless the fever fog can be call a break . the only 
 life in this great morass be that of the aquatic bird , and the animal 
 that feed on they , of both of which there be vast number . geese , 
 crane , duck , teal , coot , snipe , and plover swarm all around we , many 
 being of variety that be quite new to I , and all so tame that one 
 could almost have knock they over with a stick . among these bird I 
 especially notice a very beautiful variety of paint snipe , almost the 
 size of a woodcock , and with a flight more resembling that bird 's than 
 an english snipe 's . in the pool , too , be a species of small alligator 
 or enormous iguana , I do not know which , that feed , Billali tell I , upon 
 the waterfowl , also large quantity of a hideous black water - snake , of 
 which the bite be very dangerous , though not , I gather , so deadly as a 
 cobra 's or a puff adder 's . the bull - frog be also very large , and 
 with voice proportionate to their size ; and as for the mosquito - the 
 " musqueteer , " as Job call they - they be , if possible , even bad 
 than they have be on the river , and torment we greatly . undoubtedly , 
 however , the bad feature of the swamp be the awful smell of 
 rotting vegetation that hang about it , which be at time positively 
 overpowering , and the malarious exhalation that accompany it , which 
 we be of course oblige to breathe . 

 on we go through it all , till at last the sun sink in sullen splendour 
 just as we reach a spot of rise ground about two acre in extent - a 
 little oasis of dry in the midst of the miry wilderness - where Billali 
 announce that we be to camp . the camping , however , turn out to be 
 a very simple process , and consist , in fact , in sit down on the 
 ground round a scanty fire make of dry reed and some wood that have be 
 bring with we . however , we make the good we could of it , and smoke 
 and eat with such appetite as the smell of damp , stifle heat would 
 allow , for it be very hot on this low land , and yet , oddly enough , 
 chilly at time . but , however hot it be , we be glad enough to keep 
 near the fire , because we find that the mosquito do not like the 
 smoke . presently we roll ourselves up in our blanket and try to 
 go to sleep , but so far as I be concern the bull - frog , and the 
 extraordinary roaring and alarming sound produce by hundred of snipe 
 hover high in the air , make sleep an impossibility , to say nothing of 
 our other discomfort . I turn and look at Leo , who be next I ; he 
 be doze , but his face have a flushed appearance that I do not like , 
 and by the flicker fire - light I see Ustane , who be lie on the 
 other side of he , raise herself from time to time upon her elbow , and 
 look at he anxiously enough . 

 however , I could do nothing for he , for we have all already take a 
 good dose of quinine , which be the only preventive we have ; so I lay and 
 watch the star come out by thousand , till all the immense arch of 
 heaven be strew with glitter point , and every point a world ! 
 here be a glorious sight by which man might well measure his own 
 insignificance ! soon I give up think about it , for the mind wearie 
 easily when it strive to grapple with the Infinite , and to trace the 
 footstep of the Almighty as he stride from sphere to sphere , or 
 deduce his purpose from his work . such thing be not for we to know . 
 Knowledge be to the strong , and we be weak . too much wisdom would 
 perchance blind our imperfect sight , and too much strength would make 
 we drunk , and over - weight our feeble reason till it fall and we be 
 drown in the depth of our own vanity . for what be the first result 
 of man 's increase knowledge interpret from Nature 's book by the 
 persistent effort of his purblind observation ? it be not but too often 
 to make he question the existence of his maker , or indeed of any 
 intelligent purpose beyond his own ? the truth be veil , because we 
 could no more look upon her glory than we can upon the sun . it would 
 destroy we . full knowledge be not for man as man be here , for his 
 capacity , which he be apt to think so great , be indeed but small . the 
 vessel be soon fill , and , be one - thousandth part of the unutterable 
 and silent wisdom that direct the rolling of those shin sphere , and 
 the Force which make they roll , press into it , it would be shatter 
 into fragment . perhaps in some other place and time it may be 
 otherwise , who can tell ? here the lot of man bear of the flesh be but 
 to endure midst toil and tribulation , to catch at the bubble blow by 
 Fate , which he call pleasure , thankful if before they burst they rest 
 a moment in his hand , and when the tragedy be play out , and his hour 
 come to perish , to pass humbly whither he know not . 

 above I , as I lay , shine the eternal star , and there at my foot the 
 impish marsh - bear ball of fire roll this way and that , vapour - toss 
 and earth - desiring , and methought that in the two I see a type and image 
 of what man be , and what perchance man may one day be , if the living 
 Force who ordain he and they should so ordain this also . oh , that it 
 might be ours to rest year by year upon that high level of the heart to 
 which at time we momentarily attain ! oh , that we could shake loose the 
 prisone pinion of the soul and soar to that superior point , whence , 
 like to some traveller look out through space from Darien 's giddiest 
 peak , we might gaze with spiritual eye deep into Infinity ! 

 what would it be to cast off this earthy robe , to have do for ever 
 with these earthy thought and miserable desire ; no long , like those 
 corpse candle , to be toss this way and that , by force beyond our 
 control ; or which , if we can theoretically control they , we be at time 
 drive by the exigency of our nature to obey ! yes , to cast they off , 
 to have do with the foul and thorny place of the world ; and , like to 
 those glitter point above I , to rest on high wrap for ever in 
 the brightness of our well self , that even now shin in we as fire 
 faintly shin within those lurid ball , and lie down our littleness in 
 that wide glory of our dream , that invisible but surround Good , from 
 which all truth and beauty come ! 

 these and many such thought pass through my mind that night . they 
 come to torment we all at time . I say to torment , for , alas ! thinking 
 can only serve to measure out the helplessness of thought . what be the 
 purpose of our feeble crying in the awful silence of space ? can our dim 
 intelligence read the secret of that star - strew sky ? do any answer 
 come out of it ? never any at all , nothing but echo and fantastic 
 vision ! and yet we believe that there be an answer , and that upon a 
 time a new Dawn will come blush down the way of our endure night . 
 we believe it , for its reflect beauty even now shin up continually 
 in our heart from beneath the horizon of the grave , and we call it 
 Hope . without Hope we should suffer moral death , and by the help of Hope 
 we yet may climb to Heaven , or at the bad , if she also prove but a 
 kindly mockery give to hold we from despair , be gently lower into the 
 abyss of eternal sleep . 

 then I fall to reflect upon the undertaking on which we be bent , 
 and what a wild one it be , and yet how strangely the story seem to 
 fit in with what have be write century ago upon the sherd . who 
 be this extraordinary woman , queen over a people apparently as 
 extraordinary as herself , and reign amidst the vestige of a lost 
 civilisation ? and what be the meaning of this story of the Fire that 
 give unende life ? could it be possible that any fluid or essence 
 should exist which might so fortify these fleshy wall that they 
 should from age to age resist the mine and battering of decay ? it be 
 possible , though not probable . the infinite continuation of life would 
 not , as poor Vincey say , be so marvellous a thing as the production of 
 life and its temporary endurance . and if it be true , what then ? the 
 person who find it could no doubt rule the world . he could accumulate 
 all the wealth in the world , and all the power , and all the wisdom that 
 be power . he might give a lifetime to the study of each art or science . 
 well , if that be so , and this she be practically immortal , which 
 I do not for one moment believe , how be it that , with all these thing 
 at her foot , she prefer to remain in a cave amongst a society 
 of cannibal ? this surely settle the question . the whole story be 
 monstrous , and only worthy of the superstitious day in which it be 
 write . at any rate I be very sure that I would not attempt to 
 attain unende life . I have have far too many worry and disappointment 
 and secret bitterness during my forty odd year of existence to wish 
 that this state of affair should be continue indefinitely . and yet I 
 suppose that my life have be , comparatively speak , a happy one . 

 and then , reflect that at the present moment there be far more 
 likelihood of our earthly career be cut exceedingly short than of 
 their be unduly prolong , I at last manage to get to sleep , a fact 
 for which anybody who read this narrative , if anybody ever do , may 
 very probably be thankful . 

 when I wake again it be just dawn , and the guard and bearer be 
 move about like ghost through the dense morning mist , get ready 
 for our start . the fire have die quite down , and I rise and stretch 
 myself , shiver in every limb from the damp cold of the dawn . then I 
 look at Leo . he be sit up , hold his hand to his head , and I 
 see that his face be flushed and his eye bright , and yet yellow round 
 the pupil . 

 " well , Leo , " I say , " how do you feel ? " 

 " I feel as though I be go to die , " he answer hoarsely . " my head 
 be split , my body be tremble , and I be as sick as a cat . " 

 I whistle , or if I do not whistle I feel inclined to - Leo have get a 
 sharp attack of fever . I go to Job , and ask he for the quinine , 
 of which fortunately we have still a good supply , only to find that Job 
 himself be not much well . he complain of pain across the back , and 
 dizziness , and be almost incapable of help himself . then I do the 
 only thing it be possible to do under the circumstance - give they both 
 about ten grain of quinine , and take a slightly small dose myself as 
 a matter of precaution . after that I find Billali , and explain to he 
 how matter stand , ask at the same time what he think have well be 
 do . he come with I , and look at Leo and Job   whom , by the way , 
 he have name the Pig on account of his fatness , round face , and small 
 eye . 

 " ah , " he say , when we be out of earshot , " the fever ! I think so . 
 the Lion have it badly , but he be young , and he may live . as for the Pig , 
 his attack be not so bad ; it be the ' little fever ' which he have ; that 
 always begin with pain across the back , it will spend itself upon his 
 fat . " 

 " can they go on , my father ? " I ask . 

 " Nay , my son , they must go on . if they stop here they will certainly 
 die ; also , they will be well in the litter than on the ground . by 
 to - night , if all go well , we shall be across the marsh and in good 
 air . come , let we lift they into the litter and start , for it be very 
 bad to stand still in this morning fog . we can eat our meal as we go . " 

 this we accordingly do , and with a heavy heart I once more set out upon 
 our strange journey . for the first three hour all go as well as 
 could be expect , and then an accident happen that nearly lose we the 
 pleasure of the company of our venerable friend Billali , whose litter 
 be lead the cavalcade . we be go through a particularly 
 dangerous stretch of quagmire , in which the bearer sometimes sink up to 
 their knee . indeed , it be a mystery to I how they contrive to 
 carry the heavy litter at all over such ground as that which we be 
 traverse , though the two spare hand , as well as the four regular 
 one , have of course to put their shoulder to the pole . 

 presently , as we blunder and flounder along , there be a sharp 
 cry , then a storm of exclamation , and , last of all , a most tremendous 
 splash , and the whole caravan halt . 

 I jump out of my litter and run forward . about twenty yard ahead be 
 the edge of one of those sullen peaty pool of which I have speak , the 
 path we be follow run along the top of its bank , that , as it 
 happen , be a steep one . look towards this pool , to my horror I see 
 that Billali 's litter be float on it , and as for Billali himself , he 
 be nowhere to be see . to make matter clear I may as well explain 
 at once what have happen . one of Billali 's bearer have unfortunately 
 trodden on a bask snake , which have bite he in the leg , whereon he 
 have , not unnaturally , let go of the pole , and then , find that he 
 be tumble down the bank , grasp at the litter to save himself . the 
 result of this be what might have be expect . the litter be pull 
 over the edge of the bank , the bearer let go , and the whole thing , 
 include Billali and the man who have be bite , roll into the slimy 
 pool . when I get to the edge of the water neither of they be to be 
 see ; indeed , the unfortunate bearer never be see again . either he 
 strike his head against something , or get wedge in the mud , or possibly 
 the snake - bite paralyze he . at any rate he vanish . but though 
 Billali be not to be see , his whereabouts be clear enough from the 
 agitation of the float litter , in the bear cloth and curtain of 
 which he be entangle . 

 " he be there ! our father be there ! " say one of the man , but he do not 
 stir a finger to help he , nor do any of the other . they simply stand 
 and star at the water . 

 " out of the way , you brute ! " I shout in English , and throw off my 
 hat I take a run and spring well out into the horrid slimy - look pool . 
 a couple of stroke take I to where Billali be struggle beneath the 
 cloth . 

 somehow , I do not quite know how , I manage to push it free of he , 
 and his venerable head all cover with green slime , like that of a 
 yellowish Bacchus with ivy leaf , emerge upon the surface of the 
 water . the rest be easy , for Billali be an eminently practical 
 individual , and have the common sense not to grasp hold of I as drown 
 people often do , so I get he by the arm , and tow he to the bank , 
 through the mud   out   of which we be with difficulty drag . such a filthy 
 spectacle as we present I have never see before or since , and it will 
 perhaps give some idea of the almost superhuman dignity of Billali 's 
 appearance when I say that , cough , half - drown , and cover with mud 
 and green slime as he be , with his beautiful beard come to a dripping 
 point , like a Chinaman 's freshly - oil pig - tail , he still look 
 venerable and impose . 

 " ye dog , " he say , address the bearer , as soon as he have 
 sufficiently recover to speak , " ye leave I , your father , to drown . 
 have it not be for this stranger , my son the Baboon , assuredly I should 
 have drown . well , I will remember it , " and he fix they with his 
 gleaming though slightly watery eye , in a way I see that they do not 
 like , though they try to appear sulkily indifferent . 

 " as for thee , my son , " the old man go on , turn towards I and 
 grasp my hand , " rest assure that I be thy friend through good and 
 evil . Thou hast save my life : perchance a day may come when I shall 
 save thine . " 

 after that we clean ourselves as good we could , fish out the litter , 
 and go on , minus the man who have be drown . I do not know if 
 it be owe to his be an unpopular character , or from native 
 indifference and selfishness of temperament , but I be bind to say that 
 nobody seem to grieve much over his sudden and final disappearance , 
 unless , perhaps , it be the man who have to do his share of the work . 



 XI 

 the PLAIN of K"R 

 about an hour before sundown we at last , to my unbounded gratitude , 
 emerge from the great belt of marsh on to land that swell upwards in 
 a succession of rolling wave . just on the hither side of the crest 
 of the first wave we halt for the night . my first act be to examine 
 Leo 's condition . it be , if anything , bad than in the morning , and a 
 new and very distressing feature , vomit , set in , and continue till 
 dawn . not one wink of sleep do I get that night , for I pass it in 
 assist Ustane , who be one of the most gentle and indefatigable 
 nurse I ever see , to wait upon Leo and Job . however , the air here be 
 warm and genial without be too hot , and there be no mosquito 
 to speak of . also we be above the level of the marsh mist , which lay 
 stretch beneath we like the dim smoke - pall over a city , light up here 
 and there by the wandering globe of fen fire . thus it will be see that 
 we be , speak comparatively , in clover . 

 by dawn on the following morning Leo be quite light - head , and fancy 
 that he be divide into half . I be dreadfully distressed , and begin 
 to wonder with a sort of sick fear what the end of the attack would be . 
 alas ! I have hear but too much of how these attack generally terminate . 
 as I be wonder Billali come up and say that we must be get on , 
 more especially as , in his opinion , if Leo do not reach some spot 
 where he could be quiet , and have proper nursing , within the next twelve 
 hour , his life would only be a matter of a day or two . I could not but 
 agree with he , so we get Leo into the litter , and start on , Ustane 
 walk by his side to keep the fly off he , and see that he do not 
 throw himself out on to the ground . 

 within half an hour of sunrise we have reach the top of the rise of 
 which I have speak , and a most beautiful view break upon our gaze . 
 beneath we be a rich stretch of country , verdant with grass and lovely 
 with foliage and flower . in the background , at a distance , so far as I 
 could judge , of some eighteen mile from where we then stand , a huge and 
 extraordinary mountain rise abruptly from the plain . the base of this 
 great mountain appear to consist of a grassy slope , but rise from 
 this , I should say , from subsequent observation , at a height of about 
 five hundred foot above the level of the plain , be a most tremendous 
 and absolutely precipitous wall of bare rock , quite twelve or fifteen 
 hundred foot in height . the shape of the mountain , which be undoubtedly 
 of volcanic origin , be round , and of course , as only a segment of its 
 circle be visible , it be difficult to estimate its exact size , which 
 be enormous . I afterwards discover that it could cover less than 
 fifty square mile of ground . anything more grand and impose than 
 the sight present by this great natural castle , start in solitary 
 grandeur from the level of the plain , I never see , and I suppose I never 
 shall . its very solitude add to its majesty , and its tower cliff 
 seem to kiss the sky . indeed , generally speak , they be clothe in 
 cloud that lie in fleecy mass upon their broad and level battlement . 

 I sit up in my hammock and gaze out across the plain at this thrilling 
 and majestic sight , and I suppose that Billali notice it , for he 
 bring his litter alongside . 

 " behold the house of ' she - who - must - be - obey ! ' " he say . " have ever a 
 queen such a throne before ? " 

 " it be wonderful , my father , " I answer . " but how do we enter . those 
 cliff look hard to climb . " 

 " thou shalt see , my Baboon . look now at the path below we . what think 
 thou that it be ? thou art a wise man . come , tell I . " 

 I look , and see what appear to be the line of roadway run 
 straight towards the base of the mountain , though it be cover with 
 turf . there be high bank on each side of it , break here and there , 
 but fairly continuous on the whole , the meaning of which I do not 
 understand . it seem so very odd that anybody should embank a roadway . 

 " well , my father , " I answer , " I suppose that it be a road , otherwise 
 I should have be incline to say that it be the bed of a river , or 
 rather , " I add , observe the extraordinary directness of the cutting , 
 " of a canal . " 

 Billali - who , by the way , be none the bad for his immersion of the 
 day before - nod his head sagely as he reply - 

 " thou art right , my son . it be a channel cut out by those who be 
 before we in this place to carry away water . of this I be sure : within 
 the rocky circle of the mountain whither we journey be once a great 
 lake . but those who be before we , by wonderful art of which I 
 know naught , hew a path for the water through the solid rock of the 
 mountain , pierce even to the bed of the lake . but first they cut the 
 channel that thou seest across the plain . then , when at last the water 
 burst out , it rush down the channel that have be make to receive it , 
 and cross this plain till it reach the low land behind the rise , 
 and there , perchance , it make the swamp through which we have come . then 
 when the lake be drain dry , the people whereof I speak build a mighty 
 city on its bed , whereof naught but ruin and the name of K"r yet 
 remaineth , and from age to age hew the cave and passage that thou 
 wilt see . " 

 " it may be , " I answer ; " but if so , how be it that the lake do not 
 fill up again with the rain and the water of the spring ? " 

 " Nay , my son , the people be a wise people , and they leave a drain to 
 keep it clear . seest thou the river to the right ? " and he point to a 
 fair - sized stream that wound away across the plain , some four mile from 
 we . " that be the drain , and it come out through the mountain wall where 
 this cutting go in . at first , perhaps , the water run down this canal , 
 but afterwards the people turn it , and use the cutting for a road . " 

 " and be there then no other place where one may enter into the great 
 mountain , " I ask , " except through that drain ? " 

 " there be a place , " he answer , " where cattle and man on foot may cross 
 with much labour , but it be secret . a year might thou search and 
 shouldst never find it . it be only use once a year , when the herd of 
 cattle that have be fat on the slope of the mountain , and on this 
 plain , be drive into the space within . " 

 " and do she live there always ? " I ask , " or do she come at time 
 without the mountain ? " 

 " Nay , my son , where she be , there she be . " 

 by now we be well on to the great plain , and I be examine with 
 delight the varied beauty of its semi - tropical flower and tree , the 
 latter of which grow singly , or at most in clump of three or four , much 
 of the timber being of large size , and belong apparently to a variety 
 of evergreen oak . there be also many palm , some of they more than one 
 hundred foot high , and the large and most beautiful tree fern that 
 I ever see , about which hang cloud of jewelled honeysucker and 
 great - wing butterfly . wander about among the tree or crouch 
 in the long and feather grass be all variety of game , from 
 rhinocerote down . I see a rhinoceros , buffalo   a large herd , eland , 
 quagga , and sable antelope , the most beautiful of all the buck , not 
 to mention many small variety of game , and three ostrich which 
 scud away at our approach like white drift before a gale . so 
 plentiful be the game that at last I could stand it no long . I have 
 a single barrel sport Martini with I in the litter , the " Express " 
 be too cumbersome , and espy a beautiful fat eland rub himself 
 under one of the oak - like tree , I jump out of the litter , and 
 proceed to creep as near to he as I could . he let I come within 
 eighty yard , and then turn his head , and star at I , preparatory to 
 run away . I lift the rifle , and take he about midway down the 
 shoulder , for he be side on to I , fire . I never make a clean shot 
 or a well kill in all my small experience , for the great buck sprang 
 right up into the air and fall dead . the bearer , who have all halt to 
 see the performance , give a murmur of surprise , an unwonted compliment 
 from these sullen people , who never appear to be surprised at anything , 
 and a party of the guard at once run off to cut the animal up . as for 
 myself , though I be long to have a look at he , I saunter back 
 to my litter as though I have be in the habit of kill eland all my 
 life , feel that I have go up several degree in the estimation 
 of the Amahagger , who look on the whole thing as a very high - class 
 manifestation of witchcraft . as a matter of fact , however , I have 
 never see an eland in a wild state before . Billali receive I with 
 enthusiasm . 

 " it be wonderful , my son the Baboon , " he cry ; " wonderful ! thou art 
 a very great man , though so ugly . have I not see , surely I would never 
 have believe . and thou sayest that thou wilt teach I to slay in this 
 fashion ? " 

 " certainly , my father , " I say airily ; " it be nothing . " 

 but all the same I firmly make up my mind that when " my father " Billali 
 begin to fire I would without fail lie down or take refuge behind a 
 tree . 

 after this little incident nothing happen of any note till about an 
 hour and a half before sundown , when we arrive beneath the shadow of 
 the tower volcanic mass that I have already describe . it be quite 
 impossible for I to describe its grim grandeur as it appear to I 
 while my patient bearer toil along the bed of the ancient watercourse 
 towards the spot where the rich brown - hue cliff shoot up from precipice 
 to precipice till its crown lose itself in a cloud . all I can say be 
 that it almost awe I by the intensity of its lonesome and most solemn 
 greatness . on we go up the bright and sunny slope , till at last the 
 creep shadow from above swallow up its brightness , and presently 
 we begin to pass through a cutting hewn in the live rock . Deeper 
 and deep grow this marvellous work , which must , I should say , have 
 employ thousand of man for many year . indeed , how it be ever 
 execute at all without the aid of blasting - powder or dynamite I can not 
 to this day imagine . it be and must remain one of the mystery of that 
 wild land . I can only suppose that these cutting and the vast cave 
 that have be hollow out of the rock they pierce be the State 
 undertaking of the people of K"r , who live here in the dim lose 
 age of the world , and , as in the case of the egyptian monument , be 
 execute by the force labour of ten of thousand of captive , carry 
 on through an indefinite number of century . but who be the people ? 

 at last we reach the face of the precipice itself , and find ourselves 
 look into the mouth of a dark tunnel that forcibly remind I of 
 those undertake by our nineteenth - century engineer in the construction 
 of railway line . out of this tunnel flow a considerable stream of 
 water . indeed , though I do not think that I have mention it , we have 
 follow this stream , which ultimately develop into the river I have 
 already describe as wind away to the right , from the spot where 
 the cutting in the solid rock commence . half of this cutting form a 
 channel for the stream , and half , which be place on a slightly high 
 level - eight foot perhaps - be devoted to the purpose of a roadway . at 
 the termination of the cutting , however , the stream turn off across 
 the plain and follow a channel of its own . at the mouth of the cave 
 the cavalcade be halt , and , while the man employ themselves in 
 light some earthenware lamp they have bring with they , Billali , 
 descend from his litter , inform I politely but firmly that the 
 order of she be that we be now to be blindfold , so that we 
 should not learn the secret of the path through the bowel of the 
 mountain . to this I , of course , assent cheerfully enough , but Job , 
 who be now very much well , notwithstanding the journey , do not like 
 it at all , fancy , I believe , that it be but a preliminary step to 
 be hot - potted . he be , however , a little consoled when I point out 
 to he that there be no hot pot at hand , and , so far as I know , no 
 fire to heat they in . as for poor Leo , after turn restlessly for 
 hour , he have , to my deep thankfulness , at last drop off into a sleep 
 or stupor , I do not know which , so there be no need to blindfold he . 
 the blindfolding be perform by bind a piece of the yellowish linen 
 whereof those of the Amahagger who condescend to wear anything in 
 particular make their dress , tightly round the eye . this linen I 
 afterwards discover be take from the tomb , and be not , as I have at 
 first suppose , of native manufacture . the bandage be then knot at 
 the back of the head , and finally bring down again and the end bind 
 under the chin to prevent its slipping . Ustane be , by the way , also 
 blindfold , I do not know why , unless it be from fear that she should 
 impart the secret of the route to we . 

 this operation perform we start on once more , and soon , by the 
 echo sound of the footstep of the bearer and the increase noise 
 of the water cause by reverberation in a confine space , I know that 
 we be enter into the bowel of the great mountain . it be an eerie 
 sensation , be bear along into the dead heart of the rock we know not 
 whither , but I be get use to eerie sensation by this time , and by 
 now be pretty well prepared for anything . so I lay still , and listen 
 to the tramp , tramp of the bearer and the rushing of the water , and 
 try to believe that I be enjoy myself . presently the man set up 
 the melancholy little chant that I have hear on the first night when we 
 be capture in the whaleboat , and the effect produce by their voice 
 be very curious , and quite indescribable . after a while the air begin 
 to get exceedingly thick and heavy , so much so , indeed , that I feel as 
 though I be go to choke , till at length the litter take a sharp 
 turn , then another and another , and the sound of the run water 
 cease . after this the air be fresher again , but the turn be 
 continuous , and to I , blindfold as I be , most bewildering . I try 
 to keep a map of they in my mind in case it might ever be necessary 
 for we to try and escape by this route , but , needless to say , fail 
 utterly . another half - hour or so pass , and then suddenly I become 
 aware that we be once more in the open air . I could see the light 
 through my bandage and feel its freshness on my face . a few more minute 
 and the caravan halt , and I hear billali order Ustane to remove her 
 bandage and undo our . without wait for her attention I get the knot 
 of mine loose , and look out . 

 as I anticipate , we have pass right through the precipice , and be 
 now on the farth side , and immediately beneath its beetle face . the 
 first thing I notice be that the cliff be not nearly so high here , not 
 so high I should say by five hundred foot , which prove that the bed of 
 the lake , or rather of the vast ancient crater in which we stand , be 
 much above the level of the surround plain . for the rest , we find 
 ourselves in a huge rock - surround cup , not unlike that of the first 
 place where we have sojourn , only ten time the size . indeed , I could 
 only just make out the frown line of the opposite cliff . a great 
 portion of the plain thus enclose by nature be cultivate , and fence 
 in with wall of stone place there to keep the cattle and goat , of 
 which there be large herd about , from break into the garden . 
 here and there rise great grass mound , and some mile away towards the 
 centre I think that I could see the outline of colossal ruin . I have 
 no time to observe anything more at the moment , for we be instantly 
 surround by crowd of Amahagger , similar in every particular to those 
 with whom we be already familiar , who , though they speak little , 
 press round we so closely as to obscure the view to a person lie 
 in a hammock . then all of a sudden a number of armed man arrange in 
 company , and marshal by officer who hold ivory wand in their 
 hand , come run swiftly towards we , have , so far as I could 
 make out , emerge from the face of the precipice like ant from their 
 burrow . these man as well as their officer be all rob in addition 
 to the usual leopard skin , and , as I gather , form the bodyguard of 
  she herself . 

 their leader advance to Billali , salute he by place his ivory wand 
 transversely across his forehead , and then ask some question which 
 I could not catch , and Billali have answer he the whole regiment 
 turn and march along the side of the cliff , our cavalcade of litter 
 follow in their track . after go thus for about half a mile we 
 halt once more in front of the mouth of a tremendous cave , measure 
 about sixty foot in height by eighty wide , and here Billali descend 
 finally , and request Job and myself to do the same . Leo , of course , 
 be far too ill to do anything of the sort . I do so , and we enter the 
 great cave , into which the light of the set sun penetrate for 
 some distance , while beyond the reach of the daylight it be faintly 
 illuminate with lamp which seem to I to stretch away for an almost 
 immeasurable distance , like the gas light of an empty London street . 
 the first thing I notice be that the wall be cover with 
 sculpture in bas - relief , of a sort , pictorially speak , similar to 
 those that I have describe upon the vas ; - love - scene principally , 
 then hunt picture , picture of execution , and the torture of 
 criminal by the placing of a , presumably , red - hot pot upon the head , 
 show whence our host have derive this pleasant practice . there 
 be very few battle - piece , though many of duel , and man run and 
 wrestling , and from this fact I be lead to believe that this people be 
 not much subject to attack by exterior foe , either on account of the 
 isolation of their position or because of their great strength . between 
 the picture be column of stone character of a formation absolutely 
 new to I ; at any rate , they be neither greek nor egyptian , nor 
 Hebrew , nor assyrian - that I be sure of . they look more like chinese 
 writing than any other that I be acquaint with . near to the entrance 
 of the cave both picture and writing be wear away , but far in 
 they be in many case absolutely fresh and perfect as the day on which 
 the sculptor have cease work on they . 

 the regiment of guard do not come far than the entrance to the 
 cave , where they form up to let we pass through . on enter the place 
 itself we be , however , meet by a man rob in white , who bow humbly , 
 but say nothing , which , as it afterwards appear that he be a deaf 
 mute , be not very wonderful . 

 run at right angle to the great cave , at a distance of some twenty 
 foot from the entrance , be a small cave or wide gallery , that be 
 pierce into the rock both to the right and to the left of the main 
 cavern . in front of the gallery to our left stand two guard , from which 
 circumstance I argue that it be the entrance to the apartment of 
  she herself . the mouth of the right - hand gallery be unguarde , and 
 along it the mute indicate that we be to go . walk a few yard down 
 this passage , which be light with lamp , we come to the entrance of 
 a chamber have a curtain make of some grass material , not unlike a 
 Zanzibar mat in appearance , hang over the doorway . this the mute draw 
 back with another profound obeisance , and lead the way into a good - sized 
 apartment , hewn , of course , out of the solid rock , but to my great 
 relief light by mean of a shaft pierce in the face of the precipice . 
 in this room be a stone bedstead , pot full of water for washing , and 
 beautifully tan leopard skin to serve as blanket . 

 here we leave Leo , who be still sleep heavily , and with he stop 
 Ustane . I notice that the mute give she a very sharp look , as much 
 as to say , " who be you , and by whose order do you come here ? " then he 
 conduct we to another similar room which Job take , and then to two 
 more that be respectively occupy by Billali and myself . 



 XII 

 " SHE " 

 the first care of Job and myself , after see to Leo , be to wash 
 ourselves and put on clean clothing , for what we be wear have not 
 be change since the loss of the dhow . fortunately , as I think that 
 I have say , by far the great part of our personal baggage have be 
 pack into the whaleboat , and be therefore save - and bring hither 
 by the bearer - although all the store lay in by we for barter and 
 present to the native be lose . nearly all our clothing be make of a 
 well - shrink and very strong grey flannel , and excellent I find it for 
 travel in these place , because though a Norfolk jacket , shirt , 
 and pair of trouser of it only weigh about four pound , a great 
 consideration in a tropical country , where every extra ounce tell on 
 the wearer , it be warm , and offer a good resistance to the ray of 
 the sun , and good of all to chill , which be so apt to result from 
 sudden change of temperature . 

 never shall I forget the comfort of the " wash and brush - up , " and of 
 those clean flannel . the only thing that be want to complete my joy 
 be a cake of soap , of which we have none . 

 afterwards I discover that the Amahagger , who do not reckon dirt among 
 their many disagreeable quality , use a kind of burn earth for washing 
 purpose , which , though unpleasant to the touch till one get accustom 
 to it , form a very fair substitute for soap . 

 by the time that I be dress , and have comb and trim my black 
 beard , the previous condition of which be certainly sufficiently 
 unkempt to give weight to Billali 's appellation for I of " Baboon , " I 
 begin to feel most uncommonly hungry . therefore I be by no mean sorry 
 when , without the slight preparatory sound or warning , the curtain 
 over the entrance to my cave be fling aside , and another mute , a 
 young girl this time , announce to I by sign that I could not 
 misunderstand - that be , by open her mouth and point down it - that 
 there be something ready to eat . accordingly I follow she into the 
 next chamber , which we have not yet enter , where I find Job , who have 
 also , to his great embarrassment , be conduct thither by a fair mute . 
 Job never get over the advance the former lady have make towards he , 
 and suspect every girl who come near to he of similar design . 

 " these young party have a way of look at one , sir , " he would say 
 apologetically , " which I do not   call respectable . " 

 this chamber be twice the size of the sleeping cave , and I see at once 
 that it have originally serve as a refectory , and also probably as an 
 embalming room for the Priests of the Dead ; for I may as well say at 
 once that these hollow - out cave be nothing more nor less than vast 
 catacomb , in which for ten of age the mortal remain of the great 
 extinct race whose monument surround we have be first preserve , 
 with an art and a completeness that have never since be equal , 
 and then hide away for all time . on each side of this particular 
 rock - chamber be a long and solid stone table , about three foot wide by 
 three foot six in height , hew out of the living rock , of which it have 
 form part , and be still attach to at the base . these table be 
 slightly hollow out or curve inward , to give room for the knee of 
 any one sit on the stone ledge that have be cut for a bench along 
 the side of the cave at a distance of about two foot from they . each of 
 they , also , be so arrange that it end right under a shaft pierce 
 in the rock for the admission of light and air . on examine they 
 carefully , however , I see that there be a difference between they that 
 have at first escape my attention , viz . that one of the table , that 
 to the left as we enter the cave , have evidently be use , not to 
 eat upon , but for the purpose of embalming . that this be beyond all 
 question the case be clear from five shallow depression in the stone 
 of the table , all shape like a human form , with a separate place 
 for the head to lie in , and a little bridge to support the neck , each 
 depression be of a different size , so as to fit body vary in 
 stature from a full - grow man 's to a small child 's , and with little 
 hole bore at interval to carry off fluid . and , indeed , if any further 
 confirmation be require , we have but to look at the wall of the cave 
 above to find it . for there , sculpture all round the apartment , and 
 look nearly as fresh as the day it be do , be the pictorial 
 representation of the death , embalming , and burial of an old man with a 
 long beard , probably an ancient king or grandee of this country . 

 the first picture represent his death . he be lie upon a couch which 
 have four short curve post at the corner come to a knob at the end , 
 in appearance something like write note of music , and be evidently 
 in the very act of expiring . gather round the couch be woman and 
 child weep , the former with their hair hang down their back . 
 the next scene represent the embalmment of the body , which lie stark 
 upon a table with depression in it , similar to the one before we ; 
 probably , indeed , it be a picture of the same table . three man be 
 employ at the work - one superintend , one hold a funnel shape 
 exactly like a port wine strainer , of which the narrow end be fix in 
 an incision in the breast , no doubt in the great pectoral artery ; while 
 the third , who be depict as stand straddle - legged over the corpse , 
 hold a kind of large jug high in his hand , and pour from it some 
 steaming fluid which fall accurately into the funnel . the most curious 
 part of this sculpture be that both the man with the funnel and the 
 man who pour the fluid be draw hold their nose , either I suppose 
 because of the stench arise from the body , or more probably to keep 
 out the aromatic fume of the hot fluid which be be force into the 
 dead man 's vein . another curious thing which I be unable to explain be 
 that all three man be represent as have a band of linen tie round 
 the face with hole in it for the eye . 

 the third sculpture be a picture of the burial of the deceased . there 
 he be , stiff and cold , clothe in a linen robe , and lay out on a stone 
 slab such as I have sleep upon at our first sojourning - place . at his 
 head and foot burn lamp , and by his side be place several of 
 the beautiful paint vas that I have describe , which be perhaps 
 suppose to be full of provision . the little chamber be crowd with 
 mourner , and with musician play on an instrument resemble a lyre , 
 while near the foot of the corpse stand a man hold a sheet , with 
 which he be prepare to cover it from view . 

 these sculpture , look at merely as work of art , be so remarkable 
 that I make no apology for describe they rather fully . they strike 
 I also as be of surpass interest as represent , probably with 
 studious accuracy , the last rite of the dead as practise among 
 an utterly lost people , and even then I think how envious some 
 antiquarian friend of my own at Cambridge would be if ever I find an 
 opportunity of describe these wonderful remain to they . probably they 
 would say that I be exaggerate , notwithstanding that every page of 
 this history must bear so much internal evidence of its truth that it 
 would obviously have be quite impossible for I to have invent it . 

 to return . as soon as I have hastily examine these sculpture , which 
 I think I omit to mention be execute in relief , we sit down to a 
 very excellent meal of boil goat's - flesh , fresh milk , and cake make 
 of meal , the whole be serve upon clean wooden platter . 

 when we have eat we return to see how Leo be get on , billali 
 say that he must now wait upon she , and hear her command . on 
 reach Leo 's room we find the poor boy in a very bad way . he have wake 
 up from his torpor , and be altogether off his head , babble about some 
 boat - race on the cam , and be inclined to be violent . indeed , when we 
 enter the room Ustane be hold he down . I speak to he , and my 
 voice seem to soothe he ; at any rate he grow much quieter , and be 
 persuade to swallow a dose of quinine . 

 I have be sit with he for an hour , perhaps - at any rate I know 
 that it be get so dark that I could only just make out his head 
 lie like a gleam of gold upon the pillow we have extemporise out of a 
 bag cover with a blanket - when suddenly Billali arrive with an air 
 of great importance , and inform I that she herself have deign to 
 express a wish to see I - an honour , he add , accord to but very 
 few . I think that he be a little horrified at my cool way of take the 
 honour , but the fact be that I do not feel overwhelmed with gratitude 
 at the prospect of see some savage , dusky queen , however absolute 
 and mysterious she might be , more especially as my mind be full of 
 dear Leo , for whose life I begin to have great fear . however , I rise to 
 follow he , and as I do so I catch sight of something bright lie on 
 the floor , which I pick up . perhaps the reader will remember that with 
 the potsherd in the casket be a composition scarabæus mark with a 
 round O , a goose , and another curious hieroglyphic , the meaning of which 
 be " Suten se Ra , " or " Royal Son of the Sun . " the scarab , which be a very 
 small one , Leo have insist upon have set in a massive gold ring , such 
 as be generally use for signet , and it be this very ring that I now 
 pick up . he have pull it off in the paroxysm of his fever , at least 
 I suppose so , and fling it down upon the rock - floor . think that if I 
 leave it about it might get lose , I slip it on my own little finger , 
 and then follow Billali , leave Job and Ustane with Leo . 

 we pass down the passage , cross the great aisle - like cave , and come 
 to the corresponding passage on the other side , at the mouth of which 
 the guard stand like two statue . as we come they bow their head in 
 salutation , and then lift their long spear place they transversely 
 across their forehead , as the leader of the troop that have meet we 
 have do with their ivory wand . we step between they , and find 
 ourselves in an exactly similar gallery to that which lead to our own 
 apartment , only this passage be , comparatively speak , brilliantly 
 light . a few pace down it we be meet by four mute - two man and two 
 woman - who bow low and then arrange themselves , the woman in front 
 and the man behind of we , and in this order we continue our procession 
 past several doorway hang with curtain resemble those lead to 
 our own quarter , and which I afterwards find open out into chamber 
 occupy by the mute who attend on she . a few pace more and we 
 come to another doorway face we , and not to our left like the other , 
 which seem to mark the termination of the passage . here two more 
 white- , or rather yellow - rob guard be stand , and they too 
 bow , salute , and let we pass through heavy curtain into a great 
 antechamber , quite forty foot long by as many wide , in which some eight 
 or ten woman , most of they young and handsome , with yellowish hair , sit 
 on cushion work with ivory needle at what have the appearance of 
 be embroidery frame . these woman be also deaf and dumb . at the 
 farther end of this great lamp - light apartment be another doorway close 
 in with heavy oriental - look curtain , quite unlike those that hang 
 before the door of our own room , and here stand two particularly 
 handsome girl mute , their head bow upon their bosom and their hand 
 cross in an attitude of humble submission . as we advance they each 
 stretch out an arm and draw back the curtain . Thereupon Billali do 
 a curious thing . down he go , that venerable - look old gentleman - for 
 Billali be a gentleman at the bottom - down on to his hand and knee , 
 and in this undignified position , with his long white beard trail on 
 the ground , he begin to creep into the apartment beyond . I follow he , 
 stand on my foot in the usual fashion . look over his shoulder he 
 perceive it . 

 " down , my son ; down , my Baboon ; down on to thy hand and knee . we enter 
 the presence of she , and , if thou art not humble , of a surety she will 
 blast thee where thou stand . " 

 I halt , and feel scared . indeed , my knee begin to give way of their 
 own mere motion ; but reflection come to my aid . I be an Englishman , 
 and why , I ask myself , should I creep into the presence of some savage 
 woman as though I be a monkey in fact as well as in name ? I would not 
 and could not do it , that be , unless I be absolutely sure that my life 
 or comfort depend upon it . if once I begin to creep upon my knee I 
 should always have to do so , and it would be a patent acknowledgment of 
 inferiority . so , fortify by an insular prejudice against " kootooing , " 
 which have , like most of our so - call prejudice , a good deal of common 
 sense to recommend it , I march in boldly after Billali . I find myself 
 in another apartment , considerably small than the anteroom , of which 
 the wall be entirely hang with rich - look curtain of the same make 
 as those over the door , the work , as I subsequently discover , of the 
 mute who sit in the antechamber and wove they in strip , which be 
 afterwards sew together . also , here and there about the room , be 
 settee of a beautiful black wood of the ebony tribe , inlay with ivory , 
 and all over the floor be other tapestry , or rather rug . at the top 
 end of this apartment be what appear to be a recess , also drape with 
 curtain , through which shone ray of light . there be nobody in the 
 place except ourselves . 

 Painfully and slowly old Billali creep up the length of the cave , and 
 with the most dignified stride that I could command I follow after 
 he . but I feel that it be more or less of a failure . to begin with , it 
 be not possible to look dignified when you be follow in the wake 
 of an old man writhe along on his stomach like a snake , and then , 
 in order to go sufficiently slowly , either I have to keep my leg some 
 second in the air at every step , or else to advance with a full stop 
 between each stride , like Mary Queen of Scots go to execution in a 
 play . Billali be not good at crawl , I suppose his year stand in the 
 way , and our progress up that apartment be a very long affair . I be 
 immediately behind he , and several time I be sorely tempt to help 
 he on with a good kick . it be so absurd to advance into the presence of 
 savage royalty after the fashion of an Irishman drive a pig to market , 
 for that be what we look like , and the idea nearly make I burst out 
 laugh then and there . I have to work off my dangerous tendency to 
 unseemly merriment by blow my nose , a proceeding which fill old 
 Billali with horror , for he look over his shoulder and make a ghastly 
 face at I , and I hear he murmur , " oh , my poor Baboon ! " 

 at last we reach the curtain , and here Billali collapse flat on to 
 his stomach , with his hand stretch out before he as though he be 
 dead , and I , not know what to do , begin to stare about the place . but 
 presently I clearly feel that somebody be look at I from behind the 
 curtain . I could not see the person , but I could distinctly feel his 
 or her gaze , and , what be more , it produce a very odd effect upon my 
 nerve . I be frightened , I do not know why . the place be a strange 
 one , it be true , and look lonely , notwithstanding its rich hanging 
 and the soft glow of the lamp - indeed , these accessory add to , 
 rather than detract from its loneliness , just as a lighted street at 
 night have always a more solitary appearance than a dark one . it be 
 so silent in the place , and there lie billali like one dead before the 
 heavy curtain , through which the odour of perfume seem to float up 
 towards the gloom of the arched roof above . Minute grow into minute , and 
 still there be no sign of life , nor do the curtain move ; but I feel 
 the gaze of the unknown be sink through and through I , and 
 fill I with a nameless terror , till the perspiration stand in bead 
 upon my brow . 

 at length the curtain begin to move . who could be behind it ? - some naked 
 savage queen , a languish oriental beauty , or a nineteenth - century 
 young lady , drinking afternoon tea ? I have not the slight idea , 
 and should not have be astonish at see any of the three . I be 
 get beyond astonishment . the curtain agitate itself a little , then 
 suddenly between its fold there appear a most beautiful white hand 
  white as snow , and with long taper finger , end in the pink 
 nail . the hand grasp the curtain , and draw it aside , and as it do so 
 I hear a voice , I think the soft and yet most silvery voice I ever 
 hear . it remind I of the murmur of a brook . 

 " Stranger , " say the voice in Arabic , but much purer and more classical 
 Arabic than the Amahagger talk - ' strange , wherefore art thou so much 
 afraid ? " 

 now I flatter myself that in spite of my inward terror I have keep 
 a very fair command of my countenance , and be , therefore , a little 
 astonish at this question . before I have make up my mind how to answer 
 it , however , the curtain be draw , and a tall figure stand before we . I 
 say a figure , for not only the body , but also the face be wrap up in 
 soft white , gauzy material in such a way as at first sight to remind I 
 most forcibly of a corpse in its grave - clothe . and yet I do not know 
 why it should have give I that idea , see that the wrapping be so 
 thin that one could distinctly see the gleam of the pink flesh beneath 
 they . I suppose it be owe to the way in which they be arrange , 
 either accidentally , or more probably by design . anyhow , I feel more 
 frightened than ever at this ghost - like apparition , and my hair begin 
 to rise upon my head as the feeling creep over I that I be in the 
 presence of something that be not canny . I could , however , clearly 
 distinguish that the swathe mummy - like form before I be that of a 
 tall and lovely woman , instinct with beauty in every part , and also 
 with a certain snake - like grace which I have never see anything to 
 equal before . when she move a hand or foot her entire frame seem to 
 undulate , and the neck do not bend , it curve . 

 " why art thou so frightened , strange ? " ask the sweet voice again - a 
 voice which seem to draw the heart out of I , like the strain of 
 soft music . " be there that about I that should affright a man ? then 
 surely be man change from what they use to be ! " and with a little 
 coquettish movement she turn herself , and hold up one arm , so as 
 to show all her loveliness and the rich hair of raven blackness that 
 stream in soft ripple down her snowy robe , almost to her sandalle 
 foot . 

 " it be thy beauty that make I fear , oh Queen , " I answer humbly , 
 scarcely know what to say , and I think that as I do so I hear old 
 Billali , who be still lie prostrate on the floor , mutter , " good , my 
 Baboon , good . " 

 " I see that man still know how to beguile we woman with false word . ah , 
 strange , " she answer , with a laugh that sound like distant silver 
 bell , " thou wast afraid because mine eye be search out thine 
 heart , therefore wast thou afraid . yet be but a woman , I forgive thee 
 for the lie , for it be courteously say . and now tell I how come ye 
 hither to this land of the dweller among the cave - a land of swamp 
 and evil thing and dead old shadow of the dead ? what come ye for to 
 see ? how be it that ye hold your life so cheap as to place 
 they in the hollow of the hand of Hiya , into the hand of 
 ' she - who - must - be - obeyed ' ? tell I also how come ye to know the tongue 
 I talk . it be an ancient tongue , that sweet child of the old Syriac . 
 Liveth it yet in the world ? Thou seest I dwell among the cave and the 
 dead , and naught know I of the affair of man , nor have I care to know . 
 I have live , o stranger , with my memory , and my memory be in a 
 grave that mine hand hollow , for truly hath it be say that 
 the child of man maketh his own path evil ; " and her beautiful voice 
 quiver , and break in a note as soft as any wood - bird 's . suddenly 
 her eye fall upon the sprawl frame of Billali , and she seem to 
 recollect herself . 

 " ah ! thou art there , old man . tell I how it be that thing have go 
 wrong in thine household . Forsooth , it seem that these my guest be 
 set upon . ay , and one be nigh to be slay by the hot - pot to be eat 
 of those brute , thy child , and have not the other fight gallantly 
 they too have be slay , and not even I could have call back the life 
 which have be loose from the body . what mean it , old man ? what hast 
 thou to say that I should not give thee over to those who execute my 
 vengeance ? " 

 her voice have rise in her anger , and it ring clear and cold against the 
 rocky wall . also I think I could see her eye flash through the gauze 
 that hide they . I see poor Billali , whom I have believe to be a very 
 fearless person , positively quiver with terror at her word . 

 " oh ' Hiya ! ' oh she ! " he say , without lift his white head from the 
 floor . " oh she , as thou art great be merciful , for I be now as ever 
 thy servant to obey . it be no plan or fault of mine , oh she , it be 
 those wicked one who be call my child . lead on by a woman whom thy 
 guest the Pig have scorn , they would have follow the ancient custom 
 of the land , and eat the fat black stranger who come hither with these 
 thy guest the Baboon and the Lion who be sick , think that no word 
 have come from thee about the black one . but when the Baboon and the Lion 
 see what they would do , they slay the woman , and slay also their servant 
 to save he from the horror of the pot . then those evil one , ay , those 
 child of the Wicked one who live in the Pit , they go mad with the 
 lust of blood , and fly at the throat of the Lion and the Baboon and 
 the Pig . but gallantly they fight . oh Hiya ! they fight like very 
 man , and slay many , and hold their own , and then I come and save they , 
 and the evildoer have I send on hither to K"r to be judge of thy 
 greatness , oh she ! and here they be . " 

 " ay , old man , I know it , and to - morrow will I sit in the great hall and 
 do justice upon they , fear not . and for thee , I forgive thee , though 
 hardly . see that thou dost keep thine household well . go . " 

 Billali rise upon his knee with astonishing alacrity , bow his head 
 thrice , and his white beard sweep the ground , crawl down the 
 apartment as he have crawl up it , till he finally vanish through the 
 curtain , leave I , not a little to my alarm , alone with this terrible 
 but most fascinating person . 



 xiii 

 ayesha unveils 

 " there , " say she , " he have go , the white - bearded old fool ! ah , how 
 little knowledge do a man acquire in his life . he gathereth it up like 
 water , but like water it runneth through his finger , and yet , if his 
 hand be but wet as though with dew , behold a generation of fool call 
 out , ' see , he be a wise man ! ' be it not so ? but how call they thee ? 
 ' Baboon , ' he say , " and she laugh ; " but that be the fashion of these 
 savage who lack imagination , and fly to the beast they resemble for a 
 name . how do they call thee in thine own country , strange ? " 

 " they call I Holly , oh Queen , " I answer . 

 " Holly , " she answer , speak the word with difficulty , and yet with a 
 most charming accent ; " and what be ' Holly ' ? " 

 " ' Holly ' be a prickly tree , " I say . 

 " so . well , thou hast a prickly and yet a tree - like look . strong art 
 thou , and ugly , but if my wisdom be not at fault , honest at the core , 
 and a staff to lean on . also one who think . but stay , oh Holly , stand 
 not there , enter with I and be seat by I . I would not see thee crawl 
 before I like those slave . I be aweary of their worship and their 
 terror ; sometimes when they vex I I could blast they for very sport , 
 and to see the rest turn white , even to the heart . " and she hold the 
 curtain aside with her ivory hand to let I pass in . 

 I enter , shudder . this woman be very terrible . within the curtain 
 be a recess , about twelve foot by ten , and in the recess be a couch 
 and a table whereon stand fruit and sparkle water . by it , at its end , 
 be a vessel like a font cut in carve stone , also full of pure water . 
 the place be softly light with lamp form out of the beautiful vessel 
 of which I have speak , and the air and curtain be laden with a 
 subtle perfume . Perfume too seem to emanate from the glorious hair and 
 white - cling vestment of she herself . I enter the little room , 
 and there stand uncertain . 

 " sit , " say she , point to the couch . " as yet thou hast no cause to 
 fear I . if thou hast cause , thou shalt not fear for long , for I shall 
 slay thee . therefore let thy heart be light . " 

 I sit down on the foot of the couch near to the font - like basin of 
 water , and she sink down softly on to the other end . 

 " now , Holly , " she say , " how com thou to speak Arabic ? it be my own 
 dear tongue , for Arabian be I by my birth , even ' al Arab al Ariba '   an 
 Arab of the Arabs , and of the race of our father Yárab , the son of 
 Kâhtan , for in that fair and ancient city ozal be I bear , in the 
 province of Yaman the Happy . yet dost thou not speak it as we use to 
 speak . thy talk doth lack the music of the sweet tongue of the tribe of 
 Hamyar which I be will not to hear . some of the word too seem change , 
 even as among these Amahagger , who have debase and defile its purity , 
 so that I must speak with they in what be to I another tongue . "   

      yárab the son of Kâhtan , who live some century 
  before the time of Abraham , be the father of the ancient 
  Arabs , and give its name Araba to the country . in speak 
  of herself as " al Arab al Ariba , " she no doubt mean to 
  convey that she be of the true arab blood as distinguish 
  from the naturalise Arabs , the descendant of Ismael , the 
  son of Abraham and Hagar , who be know as " al Arab al 
  mostáraba . " the dialect of the Koreish be usually call 
  the clear or " perspicuous " Arabic , but the hamaritic dialect 
  approach near to the purity of the mother Syriac . - L. H. 
  H. 

 " I have study it , " I answer , " for many year . also the language be 
 speak in Egypt and elsewhere . " 

 " so it be still speak , and there be yet an Egypt ? and what Pharaoh sit 
 upon the throne ? still one of the spawn of the Persian Ochús , or be 
 the Achæmenians go , for far be it to the day of Ochús . " 

 " the Persians have be go for Egypt for nigh two thousand year , and 
 since then the Ptolemies , the Romans , and many other have flourish 
 and hold sway upon the Nile , and fall when their time be ripe , " I 
 say , aghast . " what canst thou know of the Persian Artaxerxes ? " 

 she laugh , and make no answer , and again a cold chill go through 
 I . " and Greece , " she say ; " be there still a Greece ? ah , I love the 
 Greeks . beautiful be they as the day , and clever , but fierce at heart 
 and fickle , notwithstanding . " 

 " yes , " I say , " there be a Greece ; and , just now , it be once more a 
 people . yet the Greeks of to - day be not what the Greeks of the old time 
 be , and Greece herself be but a mockery of the Greece that be . " 

 " so ! the Hebrews , be they yet at Jerusalem ? and do the Temple that 
 the wise king build stand , and if so what God do they worship therein ? 
 be their Messiah come , of whom they preach so much and prophesy so 
 loudly , and doth he rule the earth ? " 

 " the Jews be break and go , and the fragment of their people strew 
 the world , and Jerusalem be no more . as for the temple that Herod 
 build - - " 

 " Herod ! " she say . " I know not Herod . but go on . " 

 " the Romans burn it , and the roman eagle fly across its ruin , and 
 now Judæa be a desert . " 

 " so , so ! they be a great people , those Romans , and go straight to 
 their end - ay , they speed to it like Fate , or like their own eagle on 
 their prey ! - and leave peace behind they . " 

 " Solitudinem faciunt , pacem appellant , " I suggest . 

 " ah , thou canst speak the Latin tongue , too ! " she say , in surprise . " it 
 hath a strange ring in my ear after all these day , and it seem to 
 I that thy accent do not fall as the Romans put it . who be it write 
 that ? I know not the saying , but it be a true one of that great people . 
 it seem that I have find a learn man - one whose hand have hold the 
 water of the world 's knowledge . know thou Greek also ? " 

 " yes , oh Queen , and something of Hebrew , but not to speak they well . 
 they be all dead language now . " 

 she clap her hand in childish glee . " of a truth , ugly tree that thou 
 art , thou grow the fruit of wisdom , oh Holly , " she say ; " but of 
 those Jews whom I hat , for they call I ' heathen ' when I would have 
 teach they my philosophy - do their Messiah come , and doth he rule the 
 world ? " 

 " their Messiah come , " I answer with reverence ; " but he come poor and 
 lowly , and they would have none of he . they scourge he , and crucify 
 he upon a tree , but yet his word and his work live on , for he be the 
 Son of God , and now of a truth he doth rule half the world , but not with 
 an Empire of the World . " 

 " ah , the fierce - hearted wolf , " she say , " the follower of Sense and 
 many god - greedy of gain and faction - tear . I can see their dark face 
 yet . so they crucify their Messiah ? well can I believe it . that he be 
 a Son of the Living Spirit would be naught to they , if indeed he be so , 
 and of that we will talk afterwards . they would care naught for any God 
 if he come not with pomp and power . they , a choose people , a vessel 
 of he they call Jehovah , ay , and a vessel of Baal , and a vessel of 
 Astoreth , and a vessel of the god of the Egyptians - a high - stomach 
 people , greedy of aught that bring they wealth and power . so they 
 crucify their Messiah because he come in lowly guise - and now be 
 they scatter about the earth ? why , if I remember , so say one of their 
 prophet that it should be . well , let they go - they break my heart , 
 those Jews , and make I look with evil eye across the world , ay , and 
 drive I to this wilderness , this place of a people that be before 
 they . when I would have teach they wisdom in Jerusalem they stone I , 
 ay , at the Gate of the Temple those white - bearded hypocrite and Rabbis 
 hound the people on to stone I ! see , here be the mark of it to this 
 day ! " and with a sudden move she pull up the gauzy wrap on her 
 rounded arm , and point to a little scar that show red against its 
 milky beauty . 

 I shrink back , horrify . 

 " pardon I , oh Queen , " I say , " but I be bewilder . Nigh upon two 
 thousand year have roll across the earth since the Jewish Messiah 
 hang upon his cross at Golgotha . how then canst thou have teach thy 
 philosophy to the Jews before he be ? thou art a woman and no spirit . 
 how can a woman live two thousand year ? why dost thou befool I , oh 
 Queen ? " 

 she lean back upon the couch , and once more I feel the hidden eye 
 play upon I and search out my heart . 

 " oh man ! " she say at last , speak very slowly and deliberately , " it 
 seem that there be still thing upon the earth of which thou know 
 naught . dost thou still believe that all thing die , even as those very 
 Jews believe ? I tell thee that naught die . there be no such thing as 
 Death , though there be a thing call Change . see , " and she point to 
 some sculpture on the rocky wall . " three time two thousand year have 
 pass since the last of the great race that hew those picture fall 
 before the breath of the pestilence which destroy they , yet be they 
 not dead . e'en now they live ; perchance their spirit be draw towards 
 we at this very hour , " and she glance round . " of a surety it sometimes 
 seem to I that my eye can see they . " 

 " yes , but to the world they be dead . " 

 " ay , for a time ; but even to the world be they bear again and again . I , 
 yes I , Ayesha     - for that , strange , be my name - I say to thee that 
 I wait now for one I love to be bear again , and here I tarry till he 
 find I , know of a surety that hither he will come , and that here , 
 and here only , shall he greet I . why , dost thou believe that I , who 
 be all - powerful , I , whose loveliness be more than the loveliness of the 
 Grecian Helen , of whom they use to sing , and whose wisdom be wide , ay , 
 far more wide and deep than the wisdom of Solomon the Wise - I , who know 
 the secret of the earth and its rich , and can turn all thing to 
 my us - I , who have even for a while overcome Change , that ye call 
 Death - why , I say , oh strange , dost thou think that I herd here with 
 barbarian low than the beast ? " 

     Pronounced Assha . - L. H. H. 

 " I know not , " I say humbly . 

 " because I wait for he I love . my life have perchance be evil , I know 
 not - for who can say what be evil and what good ? - so I fear to die even 
 if I could die , which I can not until mine hour come , to go and seek he 
 where he be ; for between we there might rise a wall I could not climb , 
 at least , I dread it . surely easy would it be also to lose the way in 
 seek in those great space wherein the planet wander on for ever . 
 but the day will come , it may be when five thousand more year have 
 pass , and be lose and melt into the vault of Time , even as the 
 little cloud melt into the gloom of night , or it may be to - morrow , 
 when he , my love , shall be bear again , and then , follow a law that 
 be strong than any human plan , he shall find I here , where once 
 he know I , and of a surety his heart will soften towards I , though I 
 sin against he ; ay , even though he know I not again , yet will he 
 love I , if only for my beauty 's sake . " 

 for a moment I be dumbfound , and could not answer . the matter be too 
 overpowering for my intellect to grasp . 

 " but even so , oh Queen , " I say at last , " even if we man be bear again 
 and again , that be not so with thee , if thou speakest truly . " here she 
 look up sharply , and once more I catch the flash of those hide 
 eye ; " thou , " I go on hurriedly , " who hast never die ? " 

 " that be so , " she say ; " and it be so because I have , half by chance and 
 half by learn , solve one of the great secret of the world . tell 
 I , stranger : life be - why therefore should not life be lengthen for a 
 while ? what be ten or twenty or fifty thousand year in the history of 
 life ? why in ten thousand year scarce will the rain and storm lessen 
 a mountain top by a span in thickness ? in two thousand year these cave 
 have not change , nothing have change but the beast , and man , who be as 
 the beast . there be naught that be wonderful about the matter , couldst 
 thou but understand . life be wonderful , ay , but that it should be a 
 little lengthened be not wonderful . nature hath her animate spirit as 
 well as man , who be Nature 's child , and he who can find that spirit , 
 and let it breathe upon he , shall live with her life . he shall not live 
 eternally , for Nature be not eternal , and she herself must die , even as 
 the nature of the moon hath die . she herself must die , I say , or rather 
 change and sleep till it be time for she to live again . but when shall 
 she die ? not yet , I ween , and while she live , so shall he who hath 
 all her secret live with she . all I have it not , yet have I some , more 
 perchance than any who be before I . now , to thee I doubt not that 
 this thing be a great mystery , therefore I will not overcome thee with 
 it now . another time I will tell thee more if the mood be on I , though 
 perchance I shall never speak thereof again . dost thou wonder how I 
 know that ye be come to this land , and so save your head from the 
 hot - pot ? " 

 " ay , oh Queen , " I answer feebly . 

 " then gaze upon that water , " and she point to the font - like vessel , 
 and then , bend forward , hold her hand over it . 

 I rise and gaze , and instantly the water darken . then it clear , and 
 I see as distinctly as I ever see anything in my life - I see , I say , our 
 boat upon that horrible canal . there be Leo lie at the bottom asleep 
 in it , with a coat throw over he to keep off the mosquito , in such a 
 fashion as to hide his face , and myself , Job , and mahomed towing on the 
 bank . 

 I start back , aghast , and cry out that it be magic , for I 
 recognise the whole scene - it be one which have actually occur . 

 " Nay , nay ; oh Holly , " she answer , " it be no magic , that be a fiction 
 of ignorance . there be no such thing as magic , though there be such a 
 thing as a knowledge of the secret of Nature . that water be my glass ; 
 in it I see what pass if I will to summon up the picture , which be 
 not often . therein I can show thee what thou wilt of the past , if it be 
 anything that hath to do with this country and with what I have know , 
 or anything that thou , the gazer , hast know . think of a face if thou 
 wilt , and it shall be reflect from thy mind upon the water . I know not 
 all the secret yet - I can read nothing in the future . but it be an old 
 secret ; I do not find it . in Arabia and in Egypt the sorcerer know 
 it century go . so one day I chance to bethink I of that old 
 canal - some twenty age since I sail upon it , and I be minded to 
 look thereon again . so I look , and there I see the boat and three man 
 walking , and one , whose face I could not see , but a youth of noble form , 
 sleep in the boat , and so I send and save ye . and now farewell . but 
 stay , tell I of this youth - the Lion , as the old man call he . I would 
 look upon he , but he be sick , thou sayest - sick with the fever , and 
 also wound in the fray . " 

 " he be very sick , " I answer sadly ; " canst thou do nothing for he , oh 
 Queen ! who knowest so much ? " 

 " of a surety I can . I can cure he ; but why speak thou so sadly ? dost 
 thou love the youth ? be he perchance thy son ? " 

 " he be my adopt son , oh Queen ! shall he be bring in before thee ? " 

 " Nay . how long hath the fever take he ? " 

 " this be the third day . " 

 " good ; then let he lie another day . then will he perchance throw it off 
 by his own strength , and that be well than that I should cure he , 
 for my medicine be of a sort to shake the life in its very citadel . if , 
 however , by to - morrow night , at that hour when the fever first take he , 
 he doth not begin to mend , then will I come to he and cure he . stay , 
 who nurse he ? " 

 " our white servant , he whom billali name the Pig ; also , " and here 
 I speak with some little hesitation , " a woman name Ustane , a very 
 handsome woman of this country , who come and embrace he when she 
 first see he , and hath stay by he ever since , as I understand be the 
 fashion of thy people , oh Queen . " 

 " my people ! speak not to I of my people , " she answer hastily ; " these 
 slave be no people of mine , they be but dog to do my bidding till 
 the day of my deliverance come ; and , as for their custom , naught have 
 I to do with they . also , call I not queen - I be weary of flattery and 
 title - call I Ayesha , the name hath a sweet sound in mine ear , it be 
 an echo from the past . as for this Ustane , I know not . I wonder if it 
 be she against whom I be warn , and whom I in turn do warn ? hath 
 she - stay , I will see ; " and , bend forward , she pass her hand over 
 the font of water and gaze intently into it . " see , " she say quietly , 
 " be that the woman ? " 

 I look into the water , and there , mirror upon its placid surface , 
 be the silhouette of Ustane 's stately face . she be bend forward , 
 with a look of infinite tenderness upon her feature , watch something 
 beneath she , and with her chestnut lock fall on to her right 
 shoulder . 

 " it be she , " I say , in a low voice , for once more I feel much disturb 
 at this most uncommon sight . " she watch Leo asleep . " 

 " Leo ! " say Ayesha , in an absent voice ; " why , that be ' lion ' in the 
 Latin tongue . the old man hath name happily for once . it be very 
 strange , " she go on , speak to herself , " very . so like - but it be 
 not possible ! " with an impatient gesture she pass her hand over 
 the water once more . it darken , and the image vanish silently and 
 mysteriously as it have rise , and once more the lamplight , and the 
 lamplight only , shine on the placid surface of that limpid , live 
 mirror . 

 " Hast thou aught to ask I before thou goest , oh Holly ? " she say , after 
 a few moment ' reflection . " it be but a rude life that thou must live 
 here , for these people be savage , and know not the way of cultivate 
 man . not that I be troubled thereby , for behold my food , " and she 
 point to the fruit upon the little table . " naught but fruit doth 
 ever pass my lip - fruit and cake of flour , and a little water . I have 
 bid my girl to wait upon thee . they be mute , thou know , deaf 
 be they and dumb , and therefore the safe of servant , save to those 
 who can read their face and their sign . I breed they so - it hath take 
 many century and much trouble ; but at last I have triumph . once I 
 succeed before , but the race be too ugly , so I let it die away ; but 
 now , as thou seest , they be otherwise . once , too , I rear a race of 
 giant , but after a while Nature would no more of it , and it die away . 
 Hast thou aught to ask of I ? " 

 " ay , one thing , oh Ayesha , " I say boldly ; but feel by no mean as 
 bold as I trust I look . " I would gaze upon thy face . " 

 she laugh out in her bell - like note . " bethink thee , Holly , " she 
 answer ; " bethink thee . it seem that thou know the old myth of the 
 god of Greece . be there not one Actæon who perish miserably because 
 he look on too much beauty ? if I show thee my face , perchance thou 
 wouldst perish miserably also ; perchance thou wouldst eat out thy heart 
 in impotent desire ; for know I be not for thee - I be for no man , save 
 one , who hath be , but be not yet . " 

 " as thou wilt , Ayesha , " I say . " I fear not thy beauty . I have put my 
 heart away from such vanity as woman 's loveliness , that passeth like a 
 flower . " 

 " Nay , thou errest , " she say ; " that do not pass . my beauty endure 
 even as I endure ; still , if thou wilt , oh rash man , have thy will ; but 
 blame not I if passion mount thy reason , as the egyptian breaker use 
 to mount a colt , and guide it whither thou wilt not . never may the man 
 to whom my beauty have be unveil put it from his mind , and therefore 
 even with these savage do I go veil , lest they vex I , and I should 
 slay they . say , wilt thou see ? " 

 " I will , " I answer , my curiosity overpower I . 

 she lift her white and rounded arm - never have I see such arm 
 before - and slowly , very slowly , withdraw some fasten beneath her 
 hair . then all of a sudden the long , corpse - like wrapping fall from she 
 to the ground , and my eye travel up her form , now only rob in 
 a garb of cling white that do but serve to show its perfect and 
 imperial shape , instinct with a life that be more than life , and with a 
 certain serpent - like grace that be more than human . on her little foot 
 be sandal , fasten with stud of gold . then come ankle more perfect 
 than ever sculptor dream of . about the waist her white kirtle be 
 fasten by a double - headed snake of solid gold , above which her 
 gracious form swell up in line as pure as they be lovely , till the 
 kirtle end on the snowy argent of her breast , whereon her arm be 
 fold . I gaze above they at her face , and - I do not exaggerate - shrank 
 back blinded and amazed . I have hear of the beauty of celestial being , 
 now I see it ; only this beauty , with all its awful loveliness and 
 purity , be evil - at least , at the time , it strike I as evil . how be 
 I to describe it ? I can not - simply I can not ! the man do not live 
 whose pen could convey a sense of what I see . I might talk of the great 
 change eye of deep , soft black , of the tinted face , of the 
 broad and noble brow , on which the hair grow low , and delicate , straight 
 feature . but , beautiful , surpassingly beautiful as they all be , her 
 loveliness do not lie in they . it lie rather , if it can be say to have 
 have any fix abide place , in a visible majesty , in an imperial grace , 
 in a godlike stamp of softened power , which shine upon that radiant 
 countenance like a live halo . never before have I guess what beauty 
 make sublime could be - and yet , the sublimity be a dark one - the glory 
 be not all of heaven - though none the less be it glorious . though 
 the face before I be that of a young woman of certainly not more than 
 thirty year , in perfect health , and the first flush of ripened beauty , 
 yet it have stamp upon it a look of unutterable experience , and of 
 deep acquaintance with grief and passion . not even the lovely smile that 
 creep about the dimple of her mouth could hide this shadow of sin and 
 sorrow . it shine even in the light of the glorious eye , it be present 
 in the air of majesty , and it seem to say : " behold I , lovely as no 
 woman be or be , undying and half - divine ; memory haunt I from age to 
 age , and passion lead I by the hand - evil have I do , and from age to 
 age evil I shall do , and sorrow shall I know till my redemption come . " 

 draw by some magnetic force which I could not resist , I let my eye 
 rest upon her shin orb , and feel a current pass from they to I that 
 bewildered and half - blind I . 

 she laugh - ah , how musically ! and nod her little head at I with 
 an air of sublimated coquetry that would have do credit to a Venus 
 Victrix . 

 " rash man ! " she say ; " like Actæon , thou hast have thy will ; be careful 
 lest , like Actæon , thou too dost perish miserably , tear to piece 
 by the ban - hound of thine own passion . I too , oh Holly , be a virgin 
 goddess , not to be move of any man , save one , and it be not thou . say , 
 hast thou see enough ! " 

 " I have look on beauty , and I be blind , " I say hoarsely , lift my 
 hand to cover up my eye . 

 " so ! what do I tell thee ? beauty be like the lightning ; it be lovely , 
 but it destroy - especially tree , oh Holly ! " and again she nod and 
 laugh . 

 suddenly she pause , and through my finger I see an awful change come 
 over her countenance . her great eye suddenly fix themselves into an 
 expression in which horror seem to struggle with some tremendous hope 
 arise through the depth of her dark soul . the lovely face grow rigid , 
 and the gracious willowy form seem to erect itself . 

 " Man , " she half whisper , half hiss , throw back her head like a 
 snake about to strike - " Man , whence hadst thou that scarab on thy hand ? 
 speak , or by the Spirit of Life I will blast thee where thou stand ! " 
 and she take one light step towards I , and from her eye there shine 
 such an awful light - to I it seem almost like a flame - that I fall , 
 then and there , on the ground before she , babble confusedly in my 
 terror . 

 " peace , " she say , with a sudden change of manner , and speak in her 
 former soft voice . " I do affright thee ! forgive I ! but at time , oh 
 Holly , the almost infinite mind grow impatient of the slowness of the 
 very finite , and be I tempt to use my power out of vexation - very 
 nearly wast thou dead , but I remember - - . but the scarab - about the 
 scarabæus ! " 

 " I pick it up , " I gurgle feebly , as I get on to my foot again , and 
 it be a solemn fact that my mind be so disturbed that at the moment I 
 could remember nothing else about the ring except that I have pick it 
 up in Leo 's cave . 

 " it be very strange , " she say with a sudden access of womanlike 
 trembling and agitation which seem out of place in this awful 
 woman - " but once I know a scarab like to that . it - hang round the 
 neck - of one I love , " and she give a little sob , and I see that after 
 all she be only a woman , although she might be a very old one . 

 " there , " she go on , " it must be one like to it , and yet never do 
 I see one like to it , for thereto hang a history , and he who wear it 
 prize it much .     but the scarab that I know be not set thus in the 
 bezel of a ring . go now , Holly , go , and , if thou canst , try to forget 
 that thou hast of thy folly look upon Ayesha 's beauty , " and , turn 
 from I , she fling herself on her couch , and bury her face in the 
 cushion . 

      I be inform by a renowned and learn Egyptologist , to 
  whom I have submit this very interesting and beautifully 
  finish scarab , " Suten se Ra , " that he have never see one 
  resemble it . although it bear a title frequently give to 
  egyptian royalty , he be of opinion that it be not 
  necessarily the cartouche of a Pharaoh , on which either the 
  throne or personal name of the monarch be generally 
  inscribe . what the history of this particular scarab may 
  have be we can now , unfortunately , never know , but I have 
  little doubt but that it play some part in the tragic 
  story of the Princess Amenartas and her lover Kallikrates , 
  the forsworn priest of Isis . - Editor . 

 as for I , I stumble from her presence , and I do not remember how I 
 reach my own cave . 



 XIV 

 a SOUL in HELL 

 it be nearly ten o'clock at night when I cast myself down upon my bed , 
 and begin to gather my scattered wit , and reflect upon what I have see 
 and hear . but the more I reflect the less I could make of it . be I 
 mad , or drunk , or dream , or be I merely the victim of a gigantic 
 and most elaborate hoax ? how be it possible that I , a rational man , 
 not unacquainted with the lead scientific fact of our history , and 
 hitherto an absolute and utter disbeliever in all the hocus - pocus which 
 in Europe go by the name of the supernatural , could believe that I have 
 within the last few minute be engage in conversation with a woman 
 two thousand and odd year old ? the thing be contrary to the experience 
 of human nature , and absolutely and utterly impossible . it must be a 
 hoax , and yet , if it be a hoax , what be I to make of it ? what , too , 
 be to be say of the figure on the water , of the woman 's extraordinary 
 acquaintance with the remote past , and her ignorance , or apparent 
 ignorance , of any subsequent history ? what , too , of her wonderful and 
 awful loveliness ? this , at any rate , be a patent fact , and beyond the 
 experience of the world . no merely mortal woman could shine with such 
 a supernatural radiance . about that she have , at any rate , be in the 
 right - it be not safe for any man to look upon such beauty . I be 
 a harden vessel in such matter , have , with the exception of one 
 painful experience of my green and tender youth , put the soft sex 
  I sometimes think that this be a misnomer   almost entirely out of my 
 thought . but now , to my intense horror , I know that I could never put 
 away the vision of those glorious eye ; and alas ! the very diablerie 
 of the woman , whilst it horrify and repel , attract in even a 
 great degree . a person with the experience of two thousand year at 
 she back , with the command of such tremendous power , and the knowledge 
 of a mystery that could hold off death , be certainly worth fall 
 in love with , if ever woman be . but , alas ! it be not a question of 
 whether or no she be worth it , for so far as I could judge , not be 
 verse in such matter , I , a fellow of my college , note for what my 
 acquaintance be pleased to call my misogyny , and a respectable man 
 now well on in middle life , have fall absolutely and hopelessly in love 
 with this white sorceress . nonsense ; it must be nonsense ! she have warn 
 I fairly , and I have refuse to take the warning . curse on the fatal 
 curiosity that be ever prompt man to draw the veil from woman , 
 and curse on the natural impulse that beget it ! it be the cause of 
 half - ay , and more than half - of our misfortune . why can not man be 
 content to live alone and be happy , and let the woman live alone and be 
 happy too ? but perhaps they would not be happy , and I be not sure that 
 we should either . here be a nice state of affair . I , at my age , to fall 
 a victim to this modern Circe ! but then she be not modern , at least she 
 say not . she be almost as ancient as the original Circe . 

 I tear my hair , and jump up from my couch , feel that if I do 
 not do something I should go off my head . what do she mean about the 
 scarabæus too ? it be Leo 's scarabæus , and have come out of the old 
 coffer that Vincey have leave in my room nearly one - and - twenty year 
 before . could it be , after all , that the whole story be true , and 
 the writing on the sherd be not a forgery , or the invention of some 
 crack - brain , long - forget individual ? and if so , could it be that 
  Leo be the man that she be wait for - the dead man who be to be 
 bear again ! impossible ! the whole thing be gibberish ! who ever hear of 
 a man be bear again ? 

 but if it be possible that a woman could exist for two thousand year , 
 this might be possible also - anything might be possible . I myself might , 
 for aught I know , be a reincarnation of some other forget self , or 
 perhaps the last of a long line of ancestral self . well , vive la 
 guerre ! why not ? only , unfortunately , I have no recollection of these 
 previous condition . the idea be so absurd to I that I burst out 
 laughing , and , address the sculptured picture of a grim - look 
 warrior on the cave wall , call out to he aloud , " who know , old 
 fellow ? - perhaps I be your contemporary . by Jove ! perhaps I be you and 
 you be I , " and then I laugh again at my own folly , and the sound of 
 my laughter ring dismally along the vaulted roof , as though the ghost of 
 the warrior have echo the ghost of a laugh . 

 next I bethink I that I have not be to see how Leo be , so , take 
 up one of the lamp which be burn at my bedside , I slip off my 
 shoe and creep down the passage to the entrance of his sleep cave . 
 the draught of the night air be lift his curtain to and fro gently , 
 as though spirit hand be draw and redrawe it . I slide into the 
 vault - like apartment , and look round . there be a light by which I 
 could see that Leo be lie on the couch , toss restlessly in his 
 fever , but asleep . at his side , half - lie on the floor , half - lean 
 against the stone couch , be Ustane . she hold his hand in one of her , 
 but she too be doze , and the two make a pretty , or rather a pathetic , 
 picture . Poor Leo ! his cheek be burn red , there be dark shadow 
 beneath his eye , and his breath come heavily . he be very , very ill ; 
 and again the horrible fear seize I that he might die , and I be leave 
 alone in the world . and yet if he live he would perhaps be my rival 
 with Ayesha ; even if he be not the man , what chance should I , 
 middle - aged and hideous , have against his bright youth and beauty ? well , 
 thank Heaven ! my sense of right be not dead . she have not kill that 
 yet ; and , as I stand there , I pray to Heaven in my heart that my boy , 
 my more than son , might live - ay , even if he prove to be the man . 

 then I go back as softly as I have come , but still I could not sleep ; 
 the sight and thought of dear Leo lie there so ill have but add fuel 
 to the fire of my unrest . my wearied body and overstrain mind awaken 
 all my imagination into preternatural activity . idea , vision , almost 
 inspiration , float before it with startling vividness . Most of they 
 be grotesque enough , some be ghastly , some recall thought and 
 sensation that have for year be bury in the débris of my past 
 life . but , behind and above they all , hover the shape of that awful 
 woman , and through they gleam the memory of her entrance loveliness . 
 up and down the cave I strode - up and down . 

 suddenly I observe , what I have not notice before , that there be a 
 narrow aperture in the rocky wall . I take up the lamp and examine it ; 
 the aperture lead to a passage . now , I be still sufficiently sensible 
 to remember that it be not pleasant , in such a situation as ours be , to 
 have passage run into one 's bed - chamber from no one know where . if 
 there be passage , people can come up they ; they can come up when one 
 be asleep . partly to see where it go to , and partly from a restless 
 desire to be do something , I follow the passage . it lead to a stone 
 stair , which I descend ; the stair end in another passage , or rather 
 tunnel , also hew out of the bed - rock , and run , so far as I could 
 judge , exactly beneath the gallery that lead to the entrance of our 
 room , and across the great central cave . I go on down it : it be as 
 silent as the grave , but still , draw by some sensation or attraction 
 that I can not define , I follow on , my stockinged foot fall without 
 noise on the smooth and rocky floor . when I have traverse some fifty 
 yard of space , I come to another passage run at right angle , and 
 here an awful thing happen to I : the sharp draught catch my lamp 
 and extinguish it , leave I in utter darkness in the bowel of that 
 mysterious place . I take a couple of stride forward so as to clear the 
 bisecting tunnel , be terribly afraid lest I should turn up it in 
 the dark if once I get confuse as to the direction , and then pause to 
 think . what be I to do ? I have no match ; it seem awful to attempt that 
 long journey back through the utter gloom , and yet I could not stand 
 there all night , and , if I do , probably it would not help I much , for 
 in the bowel of the rock it would be as dark at midday as at midnight . 
 I look back over my shoulder - not a sight or a sound . I peer forward 
 into the darkness : surely , far away , I see something like the faint glow 
 of fire . perhaps it be a cave where I could get a light - at any rate , 
 it be worth investigate . slowly and painfully I creep along the 
 tunnel , keep my hand against its wall , and feel at every step with 
 my foot before I put it down , fear lest I should fall into some 
 pit . thirty pace - there be a light , a broad light that come and go , 
 shin through curtain ! fifty pace - it be close at hand ! sixty - oh , 
 great heaven ! 

 I be at the curtain , and they do not hang close , so I could see 
 clearly into the little cavern beyond they . it have all the appearance of 
 be a tomb , and be light up by a fire that burn in its centre with a 
 whitish flame and without smoke . indeed , there , to the left , be a stone 
 shelf with a little ledge to it three inch or so high , and on the 
 shelf lie what I take to be a corpse ; at any rate , it look like one , 
 with something white throw over it . to the right be a similar shelf , 
 on which lie some broidered covering . over the fire bend the figure of 
 a woman ; she be sideways to I and face the corpse , wrap in a dark 
 mantle that hide she like a nun 's cloak . she seem to be star at the 
 flickering flame . suddenly , as I be try to make up my mind what 
 to do , with a convulsive movement that somehow give an impression of 
 despairing energy , the woman rise to her foot and cast the dark cloak 
 from she . 

 it be she herself ! 

 she be clothe , as I have see she when she unveil , in the kirtle of 
 cling white , cut low upon her bosom , and bind in at the waist with 
 the barbaric double - headed snake , and , as before , her ripple black 
 hair fall in heavy mass down her back . but her face be what catch my 
 eye , and hold I as in a vice , not this time by the force of its beauty , 
 but by the power of fascinated terror . the beauty be still there , 
 indeed , but the agony , the blind passion , and the awful vindictiveness 
 display upon those quivering feature , and in the tortured look of the 
 upturned eye , be such as surpass my power of description . 

 for a moment she stand still , her hand raise high above her head , and 
 as she do so the white robe slip from she down to her golden girdle , 
 bar the blind loveliness of her form . she stand there , her finger 
 clench , and the awful look of malevolence gather and deepen on her 
 face . 

 suddenly I think of what would happen if she discover I , and the 
 reflection make I turn sick and faint . but , even if I have know that I 
 must die if I stop , I do not believe that I could have move , for 
 I be absolutely fascinated . but still I know my danger . suppose she 
 should hear I , or see I through the curtain , suppose I even sneeze , 
 or that her magic tell she that she be be watch - swift indeed 
 would be my doom . 

 Down come the clench hand to her side , then up again above her head , 
 and , as I be a living and honourable man , the white flame of the fire 
 leapt up after they , almost to the roof , throw a fierce and ghastly 
 glare upon she herself , upon the white figure beneath the covering , 
 and every scroll and detail of the rockwork . 

 Down come the ivory arm again , and as they do so she speak , or rather 
 hiss , in Arabic , in a note that curdle my blood , and for a second 
 stop my heart . 

 " curse she , may she be everlastingly accurse . " 

 the arm fall and the flame sink . up they go again , and the broad 
 tongue of fire shoot up after they ; and then again they fall . 

 " curse her memory - accurse be the memory of the Egyptian . " 

 up again , and again down . 

 " curse she , the daughter of the Nile , because of her beauty . 

 " curse she , because her magic hath prevail against I . 

 " curse she , because she hold my beloved from I . " 

 and again the flame dwindle and shrank . 

 she put her hand before her eye , and abandon the hiss tone , 
 cry aloud : - 

 " what be the use of cursing ? - she prevail , and she be go . " 

 then she recommence with an even more frightful energy : - 

 " curse she where she be . let my curse reach she where she be and 
 disturb her rest . 

 " curse she through the starry space . let her shadow be accurse . 

 " let my power find she even there . 

 " let she hear I even there . let she hide herself in the blackness . 

 " let she go down into the pit of despair , because I shall one day find 
 she . " 

 again the flame fall , and again she cover her eye with her hand . 

 " it be of no use - no use , " she wail ; " who can reach those who sleep ? 
 not even I can reach they . " 

 then once more she begin her unholy rite . 

 " curse she when she shall be bear again . let she be bear accurse . 

 " let she be utterly accuse from the hour of her birth until sleep find 
 she . 

 " Yea , then , let she be accurse ; for then shall I overtake she with my 
 vengeance , and utterly destroy she . " 

 and so on . the flame rise and fall , reflect itself in her agonised 
 eye ; the hiss sound of her terrible malediction , and no word of 
 mine can convey how terrible they be , run round the wall and die 
 away in little echo , and the fierce light and deep gloom alternate 
 themselves on the white and dreadful form stretch upon that bi of 
 stone . 

 but at length she seem to wear herself out and cease . she sit herself 
 down upon the rocky floor , shake the dense cloud of her beautiful hair 
 over her face and breast , and begin to sob terribly in the torture of a 
 heartrende despair . 

 " two thousand year , " she moan - " two thousand year have I want and 
 endure ; but though century doth still creep on to century , and time 
 give place to time , the sting of memory hath not lessen , the light of 
 hope doth not shine more bright . oh ! to have live two thousand year , 
 with all my passion eat out my heart , and with my sin ever before I . 
 oh , that for I life can not bring forgetfulness ! oh , for the weary year 
 that have be and be yet to come , and evermore to come , endless and 
 without end ! 

 " my love ! my love ! my love ! why do that stranger bring thee back to I 
 after this sort ? for five hundred year I have not suffer thus . oh , 
 if I sin against thee , have I not wipe away the sin ? when wilt thou 
 come back to I who have all , and yet without thee have naught ? what be 
 there that I can do ? what ? what ? what ? and perchance she - perchance that 
 egyptian doth abide with thee where thou art , and mock my memory . oh , 
 why could I not die with thee , I who slay thee ? alas , that I can not die ! 
 alas ! alas ! " and she fling herself prone upon the ground , and sob and 
 weep till I think her heart must burst . 

 suddenly she cease , raise herself to her foot , rearrange her robe , 
 and , toss back her long lock impatiently , sweep across to where the 
 figure lie upon the stone . 

 " oh Kallikrates , " she cry , and I tremble at the name , " I must look 
 upon thy face again , though it be agony . it be a generation since 
 I look upon thee whom I slay - slew with mine own hand , " and with 
 tremble finger she seize the corner of the sheet - like wrapping that 
 cover the form upon the stone bier , and then pause . when she speak 
 again , it be in a kind of awed whisper , as though her idea be 
 terrible even to herself . 

 " shall I raise thee , " she say , apparently address the corpse , ' so 
 that thou standest there before I , as of old ? I can do it , " and she 
 hold out her hand over the sheeted dead , while her whole frame become 
 rigid and terrible to see , and her eye grow fix and dull . I shrink in 
 horror behind the curtain , my hair stand up upon my head , and , whether 
 it be my imagination or a fact I be unable to say , but I think that 
 the quiet form beneath the covering begin to quiver , and the winding 
 sheet to lift as though it lie on the breast of one who sleep . suddenly 
 she withdraw her hand , and the motion of the corpse seem to I to 
 cease . 

 " to what purpose ? " she say gloomily . " of what good be it to recall the 
 semblance of life when I can not recall the spirit ? even if thou stoodest 
 before I thou wouldst not know I , and couldst but do what I bid thee . 
 the life in thee would be my life , and not thy life , Kallikrates . " 

 for a moment she stand there brooding , and then cast herself down on her 
 knee beside the form , and begin to press her lip against the sheet , 
 and weep . there be something so horrible about the sight of this 
 awe - inspire woman let loose her passion on the dead - so much more 
 horrible even than anything that have go before - that I could no long 
 bear to look at it , and , turning , begin to creep , shake as I be in 
 every limb , slowly along the pitch - dark passage , feel in my trembling 
 heart that I have see a vision of a Soul in Hell . 

 on I stumble , I scarcely know how . twice I fall , once I turn up the 
 bisecting passage , but fortunately find out my mistake in time . for 
 twenty minute or more I creep along , till at last it occur to I 
 that I must have pass the little stair by which I have descend . so , 
 utterly exhaust , and nearly frighten to death , I sink down at length 
 there on the stone flooring , and sink into oblivion . 

 when I come to I notice a faint ray of light in the passage just behind 
 I . I creep to it , and find it be the little stair down which the weak 
 dawn be steal . pass up it , I gain my chamber in safety , and , 
 fling myself on the couch , be soon lose in slumber or rather stupor . 



 XV 

 ayesha GIVES judgment 

 the next thing that I remember be open my eye and perceive the 
 form of Job , who have now practically recover from his attack of fever . 
 he be stand in the ray of light that pierce into the cave from 
 the outer air , shake out my clothe as a makeshift for brush they , 
 which he could not do because there be no brush , and then fold they 
 up neatly and lay they on the foot of the stone couch . this do , he 
 get my travel dressing - case out of the Gladstone bag , and open it 
 ready for my use . first he stand it on the foot of the couch also , then , 
 be afraid , I suppose , that I should kick it off , he place it on a 
 leopard skin on the floor , and stand back a step or two to observe the 
 effect . it be not satisfactory , so he shut up the bag , turn it on 
 end , and , have rest it against the foot of the couch , place the 
 dressing - case on it . next he look at the pot full of water , which 
 constitute our washing apparatus . " ah ! " I hear he murmur , " no hot 
 water in this beastly place . I suppose these poor creature only use it 
 to boil each other in , " and he sigh deeply . 

 " what be the matter , Job ? " I say . 

 " Beg pardon , sir , " he say , touch his hair . " I think you be 
 asleep , sir ; and I be sure you seem as though you want it . one might 
 think from the look of you that you have be have a night of it . " 

 I only groan by way of answer . I have , indeed , be have a night of 
 it , such as I hope never to have again . 

 " how be Mr. Leo , Job ? " 

 " much the same , sir . if he do not   soon mend , he will end , sir ; and that be 
 all about it ; though I must say that that there savage , Ustane , do 
 do she good for he , almost like a baptise Christian . she be always 
 hang round and look after he , and if I venture to interfere it be 
 awful to see she ; her hair seem to stand on end , and she curse and 
 swear away in her heathen talk - at least I fancy she must be curse , 
 from the look of she . " 

 " and what do you do then ? " 

 " I make she a perlite bow , and I say , ' young woman , your position be one 
 that I do not   quite understand , and can not   recognise . let I tell you that 
 I have a duty to perform to my master as be incapacitate by illness , 
 and that I be go to perform it until I be incapacitate too , ' but 
 she do not   take no heed , not she - only curse and swear away bad than 
 ever . last night she put her hand under that sort of night - shirt she 
 wear and whip out a knife with a kind of a curl in the blade , so I 
 whip out my revolver , and we walk round and round each other till at 
 last she burst out laugh . it be not   nice treatment for a Christian 
 man to have to put up with from a savage , however handsome she may be , 
 but it be what people must expect as be fool enough "   Job lay great 
 emphasis on the " fool "   " to come to such a place to look for thing no 
 man be mean to find . it be a judgment on we , sir - that be my view ; and I , 
 for one , be of opinion that the judgment be not   half do yet , and when 
 it be do we shall be do too , and just stop in these beastly cave 
 with the ghost and the corpsese for once and all . and now , sir , I 
 must be see about Mr. Leo 's broth , if that wild cat will let I ; and , 
 perhaps , you would like to get up , sir , because it be past nine o'clock . " 

 Job 's remark be not of an exactly cheer order to a man who have 
 pass such a night as I have ; and , what be more , they have the weight of 
 truth . take one thing with another , it appear to I to be an utter 
 impossibility that we should escape from the place we be . suppose 
 that Leo recover , and suppose that she would let we go , which be 
 exceedingly doubtful , and that she do not " blast " we in some moment of 
 vexation , and that we be not hot - potted by the Amahagger , it would be 
 quite impossible for we to find our way across the network of marsh 
 which , stretch for score and score of mile , form a strong and 
 more impassable fortification round the various Amahagger household 
 than any that could be build or design by man . no , there be but 
 one thing to do - face it out ; and , speak for my own part , I be so 
 intensely interested in the whole weird story that , so far as I be 
 concern , notwithstanding the shattered state of my nerve , I ask 
 nothing well , even if my life pay forfeit to my curiosity . what man 
 for whom physiology have charm could forbear to study such a character 
 as that of this Ayesha when the opportunity of do so present 
 itself ? the very terror of the pursuit add to its fascination , and 
 besides , as I be force to own to myself even now in the sober light of 
 day , she herself have attraction that I could not forget . not even the 
 dreadful sight which I have witness during the night could drive that 
 folly from my mind ; and alas ! that I should have to admit it , it have not 
 be drive thence to this hour . 

 after I have dress myself I pass into the eating , or rather embalming 
 chamber , and have some food , which be as before bring to I by the 
 girl mute . when I have finish I go and see poor Leo , who be quite 
 off his head , and do not even know I . I ask Ustane how she think 
 he be ; but she only shake her head and begin to cry a little . evidently 
 her hope be small ; and I then and there make up my mind that , if it 
 be in any way possible , I would get she to come and see he . surely 
 she would cure he if she choose - at any rate she say she could . while I 
 be in the room , Billali enter , and also shake his head . 

 " he will die at night , " he say . 

 " God forbid , my father , " I answer , and turn away with a heavy heart . 

 " She - who - must - be - obey command thy presence , my Baboon , " say the 
 old man as soon as we get to the curtain ; " but , oh my dear son , be more 
 careful . yesterday I make sure in my heart that she would blast thee 
 when thou didst not crawl upon thy stomach before she . she be sit in 
 the great hall even now to do justice upon those who would have smite 
 thee and the Lion . come on , my son ; come swiftly . " 

 I turn , and follow he down the passage , and when we reach the 
 great central cave see that many Amahagger , some rob , and some merely 
 clothe in the sweet simplicity of a leopard skin , be hurry along 
 it . we mingle with the throng , and walk up the enormous and , indeed , 
 almost interminable cave . all the way its wall be elaborately 
 sculpture , and every twenty pace or so passage open out of it at 
 right angle , lead , Billali tell I , to tomb , hollow in the rock 
 by " the people who be before . " nobody visit those tomb now , he 
 say ; and I must say that my heart rejoice when I think of the 
 opportunity of antiquarian research which open out before I . 

 at last we come to the head of the cave , where there be a rock daïs 
 almost exactly similar to the one on which we have be so furiously 
 attack , a fact that prove to I that these daïs must have be use 
 as altar , probably for the celebration of religious ceremony , and 
 more especially of rite connect with the interment of the dead . on 
 either side of this daïs be passage lead , Billali inform I , to 
 other cave full of dead body . " indeed , " he add , " the whole mountain 
 be full of dead , and nearly all of they be perfect . " 

 in front of the daïs be gather a great number of people of both 
 sex , who stand star about in their peculiar gloomy fashion , which 
 would have reduce Mark Tapley himself to misery in about five minute . 
 on the daïs be a rude chair of black wood inlay with ivory , have 
 a seat make of grass fibre , and a footstool form of a wooden slab 
 attach to the framework of the chair . 

 suddenly there be a cry of " Hiya ! Hiya ! "   " she ! she ! " , and thereupon 
 the entire crowd of spectator instantly precipitate itself upon the 
 ground , and lie still as though it be individually and collectively 
 stricken dead , leave I stand there like some solitary survivor of 
 a massacre . as it do so a long string of guard begin to defile from a 
 passage to the left , and range themselves on either side of the daïs . 
 then follow about a score of male mute , then as many woman mute 
 bear lamp , and then a tall white figure , swathe from head to foot , 
 in whom I recognise she herself . she mount the daïs and sit down 
 upon the chair , and speak to I in Greek , I suppose because she do 
 not wish those present to understand what she say . 

 " come hither , oh Holly , " she say , " and sit thou at my foot , and see I 
 do justice on those who would have slay thee . forgive I if my greek 
 doth halt like a lame man ; it be so long since I have hear the sound of 
 it that my tongue be stiff , and will not bend rightly to the word . " 

 I bow , and , mount the daïs , sit down at her foot . 

 " how hast thou sleep , my Holly ? " she ask . 

 " I sleep not well , oh Ayesha ! " I answer with perfect truth , and with 
 an inward fear that perhaps she know how I have pass the heart of the 
 night . 

 " so , " she say , with a little laugh ; " I , too , have not sleep well . last 
 night I have dream , and methink that thou didst call they to I , oh 
 Holly . " 

 " of what didst thou dream , Ayesha ? " I ask indifferently . 

 " I dream , " she answer quickly , " of one I hate and one I love , " and 
 then , as though to turn the conversation , she address the captain of 
 her guard in Arabic : " let the man be bring before I . " 

 the captain bow low , for the guard and her attendant do not 
 prostrate themselves , but have remain stand , and depart with his 
 underling down a passage to the right . 

 then come a silence . she lean she swathe head upon her hand and 
 appear to be lose in thought , while the multitude before she continue 
 to grovel upon their stomach , only screw their head round a little 
 so as to get a view of we with one eye . it seem that their queen 
 so rarely appear in public that they be willing to undergo this 
 inconvenience , and even graver risk , to have the opportunity of look 
 on she , or rather on her garment , for no live man there except myself 
 have ever see her face . at last we catch sight of the waving of light , 
 and hear the tramp of man come along the passage , and in file the 
 guard , and with they the survivor of our would - be murderer , to the 
 number of twenty or more , on whose countenance a natural expression of 
 sullenness struggle with the terror that evidently fill their savage 
 heart . they be range in front of the daïs , and would have cast 
 themselves down on the floor of the cave like the spectator , but she 
 stop they . 

 " Nay , " she say in her soft voice , ' stand ; I pray you stand . 
 perchance the time will soon be when ye shall grow weary of be 
 stretch out , " and she laugh melodiously . 

 I see a cringe of terror run along the rank of the doom wretch , 
 and , wicked villain as they be , I feel sorry for they . some minute , 
 perhaps two or three , pass before anything fresh occur , during 
 which she appear from the movement of her head - for , of course , 
 we could not see her eye - to be slowly and carefully examine each 
 delinquent . at last she speak , address herself to I in a quiet and 
 deliberate tone . 

 " dost thou , oh my guest , recognise these man ? " 

 " ay , oh Queen , nearly all of they , " I say , and I see they glower at I 
 as I say it . 

 " then tell to I , and this great company , the tale whereof I have 
 hear . " 

 thus adjure , I , in as few word as I could , relate the history of the 
 cannibal feast , and of the attempt torture of our poor servant . the 
 narrative be receive in perfect silence , both by the accuse and by 
 the audience , and also by she herself . when I have do , Ayesha call 
 upon Billali by name , and , lift his head from the ground , but without 
 rise , the old man confirm my story . no further evidence be take . 

 " Ye have hear , " say she at length , in a cold , clear voice , 
 very different from her usual tone - indeed , it be one of the most 
 remarkable thing about this extraordinary creature that her voice have 
 the power of suit itself in a wonderful manner to the mood of the 
 moment . " what have ye to say , ye rebellious child , why vengeance 
 should not be do upon you ? " 

 for some time there be no answer , but at last one of the man , a fine , 
 broad - cheste fellow , well on in middle - life , with deep - graven feature 
 and an eye like a hawk 's , speak , and say that the order that they have 
 receive be not to harm the white man ; nothing be say of their 
 black servant , so , egg on thereto by a woman who be now dead , they 
 proceed to try to hot - pot he after the ancient and honourable custom 
 of their country , with a view of eat he in due course . as for their 
 sudden attack upon ourselves , it be make in an access of sudden fury , 
 and they deeply regret it . he end by humbly pray that they might 
 be banish into the swamp , to live and die as it might chance ; but I 
 see it write on his face that he have but little hope of mercy . 

 then come a pause , and the most intense silence reign over the whole 
 scene , which , illuminate as it be by the flicker of the lamp strike 
 out broad pattern of light and shadow upon the rocky wall , be as 
 strange as any I ever see , even in that unholy land . upon the ground 
 before the daïs be stretch score of the corpselike form of the 
 spectator , till at last the long line of they be lose in the 
 gloomy background . before this outstretche audience be the knot 
 of evil - doer , try to cover up their natural terror with a brave 
 appearance of unconcern . on the right and leave stand the silent guard , 
 rob in white and arm with great spear and dagger , and man and 
 woman mute watch with hard curious eye . then , seat in her 
 barbaric chair above they all , with myself at her foot , be the veil 
 white woman , whose loveliness and awesome power seem to visibly shine 
 about she like a halo , or rather like the glow from some unseen light . 
 never have I see her veil shape look more terrible than it do in 
 that space , while she gather herself up for vengeance . 

 at last it come . 

 " dog and serpent , " she begin in a low voice that gradually gather 
 power as she go on , till the place ring with it . " eater of human 
 flesh , two thing have ye do . first , ye have attack these stranger , 
 be white man , and would have slay their servant , and for that alone 
 death be your reward . but that be not all . ye have dare to disobey I . 
 do I not send my word unto you by Billali , my servant , and the father 
 of your household ? do I not bid you to hospitably entertain these 
 stranger , whom now ye have strive to slay , and whom , have not they 
 be brave and strong beyond the strength of man , ye would cruelly have 
 murder ? hath it not be teach to you from childhood that the law of 
  she be an ever fix law , and that he who breaketh it by so much as 
 one jot or tittle shall perish ? and be not my light word a law ? 
 have not your father teach you this , I say , whilst as yet ye be but 
 child ? do ye not know that as well might ye bid these great cave to 
 fall upon you , or the sun to cease its journeying , as to hope to turn 
 I from my course , or make my word light or heavy , accord to your 
 mind ? well do ye know it , ye Wicked Ones . but ye be all evil - evil 
 to the core - the wickedness bubble up in you like a fountain in the 
 spring - time . be it not for I , generation since have ye cease to be , 
 for of your own evil way have ye destroy each other . and now , because 
 ye have do this thing , because ye have strive to put these man , my 
 guest , to death , and yet more because ye have dare to disobey my word , 
 this be the doom that I doom you to . that ye be take to the cave of 
 torture ,     and give over to the tormentor , and that on the go down 
 of to - morrow 's sun those of you who yet remain alive be slain , even as 
 ye would have slay the servant of this my guest . " 

      " the cave of torture . " I afterwards see this dreadful 
  place , also a legacy from the prehistoric people who live 
  in K"r . the only object in the cave itself be slab of 
  rock arrange in various position to facilitate the 
  operation of the torturer . many of these slab , which be 
  of a porous stone , be stain quite dark with the blood of 
  ancient victim that have soak into they . also in the 
  centre of the room be a place for a furnace , with a cavity 
  wherein to heat the historic pot . but the most dreadful 
  thing about the cave be that over each slab be a 
  sculpture illustration of the appropriate torture be 
  apply . these sculpture be so awful that I will not 
  harrow the reader by attempt a description of they . - L. 
  H. H. 

 she cease , and a faint murmur of horror run round the cave . as for the 
 victim , as soon as they realise the full hideousness of their doom , 
 their stoicism forsook they , and they fling themselves down upon the 
 ground , and weep and implore for mercy in a way that be dreadful to 
 behold . I , too , turn to Ayesha , and beg she to spare they , or at 
 least to mete out their fate in some less awful way . but she be hard as 
 adamant about it . 

 " my Holly , " she say , again speak in Greek , which , to tell the truth , 
 although I have always be consider a well scholar of the language 
 than most man , I find it rather difficult to follow , chiefly because of 
 the change in the fall of the accent . Ayesha , of course , talk with 
 the accent of her contemporary , whereas we have only tradition and the 
 modern accent to guide we as to the exact pronunciation . " my Holly , it 
 can not be . be I to show mercy to those wolf , your life would not be 
 safe among this people for a day . Thou know they not . they be tiger 
 to lap blood , and even now they hunger for your life . how think 
 thou that I rule this people ? I have but a regiment of guard to do my 
 bidding , therefore it be not by force . it be by terror . my empire be 
 of the imagination . once in a generation mayhap I do as I have do but 
 now , and slay a score by torture . believe not that I would be cruel , or 
 take vengeance on anything so low . what can it profit I to be avenge 
 on such as these ? those who live long , my Holly , have no passion , 
 save where they have interest . though I may seem to slay in wrath , 
 or because my mood be cross , it be not so . Thou hast see how in the 
 heaven the little cloud blow this way and that without a cause , yet 
 behind they be the great wind sweep on its path whither it listeth . 
 so it be with I , oh Holly . my mood and change be the little cloud , 
 and fitfully these seem to turn ; but behind they ever blow the great 
 wind of my purpose . Nay , the man must die ; and die as I have say . " 
 then , suddenly turn to the captain of the guard : - 

 " as my word be , so be it ! " 



 XVI 

 the tombs of K"R 

 after the prisoner have be remove Ayesha wave her hand , and the 
 spectator turn round , and begin to crawl off down the cave like a 
 scatter flock of sheep . when they be a fair distance from the daïs , 
 however , they rise and walk away , leave the queen and myself alone , 
 with the exception of the mute and the few remain guard , most of 
 whom have depart with the doom man . think this a good opportunity , 
 I ask she to come and see Leo , tell she of his serious condition ; 
 but she would not , say that he certainly would not die before the 
 night , as people never die of that sort of fever except at nightfall 
 or dawn . also she say that it would be well to let the sickness spend 
 its course as much as possible before she cure it . accordingly , I be 
 rise to leave , when she bid I follow she , as she would talk with I , 
 and show I the wonder of the cave . 

 I be too much involve in the web of her fatal fascination to say she 
 no , even if I have wish , which I do not . she rise from her chair , and , 
 make some sign to the mute , descend from the daïs . Thereon four 
 of the girl take lamp , and range themselves two in front and two 
 behind we , but the other go away , as also do the guard . 

 " now , " she say , " wouldst thou see some of the wonder of this place , oh 
 Holly ? look upon this great cave . saw thou ever the like ? yet be it , 
 and many more like it , hollow by the hand of the dead race that once 
 live here in the city on the plain . a great and wonderful people must 
 they have be , those man of K"r , but , like the Egyptians , they think 
 more of the dead than of the living . how many man , think thou , 
 work for how many year , do it need to the hollow out this cave 
 and all the gallery thereof ? " 

 " ten of thousand , " I answer . 

 " so , oh Holly . this people be an old people before the Egyptians 
 be . a little can I read of their inscription , have find the key 
 thereto - and see thou here , this be one of the last of the cave that 
 they hollow , " and , turn to the rock behind she , she motion the 
 mute to hold up the lamp . Carven over the daïs be the figure of an 
 old man seat in a chair , with an ivory rod in his hand . it strike I 
 at once that his feature be exceedingly like those of the man who be 
 represent as be embalm in the chamber where we take our meal . 
 beneath the chair , which , by the way , be shape exactly like the one 
 in which Ayesha have sit to give judgment , be a short inscription in the 
 extraordinary character of which I have already speak , but which I do 
 not remember sufficient of to illustrate . it look more like chinese 
 writing than any other that I be acquaint with . this inscription 
 Ayesha proceed , with some difficulty and hesitation , to read aloud and 
 translate . it run as follow : - 

 " in the year four thousand two hundred and fifty - nine from the founding 
 of the City of imperial K"r be this cave   or burial place   complete 
 by Tisno , King of K"r , the people thereof and their slave have 
 labour thereat for three generation , to be a tomb for their citizen 
 of rank who shall come after . may the blessing of the heaven above the 
 heaven rest upon their work , and make the sleep of Tisno , the mighty 
 monarch , the likeness of whose feature be graven above , a sound and 
 happy sleep till the day of awakening ,     and also the sleep of his 
 servant , and of those of his race who , rise up after he , shall yet 
 lay their head as low . " 

      this phrase be remarkable , as seem to indicate a 
  belief in a future state . - Editor . 

 " Thou se , oh Holly , " she say , " this people found the city , of 
 which the ruin yet cumber the plain yonder , four thousand year before 
 this cave be finish . yet , when first mine eye beheld it two thousand 
 year ago , be it even as it be now . Judge , therefore , how old must that 
 city have be ! and now , follow thou I , and I will show thee after what 
 fashion this great people fall when the time be come for it to fall , " 
 and she lead the way down to the centre of the cave , stop at a spot 
 where a round rock have be let into a kind of large manhole in the 
 flooring , accurately fill it just as the iron plate fill the space 
 in the London pavement down which the coal be throw . " Thou se , " 
 she say . " tell I , what be it ? " 

 " Nay , I know not , " I answer ; whereon she cross to the left - hand side 
 of the cave   look towards the entrance   and sign to the mute to 
 hold up the lamp . on the wall be something paint with a red pigment 
 in similar character to those hewn beneath the sculpture of Tisno , king 
 of K"r . this inscription she proceed to translate to I , the pigment 
 still be fresh enough to show the form of the letter . it run thus : 

 " I , Junis , a priest of the Great Temple of K"r , write this upon the 
 rock of the burying - place in the year four thousand eight hundred and 
 three from the founding of K"r . K"r be fall ! no more shall the 
 mighty feast in her hall , no more shall she rule the world , and her 
 navy go out to commerce with the world . K"r be fall ! and her mighty 
 work and all the city of K"r , and all the harbour that she build 
 and the canal that she make , be for the wolf and the owl and the wild 
 swan , and the barbarian who come after . twenty and five moon ago do 
 a cloud settle upon K"r , and the hundred city of K"r , and out of the 
 cloud come a pestilence that slay her people , old and young , one 
 with another , and spar not . one with another they turn black and 
 die - the young and the old , the rich and the poor , the man and the 
 woman , the prince and the slave . the pestilence slew and slew , and 
 cease not by day or by night , and those who escape from the pestilence 
 be slay of the famine . no long could the body of the child of 
 K"r be preserve accord to the ancient rite , because of the number 
 of the dead , therefore be they hurl into the great pit beneath 
 the cave , through the hole in the floor of the cave . then , at last , a 
 remnant of this the great people , the light of the whole world , go 
 down to the coast and take ship and sail northward ; and now be I , the 
 Priest Junis , who write this , the last man leave alive of this great city 
 of man , but whether there be any yet leave in the other city I know 
 not . this do I write in misery of heart before I die , because K"r 
 the Imperial be no more , and because there be none to worship in her 
 temple , and all her palace be empty , and her prince and her captain 
 and her trader and her fair woman have pass off the face of the 
 earth . " 

 I give a sigh of astonishment - the utter desolation depict in this 
 rude scrawl be so overpowering . it be terrible to think of this 
 solitary survivor of a mighty people record its fate before he too 
 go down into darkness . what must the old man have feel as , in ghastly 
 terrifying solitude , by the light of one lamp feebly illuminate a 
 little space of gloom , he in a few brief line daub the history of his 
 nation 's death upon the cavern wall ? what a subject for the moralist , or 
 the painter , or indeed for any one who can think ! 

 " Doth it not occur to thee , oh Holly , " say Ayesha , lay her hand upon 
 my shoulder , " that those man who sail North may have be the father 
 of the first Egyptians ? " 

 " Nay , I know not , " I say ; " it seem that the world be very old . " 

 " Old ? yes , it be old indeed . time after time have nation , ay , and rich 
 and strong nation , learn in the art , be and pass away and 
 be forget , so that no memory of they remain . this be but one of 
 several ; for Time eat up the work of man , unless , indeed , he dig in 
 cave like the people of K"r , and then mayhap the sea swallow they , or 
 the earthquake shake they in . who know what hath be on the earth , or 
 what shall be ? there be no new thing under the sun , as the wise Hebrew 
 write long ago . yet be not these people utterly destroy , as I think . 
 some few remain in the other city , for their city be many . but 
 the barbarian from the south , or perchance my people , the Arabs , 
 come down upon they , and take their woman to wife , and the race of the 
 Amahagger that be now be a bastard brood of the mighty son of K"r , and 
 behold it dwelleth in the tomb with its father ' bone .     but I know 
 not : who can know ? my art can not pierce so far into the blackness of 
 Time 's night . a great people be they . they conquer till none be 
 leave to conquer , and then they dwelt at ease within their rocky mountain 
 wall , with their man servant and their maid servant , their minstrel , 
 their sculptor , and their concubine , and trade and quarrel , and 
 eat and hunt and sleep and make merry till their time come . but come , 
 I will show thee the great pit beneath the cave whereof the writing 
 speak . never shall thine eye witness such another sight . " 

      the name of the race Ama - hagger would seem to indicate a 
  curious mingling of race such as might easily have occur 
  in the neighbourhood of the Zambesi . the prefix " Ama " be 
  common to the Zulu and kindre race , and signify 
  " people , " while " hagger " be an arabic word mean a stone . 
  - Editor . 

 accordingly I follow she to a side passage opening out of the main 
 cave , then down a great number of step , and along an underground shaft 
 which can not have be less than sixty foot beneath the surface of the 
 rock , and be ventilate by curious boring that run upward , I know not 
 where . suddenly the passage end , and she halt and bade the mute 
 hold up the lamp , and , as she have prophesy , I see a scene such as 
 I be not likely to see again . we be stand in an enormous pit , or 
 rather on the brink of it , for it go down deeply - I do not know how 
 much - than the level on which we stand , and be edge in with a low wall 
 of rock . so far as I could judge , this pit be about the size of the 
 space beneath the dome of St. Paul 's in London , and when the lamp be 
 hold up I see that it be nothing but one vast charnel - house , be 
 literally full of thousand of human skeleton , which lie pile up in an 
 enormous gleam pyramid , form by the slip down of the body 
 at the apex as fresh one be drop in from above . anything more 
 appalling than this jumbled mass of the remain of a depart race I 
 can not imagine , and what make it even more dreadful be that in this 
 dry air a considerable number of the body have simply become desiccated 
 with the skin still on they , and now , fix in every conceivable 
 position , star at we out of the mountain of white bone , grotesquely 
 horrible caricature of humanity . in my astonishment I utter an 
 ejaculation , and the echo of my voice , ring in the vaulted space , 
 disturb a skull that have be accurately balance for many thousand 
 of year near the apex of the pile . down it come with a run , bound 
 along merrily towards we , and of course bring an avalanche of other 
 bone after it , till at last the whole pit rattle with their movement , 
 even as though the skeleton be get up to greet we . 

 " come , " I say , " I have see enough . these be the body of those who 
 die of the great sickness , be it not so ? " I add , as we turn away . 

 " Yea . the people of K"r ever embalm their dead , as do the Egyptians , 
 but their art be great than the art of the Egyptians , for , whereas 
 the Egyptians disembowel and draw the brain , the people of K"r 
 inject fluid into the vein , and thus reach every part . but stay , 
 thou shalt see , " and she halt at haphazard at one of the little 
 doorway opening out of the passage along which we be walk , and 
 motion to the mute to light we in . we enter into a small chamber 
 similar to the one in which I have sleep at our first stop - place , 
 only instead of one there be two stone bench or bed in it . on the 
 bench lie figure cover with yellow linen ,     on which a fine and 
 impalpable dust have gather in the course of age , but nothing like to 
 the extent that one would have anticipate , for in these deep - hewn cave 
 there be no material to turn to dust . about the body on the stone 
 shelf and floor of the tomb be many paint vas , but I see very 
 few ornament or weapon in any of the vault . 

      all the linen that the Amahagger wear be take from the 
  tomb , which account for its yellow hue . it be well 
  wash , however , and properly rebleache , it acquire its 
  former snowy whiteness , and be the soft and good linen I 
  ever see . - L. H. H. 

 " uplift the cloth , oh Holly , " say Ayesha , but when I put out my hand 
 to do so I draw it back again . it seem like sacrilege , and , to speak 
 the truth , I be awe by the dread solemnity of the place , and of the 
 presence before we . then , with a little laugh at my fear , she draw 
 they herself , only to discover other and yet fine cloth lie over the 
 form upon the stone bench . these also she withdraw , and then for the 
 first time for thousand upon thousand of year do live eye look upon 
 the face of that chilly dead . it be a woman ; she might have be 
 thirty - five year of age , or perhaps a little less , and have certainly 
 be beautiful . even now her calm clear - cut feature , mark out with 
 delicate eyebrow and long eyelash which throw little line of the 
 shadow of the lamplight upon the ivory face , be wonderfully beautiful . 
 there , rob in white , down which her blue - black hair be stream , she 
 sleep her last long sleep , and on her arm , its face press against her 
 breast , there lie a little babe . so sweet be the sight , although so 
 awful , that - I confess it without shame - I could scarcely withhold my 
 tear . it take I back across the dim gulf of age to some happy home in 
 dead Imperial K"r , where this winsome lady girt about with beauty have 
 live and die , and die take she last - bear with she to the tomb . 
 there they be before we , mother and babe , the white memory of a 
 forget human history speak more eloquently to the heart than 
 could any write record of their life . reverently I replace the 
 grave - cloth , and , with a sigh that flower so fair should , in the 
 purpose of the Everlasting , have only bloom to be gather to the 
 grave , I turn to the body on the opposite shelf , and gently unveil 
 it . it be that of a man in advanced life , with a long grizzle beard , 
 and also rob in white , probably the husband of the lady , who , after 
 survive she many year , come at the last to sleep once more for good 
 and all beside she . 

 we leave the place and enter other . it would be too long to describe 
 the many thing I see in they . each one have its occupant , for the five 
 hundred and odd year that have elapse between the completion of the 
 cave and the destruction of the race have evidently suffice to fill 
 these catacomb , numberless as they be , and all appear to have be 
 undisturbed since the day when they be place there . I could fill a 
 book with the description of they , but to do so would only be to repeat 
 what I have say , with variation . 

 nearly all the body , so masterfully be the art with which they have 
 be treat , be as perfect as on the day of death thousand of year 
 before . nothing come to injure they in the deep silence of the living 
 rock : they be beyond the reach of heat and cold and damp , and the 
 aromatic drug with which they have be saturate be evidently 
 practically everlaste in their effect . here and there , however , we see 
 an exception , and in these case , although the flesh look sound enough 
 externally , if one touch it it fall in , and reveal the fact that the 
 figure be but a pile of dust . this arise , Ayesha tell I , from these 
 particular body have , either owe to haste in the burial or 
 other cause , be soak in the preservative ,     instead of its being 
 inject into the substance of the flesh . 

      Ayesha afterwards show I the tree from the leaf of 
  which this ancient preservative be manufacture . it be a 
  low bush - like tree , that to this day grow in wonderful 
  plenty upon the side of the mountain , or rather upon the 
  slope lead up to the rocky wall . the leaf be long 
  and narrow , a vivid green in colour , but turn a bright 
  red in the autumn , and not unlike those of a laurel in 
  general appearance . they have little smell when green , but 
  if boil the aromatic odour from they be so strong that one 
  can hardly bear it . the good mixture , however , be make from 
  the root , and among the people of K"r there be a law , 
  which Ayesha show I allude to on some of the 
  inscription , to the effect that on pain of heavy penalty 
  no one under a certain rank be to be embalm with the 
  drug prepare from the root . the object and effect of this 
  be , of course , to preserve the tree from extermination . 
  the sale of the leaf and root be a Government monopoly , 
  and from it the king of K"r derive a large proportion of 
  their private revenue . - L. H. H. 

 about the last tomb we visit I must , however , say one word , for its 
 content speak even more eloquently to the human sympathy than those 
 of the first . it have but two occupant , and they lay together on a 
 single shelf . I withdraw the grave - cloth and there , clasped heart to 
 heart , be a young man and a bloom girl . her head rest on his arm , 
 and his lip be press against her brow . I open the man 's linen 
 robe , and there over his heart be a dagger - wound , and beneath the 
 woman 's fair breast be a like cruel stab , through which her life have 
 ebb away . on the rock above be an inscription in three word . Ayesha 
 translate it . it be " wed in Death . " 

 what be the life - story of these two , who , of a truth , be beautiful in 
 their life , and in their death be not divide ? 

 I close my eyelid , and imagination , take up the thread of thought , 
 shoot its swift shuttle back across the age , weave a picture on their 
 blackness so real and vivid in its detail that I could almost for a 
 moment think that I have triumph o'er the Past , and that my spirit 's 
 eye have pierce the mystery of Time . 

 I seem to see this fair girl form - the yellow hair stream down 
 she , glitter against her garment snowy white , and the bosom that 
 be white than the robe , even dim with its lustre her ornament 
 of burnish gold . I seem to see the great cave fill with warrior , 
 bearded and clothe in mail , and , on the light daïs where Ayesha have 
 give judgment , a man stand , rob , and surround by the symbol of 
 his priestly office . and up the cave there come one clothe in purple , and 
 before he and behind he come minstrel and fair maiden , chant a 
 wedding song . White stand the maid against the altar , fair than 
 the fair there - purer than a lily , and more cold than the dew that 
 glisten in its heart . but as the man draw near she shudder . then out 
 of the press and throng there spring a dark - haired youth , and put his 
 arm about this long - forget maid , and kiss her pale face in which 
 the blood shoot up like light of the red dawn across the silent sky . and 
 next there be turmoil and uproar , and a flashing of sword , and they 
 tear the youth from her arm , and stab he , but with a cry she 
 snatch the dagger from his belt , and drive it into her snowy breast , 
 home to the heart , and down she fall , and then , with cry and wail , 
 and every sound of lamentation , the pageant roll away from the arena 
 of my vision , and once more the past shut to its book . 

 let he who read forgive the intrusion of a dream into a history of 
 fact . but it come so home to I - I see it all so clear in a moment , 
 as it be ; and , besides , who shall say what proportion of fact , past , 
 present , or to come , may lie in the imagination ? what be imagination ? 
 perhaps it be the shadow of the intangible truth , perhaps it be the 
 soul 's thought . 

 in an instant the whole thing have pass through my brain , and she be 
 address I . 

 " behold the lot of man , " say the veil Ayesha , as she draw the winding 
 sheet back over the dead lover , speak in a solemn , thrill voice , 
 which accord well with the dream that I have dream : " to the tomb , and 
 to the forgetfulness that hide the tomb , must we all come at last ! ay , 
 even I who live so long . even for I , oh Holly , thousand upon thousand 
 of year hence ; thousand of year after you hast go through the gate 
 and be lose in the mist , a day will dawn whereon I shall die , and be 
 even as thou art and these be . and then what will it avail that I have 
 live a little long , hold off death by the knowledge that I have 
 wring from Nature , since at last I too must die ? what be a span of ten 
 thousand year , or ten time ten thousand year , in the history of time ? 
 it be as naught - it be as the mist that roll up in the sunlight ; it 
 fleeth away like an hour of sleep or a breath of the Eternal Spirit . 
 behold the lot of man ! certainly it shall overtake we , and we shall 
 sleep . certainly , too , we shall awake and live again , and again shall 
 sleep , and so on and on , through period , space , and time , from æon 
 unto æon , till the world be dead , and the world beyond the world be 
 dead , and naught liveth but the Spirit that be Life . but for we twain 
 and for these dead one shall the end of end be Life , or shall it be 
 death ? as yet death be but Life 's Night , but out of the night be the 
 Morrow bear again , and doth again beget the Night . only when Day and 
 Night , and Life and death , be end and swallow up in that from which 
 they come , what shall be our fate , oh Holly ? who can see so far ? not 
 even I ! " 

 and then , with a sudden change of tone and manner - 

 " Hast thou see enough , my stranger guest , or shall I show thee more of 
 the wonder of these tomb that be my palace hall ? if thou wilt , I can 
 lead thee to where Tisno , the mighty and most valorous king of K"r , 
 in whose day these cave be end , lie in a pomp that seem to mock 
 at nothingness , and bid the empty shadow of the past do homage to his 
 sculpture vanity ! " 

 " I have see enough , oh Queen , " I answer . " my heart be overwhelm 
 by the power of the present death . mortality be weak , and easily break 
 down by a sense of the companionship that wait upon its end . take I 
 hence , oh Ayesha ! " 



 XVII 

 the balance turn 

 in a few minute , follow the lamp of the mute , which , hold out 
 from the body as a bearer hold water in a vessel , have the appearance of 
 float down the darkness by themselves , we come to a stair which lead 
 we to she 's ante - room , the same that Billali have creep up upon on all 
 four on the previous day . here I would have bid the Queen adieu , but 
 she would not . 

 " Nay , " she say , " enter with I , oh Holly , for of a truth thy 
 conversation pleaseth I . think , oh Holly : for two thousand year have I 
 have none to converse with save slave and my own thought , and though 
 of all this thinking hath much wisdom come , and many secret be make 
 plain , yet be I weary of my thought , and have come to loathe mine own 
 society , for surely the food that memory give to eat be bitter to the 
 taste , and it be only with the tooth of hope that we can bear to bite 
 it . now , though thy thought be green and tender , as becometh one so 
 young , yet be they those of a thinking brain , and in truth thou dost 
 bring back to my mind certain of those old philosopher with whom in 
 day bygone I have dispute at Athens , and at Becca in Arabia , for thou 
 hast the same crab air and dusty look , as though thou hadst pass 
 thy day in read ill - writ Greek , and be stain dark with the grime 
 of manuscript . so draw the curtain , and sit here by my side , and we 
 will eat fruit , and talk of pleasant thing . see , I will again unveil 
 to thee . Thou hast bring it on thyself , oh Holly ; fairly have I warn 
 thee - and thou shalt call I beautiful as even those old philosopher 
 be will not to do . fie upon they , forget their philosophy ! " 

 and without more ado she stand up and shake the white wrapping from 
 she , and come forth shin and splendid like some glitter snake when 
 she have cast her slough ; ay , and fix her wonderful eye upon I - more 
 deadly than any Basilisk 's - and pierce I through and through with 
 their beauty , and send her light laugh ring through the air like 
 chime of silver bell . 

 a new mood be on she , and the very colour of her mind seem to change 
 beneath it . it be no long torture - tear and hateful , as I have see 
 it when she be curse her dead rival by the leap flame , no long 
 icily terrible as in the judgment - hall , no long rich , and sombre , and 
 splendid , like a tyrian cloth , as in the dwelling of the dead . no , her 
 mood now be that of Aphrodité triumphing . life - radiant , ecstatic , 
 wonderful - seem to flow from she and around she . softly she laugh 
 and sigh , and swift her glance fly . she shake her heavy tress , 
 and their perfume fill the place ; she strike her little sandalled foot 
 upon the floor , and hum a snatch of some old greek epithalamium . all 
 the majesty be go , or do but lurk and faintly flicker through her 
 laugh eye , like lightning see through sunlight . she have cast off 
 the terror of the leap flame , the cold power of judgment that be 
 even now be do , and the wise sadness of the tomb - cast they off 
 and put they behind she , like the white shroud she wear , and now stand 
 out the incarnation of lovely tempting womanhood , make more perfect - and 
 in a way more spiritual - than ever woman be before . 

 " so , my Holly , sit there where thou canst see I . it be by thine own 
 wish , remember - again I say , blame I not if thou dost wear away thy 
 little span with such a sick pain at the heart that thou wouldst fain 
 have die before ever thy curious eye be set upon I . there , sit so , 
 and tell I , for in truth I be incline for praise - tell I , be I not 
 beautiful ? Nay , speak not so hastily ; consider well the point ; take I 
 feature by feature , forget not my form , and my hand and foot , and 
 my hair , and the whiteness of my skin , and then tell I truly , hast 
 thou ever know a woman who in aught , ay , in one little portion of 
 her beauty , in the curve of an eyelash even , or the modelling of a 
 shell - like ear , be justify to hold a light before my loveliness ? now , 
 my waist ! perchance thou think it too large , but of a truth it be not 
 so ; it be this golden snake that be too large , and doth not bind it as 
 it should . it be a wide snake , and knoweth that it be ill to tie in 
 the waist . but see , give I thy hand - so - now press they round I , and 
 there , with but a little force , thy finger touch , oh Holly . " 

 I could bear it no long . I be but a man , and she be more than a 
 woman . Heaven know what she be - I do not ! but then and there I 
 fall upon my knee before she , and tell she in a sad mixture of 
 language - for such moment confuse the thought - that I worship she 
 as never woman be worship , and that I would give my immortal soul 
 to marry she , which at that time I certainly would have do , and so , 
 indeed , would any other man , or all the race of man roll into one . for 
 a moment she look surprised , and then she begin to laugh , and clap she 
 hand in glee . 

 " oh , so soon , oh Holly ! " she say . " I wonder how many minute it would 
 need to bring thee to thy knee . I have not see a man kneel before 
 I for so many day , and , believe I , to a woman 's heart the sight be 
 sweet , ay , wisdom and length of day take not from that dear pleasure 
 which be our sex 's only right . 

 " what wouldst thou ? - what wouldst thou ? Thou dost not know what thou 
 doest . have I not tell thee that I be not for thee ? I love but one , and 
 thou art not the man . ah Holly , for all thy wisdom - and in a way thou 
 art wise - thou art but a fool run after folly . Thou wouldst look 
 into mine eye - thou wouldst kiss I ! well , if it pleaseth thee , 
  look , " and she bend herself towards I , and fix her dark and 
 thrilling orb upon my own ; " ay , and kiss too , if thou wilt , for , 
 thank be give to the scheme of thing , kiss leave no mark , except 
 upon the heart . but if thou dost kiss , I tell thee of a surety wilt thou 
 eat out thy breast with love of I , and die ! " and she bent yet far 
 towards I till her soft hair brush my brow , and her fragrant breath 
 play upon my face , and make I faint and weak . then of a sudden , even 
 as I stretch out my hand to clasp , she straighten herself , and a 
 quick change pass over she . reach out her hand , she hold it over my 
 head , and it seem to I that something flow from it that chill 
 I back to common sense , and a knowledge of propriety and the domestic 
 virtue . 

 " enough of this wanton folly , " she say with a touch of sternness . 
 " listen , Holly . thou art a good and honest man , and I fain would spare 
 thee ; but , oh ! it be so hard for woman to be merciful . I have say I be 
 not for thee , therefore let thy thought pass by I like an idle wind , 
 and the dust of thy imagination sink again into the depth - well , of 
 despair , if thou wilt . Thou dost not know I , Holly . hadst thou see I 
 but ten hour past when my passion seize I , thou hadst shrink from I 
 in fear and trembling . I be of many mood , and , like the water in that 
 vessel , I reflect many thing ; but they pass , my Holly ; they pass , and 
 be forget . only the water be the water still , and I still be I , and 
 that which maketh the water maketh it , and that which maketh I maketh 
 I , nor can my quality be alter . therefore , pay no heed to what I 
 seem , see that thou canst not know what I be . if thou troublest I 
 again I will veil myself , and thou shalt behold my face no more . " 

 I rise , and sink on the cushioned couch beside she , yet quiver with 
 emotion , though for a moment my mad passion have leave I , as the leaf 
 of a tree quiver still , although the gust be go that stir they . I 
 do not dare to tell she that I have see she in that deep and hellish 
 mood , mutter incantation to the fire in the tomb . 

 " so , " she go on , " now eat some fruit ; believe I , it be the only true 
 food for man . oh , tell I of the philosophy of that Hebrew Messiah , who 
 come after I , and who thou say doth now rule Rome , and Greece , and 
 Egypt , and the barbarian beyond . it must have be a strange philosophy 
 that he teach , for in my day the people would have naught of our 
 philosophy . revel and lust and drink , blood and cold steel , and the 
 shock of man gather in the battle - these be the canon of their 
 creed . " 

 I have recover myself a little by now , and , feel bitterly ashamed of 
 the weakness into which I have be betray , I do my good to expound 
 to she the doctrine of Christianity , to which , however , with the single 
 exception of our conception of Heaven and Hell , I find that she pay 
 but scant attention , her interest be all direct towards the Man 
 who teach they . also I tell she that among her own people , the Arabs , 
 another prophet , one Mohammed , have arise and preach a new faith , to 
 which many million of mankind now adhere . 

 " ah ! " she say ; " I see - two new religion ! I have know so many , and 
 doubtless there have be many more since I know aught beyond these 
 cave of K"r . mankind ask ever of the sky to vision out what 
 lie behind they . it be terror for the end , and but a subtler form of 
 selfishness - this it be that breed religion . Mark , my Holly , each 
 religion claim the future for its follower ; or , at least , the good 
 thereof . the evil be for those benighted one who will have none of 
 it ; see the light the true believer worship , as the fish see the 
 star , but dimly . the religion come and the religion pass , and the 
 civilisation come and pass , and naught endure but the world and human 
 nature . ah ! if man would but see that hope be from within and not from 
 without - that he himself must work out his own salvation ! he be there , 
 and within he be the breath of life and a knowledge of good and evil as 
 good and evil be to he . Thereon let he build and stand erect , and not 
 cast himself before the image of some unknown God , model like his 
 poor self , but with a big brain to think the evil thing , and a long 
 arm to do it . " 

 I think to myself , which show how old such reasoning be , be , 
 indeed , one of the recur quality of theological discussion , that 
 her argument sound very like some that I have hear in the nineteenth 
 century , and in other place than the cave of K"r , and with which , by 
 the way , I totally disagree , but I do not care to try and discuss the 
 question with she . to begin with , my mind be too weary with all the 
 emotion through which I have pass , and , in the second place , I know 
 that I should get the bad of it . it be weary work enough to argue 
 with an ordinary materialist , who hurl statistic and whole strata 
 of geological fact at your head , whilst you can only buffet he with 
 deduction and instinct and the snowflake of faith , that be , alas ! so 
 apt to melt in the hot ember of our trouble . how little chance , then , 
 should I have against one whose brain be supernaturally sharpen , 
 and who have two thousand year of experience , besides all manner of 
 knowledge of the secret of Nature at her command ! feel that she 
 would be more likely to convert I than I should to convert she , I 
 think it well to leave the matter alone , and so sit silent . many a 
 time since then have I bitterly regret that I do so , for thereby I 
 lose the only opportunity I can remember have have of ascertain what 
 Ayesha really believe , and what her " philosophy " be . 

 " well , my Holly , " she continue , " and so those people of mine have find 
 a prophet , a false prophet thou sayest , for he be not thine own , and , 
 indeed , I doubt it not . yet in my day be it otherwise , for then we 
 Arabs have many god . Allât there be , and Saba , the Host of Heaven , Al 
 Uzza , and Manah the stony one , for whom the blood of victim flow , 
 and Wadd and Sawâ , and Yagh - th the Lion of the dweller in Yaman , and 
 Yä - k the Horse of Morad , and Nasr the Eagle of Hamyar ; ay , and many 
 more . oh , the folly of it all , the shame and the pitiful folly ! yet when 
 I rise in wisdom and speak thereof , surely they would have slay I in 
 the name of their outraged god . well , so hath it ever be ; - but , my 
 Holly , art thou weary of I already , that thou dost sit so silent ? or 
 dost thou fear lest I should teach thee my philosophy ? - for know I have 
 a philosophy . what would a teacher be without her own philosophy ? and 
 if thou dost vex I overmuch beware ! for I will have thee learn it , and 
 thou shalt be my disciple , and we twain will find a faith that shall 
 swallow up all other . faithless man ! and but half an hour since thou 
 wast upon thy knees - the posture do not suit thee , Holly - swear 
 that thou didst love I . what shall we do ? - Nay , I have it . I will come 
 and see this youth , the Lion , as the old man Billali call he , who come 
 with thee , and who be so sick . the fever must have run its course by 
 now , and if he be about to die I will recover he . fear not , my Holly , I 
 shall use no magic . have I not tell thee that there be no such thing as 
 magic , though there be such a thing as understand and apply the 
 force which be in Nature ? go now , and presently , when I have make the 
 drug ready , I will follow thee . "   

      Ayesha be a great chemist , indeed chemistry appear to 
  have be her only amusement and occupation . she have one of 
  the cave fit up as a laboratory , and , although her 
  appliance be necessarily rude , the result that she 
  attain be , as will become clear in the course of this 
  narrative , sufficiently surprising . - L. H. H. 

 accordingly I go , only to find Job and Ustane in a great state of 
 grief , declare that Leo be in the throe of death , and that they have 
 be search for I everywhere . I rush to the couch , and glance at 
 he : clearly he be die . he be senseless , and breathe heavily , but 
 his lip be quiver , and every now and again a little shudder run 
 down his frame . I know enough of doctor to see that in another hour 
 he would be beyond the reach of earthly help - perhaps in another five 
 minute . how I curse my selfishness and the folly that have keep I 
 linger by Ayesha 's side while my dear boy lie die ! Alas and alas ! 
 how easily the good of we be light down to evil by the gleam of 
 a woman 's eye ! what a wicked wretch be I ! actually , for the last 
 half - hour I have scarcely think of Leo , and this , be it remember , 
 of the man who for twenty year have be my dear companion , and the 
 chief interest of my existence . and now , perhaps , it be too late ! 

 I wring my hand , and glance round . ustane be sit by the couch , 
 and in her eye burn the dull light of despair . Job be blubber - I 
 be sorry I can not name his distress by any more delicate word - audibly 
 in the corner . see my eye fix upon he , he go outside to give way 
 to his grief in the passage . obviously the only hope lie in Ayesha . she , 
 and she alone - unless , indeed , she be an imposter , which I could 
 not believe - could save he . I would go and implore she to come . as 
 I start to do so , however , Job come fly into the room , his hair 
 literally stand on end with terror . 

 " oh , God help we , sir ! " he ejaculate in a frightened whisper , " here be a 
 corpse a - come slide down the passage ! " 

 for a moment I be puzzle , but presently , of course , it strike I that 
 he must have see Ayesha , wrap in her grave - like garment , and be 
 deceive by the extraordinary undulating smoothness of her walk into a 
 belief that she be a white ghost glide towards he . indeed , at that 
 very moment the question be settle , for Ayesha herself be in the 
 apartment , or rather cave . Job turn , and see her sheet form , and 
 then , with a convulsive howl of " here it come ! " spring into a corner , 
 and jam his face against the wall , and Ustane , guess whose the 
 dread presence must be , prostrate herself upon her face . 

 " thou com in a good time , Ayesha , " I say , " for my boy lie at the 
 point of death . " 

 " so , " she say softly ; " provide he be not dead , it be no matter , for I 
 can bring he back to life , my Holly . be that man there thy servant , 
 and be that the method wherewith thy servant greet stranger in thy 
 country ? " 

 " he be frightened of thy garb - it hath a death - like air , " I answer . 

 she laugh . 

 " and the girl ? ah , I see now . it be she of whom thou didst speak to I . 
 well , bid they both to leave we , and we will see to this sick Lion of 
 thine . I love not that underling should perceive my wisdom . " 

 Thereon I tell Ustane in Arabic and Job in English both to leave the 
 room ; an order which the latter obey readily enough , and be glad to 
 obey , for he could not in any way subdue his fear . but it be otherwise 
 with Ustane . 

 " what do she want ? " she whisper , divide between her fear of the 
 terrible queen and her anxiety to remain near Leo . " it be surely the 
 right of a wife to be near her husband when he dieth . Nay , I will not 
 go , my lord the Baboon . " 

 " why doth not that woman leave we , my Holly ? " ask Ayesha from the 
 other end of the cave , where she be engage in carelessly examine 
 some of the sculpture on the wall . 

 " she be not willing to leave Leo , " I answer , not know what to say . 
 Ayesha wheel round , and , point to the girl Ustane , say one word , 
 and one only , but it be quite enough , for the tone in which it be say 
 mean volume . 

 " go ! " 

 and then Ustane creep past she on her hand and knee , and go . 

 " Thou seest , my Holly , " say Ayesha , with a little laugh , " it be 
 needful that I should give these people a lesson in obedience . that girl 
 go nigh to disobey I , but then she do not learn this morn how 
 I treat the disobedient . well , she have go ; and now let I see the 
 youth , " and she glide towards the couch on which Leo lie , with his face 
 in the shadow and turn towards the wall . 

 " he hath a noble shape , " she say , as she bent over he to look upon his 
 face . 

 next second her tall and willowy form be stagger back across the 
 room , as though she have be shoot or stab , stagger back till at 
 last she strike the cavern wall , and then there burst from her lip the 
 most awful and unearthly scream that I ever hear in all my life . 

 " what be it , Ayesha ? " I cry . " be he dead ? " 

 she turn , and spring towards I like a tigress . 

 " thou dog ! " she say , in her terrible whisper , which sound like the 
 hiss of a snake , " why didst thou hide this from I ? " and she stretch 
 out her arm , and I think that she be about to slay I . 

 " what ? " I ejaculate , in the most lively terror ; " what ? " 

 " ah ! " she say , " perchance thou didst not know . Learn , my Holly , learn : 
 there lie - there lie my lose Kallikrates . Kallikrates , who have come 
 back to I at last , as I know he would , as I know he would ; " and she 
 begin to sob and to laugh , and generally to conduct herself like any 
 other lady who be a little upset , murmur " Kallikrates , Kallikrates ! " 

 " nonsense , " think I to myself , but I do not like to say it ; and , 
 indeed , at that moment I be think of Leo 's life , have forget 
 everything else in that terrible anxiety . what I fear now be that he 
 should die while she be " carry on . " 

 " unless thou art able to help he , Ayesha , " I put in , by way of a 
 reminder , " thy Kallikrates will soon be far beyond thy calling . surely 
 he dieth even now . " 

 " true , " she say , with a start . " oh , why do I not come before ! I be 
 unnerved - my hand tremble , even mine - and yet it be very easy . here , 
 thou Holly , take this phial , " and she produce a tiny jar of pottery 
 from the fold of her garment , " and pour the liquid in it down his 
 throat . it will cure he if he be not dead . swift , now ! Swift ! the man 
 die ! " 

 I glance towards he ; it be true enough , Leo be in his 
 death - struggle . I see his poor face turn ashen , and hear the breath 
 begin to rattle in his throat . the phial be stopper with a little 
 piece of wood . I draw it with my tooth , and a drop of the fluid within 
 fly out upon my tongue . it have a sweet flavour , and for a second make 
 my head swim , and a mist gather before my eye , but happily the effect 
 pass away as swiftly as it have arise . 

 when I reach Leo 's side he be plainly expire - his golden head be 
 slowly turn from side to side , and his mouth be slightly open . I 
 call to Ayesha to hold his head , and this she manage to do , though 
 the woman be quiver from head to foot , like an aspen - leaf or a 
 startled horse . then , force the jaw a little more open , I pour the 
 content of the phial into his mouth . instantly a little vapour arise 
 from it , as happen when one disturb nitric acid , and this sight do 
 not increase my hope , already faint enough , of the efficacy of the 
 treatment . 

 one thing , however , be certain , the death throe cease - at first I 
 think because he have get beyond they , and cross the awful river . 
 his face turn to a livid pallor , and his heart - beat , which have be 
 feeble enough before , seem to die away altogether - only the eyelid 
 still twitch a little . in my doubt I look up at Ayesha , whose 
 head - wrapping have slip back in her excitement when she go reel 
 across the room . she be still hold Leo 's head , and , with a face as 
 pale as his own , watch his countenance with such an expression of 
 agonise anxiety as I have never see before . clearly she do not know if 
 he would live or die . five minute slowly pass and I see that she be 
 abandon hope ; her lovely oval face seem to fall in and grow visibly 
 thin beneath the pressure of a mental agony whose pencil draw black 
 line about the hollow of her eye . the coral fade even from her lip , 
 till they be as white as Leo 's face , and quiver pitifully . it be 
 shocking to see she : even in my own grief I feel for her . 

 " be it too late ? " I gasp . 

 she hide her face in her hand , and make no answer , and I too turn 
 away . but as I do so I hear a deep - draw breath , and look down 
 perceive a line of colour creep up Leo 's face , then another and 
 another , and then , wonder of wonder , the man we have think dead turn 
 over on his side . 

 " Thou seest , " I say in a whisper . 

 " I see , " she answer hoarsely . " he be save . I think we be too 
 late - another moment - one little moment more - and he have be go ! " 
 and she burst into an awful flood of tear , sob as though her heart 
 would break , and yet look lovelier than ever as she do it . as last 
 she cease . 

 " forgive I , my Holly - forgive I for my weakness , " she say . " Thou 
 seest after all I be a very woman . think - now think of it ! this morning 
 didst thou speak of the place of torment appoint by this new religion 
 of thine . Hell or Hades thou didst call it - a place where the vital 
 essence life and retain an individual memory , and where all the error 
 and fault of judgment , and unsatisfie passion and the unsubstantial 
 terror of the mind wherewith it hath at any time have to do , come to 
 mock and haunt and gibe and wring the heart for ever and for ever with 
 the vision of its own hopelessness . thus , even thus , have I live for 
 full two thousand year - for some six and sixty generation , as ye 
 reckon time - in a Hell , as thou call it - torment by the memory of 
 a crime , torture day and night with an unfulfilled desire - without 
 companionship , without comfort , without death , and lead on only down my 
 dreary road by the marsh light of Hope , which , though they flicker 
 here and there , and now glow strong , and now be not , yet , as my 
 skill tell I , would one day lead unto my deliverer . 

 " and then - think of it still , oh Holly , for never shalt thou hear such 
 another tale , or see such another scene , nay , not even if I give thee 
 ten thousand year of life - and thou shalt have it in payment if thou 
 wilt - think : at last my deliverer come - he for whom I have watch and 
 wait through the generation - at the appoint time he come to seek 
 I , as I know that he must come , for my wisdom could not err , though 
 I know not when or how . yet see how ignorant I be ! see how small my 
 knowledge , and how faint my strength ! for hour he lie there sick unto 
 death , and I feel it not - I who have wait for he for two thousand 
 year - I know it not . and then at last I see he , and behold , my chance 
 be go but by a hair 's breadth even before I have it , for he be in the 
 very jaw of death , whence no power of mine can draw he . and if he die , 
 surely must the Hell be live through once more - once more must I face 
 the weary century , and wait , and wait till the time in its fulness 
 shall bring my Beloved back to I . and then thou gav he the 
 medicine , and that five minute drag long before I know if he would 
 live or die , and I tell thee that all the sixty generation that be 
 go be not so long as that five minute . but they pass at length , 
 and still he show no sign , and I know that if the drug work not then , 
 so far as I have have knowledge , it work not at all . then think I that 
 he be once more dead , and all the torture of all the year gather 
 themselves into a single venome spear , and pierce I through and 
 through , because again I have lose kallikrate ! and then , when all be 
 do , behold ! he sigh , behold ! he live , and I know that he would 
 live , for none die on whom the drug take hold . think of it now , my 
 Holly - think of the wonder of it ! he will sleep for twelve hour and 
 then the fever will have leave he ! " 

 she stop , and lay her hand upon his golden head , and then bent down 
 and kiss his brow with a chastened abandonment of tenderness that 
 would have be beautiful to behold have not the sight cut I to the 
 heart - for I be jealous ! 



 xviii 

 " GO , WOMAN ! " 

 then follow a silence of a minute or so , during which she appear , 
 if one might judge from the almost angelic rapture of her face - for she 
 look angelic sometimes - to be plunge into a happy ecstasy . suddenly , 
 however , a new thought strike she , and her expression become the very 
 reverse of angelic . 

 " almost have I forget , " she say , " that woman , Ustane . what be she 
 to Kallikrates - his servant , or - - " and she pause , and her voice 
 tremble . 

 I shrug my shoulder . " I understand that she be we d to he accord 
 to the custom of the Amahagger , " I answer ; " but I know not . " 

 her face grow dark as a thunder - cloud . Old as she be , Ayesha have not 
 outlive jealousy . 

 " then there be an end , " she say ; ' she must die , even now ! " 

 " for what crime ? " I ask , horrify . " she be guilty of naught that thou 
 art not guilty of thyself , oh Ayesha . she love the man , and he have be 
 pleased to accept her love : where , then , be her sin ? " 

 " truly , oh Holly , thou art foolish , " she answer , almost petulantly . 
 " where be her sin ? her sin be that she stand between I and my desire . 
 well , I know that I can take he from she - for dwell there a man upon 
 this earth , oh Holly , who could resist I if I put out my strength ? 
 man be faithful for so long only as temptation pass they by . if the 
 temptation be but strong enough , then will the man yield , for every man , 
 like every rope , hath his break strain , and passion be to man what 
 gold and power be to woman - the weight upon their weakness . believe I , 
 ill will it go with mortal woman in that heaven of which thou speakest , 
 if only the spirit be more fair , for their lord will never turn to 
 look upon they , and their Heaven will become their Hell . for man can be 
 buy with woman 's beauty , if it be but beautiful enough ; and woman 's 
 beauty can be ever buy with gold , if only there be gold enough . so 
 be it in my day , and so it will be to the end of time . the world be a 
 great mart , my Holly , where all thing be for sale to whom who bid the 
 high in the currency of our desire . " 

 these remark , which be as cynical as might have be expect from 
 a woman of Ayesha 's age and experience , jar upon I , and I answer , 
 testily , that in our heaven there be no marriage or give in marriage . 

 " else would it not be heaven , dost thou mean ? " she put in . " fie on thee , 
 Holly , to think so ill of we poor woman ! be it , then , marriage that 
 mark the line between thy heaven and thy hell ? but enough of this . this 
 be no time for disputing and the challenge of our wit . why dost thou 
 always dispute ? art thou also a philosopher of these latter day ? as 
 for this woman , she must die ; for , though I can take her lover from she , 
 yet , while she live , might he think tenderly of she , and that I can not 
 away with . no other woman shall dwell in my Lord 's thought ; my empire 
 shall be all my own . she hath have her day , let she be content ; for 
 well be an hour with love than a century of loneliness - now the night 
 shall swallow she . " 

 " Nay , nay , " I cry , " it would be a wicked crime ; and from a crime 
 naught come but what be evil . for thine own sake , do not this deed . " 

 " be it , then , a crime , oh foolish man , to put away that which stand 
 between we and our end ? then be our life one long crime , my Holly , 
 since day by day we destroy that we may live , since in this world none 
 save the strong can endure . those who be weak must perish ; the earth 
 be to the strong , and the fruit thereof . for every tree that grow a 
 score shall wither , that the strong one may take their share . we run to 
 place and power over the dead body of those who fail and fall ; ay , we 
 win the food we eat from out of the mouth of starve babe . it be 
 the scheme of thing . Thou sayest , too , that a crime breed evil , but 
 therein thou dost lack experience ; for out of crime come many good 
 thing , and out of good grow much evil . the cruel rage of the tyrant 
 may prove a blessing to the thousand who come after he , and the 
 sweetheartedness of a holy man may make a nation slave . man doeth this , 
 and doeth that from the good or evil of his heart ; but he knoweth not 
 to what end his moral sense doth prompt he ; for when he striketh he be 
 blind to where the blow shall fall , nor can he count the airy thread 
 that weave the web of circumstance . good and evil , love and hate , night 
 and day , sweet and bitter , man and woman , heaven above and the earth 
 beneath - all these thing be necessary , one to the other , and who know 
 the end of each ? I tell thee that there be a hand of fate that twin 
 they up to bear the burden of its purpose , and all thing be gather 
 in that great rope to which all thing be needful . therefore doth it 
 not become we to say this thing be evil and this good , or the dark be 
 hateful and the light lovely ; for to other eye than ours the evil may 
 be the good and the darkness more beautiful than the day , or all alike 
 be fair . hear thou , my Holly ? " 

 I feel it be hopeless to argue against casuistry of this nature , which , 
 if it be carry to its logical conclusion , would absolutely destroy 
 all morality , as we understand it . but her talk give I a fresh thrill 
 of fear ; for what may not be possible to a being who , unconstraine by 
 human law , be also absolutely unshackle by a moral sense of right and 
 wrong , which , however partial and conventional it may be , be yet 
 base , as our conscience tell we , upon the great wall of individual 
 responsibility that mark off mankind from the beast ? 

 but I be deeply anxious to save Ustane , whom I like and respect , 
 from the dire fate that overshadow she at the hand of her mighty 
 rival . so I make one more appeal . 

 " Ayesha , " I say , " thou art too subtle for I ; but thou thyself hast 
 tell I that each man should be a law unto himself , and follow the 
 teaching of his heart . hath thy heart no mercy towards she whose place 
 thou wouldst take ? bethink thee - as thou sayest - though to I the thing 
 be incredible - he whom thou desir have return to thee after many 
 age , and but now thou hast , as thou sayest also , wring he from the 
 jaw of death . wilt thou celebrate his come by the murder of one who 
 love he , and whom perchance he love - one , at the least , who save 
 his life for thee when the spear of thy slave would have make an end 
 thereof ? Thou sayest also that in past day thou didst grievously wrong 
 this man , that with thine own hand thou didst slay he because of the 
 Egyptian Amenartas whom he love . " 

 " how know thou that , oh stranger ? how know thou that name ? I speak 
 it not to thee , " she break in with a cry , catch at my arm . 

 " perchance I dream it , " I answer ; ' strange dream do hover about 
 these cave of K"r . it seem that the dream be , indeed , a shadow of 
 the truth . what come to thee of thy mad crime ? - two thousand year of 
 wait , be it not ? and now wouldst thou repeat the history ? say what 
 thou wilt , I tell thee that evil will come of it ; for to he who doeth , 
 at the least , good breed good and evil evil , even though in after day 
 out of evil cometh good . offence must need come ; but woe to he by 
 whom the offence cometh . so say that Messiah of whom I speak to thee , 
 and it be truly say . if thou slay this innocent woman , I say unto 
 thee that thou shalt be accurse , and pluck no fruit from thine ancient 
 tree of love . also , what think thou ? how will this man take thee 
 red - handed from the slaughter of she who love and tend he ? " 

 " as to that , " she answer , " I have already answer thee . have I slain 
 thee as well as she , yet should he love I , Holly , because he could not 
 save himself from therefrom any more than thou couldst save thyself from 
 die , if by chance I slay thee , oh Holly . and yet maybe there be truth 
 in what thou dost say ; for in some way it presseth on my mind . if it 
 may be , I will spare this woman ; for have I not tell thee that I be not 
 cruel for the sake of cruelty ? I love not to see suffering , or to cause 
 it . let she come before I - quick now , before my mood change , " and she 
 hastily cover her face with its gauzy wrap . 

 well pleased to have succeed even to this extent , I pass out into 
 the passage and call to Ustane , whose white garment I catch sight of 
 some yard away , huddle up against one of the earthenware lamp that 
 be place at interval along the tunnel . she rise , and run towards I . 

 " be my lord dead ? oh , say not he be dead , " she cry , lift her 
 noble - look face , all stain as it be with tear , up to I with an 
 air of infinite beseech that go straight to my heart . 

 " Nay , he live , " I answer . " she hath save he . enter . " 

 she sigh deeply , enter , and fall upon her hand and knee , after the 
 custom of the Amahagger people , in the presence of the dread she . 

 " stand , " say Ayesha , in her cold voice , " and come hither . " 

 Ustane obey , stand before she with bow head . 

 then come a pause , which Ayesha break . 

 " who be this man ? " she say , point to the sleep form of Leo . 

 " the man be my husband , " she answer in a low voice . 

 " who give he to thee for a husband ? " 

 " I take he accord to the custom of our country , oh she . " 

 " Thou hast do evil , woman , in take this man , who be a stranger . he 
 be not a man of thine own race , and the custom fail . listen : perchance 
 thou didst this thing through ignorance , therefore , woman , do I spare 
 thee , otherwise hadst thou die . listen again . go from hence back to 
 thine own place , and never dare to speak to or set thine eye upon this 
 man again . he be not for thee . listen a third time . if thou breakest 
 this my law , that moment thou di . go . " 

 but Ustane do not move . 

 " go , woman ! " 

 then she look up , and I see that her face be tear with passion . 

 " Nay , oh she . I will not go , " she answer in a choke voice : " the 
 man be my husband , and I love he - I love he , and I will not leave he . 
 what right hast thou to command I to leave my husband ? " 

 I see a little quiver pass down Ayesha 's frame , and shudder myself , 
 fear the bad . 

 " be pitiful , " I say in Latin ; " it be but nature work . " 

 " I be pitiful , " she answer coldly in the same language ; " have I not 
 be pitiful she have be dead even now . " then , address Ustane : 
 " Woman , I say to thee , go before I destroy thee where thou art ! " 

 " I will not go ! he be mine - mine ! " she cry in anguish . " I take he , 
 and I save his life ! destroy I , then , if thou hast the power ! I will 
 not give thee my husband - never - never ! " 

 Ayesha make a movement so swift that I could scarcely follow it , but it 
 seem to I that she lightly strike the poor girl upon the head with 
 her hand . I look at Ustane , and then stagger back in horror , for 
 there upon her hair , right across her bronze - like tress , be three 
 finger - mark white as snow . as for the girl herself , she have put she 
 hand to her head , and be look daze . 

 " great heaven ! " I say , perfectly aghast at this dreadful manifestation 
 of human power ; but she do but laugh a little . 

 " thou think , poor ignorant fool , " she say to the bewildered woman , 
 " that I have not the power to slay . stay , there lie a mirror , " and she 
 point to Leo 's round shaving - glass that have be arrange by Job with 
 other thing upon his portmanteau ; " give it to this woman , my Holly , and 
 let she see that which lie across her hair , and whether or no I have 
 power to slay . " 

 I pick up the glass , and hold it before Ustane 's eye . she gaze , then 
 feel at her hair , then gaze again , and then sink upon the ground with a 
 sort of sob . 

 " now , wilt thou go , or must I strike a second time ? " ask Ayesha , in 
 mockery . " look , I have set my seal upon thee so that I may know thee 
 till thy hair be all as white as it . if I see thy face again , be sure , 
 too , that thy bone shall soon be white than my mark upon thy hair . " 

 utterly awe and break down , the poor creature rise , and , mark with 
 that awful mark , creep from the room , sob bitterly . 

 " look not so fright , my Holly , " say Ayesha , when she have go . " I 
 tell thee I deal not in magic - there be no such thing . ' tis only a force 
 that thou dost not understand . I mark she to strike terror to her 
 heart , else must I have slay she . and now I will bid my servant to 
 bear my Lord Kallikrates to a chamber near mine own , that I may watch 
 over he , and be ready to greet he when he wake ; and thither , too , 
 shalt thou come , my Holly , and the white man , thy servant . but one thing 
 remember at thy peril . naught shalt thou say to Kallikrates as to how 
 this woman go , and as little as may be of I . now , I have warn 
 thee ! " and she slide away to give her order , leave I more absolutely 
 confound than ever . indeed , so bewildered be I , and rack and tear 
 with such a succession of various emotion , that I begin to think that 
 I must be go mad . however , perhaps fortunately , I have but little time 
 to reflect , for presently the mute arrive to carry the sleep Leo 
 and our possession across the central cave , so for a while all be 
 bustle . our new room be situate immediately behind what we use to 
 call Ayesha 's boudoir - the curtain space where I have first see she . 
 where she herself sleep I do not then know , but it be somewhere quite 
 close . 

 that night I pass in Leo 's room , but he sleep through it like the 
 dead , never once stir . I also sleep fairly well , as , indeed , I 
 need to do , but my sleep be full of dream of all the horror 
 and wonder I have undergo . chiefly , however , I be haunt by that 
 frightful piece of diablerie by which Ayesha leave her finger - mark 
 upon her rival 's hair . there be something so terrible about her swift , 
 snake - like movement , and the instantaneous blanching of that threefold 
 line , that , if the result to Ustane have be much more tremendous , I 
 doubt if they would have impress I so deeply . to this day I often 
 dream of that awful scene , and see the weep woman , bereaved , and 
 mark like Cain , cast a last look at her lover , and creep from the 
 presence of her dread Queen . 

 another dream that trouble I originate in the huge pyramid of bone . 
 I dream that they all stand up and march past I in thousand 
 and ten of thousand - in squadron , company , and army - with the 
 sunlight shin through their hollow rib . on they rush across the 
 plain to K"r , their imperial home ; I see the drawbridge fall before 
 they , and hear their bone clank through the brazen gate . on they 
 go , up the splendid street , on past fountain , palace , and temple 
 such as the eye of man never see . but there be no man to greet they in 
 the market - place , and no woman 's face appear at the window - only 
 a bodiless voice go before they , call : " Fallen be Imperial 
 K"r ! - fall ! - fall ! fall ! " on , right through the city , march 
 those gleam phalanx , and the rattle of their bony tread echo 
 through the silent air as they press grimly on . they pass through 
 the city and clomb the wall , and march along the great roadway that 
 be make upon the wall , till at length they once more reach the 
 drawbridge . then , as the sun be sink , they return again towards 
 their sepulchre , and luridly his light shine in the socket of their 
 empty eye , throw gigantic shadow of their bone , that stretch 
 away , and creep and creep like huge spider ' leg as their army wound 
 across the plain . then they come to the cave , and once more one by one 
 fling themselves in unending file through the hole into the pit of 
 bone , and I awake , shudder , to see she , who have evidently be 
 stand between my couch and Leo 's , glide like a shadow from the room . 

 after this I sleep again , soundly this time , till morning , when I 
 awake much refresh , and get up . at last the hour draw near at which , 
 accord to Ayesha , Leo be to awake , and with it come she herself , 
 as usual , veil . 

 " thou shalt see , oh Holly , " she say ; " presently shall he awake in his 
 right mind , the fever have leave he . " 

 hardly be the word out of her mouth , when Leo turn round and 
 stretch out his arm , yawn , open his eye , and , perceive a 
 female form bend over he , throw his arm round she and kiss she , 
 mistake she , perhaps , for Ustane . at any rate , he say , in Arabic , 
 " Hullo , Ustane , why have you tie your head up like that ? have you get 
 the toothache ? " and then , in English , " I say , I be awfully hungry . why , 
 Job , you old son of a gun , where the deuce have we get to now - eh ? " 

 " I be sure I wish I know , Mr. Leo , " say Job , edge suspiciously past 
 Ayesha , whom he still regard with the utmost disgust and horror , be 
 by no mean sure that she be not an animate corpse ; " but you must not 
 talk , Mr. Leo , you have   be very ill , and give we a great deal of 
 hanxiety , and , if this lady , " look at Ayesha , " would be so kind as to 
 move , I will bring you your soup . " 

 this turn Leo 's attention to the " lady , " who be stand by in 
 perfect silence . " Hullo ! " he say ; " that be not Ustane - where be 
 Ustane ? " 

 then , for the first time , Ayesha speak to he , and her first word be 
 a lie . " she have go from hence upon a visit , " she say ; " and , behold , 
 in her place be I here as thine handmaiden . " 

 Ayesha 's silver note seem to puzzle Leo 's half - awakened intellect , 
 as also do her corpse - like wrapping . however , he say nothing at the 
 time , but drink off his soup greedily enough , and then turn over and 
 sleep again till the evening . when he wake for the second time he see 
 I , and begin to question I as to what have happen , but I have to 
 put he off as well I could till the morrow , when he awake almost 
 miraculously well . then I tell he something of his illness and of my 
 doing , but as Ayesha be present I could not tell he much except that 
 she be the Queen of the country , and well disposed towards we , and 
 that it be her pleasure to go veil ; for , though of course I speak in 
 English , I be afraid that she might understand what we be say from 
 the expression of our face , and besides , I remember her warning . 

 on the following day Leo get up almost entirely recover . the flesh 
 wound in his side be heal , and his constitution , naturally a vigorous 
 one , have shake off the exhaustion consequent on his terrible fever with 
 a rapidity that I can only attribute to the effect of the wonderful 
 drug which Ayesha have give to he , and also to the fact that his 
 illness have be too short to reduce he very much . with his return 
 health come back full recollection of all his adventure up to the time 
 when he have lose consciousness in the marsh , and of course of Ustane 
 also , to whom I have discover he have grow considerably attach . 
 indeed , he overwhelm I with question about the poor girl , which I 
 do not dare to answer , for after Leo 's first awakening she have send 
 for I , and again warn I solemnly that I be to reveal nothing of the 
 story to he , delicately hint that if I do it would be the bad for 
 I . she also , for the second time , caution I not to tell Leo anything 
 more than I be oblige about herself , say that she would reveal 
 herself to he in her own time . 

 indeed , her whole manner change . after all that I have see I have 
 expect that she would take the early opportunity of claim the 
 man she believe to be her old - world lover , but this , for some reason of 
 her own , which be at the time quite inscrutable to I , she do not do . 
 all that she do be to attend to his want quietly , and with a humility 
 which be in strike contrast with her former imperious bearing , 
 address he always in a tone of something very like respect , and 
 keep he with she as much as possible . of course his curiosity be as 
 much excited about this mysterious woman as my own have be , and he be 
 particularly anxious to see her face , which I have , without enter 
 into particular , tell he be as lovely as her form and voice . this 
 in itself be enough to raise the expectation of any young man to a 
 dangerous pitch , and , have it not be that he have not as yet completely 
 shake off the effect of illness , and be much troubled in his mind 
 about Ustane , of whose affection and brave devotion he speak in touching 
 term , I have no doubt that he would have enter into her plan , and 
 fall in love with she by anticipation . as it be , however , he be 
 simply wildly curious , and also , like myself , considerably awe , for , 
 though no hint have be give to he by Ayesha of her extraordinary age , 
 he not unnaturally come to identify she with the woman speak of on 
 the potsherd . at last , quite drive into a corner by his continual 
 question , which he shower on I while he be dress on this third 
 morning , I refer he to Ayesha , say , with perfect truth , that I 
 do not know where Ustane be . accordingly , after Leo have eat a hearty 
 breakfast , we adjourn into she 's presence , for her mute have order 
 to admit we at all hour . 

 she be , as usual , seat in what , for want of a well term , we call 
 her boudoir , and on the curtain be draw she rise from her couch 
 and , stretch out both hand , come forward to greet we , or rather 
 Leo ; for I , as may be imagine , be now quite leave in the cold . it be 
 a pretty sight to see her veil form glide towards the sturdy young 
 Englishman , dress in his grey flannel suit ; for , though he be half a 
 Greek in blood , Leo be , with the exception of his hair , one of the most 
 English - look man I ever see . he have nothing of the subtle form or 
 slippery manner of the modern Greek about he , though I presume that 
 he get his remarkable personal beauty from his foreign mother , whose 
 portrait he resemble not a little . he be very tall and big - cheste , and 
 yet not awkward , as so many big man be , and his head be set upon he in 
 such a fashion as to give he a proud and vigorous air , which be well 
 translate in his Amahagger name of the " Lion . " 

 " greet to thee , my young stranger lord , " she say in her softest 
 voice . " right glad be I to see thee upon thy foot . believe I , have I not 
 save thee at the last , never wouldst thou have stand upon those foot 
 again . but the danger be do , and it shall be my care " - and she fling a 
 world of meaning into the word - " that it doth return no more . " 

 Leo bow to she , and then , in his good Arabic , thank she for all her 
 kindness and courtesy in care for one unknown to she . 

 " Nay , " she answer softly , " ill could the world spare such a man . 
 Beauty be too rare upon it . give I no thank , who be make happy by thy 
 come . " 

 " Humph ! old fellow , " say Leo aside to I in English , " the lady be very 
 civil . we seem to have tumble into clover . I hope that you have make 
 the most of your opportunity . by Jove ! what a pair of arm she have 
 get ! " 

 I nudge he in the rib to make he keep quiet , for I catch sight of a 
 gleam from Ayesha 's veiled eye , which be regard I curiously . 

 " I trust , " go on Ayesha , " that my servant have attend well upon 
 thee ; if there can be comfort in this poor place , be sure it wait on 
 thee . be there aught that I can do for thee more ? " 

 " yes , oh she , " answer Leo hastily , " I would fain know whither the 
 young lady who be look after I have go to . " 

 " ah , " say Ayesha : " the girl - yes , I see she . Nay , I know not ; she 
 say that she would go , I know not whither . perchance she will return , 
 perchance not . it be wearisome wait on the sick , and these savage 
 woman be fickle . " 

 Leo look both sulky and distressed at this intelligence . 

 " it be very odd , " he say to I in English ; and then , address she , 
 " I can not understand , " he say ; " the young lady and i - well - in short , 
 we have a regard for each other . " 

 Ayesha laugh a little very musically , and then turn the subject . 



 XIX 

 " give I a BLACK GOAT ! " 

 the conversation after this be of such a desultory order that I do not 
 quite recollect it . for some reason , perhaps from a desire to keep she 
 identity and character in reserve , Ayesha do not talk freely , as she 
 usually do . presently , however , she inform Leo that she have arrange 
 a dance that night for our amusement . I be astonish to hear this , as 
 I fancy that the Amahagger be much too gloomy a folk to indulge 
 in any such frivolity ; but , as will presently more clearly appear , 
 it turn out that an Amahagger dance have little in common with such 
 fantastic festivity in other country , savage or civilised . then , as 
 we be about to withdraw , she suggest that Leo might like to see 
 some of the wonder of the cave , and as he gladly assent thither we 
 depart , accompany by Job and Billali . to describe our visit would 
 only be to repeat a great deal of what I have already say . the tomb 
 we enter be indeed different , for the whole rock be a honeycomb of 
 sepulchre ,     but the content be nearly always similar . afterwards 
 we visit the pyramid of bone that have haunt my dream on the 
 previous night , and from thence go down a long passage to one of the 
 great vault occupy by the body of the poor citizen of Imperial 
 K"r . these body be not nearly so well preserve as be those of 
 the wealthy class . many of they have no linen cover on they , also 
 they be bury from five hundred to one thousand in a single large 
 vault , the corps in some instance be thickly pile one upon 
 another , like a heap of slain . 

      for a long while it puzzle I to know what could have 
  be do with the enormous quantity of rock that must 
  have be dig out of these vast cave ; but I afterwards 
  discover that it be for the most part build into the 
  wall and palace of K"r , and also use to line the 
  reservoir and sewer . - L. H. H. 

 Leo be of course intensely interested in this stupendous and unequalled 
 sight , which be , indeed , enough to awake all the imagination a man 
 have in he into the most active life . but to poor Job it do not 
 prove attractive . his nerve - already seriously shake by what he have 
 undergo since we have arrive in this terrible country - be , as may 
 be imagine , still far disturb by the spectacle of these mass of 
 depart humanity , whereof the form still remain perfect before his 
 eye , though their voice be for ever lose in the eternal silence of 
 the tomb . nor be he comfort when old Billali , by way of soothe 
 his evident agitation , inform he that he should not be frightened of 
 these dead thing , as he would soon be like they himself . 

 " there be a nice thing to say of a man , sir , " he ejaculate , when I 
 translate this little remark ; " but there , what can one expect of an old 
 man - eat savage ? not but what I dare say he be right , " and Job sigh . 

 when we have finish inspect the cave , we return and have our 
 meal , for it be now past four in the afternoon , and we all - especially 
 Leo - need some food and rest . at six o'clock we , together with Job , 
 wait on Ayesha , who set to work to terrify our poor servant still 
 far by show he picture on the pool of water in the font - like 
 vessel . she learn from I that he be one of seventeen child , and 
 then bid he think of all his brother and sister , or as many of they 
 as he could , gather together in his father 's cottage . then she tell 
 he to look in the water , and there , reflect from its stilly surface , 
 be that dead scene of many year go by , as it be recall to our 
 retainer 's brain . some of the face be clear enough , but some be 
 mere blur and splotch , or with one feature grossly exaggerated ; the 
 fact be that , in these instance , Job have be unable to recall 
 the exact appearance of the individual , or remember they only by a 
 peculiarity of his tribe , and the water could only reflect what he see 
 with his mind 's eye . for it must be remember that she be power in 
 this matter be strictly limited ; she could apparently , except in very 
 rare instance , only photograph upon the water what be actually in the 
 mind of some one present , and then only by his will . but , if she be 
 personally acquaint with a locality , she could , as in the case of 
 ourselves and the whale - boat , throw its reflection upon the water , and 
 also , it seem , the reflection of anything extraneous that be pass 
 there at the time . this power , however , do not extend to the mind 
 of other . for instance , she could show I the interior of my college 
 chapel , as I remember it , but not as it be at the moment of 
 reflection ; for , where other people be concern , her art be strictly 
 limit to the fact or memory present to their consciousness at the 
 moment . so much be this so that when we try , for her amusement , to 
 show her picture of noted building , such as St. Paul 's or the Houses 
 of Parliament , the result be most imperfect ; for , of course , though we 
 have a good general idea of their appearance , we could not recall all the 
 architectural detail , and therefore the minutiæ necessary to a perfect 
 reflection be want . but Job could not be get to understand this , 
 and , so far from accept a natural explanation of the matter , which 
 be after all , though strange enough in all conscience , nothing more 
 than an instance of glorify and perfect telepathy , he set the whole 
 thing down as a manifestation of the black magic . I shall never 
 forget the howl of terror which he utter when he see the more or less 
 perfect portrait of his long - scatter brother star at he from the 
 quiet water , or the merry peal of laughter with which Ayesha greet his 
 consternation . as for Leo , he do not altogether like it either , but run 
 his finger through his yellow curl , and remark that it give he the 
 creep . 

 after about an hour of this amusement , in the latter part of which Job 
 do not participate , the mute by sign indicate that Billali be 
 wait for an audience . accordingly he be tell to " crawl up , " which 
 he do as awkwardly as usual , and announce that the dance be ready 
 to begin if she and the white stranger would be pleased to attend . 
 shortly afterwards we all rise , and , Ayesha have throw a dark cloak 
  the same , by the way , that she have wear when I see her cursing by the 
 fire   over her white wrapping , we start . the dance be to be hold in 
 the open air , on the smooth rocky plateau in front of the great cave , 
 and thither we make our way . about fifteen pace from the mouth of the 
 cave we find three chair place , and here we sit and wait , for as 
 yet no dancer be to be see . the night be almost , but not quite , 
 dark , the moon not have rise as yet , which make we wonder how we 
 should be able to see the dancing . 

 " thou wilt presently understand , " say Ayesha , with a little laugh , when 
 Leo ask she ; and we certainly do . Scarcely be the word out of her 
 mouth when from every point we see dark form rush up , each bearing 
 with he what we at first take to be an enormous flaming torch . whatever 
 they be , they be burn furiously , for the flame stand out a 
 yard or more behind each bearer . on they come , fifty or more of they , 
 carry their flame burden and look like so many devil from 
 hell . Leo be the first to discover what these burden be . 

 " Great heaven ! " he say , " they be corps on fire ! " 

 I star and star again - he be perfectly right - the torch that be 
 to light our entertainment be human mummy from the cave ! 

 on rush the bearer of the flame corps , and , meet at a spot 
 about twenty pace in front of we , build their ghastly burden crossway 
 into a huge bonfire . heaven ! how they roar and flare ! no tar barrel 
 could have burn as those mummy do . nor be this all . suddenly I 
 see one great fellow seize a flame human arm that have fall from its 
 parent frame , and rush off into the darkness . presently he stop , and 
 a tall streak of fire shoot up into the air , illumine the gloom , and 
 also the lamp from which it spring . that lamp be the mummy of a woman 
 tie to a stout stake let into the rock , and he have fire her hair . on 
 he go a few pace and touch a second , then a third , and a fourth , 
 till at last we be surround on all three side by a great ring of 
 body flare furiously , the material with which they be preserve 
 have render they so inflammable that the flame would literally 
 spout out of the ear and mouth in tongue of fire a foot or more in 
 length . 

 Nero illuminate his garden with live Christians soak in tar , and 
 we be now treat to a similar spectacle , probably for the first time 
 since his day , only happily our lamp be not live one . 

 but , although this element of horror be fortunately want , to 
 describe the awful and hideous grandeur of the spectacle thus present 
 to we be , I feel , so absolutely beyond my poor power that I scarcely 
 dare attempt it . to begin with , it appeal to the moral as well as the 
 physical susceptibility . there be something very terrible , and yet 
 very fascinating , about the employment of the remote dead to illumine 
 the orgy of the living ; in itself the thing be a satire , both on the 
 living and the dead . Cæsar 's dust - or be it Alexander 's ? - may stop a 
 bunghole , but the function of these dead Cæsars of the past be to 
 light up a savage fetish dance . to such base us may we come , of so 
 little account may we be in the mind of the eager multitude that we 
 shall breed , many of whom , so far from revere our memory , will live to 
 curse we for beget they into such a world of woe . 

 then there be the physical side of the spectacle , and a weird and 
 splendid one it be . those old citizen of K"r burn as , to judge from 
 their sculpture and inscription , they have live , very fast , and with 
 the utmost liberality . what be more , there be plenty of they . as soon 
 as ever a mummy have burn down to the ankle , which it do in about 
 twenty minute , the foot be kick away , and another one put in its 
 place . the bonfire be keep go on the same generous scale , and its 
 flame shoot up , with a hiss and a crackle , twenty or thirty foot into 
 the air , throw great flash of light far out into the gloom , through 
 which the dark form of the Amahagger flit to and fro like 
 devil replenish the infernal fire . we all stand and star 
 aghast - shock , and yet fascinate at so strange a spectacle , and half 
 expect to see the spirit those flame form have once enclose come 
 creep from the shadow to work vengeance on their desecrator . 

 " I promise thee a strange sight , my Holly , " laugh Ayesha , whose 
 nerve alone do not seem to be affect ; " and , behold , I have not 
 fail thee . also , it hath its lesson . trust not to the future , for 
 who know what the future may bring ! therefore , live for the day , and 
 endeavour not to escape the dust which seem to be man 's end . what 
 think thou those long - forget noble and lady would have feel have 
 they know that they should one day flare to light the dance or boil the 
 pot of savage ? but see , here come the dancer ; a merry crew - be they 
 not ? the stage be light - now for the play . " 

 as she speak , we perceive two line of figure , one male and the other 
 female , to the number of about a hundred , each advance round the human 
 bonfire , array only in the usual leopard and buck skin . they form 
 up , in perfect silence , in two line , face each other between we 
 and the fire , and then the dance - a sort of infernal and fiendish 
 cancan - begin . to describe it be quite impossible , but , though there be 
 a good deal of tossing of leg and double - shuffling , it seem to our 
 untutored mind to be more of a play than a dance , and , as usual with 
 this dreadful people , whose mind seem to have take their colour from 
 the cave in which they live , and whose joke and amusement be draw 
 from the inexhaustible store of preserve mortality with which they 
 share their home , the subject appear to be a most ghastly one . I 
 know that it represent an attempt murder first of all , and then the 
 burial alive of the victim and his struggle from the grave ; each act 
 of the abominable drama , which be carry on in perfect silence , be 
 round off and finish with a furious and most revolt dance round 
 the suppose victim , who writhe upon the ground in the red light of the 
 bonfire . 

 presently , however , this pleasing piece be interrupt . suddenly there 
 be a slight commotion , and a large powerful woman , whom I have note as 
 one of the most vigorous of the dancer , come , make mad and drunken with 
 unholy excitement , bound and staggering towards we , shriek out as 
 she come : - 

 " I want a Black Goat , I must have a Black Goat , bring I a Black 
 Goat ! " and down she fall upon the rocky floor foaming and writhing , and 
 shriek for a Black Goat , about as hideous a spectacle as can well be 
 conceive . 

 instantly most of the dancer come up and get round she , though some 
 still continue their caper in the background . 

 " she have get a Devil , " call out one of they . " run and get a black 
 goat . there , Devil , keep quiet ! keep quiet ! you shall have the goat 
 presently . they have go to fetch it , Devil . " 

 " I want a Black Goat , I must have a Black Goat ! " shriek the foaming 
 rolling creature again . 

 " all right , Devil , the goat will be here presently ; keep quiet , there be 
 a good Devil ! " 

 and so on till the goat , take from a neighbouring kraal , do at last 
 arrive , be drag bleat on to the scene by its horn . 

 " be it a black One , be it a black one ? " shriek the possessed . 

 " yes , yes , Devil , as black as night ; " then aside , " keep it behind thee , 
 do not   let the Devil see that it have get a white spot on its rump and 
 another on its belly . in one minute , Devil . there , cut his throat quick . 
 where be the saucer ? " 

 " the Goat ! the Goat ! the Goat ! give I the blood of my black goat ! I 
 must have it , do not   you see I must have it ? oh ! oh ! oh ! give I the 
 blood of the goat . " 

 at this moment a terrify bah ! announce that the poor goat have be 
 sacrifice , and the next minute a woman run up with a saucer full of 
 blood . this the possessed creature , who be then rave and foam she 
 wildest , seize and drank , and be instantly recover , and without 
 a trace of hysteria , or fit , or be possess , or whatever dreadful 
 thing it be she be suffer from . she stretch her arm , smile 
 faintly , and walk quietly back to the dancer , who presently withdraw 
 in a double line as they have come , leave the space between we and the 
 bonfire desert . 

 I think that the entertainment be now over , and , feel rather 
 queer , be about to ask she if we could rise , when suddenly what 
 at first I take to be a baboon come hop round the fire , and be 
 instantly meet upon the other side by a lion , or rather a human being 
 dress in a lion 's skin . then come a goat , then a man wrap in an 
 ox 's hide , with the horn wobble about in a ludicrous way . after he 
 follow a blesbok , then an impala , then a koodoo , then more goat , and 
 many other animal , include a girl sew up in the shin scaly hide 
 of a boa - constrictor , several yard of which trail along the ground 
 behind she . when all the beast have collect they begin to dance about 
 in a lumber , unnatural fashion , and to imitate the sound produce 
 by the respective animal they represent , till the whole air be alive 
 with roar and bleat and the hiss of snake . this go on for a 
 long time , till , get tired of the pantomime , I ask Ayesha if there 
 would be any objection to Leo and myself walk round to inspect the 
 human torch , and , as she have nothing to say against it , we start , 
 strike round to the left . after look at one or two of the flame 
 body , we be about to return , thoroughly disgusted with the grotesque 
 weirdness of the spectacle , when our attention be attract by one of 
 the dancer , a particularly active leopard , that have separate itself 
 from its fellow - beast , and be whisk about in our immediate 
 neighbourhood , but gradually draw into a spot where the shadow 
 be darkest , equidistant between two of the flaming mummy . draw by 
 curiosity , we follow it , when suddenly it dart past we into the 
 shadow beyond , and as it do so erect itself and whisper , " come , " 
 in a voice that we both recognise as that of Ustane . without wait to 
 consult I Leo turn and follow she into the outer darkness , and I , 
 feel sick enough at heart , go after they . the leopard crawl on 
 for about fifty pace - a sufficient distance to be quite beyond the 
 light of the fire and torch - and then Leo come up with it , or , rather , 
 with Ustane . 

 " oh , my lord , " I hear her whisper , ' so I have find thee ! listen . I be 
 in peril of my life from ' she - who - must - be - obey . ' surely the Baboon 
 have tell thee how she drive I from thee ? I love thee , my lord , and thou 
 art mine accord to the custom of the country . I save thy life ! my 
 Lion , wilt thou cast I off now ? " 

 " of course not , " ejaculate Leo ; " I have be wonder whither thou 
 hadst gone . let we go and explain matter to the Queen . " 

 " Nay , nay , she would slay we . Thou know not her power - the Baboon 
 there , he knoweth , for he see . Nay , there be but one way : if thou wilt 
 cleave to I , thou must flee with I across the marsh even now , and 
 then perchance we may escape . " 

 " for Heaven 's sake , Leo , " I begin , but she break in - 

 " Nay , listen not to he . swift - be swift - death be in the air we 
 breathe . even now , mayhap , she heareth we , " and without more ado she 
 proceed to back her argument by throw herself into his arm . as 
 she do so the leopard 's head slip from her hair , and I see the three 
 white finger - mark upon it , gleam faintly in the starlight . once 
 more realise the desperate nature of the position , I be about to 
 interpose , for I know that Leo be not too strong - minded where woman 
 be concern , when - oh ! horror ! - I hear a little silvery laugh behind 
 I . I turn round , and there be she herself , and with her billali 
 and two male mute . I gasp and nearly sink to the ground , for I know 
 that such a situation must result in some dreadful tragedy , of which it 
 seem exceedingly probable to I that I should be the first victim . as 
 for Ustane , she untwine her arm and cover her eye with her hand , 
 while Leo , not know the full terror of the position , merely cover 
 up , and look as foolish as a man catch in such a trap would naturally 
 do . 



 XX 

 TRIUMPH 

 then follow a moment of the most painful silence that I ever endure . 
 it be break by Ayesha , who address herself to Leo . 

 " Nay , now , my lord and guest , " she say in her soft tone , which yet 
 have the ring of steel about they , " look not so bashful . surely the sight 
 be a pretty one - the leopard and the lion ! " 

 " oh , hang it all ! " say Leo in English . 

 " and thou , Ustane , " she go on , ' surely I should have pass thee by , 
 have not the light fall on the white across thy hair , " and she point 
 to the bright edge of the rise moon which be now appear above 
 the horizon . " well ! well ! the dance be do - see , the taper have burn 
 down , and all thing end in silence and in ash . so thou thoughtest 
 it a fit time for love , Ustane , my servant - and I , dream not that I 
 could be disobey , think thee already far away . " 

 " play not with I , " moan the wretched woman ; ' slay I , and let there 
 be an end . " 

 " Nay , why ? it be not well to go so swift from the hot lip of love down 
 to the cold mouth of the grave , " and she make a motion to the mute , who 
 instantly step up and catch the girl by either arm . with an oath Leo 
 spring upon the near , and hurl he to the ground , and then stand 
 over he with his face set , and his fist ready . 

 again Ayesha laugh . " it be well throw , my guest ; thou hast a strong 
 arm for one who so late be sick . but now out of thy courtesy I pray 
 thee let that man live and do my bidding . he shall not harm the girl ; 
 the night air grow chill , and I would welcome she in mine own place . 
 surely she whom thou dost favour shall be favour of I also . " 

 I take Leo by the arm , and pull he from the prostrate mute , and he , 
 half bewilder , obey the pressure . then we all set out for the cave 
 across the plateau , where a pile of white human ash be all that 
 remain of the fire that have light the dancing , for the dancer have 
 vanish . 

 in due course we gain Ayesha 's boudoir - all too soon , it seem to I , 
 have a sad presage of what be to come lie heavy on my heart . 

 Ayesha seat herself upon her cushion , and , have dismiss Job and 
 Billali , by sign bid the mute tend the lamp and retire - all save 
 one girl , who be her favourite personal attendant . we three remain 
 standing , the unfortunate Ustane a little to the left of the rest of we . 

 " now , oh Holly , " Ayesha begin , " how come it that thou who didst hear 
 my word bid this evil - doer " - and she point to Ustane - " to go 
 hence - thou at whose prayer I do weakly spare her life - how come it , 
 I say , that thou wast a sharer in what I see to - night ? Answer , and for 
 thine own sake , I say , speak all the truth , for I be not minded to hear 
 lie upon this matter ! " 

 " it be by accident , oh Queen , " I answer . " I know naught of it . " 

 " I do believe thee , oh Holly , " she answer coldly , " and well it be for 
 thee that I do - then do the whole guilt rest upon she . " 

 " I do not find any guilt therein , " break in Leo . " she be not another 
 man 's wife , and it appear that she have marry I accord to the 
 custom of this awful place , so who be the bad ? any way , madam , " he 
 go on , " whatever she have do I have do too , so if she be to be 
 punish let I be punish also ; and I tell thee , " he go on , work 
 himself up into a fury , " that if thou bidd one of those dead and dumb 
 villain to touch she again I will tear he to piece ! " and he look as 
 though he mean it . 

 Ayesha listen in icy silence , and make no remark . when he have 
 finish , however , she address Ustane . 

 " Hast thou aught to say , woman ? thou silly straw , thou feather , who 
 didst think to float towards thy passion 's petty end , even against the 
 great wind of my will ! tell I , for I fain would understand . why didst 
 thou this thing ? " 

 and then I think I see the most tremendous exhibition of moral courage 
 and intrepidity that it be possible to conceive . for the poor doom 
 girl , know what she have to expect at the hand of her terrible Queen , 
 know , too , from bitter experience , how great be her adversary 's 
 power , yet gather herself together , and out of the very depth of her 
 despair draw material to defy she . 

 " I do it , oh she , " she answer , draw herself up to the full of 
 her stately height , and throw back the panther skin from her head , 
 " because my love be strong than the grave . I do it because my life 
 without this man whom my heart choose would be but a live death . 
 therefore do I risk my life , and , now that I know that it be forfeit 
 to thine anger , yet be I glad that I do risk it , and pay it away in the 
 risking , ay , because he embrace I once , and tell I that he love I 
 yet . " 

 here Ayesha half rise from her couch , and then sink down again . 

 " I have no magic , " go on Ustane , her rich voice ring strong and 
 full , " and I be not a queen , nor do I live for ever , but a woman 's heart 
 be heavy to sink through water , however deep , oh Queen ! and a woman 's 
 eye be quick to see - even through thy veil , oh Queen ! 

 " listen : I know it , thou dost love this man thyself , and therefore 
 wouldst thou destroy I who stand across thy path . ay , I die - I die , and 
 go into the darkness , nor know I whither I go . but this I know . there be 
 a light shin in my breast , and by that light , as by a lamp , I see 
 the truth , and the future that I shall not share unroll itself before 
 I like a scroll . when first I know my lord , " and she point to Leo , " I 
 know also that death would be the bridal gift he give I - it rush upon 
 I of a sudden , but I turn not back , be ready to pay the price , 
 and , behold , death be here ! and now , even as I know that , so do I , 
 stand on the step of doom , know that thou shalt not reap the profit 
 of thy crime . mine he be , and , though thy beauty shine like a sun among 
 the star , mine shall he remain for thee . never here in this life shall 
 he look thee in the eye and call thee spouse . Thou too art doom , I 
 see " - and her voice ring like the cry of an inspire prophetess ; " ah , I 
 see - - " 

 then come an answer cry of mingled rage and terror . I turn my head . 
 Ayesha have rise , and be stand with her outstretched hand pointing 
 at Ustane , who have suddenly stop speak . I gaze at the poor 
 woman , and as I gaze there come upon her face that same woeful , fix 
 expression of terror that I have see once before when she have break out 
 into her wild chant . her eye grow large , her nostril dilate , and her 
 lip blanch . 

 Ayesha say nothing , she make no sound , she only draw herself up , 
 stretch out her arm , and , her tall veil frame quiver like an 
 aspen leaf , appear to look fixedly at her victim . even as she do so 
 Ustane put her hand to her head , utter one pierce scream , turn 
 round twice , and then fall backwards with a thud - prone upon the floor . 
 both Leo and myself rush to she - she be stone dead - blast into 
 death by some mysterious electric agency or overwhelming will - force 
 whereof the dread she have command . 

 for a moment Leo do not quite realise what have happen . but , when he 
 do , his face be awful to see . with a savage oath he rise from beside 
 the corpse , and , turning , literally spring at Ayesha . but she be 
 watch , and , see he come , stretch out her hand again , and he 
 go staggering back towards I , and would have fall , have I not 
 catch he . afterwards he tell I that he feel as though he have suddenly 
 receive a violent blow in the chest , and , what be more , utterly cow , 
 as if all the manhood have be take out of he . 

 then Ayesha speak . " forgive I , my guest , " she say softly , address 
 he , " if I have shock thee with my justice . " 

 " forgive thee , thou fiend , " roar poor Leo , wring his hand in his 
 rage and grief . " forgive thee , thou murderess ! by Heaven , I will kill 
 thee if I can ! " 

 " Nay , nay , " she answer in the same soft voice , " thou dost not 
 understand - the time have come for thee to learn . thou art my love , 
 my Kallikrates , my Beautiful , my Strong ! for two thousand year , 
 Kallikrates , have I wait for thee , and now at length thou hast come 
 back to I ; and as for this woman , " point to the corpse , ' she 
 stand between I and thee , and therefore have I lay she in the dust , 
 kallikrate . " 

 " it be an accursed lie ! " say Leo . " my name be not Kallikrates ! I be Leo 
 Vincey ; my ancestor be Kallikrates - at least , I believe he be . " 

 " ah , thou sayest it - thine ancestor be Kallikrates , and thou , even 
 thou , art Kallikrates reborn , come back - and mine own dear lord ! " 

 " I be not Kallikrates , and , as for be thy lord , or have aught to do 
 with thee , I have soon be the lord of a fiend from hell , for she would 
 be well than thou . " 

 " sayest thou so - sayest thou so , Kallikrates ? Nay , but thou hast not 
 see I for so long a time that no memory remain . yet be I very fair , 
 kallikrate ! " 

 " I hate thee , murderess , and I have no wish to see thee . what be it to 
 I how fair thou art ? I hate thee , I say . " 

 " yet within a very little space shalt thou creep to my knee , and swear 
 that thou dost love I , " answer Ayesha , with a sweet , mock laugh . 
 " come , there be no time like the present time , here before this dead 
 girl who love thee , let we put it to the proof . 

 " look now on I , Kallikrates ! " and with a sudden motion she shake she 
 gauzy cover from she , and stand forth in her low kirtle and her snaky 
 zone , in her glorious radiant beauty and her imperial grace , rise from 
 her wrapping , as it be , like Venus from the wave , or Galatea from her 
 marble , or a beatified spirit from the tomb . she stand forth , and fix 
 her deep and glow eye upon Leo 's eye , and I see his clenched fist 
 unclasp , and his set and quivering feature relax beneath her gaze . 
 I see his wonder and astonishment grow into admiration , and then into 
 fascination , and the more he struggle the more I see the power of her 
 dread beauty fasten on he and take possession of his sens , drug 
 they , and draw the heart out of he . do I not know the process ? have 
 not I , who be twice his age , go through it myself ? be I not go 
 through it afresh even then , although her sweet and passionate gaze be 
 not for I ? yes , alas , I be ! alas , that I should have to confess that 
 at that very moment I be rent by mad and furious jealousy . I could 
 have fly at he , shame upon I ! the woman have confound and almost 
 destroy my moral sense , as she be bind to confound all who look 
 upon her superhuman loveliness . but - I do not quite know how - I get the 
 well of myself , and once more turn to see the climax of the tragedy . 

 " oh , great Heaven ! " gasp Leo , " art thou a woman ? " 

 " a woman in truth - in very truth - and thine own spouse , Kallikrates ! " 
 she answer , stretch out her rounded ivory arm towards he , and 
 smile , ah , so sweetly ! 

 he look and look , and slowly I perceive that he be draw nearer 
 to she . suddenly his eye fall upon the corpse of poor Ustane , and he 
 shudder and stop . 

 " how can I ? " he say hoarsely . " thou art a murderess ; she love I . " 

 Observe , he be already forget that he have love she . 

 " it be naught , " she murmur , and her voice sound sweet as the 
 night - wind pass through the tree . " it be naught at all . if I have 
 sin , let my beauty answer for my sin . if I have sin , it be for 
 love of thee : let my sin , therefore , be put away and forget ; " and 
 once more she stretch out her arm and whisper " come , " and then in 
 another few second it be all over . 

 I see he struggle - I see he even turn to fly ; but her eye draw 
 he more strongly than iron bond , and the magic of her beauty and 
 concentrated will and passion enter into he and overpower he - ay , 
 even there , in the presence of the body of the woman who have love he 
 well enough to die for he . it sound horrible and wicked enough , but he 
 should not be too greatly blame , and be sure his sin will find he out . 
 the temptress who draw he into evil be more than human , and her beauty 
 be great than the loveliness of the daughter of man . 

 I look up again and now her perfect form lie in his arm , and her lip 
 be press against his own ; and thus , with the corpse of his dead 
 love for an altar , do Leo Vincey plight his troth to her red - handed 
 murderess - plight it for ever and a day . for those who sell themselves 
 into a like dominion , pay down the price of their own honour , and 
 throw their soul into the balance to sink the scale to the level of 
 their lust , can hope for no deliverance here or hereafter . as they 
 have sow , so shall they reap and reap , even when the poppy flower of 
 passion have wither in their hand , and their harvest be but bitter 
 tare , garner in satiety . 

 suddenly , with a snake - like motion , she seem to slip from his embrace , 
 and then again break out into her low laugh of triumphant mockery . 

 " do I not tell thee that within a little space thou wouldst creep to my 
 knee , oh Kallikrates ? and surely the space have not be a great one ! " 

 Leo groan in shame and misery ; for though he be overcome and 
 stricken down , he be not so lose as to be unaware of the depth of the 
 degradation to which he have sink . on the contrary , his well nature 
 rise up in arm against his fallen self , as I see clearly enough later 
 on . 

 Ayesha laugh again , and then quickly veil herself , and make a sign 
 to the girl mute , who have be watch the whole scene with curious 
 startled eye . the girl leave , and presently return , follow by two 
 male mute , to whom the Queen make another sign . Thereon they all three 
 seize the body of poor Ustane by the arm , and drag it heavily down 
 the cavern and away through the curtain at the end . Leo watch it for 
 a little while , and then cover his eye with his hand , and it too , to 
 my excited fancy , seem to watch we as it go . 

 " there pass the dead past , " say Ayesha , solemnly , as the curtain 
 shake and fall back into their place , when the ghastly procession 
 have vanish behind they . and then , with one of those extraordinary 
 transition of which I have already speak , she again throw off her 
 veil , and break out , after the ancient and poetic fashion of the 
 dweller in Arabia ,     into a pæan of triumph or epithalamium , which , 
 wild and beautiful as it be , be exceedingly difficult to render into 
 English , and ought by right to be sing to the music of a cantata , 
 rather than write and read . it be divide into two part - one 
 descriptive or definitive , and the other personal ; and , as nearly as I 
 can remember , run as follow : - 

 Love be like a flower in the desert . 

 it be like the aloe of Arabia that bloom but once and die ; it bloom 
 in the salt emptiness of life , and the brightness of its beauty be set 
 upon the waste as a star be set upon a storm . 

 it hath the sun above that be the Spirit , and above it blow the air of 
 its divinity . 

 at the echoing of a step , Love bloom , I say ; I say Love bloom , and 
 bend her beauty down to he who passeth by . 

 he plucketh it , yea , he plucketh the red cup that be full of honey , 
 and beareth it away ; away across the desert , away till the flower be 
 wither , away till the desert be do . 

 there be only one perfect flower in the wilderness of life . 

 that flower be Love ! 

 there be only one fix star in the midst of our wandering . 

 that star be Love ! 

 there be only one hope in our despairing night . 

 that hope be Love ! 

 all else be false . all else be shadow move upon water . all else be 
 wind and vanity . 

 who shall say what be the weight or the measure of love ? 

 it be bear of the flesh , it dwelleth in the spirit . from each doth it 
 draw its comfort . 

 for beauty it be as a star . 

 many be its shape , but all be beautiful , and none know where the star 
 rise , or the horizon where it shall set . 

      among the ancient Arabians the power of poetic 
  declamation , either in verse or prose , be hold in the 
  high honour and esteem , and he who excel in it be 
  know as " Khâteb , " or orator . every year a general assembly 
  be hold at which the rival poet repeat their 
  composition , when those poem which be judge to be the 
  good be , so soon as the knowledge and the art of writing 
  become general , inscribe on silk in letter of gold , and 
  publicly exhibit , be know as " Al Modhahabât , " or 
  golden verse . in the poem give above by Mr. Holly , Ayesha 
  evidently follow the traditional poetic manner of her 
  people , which be to embody their thought in a series of 
  somewhat disconnect sentence , each remarkable for its 
  beauty and the grace of its expression . - Editor . 

 then , turn to Leo , and lay her hand upon his shoulder , she go 
 on in a full and more triumphant tone , speak in balanced sentence 
 that gradually grow and swell from idealised prose into pure and 
 majestic verse : - 

 long have I love thee , oh , my love ; yet have my love not lessen . 

 long have I wait for thee , and behold my reward be at hand - be here ! 

 far away I see thee once , and thou wast take from I . 

 then in a grave sow I the seed of patience , and shine upon it with the 
 sun of hope , and water it with tear of repentance , and breathe on 
 it with the breath of my knowledge . and now , lo ! it hath spring up , and 
 bear fruit . Lo ! out of the grave hath it spring . yea , from among the 
 dry bone and ash of the dead . 

 I have wait and my reward be with I . 

 I have overcome death , and death bring back to I he that be dead . 

 therefore do I rejoice , for fair be the future . 

 Green be the path that we shall tread across the everlaste meadow . 

 the hour be at hand . Night hath flee away into the valley . 

 the dawn kisseth the mountain top . 

 Soft shall we live , my love , and easy shall we go . 

 crown shall we be with the diadem of king . 

 worship and wonder strike all people of the world , Blinded shall 
 fall before our beauty and might . 

 from time unto time shall our greatness thunder on , roll like a 
 chariot through the dust of endless day . 

 laugh shall we speed in our victory and pomp , laugh like the 
 Daylight as he leap along the hill . 

 onward , still triumphant to a triumph ever new ! 

 onward , in our power to a power unattaine ! 

 onward , never weary , clothe with splendour for a robe ! 

 till accomplished be our fate , and the night be rush down . 

 she pause in her strange and most thrill allegorical chant , of 
 which I be , unfortunately , only able to give the burden , and that feebly 
 enough , and then say - 

 " perchance thou dost not believe my word , Kallikrates - perchance thou 
 think that I do delude thee , and that I have not live these many 
 year , and that thou hast not be bear again to I . Nay , look not 
 so - put away that pale cast of doubt , for oh be sure herein can error 
 find no foothold ! soon shall the sun forget their course and the 
 swallow miss her nest , than my soul shall swear a lie and be lead astray 
 from thee , Kallikrates . blind I , take away mine eye , and let the 
 darkness utterly fence I in , and still mine ear would catch the tone 
 of thy unforgotten voice , strike more loud against the portal of 
 my sense than can the call of brazen - throate clarion : - stop up mine 
 hearing also , and let a thousand touch I on the brow , and I would name 
 thee out of all : - yea , rob I of every sense , and see I stand deaf and 
 blind , and dumb , and with nerve that can not weigh the value of a touch , 
 yet would my spirit leap within I like a quicken child and cry unto 
 my heart , behold Kallikrates ! behold , thou watcher , the watch of 
 thy night be end ! behold thou who seekest in the night season , thy 
 morning Star ariseth . " 

 she pause awhile and then continue , " but stay , if thy heart be yet 
 harden against the mighty truth and thou dost require a further pledge 
 of that which thou dost find too deep to understand , even now shall it 
 be give to thee , and to thee also , oh my Holly . bear each one of you a 
 lamp , and follow after I whither I shall lead you . " 

 without stop to think - indeed , speak for myself , I have almost 
 abandon the function in circumstance under which to think seem 
 to be absolutely useless , since thought fall hourly helpless against a 
 black wall of wonder - we take the lamp and follow she . go to the 
 end of her " boudoir , " she raise a curtain and reveal a little stair 
 of the sort that be so common in these dim cave of K"r . as we hurry 
 down the stair I observe that the step be wear in the centre to 
 such an extent that some of they have be reduce from seven and a half 
 inch , at which I guess their original height , to about three and 
 a half . now , all the other step that I have see in the cave be 
 practically unworn , as be to be expect , see that the only traffic 
 which ever pass upon they be that of those who bear a fresh burden to 
 the tomb . therefore this fact strike my notice with that curious force 
 with which little thing do strike we when our mind be absolutely 
 overwhelm by a sudden rush of powerful sensation ; beat flat , as it 
 be , like a sea beneath the first burst of a hurricane , so that every 
 little object on the surface start into an unnatural prominence . 

 at the bottom of the staircase I stand and star at the worn step , and 
 Ayesha , turning , see I . 

 " Wonderest thou whose be the foot that have wear away the rock , my 
 Holly ? " she ask . " they be mine - even mine own light foot ! I can 
 remember when those stair be fresh and level , but for two thousand 
 year and more have I go down hither day by day , and see , my sandal 
 have wear out the solid rock ! " 

 I make no answer , but I do not think that anything that I have hear or 
 see bring home to my limited understanding so clear a sense of this 
 being 's overwhelming antiquity as that hard rock hollow out by her 
 soft white foot . how many hundred of thousand of time must she have 
 pass up and down that stair to bring about such a result ? 

 the stair lead to a tunnel , and a few pace down the tunnel be one of 
 the usual curtain - hung doorway , a glance at which tell I that it 
 be the same where I have be a witness of that terrible scene by the 
 leaping flame . I recognise the pattern of the curtain , and the sight of 
 it bring the whole event vividly before my eye , and make I tremble 
 even at its memory . Ayesha enter the tomb   for it be a tomb , and we 
 follow she - I , for one , rejoice that the mystery of the place be 
 about to be clear up , and yet afraid to face its solution . 



 XXI 

 the dead and live MEET 

 " see now the place where I have sleep for these two thousand year , " 
 say Ayesha , take the lamp from Leo 's hand and hold it above her 
 head . its ray fall upon a little hollow in the floor , where I have see 
 the leap flame , but the fire be out now . they fall upon the white 
 form stretch there beneath its wrapping upon its bed of stone , 
 upon the fretted carving of the tomb , and upon another shelf of stone 
 opposite the one on which the body lay , and separate from it by the 
 breadth of the cave . 

 " here , " go on Ayesha , lay her hand upon the rock - " here have I 
 sleep night by night for all these generation , with but a cloak to 
 cover I . it do not become I that I should lie soft when my spouse 
 yonder , " and she point to the rigid form , " lie stiff in death . here 
 night by night have I sleep in his cold company - till , thou seest , this 
 thick slab , like the stair down which we pass , have wear thin with the 
 tossing of my form - so faithful have I be to thee even in thy space 
 of sleep , Kallikrates . and now , mine own , thou shalt see a wonderful 
 thing - living , thou shalt behold thyself dead - for well have I tend 
 thee during all these year , Kallikrates . art thou prepare ? " 

 we make no answer , but gaze at each other with frightened eye , the 
 whole scene be so dreadful and so solemn . Ayesha advance , and lay she 
 hand upon the corner of the shroud , and once more speak . 

 " be not affright , " she say ; " though the thing seem wonderful to 
 thee - all we who live have thus live before ; nor be the very shape 
 that hold we a stranger to the sun ! only we know it not , because memory 
 write no record , and earth hath gather in the earth she lend we , for 
 none have save our glory from the grave . but I , by my art and by the 
 art of those dead man of K"r which I have learn , have hold thee 
 back , oh Kallikrates , from the dust , that the waxen stamp of beauty 
 on thy face should ever rest before mine eye . ' twas a mask that memory 
 might fill , serve to fashion out thy presence from the past , and 
 give it strength to wander in the habitation of my thought , clothe in a 
 mummery of life that stay my appetite with vision of dead day . 

 " Behold now , let the dead and living meet ! across the gulf of Time they 
 still be one . time hath no power against identity , though sleep the 
 merciful hath blot out the tablet of our mind , and with oblivion 
 seal the sorrow that else would hound we from life to life , stuff 
 the brain with gather grief till it burst in the madness of uttermost 
 despair . still be they one , for the wrapping of our sleep shall roll 
 away as thunder - cloud before the wind ; the frozen voice of the past 
 shall melt in music like mountain snow beneath the sun ; and the weeping 
 and the laughter of the lose hour shall be hear once more most sweetly 
 echo up the cliff of immeasurable time . 

 " ay , the sleep shall roll away , and the voice shall be hear , when down 
 the complete chain , whereof our each existence be a link , the lightning 
 of the Spirit hath pass to work out the purpose of our being ; 
 quicken and fuse those separate day of life , and shape they to 
 a staff whereon we may safely lean as we wend to our appoint fate . 

 " therefore , have no fear , Kallikrates , when thou - living , and but lately 
 bear - shalt look upon thine own depart self , who breathe and die 
 so long ago . I do but turn one page in thy Book of Being , and show thee 
 what be writ thereon . 

 " Behold ! " 

 with a sudden motion she draw the shroud from the cold form , and let the 
 lamplight play upon it . I look , and then shrink back terrified ; since , 
 say what she might in explanation , the sight be an uncanny one - for her 
 explanation be beyond the grasp of our finite mind , and when they 
 be strip from the mist of vague esoteric philosophy , and bring 
 into conflict with the cold and horrifying fact , do not do much to 
 break its force . for there , stretch upon the stone bi before we , 
 rob in white and perfectly preserve , be what appear to be the body 
 of Leo Vincey . I star from Leo , stand there alive , to Leo lying 
  there dead , and could see no difference ; except , perhaps , that the 
 body on the bier look old . feature for feature they be the same , 
 even down to the crop of little golden curl , which be Leo 's most 
 uncommon beauty . it even seem to I , as I look , that the expression 
 on the dead man 's face resemble that which I have sometimes see upon 
 Leo 's when he be plunge into profound sleep . I can only sum up the 
 closeness of the resemblance by say that I never see twin so exactly 
 similar as that dead and live pair . 

 I turn to see what effect be produce upon Leo by the sight of his 
 dead self , and find it to be one of partial stupefaction . he stand 
 for two or three minute star , and say nothing , and when at last he 
 speak it be only to ejaculate - 

 " cover it up , and take I away . " 

 " Nay , wait , Kallikrates , " say Ayesha , who , stand with the lamp 
 raise above her head , flood with its light her own rich beauty and 
 the cold wonder of the death - clothe form upon the bi , resemble 
 an inspire Sibyl rather than a woman , as she roll out her majestic 
 sentence with a grandeur and a freedom of utterance which I be , alas ! 
 quite unable to reproduce . 

 " wait , I would show thee something , that no tittle of my crime may be 
 hide from thee . do thou , oh Holly , open the garment on the breast 
 of the dead Kallikrates , for perchance my lord may fear to touch it 
 himself . " 

 I obey with tremble hand . it seem a desecration and an unhallowed 
 thing to touch that sleep image of the live man by my side . presently 
 his broad chest be bare , and there upon it , right over the heart , be a 
 wound , evidently inflict with a spear . 

 " thou seest , Kallikrates , " she say . " know then that it be I who slay 
 thee : in the Place of Life I give thee death . I slew thee because of 
 the Egyptian Amenartas , whom thou didst love , for by her wile she hold 
 thy heart , and she I could not smite as but now I smite that woman , for 
 she be too strong for I . in my haste and bitter anger I slew thee , and 
 now for all these day have I lament thee , and wait for thy coming . 
 and thou hast come , and none can stand between thee and I , and of a 
 truth now for death I will give thee life - not life eternal , for that 
 none can give , but life and youth that shall endure for thousand upon 
 thousand of year , and with it pomp , and power , and wealth , and all 
 thing that be good and beautiful , such as have be to no man before 
 thee , nor shall be to any man who come after . and now one thing more , 
 and thou shalt rest and make ready for the day of thy new birth . Thou 
 se this body , which be thine own . for all these century it hath 
 be my cold comfort and my companion , but now I need it no more , for 
 I have thy living presence , and it can but serve to stir up memory 
 of that which I would fain forget . let it therefore go back to the dust 
 from which I hold it . 

 " Behold ! I have prepare against this happy hour ! " and go to the 
 other shelf or stone ledge , which she say have serve she for a bed , she 
 take from it a large vitrified double - handed vase , the mouth of which 
 be tie up with a bladder . this she loose , and then , have bend down 
 and gently kiss the white forehead of the dead man , she undo the 
 vase , and sprinkle its content carefully over the form , take , I 
 observe , the great precaution against any drop of they touch 
 we or herself , and then pour out what remain of the liquid upon the 
 chest and head . instantly a dense vapour arose , and the cave be fill 
 with choke fume that prevent we from see anything while the 
 deadly acid   for I presume it be some tremendous preparation of that 
 sort   do its work . from the spot where the body lie come a fierce 
 fizzing and crack sound , which cease , however , before the fume have 
 clear away . at last they be all go , except a little cloud that 
 still hang over the corpse . in a couple of minute more this too have 
 vanish , and , wonderful as it may seem , it be a fact that on the stone 
 bench that have support the mortal remain of the ancient kallikrate 
 for so many century there be now nothing to be see but a few 
 handful of smoke white powder . the acid have utterly destroy the 
 body , and even in place eat into the stone . Ayesha stoop down , and , 
 take a handful of this powder in her grasp , throw it into the air , 
 say at the same time , in a voice of calm solemnity - 

 " dust to dust ! - the past to the past ! - the dead to the 
 dead ! - Kallikrates be dead , and be bear again ! " 

 the ash float noiselessly to the rocky floor , and we stand in awed 
 silence and watch they fall , too overcome for word . 

 " now leave I , " she say , " and sleep if ye may . I must watch and think , 
 for to - morrow night we go hence , and the time be long since I trod the 
 path that we must follow . " 

 accordingly we bow , and leave she . 

 as we pass to our own apartment I peep into Job 's sleep place , 
 to see how he fare , for he have go away just before our interview with 
 the murder Ustane , quite prostrate by the terror of the Amahagger 
 festivity . he be sleep soundly , good honest fellow that he be , 
 and I rejoice to think that his nerve , which , like those of most 
 uneducated people , be far from strong , have be spar the closing 
 scene of this dreadful day . then we enter our own chamber , and here 
 at last poor Leo , who , ever since he have look upon that frozen 
 image of his live self , have be in a state not far remove from 
 stupefaction , burst out into a torrent of grief . now that he be no 
 long in the presence of the dread she , his sense of the awfulness 
 of all that have happen , and more especially of the wicked murder of 
 Ustane , who be bind to he by tie so close , break upon he like a 
 storm , and lash he into an agony of remorse and terror which be 
 painful to witness . he curse himself - he curse the hour when we have 
 first see the writing on the sherd , which be be so mysteriously 
 verify , and bitterly he curse his own weakness . Ayesha he dare not 
 curse - who dare speak evil of such a woman , whose consciousness , for 
 aught we know , be watch we at the very moment ? 

 " what be I to do , old fellow ? " he groan , rest his head against my 
 shoulder in the extremity of his grief . " I let she be kill - not that 
 I could help that , but within five minute I be kiss her murderess 
 over her body . I be a degraded brute , but I can not resist that "   and 
 here his voice sink   - " that awful sorceress . I know I shall do it again 
 to - morrow ; I know that I be in her power for always ; if I never see she 
 again I should never think of anybody else during all my life ; I must 
 follow she as a needle follow a magnet ; I would not go away now if I 
 could ; I could not leave she , my leg would not carry I , but my mind be 
 still clear enough , and in my mind I hate she - at least , I think so . it 
 be all so horrible ; and that - that body ! what can I make of it ? it be 
  I ! I be sell into bondage , old fellow , and she will take my soul as 
 the price of herself ! " 

 then , for the first time , I tell he that I be in a but very little 
 well position ; and I be bind to say that , notwithstanding his own 
 infatuation , he have the decency to sympathise with I . perhaps he do 
 not think it worth while be jealous , realise that he have no cause 
 so far as the lady be concern . I go on to suggest that we should 
 try to run away , but we soon reject the project as futile , and , to be 
 perfectly honest , I do not believe that either of we would really have 
 leave Ayesha even if some superior power have suddenly offer to convey 
 we from these gloomy cave and set we down in Cambridge . we could no 
 more have leave she than a moth can leave the light that destroy it . we 
 be like confirm opium - eater : in our moment of reason we well know 
 the deadly nature of our pursuit , but we certainly be not prepared to 
 abandon its terrible delight . 

 no man who once have see she unveil , and hear the music of her 
 voice , and drunk in the bitter wisdom of her word , would willingly give 
 up the sight for a whole sea of placid joy . how much more , then , be 
 this likely to be so when , as in Leo 's case , to put myself out of the 
 question , this extraordinary creature declare her utter and absolute 
 devotion , and give what appear to be proof of its have last for 
 some two thousand year ? 

 no doubt she be a wicked person , and no doubt she have murder Ustane 
 when she stand in her path , but then she be very faithful , and by a 
 law of nature man be apt to think but lightly of a woman 's crime , 
 especially if that woman be beautiful , and the crime be commit for 
 the love of he . 

 and then , for the rest , when have such a chance ever come to a man before 
 as that which now lie in Leo 's hand ? true , in unite himself to this 
 dread woman , he would place his life under the influence of a mysterious 
 creature of evil tendency ,     but then that would be likely enough to 
 happen to he in any ordinary marriage . on the other hand , however , no 
 ordinary marriage could bring he such awful beauty - for awful be the 
 only word that can describe it - such divine devotion , such wisdom , and 
 command over the secret of nature , and the place and power that they 
 must win , or , lastly , the royal crown of unende youth , if indeed she 
 could give that . no , on the whole , it be not wonderful that , though Leo 
 be plunge in bitter shame and grief , such as any gentleman would have 
 feel under the circumstance , he be not ready to entertain the idea of 
 run away from his extraordinary fortune . 

      after some month of consideration of this statement I 
  be bind to confess that I be not quite satisfied of its 
  truth . it be perfectly true that Ayesha commit a murder , 
  but I shrewdly suspect that , be we endow with the same 
  absolute power , and if we have the same tremendous interest 
  at stake , we would be very apt to do likewise under parallel 
  circumstance . also , it must be remember that she look 
  on it as an execution for disobedience under a system which 
  make the slight disobedience punishable by death . put 
  aside this question of the murder , her evil - do resolve 
  itself into the expression of view and the acknowledgment 
  of motif which be contrary to our preaching if not to our 
  practice . now at first sight this might be fairly take as a 
  proof of an evil nature , but when we come to consider the 
  great antiquity of the individual it become doubtful if it 
  be anything more than the natural cynicism which arise 
  from age and bitter experience , and the possession of 
  extraordinary power of observation . it be a well know fact 
  that very often , put the period of boyhood out of the 
  question , the old we grow the more cynical and harden we 
  get ; indeed many of we be only save by timely death from 
  utter moral petrifaction if not moral corruption . no one 
  will deny that a young man be on the average well than an 
  old one , for he be without that experience of the order of 
  thing that in certain thoughtful disposition can hardly 
  fail to produce cynicism , and that disregard of acknowledge 
  method and establish custom which we call evil . now the 
  old man upon the earth be but a babe compare to Ayesha , 
  and the wise man upon the earth be not one - third as wise . 
  and the fruit of her wisdom be this , that there be but one 
  thing worth live for , and that be love in its high 
  sense , and to gain that good thing she be not prepared to 
  stop at trifle . this be really the sum of her evil doing , 
  and it must be remember , on the other hand , that , whatever 
  may be think of they , she have some virtue develop to a 
  degree very uncommon in either sex - constancy , for 
  instance . - L. H. H. 

 my own opinion be that he would have be mad if he have do so . but 
 then I confess that my statement on the matter must be accept with 
 qualification . I be in love with Ayesha myself to this day , and I would 
 rather have be the object of her affection for one short week than 
 that of any other woman in the world for a whole lifetime . and let I 
 add that , if anybody who doubt this statement , and think I foolish 
 for make it , could have see Ayesha draw her veil and flash out in 
 beauty on his gaze , his view would exactly coincide with my own . of 
 course , I be speak of any man . we never have the advantage of a 
 lady 's opinion of Ayesha , but I think it quite possible that she 
 would have regard the Queen with dislike , would have express she 
 disapproval in some more or less pointed manner , and ultimately have get 
 herself blast . 

 for two hour or more Leo and I sit with shake nerve and frighten 
 eye , and talk over the miraculous event through which we be 
 pass . it seem like a dream or a fairy tale , instead of the solemn , 
 sober fact . who would have believe that the writing on the potsherd be 
 not only true , but that we should live to verify its truth , and that 
 we two seeker should find she who be seek , patiently await our 
 come in the tomb of K"r ? who would have think that in the person 
 of Leo this mysterious woman should , as she believe , discover the 
 be whom she await from century to century , and whose former earthly 
 habitation she have till this very night preserve ? but so it be . in the 
 face of all we have see it be difficult for we as ordinary reasoning 
 man any long to doubt its truth , and therefore at last , with humble 
 heart and a deep sense of the impotence of human knowledge , and the 
 insolence of its assumption that deny that to be possible which it have 
 no experience of , we lay ourselves down to sleep , leave our fate in 
 the hand of that watch Providence which have thus choose to allow we 
 to draw the veil of human ignorance , and reveal to we for good or evil 
 some glimpse of the possibility of life . 



 XXII 

 JOB have a PRESENTIMENT 

 it be nine o'clock on the following morning when Job , who still look 
 scared and frighten , come in to call I , and at the same time breathe 
 his gratitude at find we alive in our bed , which it appear be 
 more than he have expect . when I tell he of the awful end of poor 
 Ustane he be even more grateful at our survival , and much shocked , 
 though Ustane have be no favourite of his , or he of her , for the 
 matter of that . she call he " pig " in bastard Arabic , and he call 
 her " hussy " in good English , but these amenity be forget in the 
 face of the catastrophe that have overwhelm she at the hand of her 
 Queen . 

 " I do not   want to say anything as may not   be agreeable , sir , " say Job , 
 when he have finish exclaim at my tale , " but it be my opinion that 
 that there she be the old gentleman himself , or perhaps his wife , if 
 he have one , which I suppose he have , for he could not   be so wicked all by 
 himself . the Witch of Endor be a fool to she , sir : bless you , she would 
 make no more of raise every gentleman in the Bible out of these here 
 beastly tomb than I should of grow cress on an old flannel . it be a 
 country of devil , this be , sir , and she be the master one of the lot ; 
 and if ever we get out of it it will be more than I expect to do . I 
 do not   see no way out of it . that witch be not   likely to let a fine young 
 man like Mr. Leo go . " 

 " come , " I say , " at any rate she save his life . " 

 " yes , and she will take his soul to pay for it . she will make he a witch , 
 like herself . I say it be wicked to have anything to do with those sort 
 of people . last night , sir , I lay awake and read in my little Bible that 
 my poor old mother give I about what be go to happen to sorceress 
 and they sort , till my hair stand on end . Lord , how the old lady would 
 stare if she see where her Job have get to ! " 

 " yes , it be a queer country , and a queer people too , Job , " I answer , 
 with a sigh , for , though I be not superstitious like Job , I admit to a 
 natural shrinking   which will not bear investigation   from the thing 
 that be above Nature . 

 " you be right , sir , " he answer , " and if you will not   think I very 
 foolish , I should like to say something to you now that Mr. Leo be out 
 of the way " -   Leo have get up early and go for a stroll   - " and that be 
 that I know it be the last country as ever I shall see in this world . 
 I have a dream last night , and I dream that I see my old father with 
 a kind of night - shirt on he , something like these folk wear when they 
 want to be in particular full - dress , and a bit of that feathery grass 
 in his hand , which he may have gather on the way , for I see lot of it 
 yesterday about three hundred yard from the mouth of this beastly cave . 

 " ' Job , ' he say to I , solemn like , and yet with a kind of satisfaction 
 shin through he , more like a Methody parson when he have sell a 
 neighbour a marked horse for a sound one and clear twenty pound by 
 the job than anything I can think on - ' Job , time 's up , Job ; but I never 
 do expect to have to come and hunt you out in this ' ere place , Job . 
 such ado as I have have to nose you up ; it be not   friendly to give 
 your poor old father such a run , let alone that a wonderful lot of bad 
 character hail from this place K"r . ' " 

 " regular caution , " I suggest . 

 " yes , sir - of course , sir , that be just what he say they be - ' caution , 
 downright scorcher ' - sir , and I be sure I do not   doubt it , see what I 
 know of they , and their hot - potting way , " go on Job sadly . " anyway , 
 he be sure that time be up , and go away say that we should 
 see more than we care for of each other soon , and I suppose he be 
 a - thinking of the fact that father and I never could hit it off together 
 for long nor three day , and I daresay that thing will be similar 
 when we meet again . " 

 " surely , " I say , " you do not   think that you be go to die because you 
 dream you see your old father ; if one die because one dream of one 's 
 father , what happen to a man who dream of his mother - in - law ? " 

 " ah , sir , you be laugh at I , " say Job ; " but , you see , you do not 
 know my old father . if it have be anybody else - my Aunt Mary , for 
 instance , who never make much of a job - I should not have think so 
 much of it ; but my father be that idle , which he should not   have be 
 with seventeen child , that he would never have put himself out to 
 come here just to see the place . no , sir ; I know that he mean business . 
 well , sir , I can not   help it ; I suppose every man must go some time or 
 other , though it be a hard thing to die in a place like this , where 
 christian burial be not   to be have for its weight in gold . I have   try 
 to be a good man , sir , and do my duty honest , and if it be not   for the 
 supercilus kind of way in which father carry on last night - a sort 
 of sniff at I as it be , as though he have not   no opinion of my 
 reference and testimonial - I should feel easy enough in my mind . any 
 way , sir , I have   be a good servant to you and Mr. Leo , bless he ! - why , 
 it seem but the other day that I use to lead he about the street 
 with a penny whip ; - and if ever you get out of this place - which , as 
 father do not   allude to you , perhaps you may - I hope you will think 
 kindly of my whitened bone , and never have anything more to do with 
 greek writing on flower - pot , sir , if I may make so bold as to say so . " 

 " come , come , Job , " I say seriously , " this be all nonsense , you know . 
 you must not   be silly enough to go get such idea into your head . 
 we have   live through some queer thing , and I hope that we may go on 
 do so . " 

 " no , sir , " answer Job , in a tone of conviction that jar on I 
 unpleasantly , " it be not   nonsense . I be a doomed man , and I feel it , and a 
 wonderful uncomfortable feeling it be , sir , for one can not   help wonder 
 how it be go to come about . if you be eat your dinner you think 
 of poison and it go against your stomach , and if you be walk along 
 these dark rabbit - burrow you think of knife , and Lord , do not   you just 
 shiver about the back ! I be not   particular , sir , provide it be sharp , 
 like that poor girl , who , now that she be go , I be sorry to have speak 
 hard on , though I do not   approve of her moral in get marry , which 
 I consider too quick to be decent . still , sir , " and poor Job turn a 
 shade paler as he say it , " I do hope it will not   be that hot - pot game . " 

 " nonsense , " I break in angrily , " nonsense ! " 

 " very well , sir , " say Job , " it be not   my place to differ from you , sir , 
 but if you happen to be go anywhere , sir , I should be oblige if you 
 could manage to take I with you , see that I shall be glad to have a 
 friendly face to look at when the time come , just to help one through , 
 as it be . and now , sir , I will be get the breakfast , " and he go , 
 leave I in a very uncomfortable state of mind . I be deeply attach 
 to old Job , who be one of the good and honest man I have ever have 
 to do with in any class of life , and really more of a friend than a 
 servant , and the mere idea of anything happen to he bring a lump 
 into my throat . beneath all his ludicrous talk I could see that he 
 himself be quite convinced that something be go to happen , 
 and though in most case these conviction turn out to be utter 
 moonshine - and this particular one especially be to be amply account 
 for by the gloomy and unaccustomed surrounding in which its victim 
 be place - still it do more or less carry a chill to my heart , as any 
 dread that be obviously a genuine object of belief be apt to do , however 
 absurd the belief may be . presently the breakfast arrive , and with it 
 Leo , who have be take a walk outside the cave - to clear his mind , he 
 say - and very glad I be to see both , for they give I a respite 
 from my gloomy thought . after breakfast we go for another walk , and 
 watch some of the Amahagger sow a plot of ground with the grain 
 from which they make their beer . this they do in scriptural fashion - a 
 man with a bag make of goat 's hide fasten round his waist walk up 
 and down the plot and scatter the seed as he go . it be a positive 
 relief to see one of these dreadful people do anything so homely and 
 pleasant as sow a field , perhaps because it seem to link they , as it 
 be , with the rest of humanity . 

 as we be return Billali meet we , and inform we that it be she 's 
 pleasure that we should wait upon she , and accordingly we enter she 
 presence , not without trepidation , for Ayesha be certainly an exception 
 to the rule . familiarity with her might and do breed passion and wonder 
 and horror , but it certainly do not breed contempt . 

 we be as usual show in by the mute , and after these have 
 retire Ayesha unveil , and once more bade Leo embrace she , which , 
 notwithstanding his heart - searching of the previous night , he do with 
 more alacrity and fervour than in strictness courtesy require . 

 she lay her white hand on his head , and look he fondly in the eye . 
 " dost thou wonder , my Kallikrates , " she say , " when thou shalt call I 
 all thine own , and when we shall of a truth be for one another and to 
 one another ? I will tell thee . first , must thou be even as I be , not 
 immortal indeed , for that I be not , but so cased and harden against 
 the attack of Time that his arrow shall glance from the armour of thy 
 vigorous life as the sunbeam glance from water . as yet I may not mate 
 with thee , for thou and I be different , and the very brightness of my 
 being would burn thee up , and perchance destroy thee . Thou couldst not 
 even endure to look upon I for too long a time lest thine eye should 
 ache , and thy sens swim , and therefore "   with a little nod   ' shall 
 I presently veil myself again . "   this by the way she do not do .   " no : 
 listen , thou shalt not be try beyond endurance , for this very 
 evening , an hour before the sun go down , shall we start hence , and 
 by to - morrow 's dark , if all go well , and the road be not lose to I , 
 which I pray it may not be , shall we stand in the place of life , and 
 thou shalt bathe in the fire , and come forth glorify , as no man ever 
 be before thee , and then , Kallikrates , shalt thou call I wife , and I 
 will call thee husband . " 

 Leo mutter something in answer to this astonishing statement , I do not 
 know what , and she laugh a little at his confusion , and go on . 

 " and thou , too , oh Holly ; on thee also will I confer this boon , and then 
 of a truth shalt thou be evergreen , and this will I do - well , because 
 thou hast please I , Holly , for thou art not altogether a fool , like 
 most of the son of man , and because , though thou hast a school of 
 philosophy as full of nonsense as those of the old day , yet hast thou 
 not forget how to turn a pretty phrase about a lady 's eye . " 

 " Hulloa , old fellow ! " whisper Leo , with a return of his old 
 cheerfulness , " have you be pay compliment ? I should never have 
 think it of you ! " 

 " I thank thee , oh Ayesha , " I reply , with as much dignity as I could 
 command , " but if there be such a place as thou dost describe , and if in 
 this strange place there may be find a fiery virtue that can hold off 
 death when he come to pluck we by the hand , yet would I none of it . for 
 I , oh Ayesha , the world have not prove so soft a nest that I would lie 
 in it for ever . a stony - hearted mother be our earth , and stone be the 
 bread she give her child for their daily food . stone to eat and 
 bitter water for their thirst , and stripe for tender nurture . who would 
 endure this for many life ? who would so load up his back with memory 
 of lost hour and love , and of his neighbour 's sorrow that he can not 
 lessen , and wisdom that bring not consolation ? hard be it to die , 
 because our delicate flesh doth shrink back from the worm it will not 
 feel , and from that unknown which the winding - sheet doth curtain from 
 our view . but hard still , to my fancy , would it be to live on , green 
 in the leaf and fair , but dead and rotten at the core , and feel that 
 other secret worm of recollection gnawing ever at the heart . " 

 " bethink thee , Holly , " she say ; " yet doth long life and strength and 
 beauty beyond measure mean power and all thing that be dear to man . " 

 " and what , oh Queen , " I answer , " be those thing that be dear to 
 man ? be they not bubble ? be not ambition but an endless ladder by 
 which no height be ever climb till the last unreachable rung be 
 mount ? for height lead on to height , and there be no resting - place 
 upon they , and rung doth grow upon rung , and there be no limit to the 
 number . Doth not wealth satiate , and become nauseous , and no long 
 serve to satisfy or pleasure , or to buy an hour 's peace of mind ? and be 
 there any end to wisdom that we may hope to reach it ? rather , the more 
 we learn , shall we not thereby be able only to well compass out our 
 ignorance ? do we live ten thousand year could we hope to solve the 
 secret of the sun , and of the space beyond the sun , and of the Hand 
 that hang they in the heaven ? would not our wisdom be but as a gnawing 
 hunger call our consciousness day by day to a knowledge of the empty 
 craving of our soul ? would it not be but as a light in one of these 
 great cavern , that , though bright it burn , and brighter yet , doth but 
 the more serve to show the depth of the gloom around it ? and what good 
 thing be there beyond that we may gain by length of day ? " 

 " Nay , my Holly , there be love - love which make all thing beautiful , 
 and doth breathe divinity into the very dust we tread . with love shall 
 life roll gloriously on from year to year , like the voice of some great 
 music that hath power to hold the hearer 's heart poise on eagle ' wing 
 above the sordid shame and folly of the earth . " 

 " it may be so , " I answer ; " but if the love one prove a broken reed to 
 pierce we , or if the love be love in vain - what then ? shall a man grave 
 his sorrow upon a stone when he hath but need to write they on 
 the water ? Nay , oh she , I will live my day , and grow old with my 
 generation , and die my appoint death , and be forget . for I do hope 
 for an immortality to which the little span that perchance thou canst 
 confer will be but as a finger 's length lay against the measure of the 
 great world ; and , mark this ! the immortality to which I look , and which 
 my faith doth promise I , shall be free from the bond that here must 
 tie my spirit down . for , while the flesh endure , sorrow and evil and 
 the scorpion whip of sin must endure also ; but when the flesh hath 
 fall from we , then shall the spirit shine forth clothe in the brightness 
 of eternal good , and for its common air shall breathe so rare an ether 
 of most noble thought that the high aspiration of our manhood , or 
 the pure incense of a maiden 's prayer , would prove too earthly gross 
 to float therein . " 


 " thou look high , " answer Ayesha , with a little laugh , " and speakest 
 clearly as a trumpet and with no uncertain sound . and yet methink that 
 but now didst thou talk of ' that Unknown ' from which the winding - sheet 
 doth curtain we . but perchance , thou seest with the eye of Faith , gaze 
 on that brightness , that be to be , through the paint - glass of thy 
 imagination . strange be the picture of the future that mankind can 
 thus draw with this brush of faith and this many - colour pigment of 
 imagination ! strange , too , that no one of they doth agree with another ! 
 I could tell thee - but there , what be the use ? why rob a fool of his 
 bauble ? let it pass , and I pray , oh Holly , that when thou dost feel old 
 age creep slowly toward thyself , and the confusion of senility make 
 havoc in thy brain , thou may not bitterly regret that thou didst cast 
 away the imperial boon I would have give to thee . but so it hath ever 
 be ; man can never be content with that which his hand can pluck . if 
 a lamp be in his reach to light he through the darkness , he must need 
 cast it down because it be no star . happiness danceth ever apace before 
 he , like the marsh - fire in the swamp , and he must catch the fire , and 
 he must hold the star ! beauty be naught to he , because there be lip 
 more honey - sweet ; and wealth be naught , because other can weigh he 
 down with heavy shekel ; and fame be naught , because there have 
 be great man than he . thyself thou saidst it , and I turn thy word 
 against thee . well , thou dream that thou shalt pluck the star . I 
 believe it not , and I think thee a fool , my Holly , to throw away the 
 lamp . " 

 I make no answer , for I could not - especially before Leo - tell she that 
 since I have see her face I know that it would always be before my eye , 
 and that I have no wish to prolong an existence which must always be 
 haunt and torture by her memory , and by the last bitterness of 
 unsatisfie love . but so it be , and so , alas , be it to this hour ! 

 " and now , " go on she , change her tone and the subject together , 
 " tell I , my Kallikrates , for as yet I know it not , how come ye to seek 
 I here ? yesternight thou didst say that Kallikrates - he whom thou 
 sawest - be thine ancestor . how be it ? tell I - thou dost not speak 
 overmuch ! " 

 thus adjure , Leo tell she the wonderful story of the casket and of the 
 potsherd that , write on by his ancestress , the Egyptian Amenartas , have 
 be the mean of guide we to she . Ayesha listen intently , and , when 
 he have finish , speak to I . 

 " do I not tell thee one day , when we do talk of good and evil , oh 
 Holly - it be when my beloved lie so ill - that out of good come evil , 
 and out of evil good - that they who sow know not what the crop 
 should be , nor he who strike where the blow should fall ? see , now : this 
 Egyptian Amenartas , this royal child of the Nile who hat I , and whom 
 even now I hate , for in a way she do prevail against I - see , now , she 
 herself hath be the very mean to bring her lover to mine arm ! for 
 her sake I slay he , and now , behold , through her he hath come back to 
 I ! she would have do I evil , and sow her seed that I might reap 
 tare , and behold she hath give I more than all the world can give , 
 and there be a strange square for thee to fit into thy circle of good 
 and evil , oh Holly ! 

 " and so , " she go on , after a pause - " and so she bid her son destroy 
 I if he might , because I slay his father . and thou , my Kallikrates , art 
 the father , and in a sense thou art likewise the son ; and wouldst thou 
 avenge thy wrong , and the wrong of that far - off mother of thine , upon 
 I , oh Kallikrates ? see , " and she slide to her knee , and draw the white 
 corsage still far down her ivory bosom - ' see , here beat my heart , 
 and there by thy side be a knife , heavy , and long , and sharp , the very 
 knife to slay an err woman with . take it now , and be avenge . Strike , 
 and strike home ! - so shalt thou be satisfied , Kallikrates , and go 
 through life a happy man , because thou hast pay back the wrong , and 
 obey the mandate of the past . " 

 he look at she , and then stretch out his hand and lift she to her 
 foot . 

 " Rise , Ayesha , " he say sadly ; " well thou know that I can not strike 
 thee , no , not even for the sake of she whom thou slewest but last 
 night . I be in thy power , and a very slave to thee . how can I kill 
 thee ? - soon should I slay myself . " 

 " almost dost thou begin to love I , Kallikrates , " she answer , smile . 
 " and now tell I of thy country - ' tis a great people , be it not ? with an 
 empire like that of Rome ! surely thou wouldst return thither , and it be 
 well , for I mean not that thou shouldst dwell in these cave of K"r . 
 Nay , when once thou art even as I be , we will go hence - fear not but 
 that I shall find a path - and then shall we journey to this England of 
 thine , and live as it becometh we to live . two thousand year have I 
 wait for the day when I should see the last of these hateful cave and 
 this gloomy - visage folk , and now it be at hand , and my heart bound up 
 to meet it like a child 's towards its holiday . for thou shalt rule this 
 England - - " 

 " but we have a queen already , " break in Leo , hastily . 

 " it be naught , it be naught , " say Ayesha ; ' she can be overthrow . " 

 at this we both break out into an exclamation of dismay , and explain 
 that we should as soon think of overthrow ourselves . 

 " but here be a strange thing , " say Ayesha , in astonishment ; " a queen 
 whom her people love ! surely the world must have change since I dwelt 
 in K"r . " 

 again we explain that it be the character of monarch that have 
 change , and that the one under whom we live be venerate and belove 
 by all right - think people in her vast realm . also , we tell she that 
 real power in our country rest in the hand of the people , and that we 
 be in fact rule by the vote of the low and least educate class 
 of the community . 

 " ah , " she say , " a democracy - then surely there be a tyrant , for I have 
 long since see that democracy , have no clear will of their own , in 
 the end set up a tyrant , and worship he . " 

 " yes , " I say , " we have our tyrant . " 

 " well , " she answer resignedly , " we can at any rate destroy these 
 tyrant , and Kallikrates shall rule the land . " 

 I instantly inform Ayesha that in England " blasting " be not an 
 amusement that could be indulge in with impunity , and that any such 
 attempt would meet with the consideration of the law and probably end 
 upon a scaffold . 

 " the law , " she laugh with scorn - " the law ! Canst thou not understand , 
 oh Holly , that I be above the law , and so shall my Kallikrates be also ? 
 all human law will be to we as the north wind to a mountain . do the 
 wind bend the mountain , or the mountain the wind ? " 

 " and now leave I , I pray thee , and thou too , my own Kallikrates , for 
 I would get I ready against our journey , and so must ye both , and your 
 servant also . but bring no great quantity of thing with thee , for I 
 trust that we shall be but three day go . then shall we return hither , 
 and I will make a plan whereby we can bid farewell for ever to these 
 sepulchre of K"r . yea , surely thou mayst kiss my hand ! " 

 so we go , I , for one , meditate deeply on the awful nature of the 
 problem that now open out before we . the terrible she have evidently 
 make up her mind to go to England , and it make I absolutely shudder 
 to think what would be the result of her arrival there . what her power 
 be I know , and I could not doubt but that she would exercise they 
 to the full . it might be possible to control she for a while , but her 
 proud , ambitious spirit would be certain to break loose and avenge 
 itself for the long century of its solitude . she would , if necessary , 
 and if the power of her beauty do not unaide prove equal to the 
 occasion , blast her way to any end she set before she , and , as she could 
 not die , and for aught I know could not even be kill ,     what be 
 there to stop she ? in the end she would , I have little doubt , assume 
 absolute rule over the british dominion , and probably over the whole 
 earth , and , though I be sure that she would speedily make ours the most 
 glorious and prosperous empire that the world have ever see , it would be 
 at the cost of a terrible sacrifice of life . 

      I regret to say that I be never able to ascertain if 
  she be invulnerable against the ordinary accident of 
  life . presumably this be so , else some misadventure would 
  have be sure to put an end to she in the course of so many 
  century . true , she offer to let Leo slay she , but very 
  probably this be only an experiment to try his temper and 
  mental attitude towards she . Ayesha never give way to 
  impulse without some valid object . - L. H. H. 

 the whole thing sound like a dream or some extraordinary invention of 
 a speculative brain , and yet it be a fact - a wonderful fact - of which 
 the whole world would soon be call on to take notice . what be the 
 meaning of it all ? after much thinking I could only conclude that this 
 marvellous creature , whose passion have keep she for so many century 
 chain as it be , and comparatively harmless , be now about to be use 
 by Providence as a means to change the order of the world , and possibly , 
 by the building up of a power that could no more be rebel against 
 or question than the decree of Fate , to change it materially for the 
 well . 



 XXIII 

 the TEMPLE of truth 

 our preparation do not take we very long . we put a change of clothing 
 apiece and some spare boot into my Gladstone bag , also we take our 
 revolver and an express rifle each , together with a good supply of 
 ammunition , a precaution to which , under Providence , we subsequently 
 owe our life over and over again . the rest of our gear , together with 
 our heavy rifle , we leave behind we . 

 a few minute before the appoint time we once more attend in 
 Ayesha 's boudoir , and find she also ready , her dark cloak throw over 
 her winding - sheetlike wrapping . 

 " be ye prepared for the great venture ? " she say . 

 " we be , " I answer , " though for my part , Ayesha , I have no faith in 
 it . " 

 " ah , my Holly , " she say , " thou art of a truth like those old Jews - of 
 whom the memory vex I so sorely - unbelieving , and hard to accept 
 that which they have not know . but thou shalt see ; for unless my mirror 
 beyond lie , " and she point to the font of crystal water , " the path be 
 yet open as it be of old time . and now let we start upon the new life 
 which shall end - who knoweth where ? " 

 " ah , " I echo , " who knoweth where ? " and we pass down into the great 
 central cave , and out into the light of day . at the mouth of the cave we 
 find a single litter with six bearer , all of they mute , wait , and 
 with they I be relieve to see our old friend Billali , for whom I 
 have conceive a sort of affection . it appear that , for reason not 
 necessary to explain at length , Ayesha have think it well that , with 
 the exception of herself , we should proceed on foot , and this we be 
 nothing loth to do , after our long confinement in these cave , 
 which , however suitable they might be for sarcophagi - a singularly 
 inappropriate word , by the way , for these particular tomb , which 
 certainly do not consume the body give to their keeping - be 
 depressing habitation for breathing mortal like ourselves . either by 
 accident or by the order of she , the space in front of the cave where 
 we have behold that awful dance be perfectly clear of spectator . not 
 a soul be to be see , and consequently I do not believe that our 
 departure be know to anybody , except perhaps the mute who wait on 
  she , and they be , of course , in the habit of keep what they see 
 to themselves . 

 in a few minute ' time we be step out sharply across the great 
 cultivate plain or lake bed , frame like a vast emerald in its setting 
 of frown cliff , and have another opportunity of wonder at the 
 extraordinary nature of the site choose by these old people of K"r for 
 their capital , and at the marvellous amount of labour , ingenuity , and 
 engineering skill that must have be bring into requisition by the 
 founder of the city to drain so huge a sheet of water , and to keep 
 it clear of subsequent accumulation . it be , indeed , so far as my 
 experience go , an unequalled instance of what man can do in the face 
 of nature , for in my opinion such achievement as the Suez Canal or 
 even the Mont Cenis Tunnel do not approach this ancient undertaking in 
 magnitude and grandeur of conception . 

 when we have be walk for about half an hour , enjoy ourselves 
 exceedingly in the delightful cool which about this time of the day 
 always appear to descend upon the great plain of K"r , and which in 
 some degree atone for the want of any land or sea breeze - for all wind 
 be keep off by the rocky mountain wall - we begin to get a clear view of 
 what Billali have inform we be the ruin of the great city . and even 
 from that distance we could see how wonderful those ruin be , a fact 
 which with every step we take become more evident . the town be not 
 very large if compare to Babylon or Thebes , or other city of remote 
 antiquity ; perhaps its outer wall contain some twelve square mile of 
 ground , or a little more . nor have the wall , so far as we could judge 
 when we reach they , be very high , probably not more than forty foot , 
 which be about their present height where they have not through the 
 sinking of the ground , or some such cause , fall into ruin . the reason 
 of this , no doubt , be that the people of K"r , be protect from any 
 outside attack by far more tremendous rampart than any that the hand of 
 man could rear , only require they for show and to guard against civil 
 discord . but on the other hand they be as broad as they be high , 
 build entirely of dress stone , hewn , no doubt , from the vast cave , 
 and surround by a great moat about sixty foot in width , some reach 
 of which be still fill with water . about ten minute before the 
 sun finally sink we reach this moat , and pass down and through it , 
 clamber across what evidently be the pile - up fragment of a great 
 bridge in order to do so , and then with some little difficulty over the 
 slope of the wall to its summit . I wish that it lie within the power of 
 my pen to give some idea of the grandeur of the sight that then meet our 
 view . there , all bath in the red glow of the sink sun , be mile 
 upon mile of ruin - column , temple , shrine , and the palace of 
 king , vary with patch of green bush . of course , the roof of these 
 building have long since fall into decay and vanish , but owe to 
 the extreme massiveness of the style of building , and to the hardness 
 and durability of the rock employ , most of the party wall and great 
 column still remain stand .   

      in connection with the extraordinary state of 
  preservation of these ruin after so vast a lapse of time - 
  at least six thousand year - it must be remember that K"r 
  be not burn or destroy by an enemy or an earthquake , but 
  desert , owe to the action of a terrible plague . 
  consequently the house be leave unharmed ; also the climate 
  of the plain be remarkably fine and dry , and there be very 
  little rain or wind ; as a result of which these relic have 
  only to contend against the unaided action of time , that 
  work but slowly upon such massive block of masonry . - L. 
  H. H. 

 Straight before we stretch away what have evidently be the main 
 thoroughfare of the city , for it be very wide , wide than the Thames 
 Embankment , and regular , be , as we afterwards discover , pave , 
 or rather build , throughout of block of dress stone , such as be 
 employ in the wall , it be but little overgrown even now with grass 
 and shrub that could get no depth of soil to live in . what have be the 
 park and garden , on the contrary , be now dense jungle . indeed , it 
 be easy even from a distance to trace the course of the various road 
 by the burn - up appearance of the scanty grass that grow upon they . on 
 either side of this great thoroughfare be vast block of ruin , each 
 block , generally speak , be separate from its neighbour by a space 
 of what have once , I suppose , be garden - ground , but be now dense and 
 tangle bush . they be all build of the same coloured stone , and most 
 of they have pillar , which be as much as we could make out in the 
 fading light as we pass swiftly up the main road , that I believe I be 
 right in say no live foot have press for thousand of year .   

      Billali tell I that the Amahagger believe that the site 
  of the city be haunt , and could not be persuade to enter 
  it upon any consideration . indeed , I could see that he 
  himself do not at all like do so , and be only console 
  by the reflection that he be under the direct protection of 
  she . it strike Leo and myself as very curious that a 
  people which have no objection to live amongst the dead , 
  with whom their familiarity have perhaps breed contempt , and 
  even use their body for purpose of fuel , should be 
  terrify at approach the habitation that these very 
  depart have occupy when alive . after all , however , it be 
  only a savage inconsistency . - L. H. H. 

 presently we come to an enormous pile , which we rightly take to be a 
 temple cover at least eight acre of ground , and apparently arrange 
 in a series of court , each one enclose another of small size , on 
 the principle of a chinese nest of box , the court be separate one 
 from the other by row of huge column . and , while I think of it , I may 
 as well state a remarkable thing about the shape of these column , which 
 resemble none that I have ever see or hear of , be fashion with a 
 kind of waist at the centre , and swell out above and below . at first 
 we think that this shape be mean to roughly symbolise or suggest 
 the female form , as be a common habit amongst the ancient religious 
 architect of many creed . on the follow day , however , as we go up 
 the slope of the mountain , we discover a large quantity of the most 
 stately look palm , of which the truck grow exactly in this shape , 
 and I have now no doubt but that the first designer of those column 
 draw his inspiration from the graceful bend of those very palm , or 
 rather of their ancestor , which then , some eight or ten thousand year 
 ago , as now , beautify the slope of the mountain that have once form 
 the shore of the volcanic lake . 

 at the façade of this huge temple , which , I should imagine , be almost 
 as large as that of El - Karnac , at Thebes , some of the large column , 
 which I measure , be between eighteen to twenty foot in diameter at 
 the base , by about seventy foot in height , our little procession be 
 halt , and Ayesha descend from her litter . 

 " there be a spot here , kallikrate , " she say to Leo , who have run up to 
 help she down , " where one might sleep . two thousand year ago do thou 
 and I and that egyptian asp rest therein , but since then have I not set 
 foot here , nor any man , and perchance it have fall , " and , follow by 
 the rest of we , she pass up a vast flight of broken and ruin step 
 into the outer court , and look round into the gloom . presently she 
 seem to recollect , and , walk a few pace along the wall to the 
 left , halt . 

 " it be here , " she say , and at the same time beckon to the two mute , 
 who be load with provision and our little belonging , to advance . 
 one of they come forward , and , produce a lamp , light it from his brazier 
  for the Amahagger when on a journey nearly always carry with they a 
 little lighted brazier , from which to provide fire . the tinder of this 
 brazier be make of broken fragment of mummy carefully damp , and , 
 if the admixture of moisture be properly manage , this unholy compound 
 would smoulder away for hour .     as soon as the lamp be light we enter 
 the place before which Ayesha have halt . it turn out to be a chamber 
 hollow in the thickness of the wall , and , from the fact of there still 
 be a massive stone table in it , I should think that it have probably 
 serve as a living - room , perhaps for one of the door - keeper of the 
 great temple . 

      after all we be not much in advance of the Amahagger in 
  these matter . " Mummy , " that be pound ancient Egyptian , 
  be , I believe , a pigment much use by artist , and 
  especially by those of they who direct their talent to the 
  reproduction of the work of the old master . - Editor . 

 here we stop , and after clean the place out and make it as 
 comfortable as circumstance and the darkness would permit , we eat some 
 cold meat , at least Leo , Job and I do , for Ayesha , as I think I have 
 say elsewhere , never touch anything except cake of flour , fruit and 
 water . while we be still eat , the moon , which be at her full , rise 
 above the mountain - wall , and begin to flood the place with silver . 

 " wot ye why I have bring you here to - night , my Holly ? " say Ayesha , 
 lean her head upon her hand and watch the great orb as she rise , 
 like some heavenly queen , above the solemn pillar of the temple . " I 
 bring you - nay , it be strange , but know thou , Kallikrates , that 
 thou liest at this moment upon the very spot where thy dead body lie 
 when I bear thee back to those cave of K"r so many year ago ? it all 
 return to my mind now . I can see it , and horrible be it to my sight ! " 
 and she shudder . 

 here Leo jump up and hastily change his seat . however the 
 reminiscence might affect Ayesha , it clearly have few charm for he . 

 " I bring you , " go on Ayesha presently , " that ye might look upon 
 the most wonderful sight that ever the eye of man beheld - the full moon 
 shin over ruin K"r . when ye have do your eating - I would that I 
 could teach you to eat naught but fruit , Kallikrates , but that will come 
 after thou hast lave in the fire . once I , too , eat flesh like a brute 
 beast . when ye have do we will go out , and I will show you this great 
 temple and the God whom man once worship therein . " 

 of course we get up at once , and start . and here again my pen fail 
 I . to give a string of measurement and detail of the various court 
 of the temple would only be wearisome , suppose that I have they , and 
 yet I know not how I be to describe what we see , magnificent as it be 
 even in its ruin , almost beyond the power of realisation . court upon dim 
 court , row upon row of mighty pillar - some of they   especially at the 
 gateway   sculpture from pedestal to capital - space upon space of empty 
 chamber that speak more eloquently to the imagination than any crowded 
 street . and over all , the dead silence of the dead , the sense of utter 
 loneliness , and the brood spirit of the Past ! how beautiful it be , 
 and yet how drear ! we do not dare to speak aloud . Ayesha herself be 
 awe in the presence of an antiquity compare to which even her length 
 of day be but a little thing ; we only whisper , and our whisper 
 seem to run from column to column , till they be lose in the quiet 
 air . bright fall the moonlight on pillar and court and shattered wall , 
 hide all their rent and imperfection in its silver garment , and 
 clothing their hoar majesty with the peculiar glory of the night . it be 
 a wonderful sight to see the full moon look down on the ruin fane 
 of K"r . it be a wonderful thing to think for how many thousand of 
 year the dead orb above and the dead city below have gaze thus upon 
 each other , and in the utter solitude of space pour forth each to each 
 the tale of their lose life and long - depart glory . the white 
 light fall , and minute by minute the quiet shadow creep across 
 the grass - grow court like the spirit of old priest haunt the 
 habitation of their worship - the white light fall , and the long shadow 
 grow till the beauty and grandeur of each scene and the untamed majesty 
 of its present Death seem to sink into our very soul , and speak more 
 loudly than the shout of army concern the pomp and splendour that 
 the grave have swallow , and even memory have forget . 

 " come , " say Ayesha , after we have gaze and gaze , I know not for how 
 long , " and I will show you the stony flower of Loveliness and Wonder 's 
 very crown , if yet it stand to mock time with its beauty and fill 
 the heart of man with longing for that which be behind the veil , " and , 
 without wait for an answer , she lead we through two more pillare 
 court into the inner shrine of the old fane . 

 and there , in the centre of the inmost court , that might have be some 
 fifty yard square , or a little more , we stand face to face with what 
 be perhaps the grand allegorical work of Art that the genius of her 
 child have ever give to the world . for in the exact centre of the 
 court , place upon a thick square slab of rock , be a huge round ball of 
 dark stone , some twenty foot in diameter , and stand on the ball be a 
 colossal wing figure of a beauty so entrance and divine that when 
 I first gaze upon it , illuminate and shadow as it be by the soft 
 light of the moon , my breath stand still , and for an instant my heart 
 cease its beating . 

 the statue be hew from marble so pure and white that even now , after 
 all those age , it shine as the moonbeam dance upon it , and its height 
 be , I should say , a trifle over twenty foot . it be the wing figure 
 of a woman of such marvellous loveliness and delicacy of form that the 
 size seem rather to add to than to detract from its so human and yet 
 more spiritual beauty . she be bend forward and poise herself upon 
 her half - spread wing as though to preserve her balance as she leant . 
 her arm be outstretche like those of some woman about to embrace 
 one she dearly love , while her whole attitude give an impression of 
 the tender beseeching . her perfect and most gracious form be naked , 
 save - and here come the extraordinary thing - the face , which be thinly 
 veil , so that we could only trace the marking of her feature . a gauzy 
 veil be throw round and about the head , and of its two end one fall 
 down across her left breast , which be outline beneath it , and one , now 
 break , stream away upon the air behind she . 

 " who be she ? " I ask , as soon as I could take my eye off the statue . 

 " Canst thou not guess , oh Holly ? " answer Ayesha . " where then be thy 
 imagination ? it be truth stand on the World , and call to its 
 child to unveil her face . see what be writ upon the pedestal . without 
 doubt it be take from the book of scripture of these man of K"r , " and 
 she lead the way to the foot of the statue , where an inscription of the 
 usual Chinese - look hieroglyphic be so deeply graven as to be still 
 quite legible , at least to Ayesha . accord to her translation it run 
 thus : - 

 " be there no man that will draw my veil and look upon my face , for it be 
 very fair ? unto he who draw my veil shall I be , and peace will I give 
 he , and sweet child of knowledge and good work . " 

 and a voice cry , " though all those who seek after thee desire thee , 
 behold ! Virgin art thou , and Virgin shalt thou go till Time be do . no 
 man be there bear of woman who may draw thy veil and live , nor shall be . 
 by Death only can thy veil be draw , oh Truth ! " 

 and Truth stretch out her arm and wept , because those who seek she 
 might not find she , nor look upon her face to face . 

 " Thou se , " say Ayesha , when she have finish translate , " truth 
 be the Goddess of the people of old K"r , and to she they build their 
 shrine , and she they seek ; know that they should never find , still 
 seek they . " 

 " and so , " I add sadly , " do man seek to this very hour , but they find 
 out ; and , as this scripture saith , nor shall they ; for in Death only be 
 Truth find . " 

 then with one more look at this veil and spiritualise 
 loveliness - which be so perfect and so pure that one might almost fancy 
 that the light of a live spirit shine through the marble prison to 
 lead man on to high and ethereal thought - this poet 's dream of beauty 
 freeze into stone , which I shall never forget while I live , we turn 
 and go back through the vast moonlit court to the spot whence we have 
 start . I never see the statue again , which I the more regret , because 
 on the great ball of stone represent the World whereon the figure 
 stand , line be draw , that probably , have there be light enough , we 
 should have discover to be a map of the Universe as it be know to 
 the people of K"r . it be at any rate suggestive of some scientific 
 knowledge that these long - dead worshipper of Truth have recognise the 
 fact that the globe be round . 



 XXIV 

 walk the PLANK 

 next day the mute wake we before the dawn ; and by the time that we have 
 get the sleep out of our eye , and go through a perfunctory wash at a 
 spring which still well up into the remain of a marble basin in the 
 centre of the north quadrangle of the vast outer court , we find she 
 stand by the litter ready to start , while old Billali and the two 
 bearer mute be busy collect the baggage . as usual , Ayesha be 
 veil like the marble truth   by the way , I wonder if she originally 
 get the idea of cover up her beauty from that statue ? . I notice , 
 however , that she seem very depressed , and have none of that proud and 
 buoyant bearing which would have betray she among a thousand woman of 
 the same stature , even if they have be veil like herself . she look 
 up as we come - for her head be bow - and greet we . Leo ask she how 
 she have sleep . 

 " Ill , my Kallikrates , " she answer , " ill . this night have strange and 
 hideous dream come creep through my brain , and I know not what they 
 may portend . almost do I feel as though some evil overshadow I ; and 
 yet how can evil touch I ? I wonder , " she go on with a sudden outbreak 
 of womanly tenderness , " I wonder if , should aught happen to I , so that 
 I sleep awhile and leave thee wake , thou wouldst think gently of I ? I 
 wonder , my Kallikrates , if thou wouldst tarry till I come again , as for 
 so many century I have tarry for thy come ? " 

 then , without wait for an answer , she go on : " come , let we be 
 set forth , for we have far to go , and before another day be bear in 
 yonder blue should we stand in the place of life . " 

 in five minute we be once more on our way through the vast ruin 
 city , which loom at we on either side in the grey dawn in a way 
 that be at once grand and oppressive . just as the first ray of the 
 rise sun shot like a golden arrow athwart this storied desolation we 
 gain the further gateway of the outer wall , and have give one more 
 glance at the hoar and pillare majesty through which we have journey , 
 and   with the exception of Job , for whom ruin have no charm   breathe 
 a sigh of regret that we have not have more time to explore it , pass 
 through the great moat , and on to the plain beyond . 

 as the sun rise so do Ayesha 's spirit , till by breakfast - time they have 
 regain their normal level , and she laughingly set down her previous 
 depression to the association of the spot where she have sleep . 

 " these barbarian swear that K"r be haunt , " she say , " and of a truth 
 I do believe their saying , for never do I know so ill a night save one . 
 I remember it now . it be on that very spot when thou didst lie dead at 
 my foot , Kallikrates . never will I visit it again ; it be a place of evil 
 oman . " 

 after a very brief halt for breakfast we press on with such good will 
 that by two o'clock in the afternoon we be at the foot of the vast 
 wall of rock that form the lip of the volcano , and which at this point 
 tower up precipitously above we for fifteen hundred or two thousand 
 foot . here we halt , certainly not to my astonishment , for I do not 
 see how it be possible that we should go any far . 

 " now , " say Ayesha , as she descend from her litter , " doth our labour 
 but commence , for here do we part with these man , and henceforward must 
 we bear ourselves ; " and then , address Billali , " do thou and these 
 slave remain here , and abide our coming . by to - morrow at the midday 
 shall we be with thee - if not , wait . " 

 Billali bow humbly , and say that her august bidding should be obey 
 if they stop there till they grow old . 

 " and this man , oh Holly , " say she , point to Job ; " good be it 
 that he should tarry also , for if his heart be not high and his courage 
 great , perchance some evil might overtake he . also , the secret of the 
 place whither we go be not fit for common eye . " 

 I translate this to Job , who instantly and earnestly entreat I , 
 almost with tear in his eye , not to leave he behind . he say he be 
 sure that he could see nothing bad than he have already see , and that 
 he be terrify to death at the idea of be leave alone with those 
 " dumb folk , " who , he think , would probably take the opportunity to 
 hot - pot he . 

 I translate what he say to Ayesha , who shrug her shoulder , and 
 answer , " well , let he come , it be naught to I ; on his own head be 
 it , and he will serve to bear the lamp and this , " and she point to a 
 narrow plank , some sixteen foot in length , which have be bind above 
 the long bearing - pole of her hammock , as I have think to make curtain 
 spread out well , but , as it now appear , for some unknown purpose 
 connect with our extraordinary undertaking . 

 accordingly , the plank , which , though tough , be very light , be give 
 to Job to carry , and also one of the lamp . I sling the other on to my 
 back , together with a spare jar of oil , while Leo load himself with 
 the provision and some water in a kid 's skin . when this be do she 
 bade Billali and the six bearer mute to retreat behind a grove of 
 flower magnolia about a hundred yard away , and remain there under 
 pain of death till we have vanish . they bow humbly , and go , and , 
 as he depart , old Billali give I a friendly shake of the hand , and 
 whisper that he have rather that it be I than he who be go on this 
 wonderful expedition with " She - who - must - be - obeyed , " and upon my word 
 I feel inclined to agree with he . in another minute they be go , and 
 then , have briefly ask we if we be ready , Ayesha turn , and gaze 
 up the tower cliff . 

 " goodness I , Leo , " I say , ' surely we be not go to climb that 
 precipice ! " 

 Leo shrug his shoulder , be in a condition of half - fascinate , 
 half - expectant mystification , and as he do so , Ayesha with a sudden 
 move begin to climb the cliff , and of course we have to follow she . it 
 be perfectly marvellous to see the ease and grace with which she spring 
 from rock to rock , and swing herself along the ledge . the ascent be 
 not , however , so difficult as it seem , although there be one or two 
 nasty place where it do not do to look behind you , the fact be that 
 the rock still slop here , and be not absolutely precipitous as it be 
 high up . in this way we , with no great labour , mount to the height 
 of some fifty foot above our last standing - place , the only really 
 troublesome thing to manage be Job 's board , and in do so draw some 
 fifty or sixty pace to the left of our starting - point , for we go up 
 like a crab , sideways . presently we reach a ledge , narrow enough at 
 first , but which widen as we follow it , and moreover slop inward 
 like the petal of a flower , so that as we follow it we gradually get 
 into a kind of rut or fold of rock , that grow deep and deeply , till at 
 last it resemble a Devonshire lane in stone , and hide we perfectly from 
 the gaze of anybody on the slope below , if there have be anybody to 
 gaze . this lane   which appear to be a natural formation   continue 
 for some fifty or sixty pace , and then suddenly end in a cave , also 
 natural , run at right angle to it . I be sure it be a natural 
 cave , and not hollow by the hand of man , because of its irregular and 
 contorted shape and course , which give it the appearance of have be 
 blow bodily in the mountain by some frightful eruption of gas follow 
 the line of the least resistance . all the cave hollow by the ancient 
 of K"r , on the contrary , be cut out with the most perfect regularity 
 and symmetry . at the mouth of this cave Ayesha halt , and bid we light 
 the two lamp , which I do , give one to she and keep the other 
 myself . then , take the lead , she advance down the cavern , pick she 
 way with great care , as indeed it be necessary to do , for the floor be 
 most irregular - strew with boulder like the bed of a stream , and in 
 some place pit with deep hole , in which it would have be easy to 
 break one 's leg . 

 this cavern we pursue for twenty minute or more , it be , so far as 
 I could form a judgment - owe to its numerous twist and turn no easy 
 task - about a quarter of a mile long . 

 at last , however , we halt at its farth end , and whilst I be still 
 try to pierce the gloom a great gust of air come tear down it , and 
 extinguish both the lamp . 

 Ayesha call to we , and we creep up to she , for she be a little in 
 front , and be reward with a view that be positively appal in 
 its gloom and grandeur . before we be a mighty chasm in the black rock , 
 jagged and tear and splinter through it in a far past age by some 
 awful convulsion of Nature , as though it have be cleave by stroke upon 
 stroke of the lightning . this chasm , which be bound by a precipice on 
 the hither , and presumably , though we could not see it , on the far 
 side also , may have measure any width across , but from its darkness I 
 do not think it can have be very broad . it be impossible to make out 
 much of its outline , or how far it run , for the simple reason that the 
 point where we be stand be so far from the upper surface of the 
 cliff , at least fifteen hundred or two thousand foot , that only a very 
 dim light struggle down to we from above . the mouth of the cavern that 
 we have be follow give on to a most curious and tremendous spur 
 of rock , which jut out in mid air into the gulf before we , for 
 a distance of some fifty yard , come to a sharp point at its 
 termination , and resemble nothing that I can think of so much as the 
 spur upon the leg of a cock in shape . this huge spur be attach only 
 to the parent precipice at its base , which be , of course , enormous , 
 just as the cock 's spur be attach to its leg . otherwise it be utterly 
 unsupported . 

 " here must we pass , " say Ayesha . " be careful lest giddiness overcome 
 you , or the wind sweep you into the gulf beneath , for of a truth it hath 
 no bottom ; " and , without give we any further time to get scar , she 
 start walk along the spur , leave we to follow she as well we 
 might . I be next to she , then come Job , painfully drag his plank , 
 while Leo bring up the rear . it be a wonderful sight to see this 
 intrepid woman glide fearlessly along that dreadful place . for my 
 part , when I have go but a very few yard , what between the pressure 
 of the air and the awful sense of the consequence that a slip would 
 entail , I find it necessary to go down on my hand and knee and crawl , 
 and so do the other two . 

 but Ayesha never condescend to this . on she go , lean her body 
 against the gust of wind , and never seem to lose her head or her 
 balance . 

 in a few minute we have cross some twenty pace of this awful bridge , 
 which get narrow at every step , and then all of a sudden a great gust 
 come tear along the gorge . I see Ayesha lean herself against it , but 
 the strong draught get under her dark cloak , and tear it from she , and 
 away it go down the wind flap like a wounded bird . it be dreadful 
 to see it go , till it be lose in the blackness . I cling to the saddle 
 of rock , and look round , while , like a live thing , the great spur 
 vibrate with a hum sound beneath we . the sight be a truly awesome 
 one . there we be poise in the gloom between earth and heaven . beneath 
 we be hundred upon hundred of foot of emptiness that gradually grow 
 dark , till at last it be absolutely black , and at what depth it end 
 be more than I can guess . above be space upon space of giddy air , and 
 far , far away a line of blue sky . and down this vast gulf upon which we 
 be pinnacle the great draught dash and roar , drive cloud and 
 misty wreath of vapour before it , till we be nearly blind , and 
 utterly confused . 

 the whole position be so tremendous and so absolutely unearthly , that I 
 believe it actually lull our sense of terror , but to this hour I often 
 see it in my dream , and at its mere phantasy wake up cover with cold 
 sweat . 

 " on ! on ! " cry the white form before we , for now the cloak have go , 
  she be rob in white , and look more like a spirit rid down the 
 gale than a woman ; " on , or ye will fall and be dash to piece . keep 
 your eye fix upon the ground , and closely hug the rock . " 

 we obey she , and creep painfully along the quivering path , against 
 which the wind shriek and wail as it shake it , cause it to murmur 
 like a vast tuning - fork . on we go , I do not know for how long , only 
 gaze round now and again , when it be absolutely necessary , until at 
 last we see that we be on the very tip of the spur , a slab of rock , 
 little large than an ordinary table , that throb and jump like any 
 over - engine steamer . there we lay , cling to the ground , and look 
 about we , while Ayesha stand lean out against the wind , down which 
 her long hair stream , and , absolutely heedless of the hideous depth 
 that yawn beneath , point before she . then we see why the narrow 
 plank have be provide , which Job and I have painfully drag along 
 between we . before we be an empty space , on the other side of which be 
 something , as yet we could not see what , for here - either owe to the 
 shadow of the opposite cliff , or from some other cause - the gloom be 
 that of night . 

 " we must wait awhile , " call Ayesha ; ' soon there will be light . " 

 at the moment I could not imagine what she mean . how could more light 
 than there be ever come to this dreadful spot ? while I be still 
 wonder , suddenly , like a great sword of flame , a beam from the 
 set sun pierce the stygian gloom , and smite upon the point of 
 rock whereon we lay , illumine Ayesha 's lovely form with an unearthly 
 splendour . I only wish I could describe the wild and marvellous beauty 
 of that sword of fire , lay across the darkness and rush mist - wreath 
 of the gulf . how it get there I do not to this moment know , but I 
 presume that there be some cleft or hole in the oppose cliff , through 
 which it pierce when the setting orb be in a direct line therewith . 
 all I can say be , that the effect be the most wonderful that I ever 
 see . right through the heart of the darkness that flame sword be 
 stab , and where it lie there be the most surpassingly vivid light , 
 so vivid that even at a distance we could see the grain of the rock , 
 while , outside of it - yes , within a few inch of its keen edge - be 
 naught but clustering shadow . 

 and now , by this ray of light , for which she have be wait , and 
 time our arrival to meet , know that at this season for thousand of 
 year it have always strike thus at sunset , we see what be before we . 
 within eleven or twelve foot of the very tip of the tongue - like rock 
 whereon we stand there arise , presumably from the far bottom of the 
 gulf , a sugarloaf - shaped cone , of which the summit be exactly opposite 
 to we . but have there be a summit only it would not have help we 
 much , for the near point of its circumference be some forty foot 
 from where we be . on the lip of this summit , however , which be 
 circular and hollow , rest a tremendous flat boulder , something like a 
 glaci stone - perhaps it be one , for all I know to the contrary - and 
 the end of this boulder approach to within twelve foot or so of we . 
 this huge rock be nothing more or less than a gigantic rock - stone , 
 accurately balance upon the edge of the cone or miniature crater , like 
 a half - crown on the rim of a wine - glass ; for , in the fierce light that 
 play upon it and we , we could see it oscillate in the gust of wind . 

 " quick ! " say Ayesha ; " the plank - we must cross while the light endure ; 
 presently it will be go . " 

 " oh , Lord , sir ! " groan Job , ' surely she do not   mean we to walk across 
 that there place on that there thing , " as in obedience to my direction 
 he push the long board towards I . 

 " that be it , Job , " I halloae in ghastly merriment , though the idea of 
 walk the plank be no pleasanter to I than to he . 

 I push the board on to Ayesha , who deftly run it across the gulf so 
 that one end of it rest on the rock - stone , the other remain on 
 the extremity of the trembling spur . then place her foot upon it to 
 prevent it from be blow away , she turn to I . 

 " since I be last here , oh Holly , " she call , " the support of the 
 move stone hath lessen somewhat , so that I be not certain if it will 
 bear our weight or no . therefore will I cross the first , because no 
 harm will come unto I , " and , without further ado , she trod lightly but 
 firmly across the frail bridge , and in another second be stand safe 
 upon the heaving stone . 

 " it be safe , " she call . " see , hold thou the plank ! I will stand on 
 the farth side of the stone so that it may not overbalance with your 
 great weight . now , come , oh Holly , for presently the light will fail 
 we . " 

 I struggle to my knee , and if ever I feel terrified in my life it be 
 then , and I be not ashamed to say that I hesitate and hang back . 

 " surely thou art not afraid , " this strange creature call in a lull of 
 the gale , from where she stand poise like a bird on the high point 
 of the rock - stone . " make way then for Kallikrates . " 

 this settle I ; it be well to fall down a precipice and die than 
 be laugh at by such a woman ; so I clench my tooth , and in another 
 instant I be on that horrible , narrow , bend plank , with bottomless 
 space beneath and around I . I have always hat a great height , but 
 never before do I realise the full horror of which such a position be 
 capable . oh , the sicken sensation of that yield board rest on 
 the two moving support . I grow dizzy , and think that I must fall ; 
 my spine creep ; it seem to I that I be fall , and my delight at 
 find myself sprawl upon that stone , which rise and fall beneath I 
 like a boat in a swell , can not be express in word . all I know be that 
 briefly , but earnestly enough , I thank Providence for preserve I so 
 far . 

 then come Leo 's turn , and though he look rather queer , he come across 
 like a rope - dancer . Ayesha stretch out her hand to clasp his own , and 
 I hear she say , " bravely do , my love - bravely do ! the old greek 
 spirit live in thee yet ! " 

 and now only poor Job remain on the farth side of the gulf . he creep 
 up to the plank , and yell out , " I can not   do it , sir . I shall fall into 
 that beastly place . " 

 " you must , " I remember say with inappropriate facetiousness - " you 
 must , Job , it be as easy as catch fly . " I suppose that I must 
 have say it to satisfy my conscience , because although the expression 
 convey a wonderful idea of facility , as a matter of fact I know no more 
 difficult operation in the whole world than catch fly - that be , in 
 warm weather , unless , indeed , it be catch mosquito . 

 " I can not , sir - I can not , indeed . " 

 " let the man come , or let he stop and perish there . see , the light be 
 die ! in a moment it will be go ! " say Ayesha . 

 I look . she be right . the sun be pass below the level of the hole 
 or cleft in the precipice through which the ray reach we . 

 " if you stop there , Job , you will die alone , " I call ; " the light be 
 go . " 

 " come , be a man , Job , " roar Leo ; " it be quite easy . " 

 thus adjure , the miserable Job , with a most awful yell , precipitate 
 himself face downward on the plank - he do not dare , small blame to 
 he , to try to walk it , and commence to draw himself across in little 
 jerk , his poor leg hang down on either side into the nothingness 
 beneath . 

 his violent jerk at the frail board make the great stone , which be 
 only balanced on a few inch of rock , oscillate in a most dreadful 
 manner , and , to make matter bad , when he be half - way across the 
 fly ray of lurid light suddenly go out , just as though a lamp 
 have be extinguish in a curtain room , leave the whole howling 
 wilderness of air black with darkness . 

 " come on , Job , for God 's sake ! " I shout in an agony of fear , while the 
 stone , gather motion with every swing , rock so violently that it 
 be difficult to hang on to it . it be a truly awful position . 

 " Lord have mercy on I ! " cry poor Job from the darkness . " oh , the 
 plank 's slip ! " and I hear a violent struggle , and think that he 
 be go . 

 but at that moment his outstretched hand , clasp in agony at the 
 air , meet my own , and I haul - ah , how I do haul , put out all 
 the strength that it have please Providence to give I in such 
 abundance - and to my joy in another minute Job be gasp on the rock 
 beside I . but the plank ! I feel it slip , and hear it knock against a 
 project knob of rock , and it be go . 

 " great heaven ! " I exclaim . " how be we go to get back ? " 

 " I do not   know , " answer Leo , out of the gloom . " ' sufficient to the day 
 be the evil thereof , ' I be thankful enough to be here . " 

 but Ayesha merely call to I to take her hand and creep after she . 



 XXV 

 the spirit of life 

 I do as I be bid , and in fear and trembling feel myself guide over 
 the edge of the stone . I sprawl my leg out , but could touch nothing . 

 " I be go to fall ! " I gasp . 

 " Nay , let thyself go , and trust to I , " answer Ayesha . 

 now , if the position be consider , it will be easily understand that 
 this be a great demand upon my confidence than be justify by my 
 knowledge of Ayesha 's character . for all I know she might be in the very 
 act of consign I to a horrible doom . but in life we sometimes have 
 to lay our faith upon strange altar , and so it be now . 

 " let thyself go ! " she cry , and , have no choice , I do . 

 I feel myself slide a pace or two down the slop surface of the rock , 
 and then pass into the air , and the thought flash through my brain 
 that I be lose . but no ! in another instant my foot strike against a 
 rocky floor , and I feel that I be stand upon something solid , and 
 out of reach of the wind , which I could hear sing away overhead . as 
 I stand there thank Heaven for these small mercy , there be a slip 
 and a scuffle , and down come Leo alongside of I . 

 " Hulloa , old fellow ! " he call out , " be you there ? this be get 
 interesting , be it not ? " 

 just then , with a terrific yell , Job arrive right on the top of we , 
 knock we both down . by the time we have struggle to our foot again 
 Ayesha be stand among we , and bid we light the lamp , which 
 fortunately remain uninjured , as also do the spare jar of oil . 

 I get out my box of wax match , and they strike as merrily , there , in 
 that awful place , as they could have do in a London drawing - room . 

 in a couple of minute both the lamp be alight and reveal a curious 
 scene . we be huddle together in a rocky chamber , some ten foot 
 square , and scar enough we look ; that be , except Ayesha , who be 
 stand calmly with her arm fold , and wait for the lamp to burn 
 up . the chamber appear to be partly natural , and partly hollow out 
 of the top of the cone . the roof of the natural part be form of the 
 swing stone , and that of the back part of the chamber , which slop 
 downward , be hew from the live rock . for the rest , the place be warm 
 and dry - a perfect haven of rest compare to the giddy pinnacle above , 
 and the quivering spur that shoot out to meet it in mid - air . 

 " so ! " say she , ' safely have we come , though once I fear that 
 the rock stone would fall with you , and precipitate you into the 
 bottomless depth beneath , for I do believe that the cleft goeth down 
 to the very womb of the world . the rock whereon the stone resteth hath 
 crumble beneath the swing weight . and now that he , " nod towards 
 Job , who be sit on the floor , feebly wipe his forehead with a red 
 cotton pocket - handkerchief , " whom they rightly call the ' Pig , ' for as a 
 pig be he stupid , hath let fall the plank , it will not be easy to return 
 across the gulf , and to that end must I make a plan . but now rest a 
 while , and look upon this place . what think ye that it be ? " 

 " we know not , " I answer . 

 " wouldst thou believe , oh Holly , that once a man do choose this airy 
 nest for a daily habitation , and do here endure for many year ; leave 
 it only but one day in every twelve to seek food and water and oil that 
 the people bring , more than he could carry , and lay as an offering in 
 the mouth of the tunnel through which we pass hither ? " 

 we look up wonderingly , and she continue - 

 " yet so it be . there be a man - Noot , he name himself - who , though 
 he live in the latter day , have of the wisdom of the son of K"r . a 
 hermit be he , and a philosopher , and greatly skilled in the secret 
 of Nature , and he it be who discover the fire that I shall show you , 
 which be Nature 's blood and life , and also that he who bath therein , 
 and breathe thereof , should live while nature live . but like unto 
 thee , oh Holly , this man , Noot , would not turn his knowledge to account . 
 ' Ill , ' he say , ' be it for man to live , for man be bear to die . ' 
 therefore do he tell his secret to none , and therefore do he come and 
 live here , where the seeker after Life must pass , and be revere of 
 the Amahagger of the day as holy , and a hermit . and when first I come to 
 this country - know thou how I come , Kallikrates ? another time I will 
 tell thee , for it be a strange tale - I hear of this philosopher , and 
 wait for he when he come to fetch his food , and return with he 
 hither , though greatly do I fear to tread the gulf . then do I beguile 
 he with my beauty and my wit , and flatter he with my tongue , so that 
 he lead I down and show I the fire , and tell I the secret of the 
 Fire , but he would not suffer I to step therein , and , fear lest he 
 should slay I , I refrain , know that the man be very old , and soon 
 would die . and I return , have learn from he all that he know of 
 the wonderful Spirit of the World , and that be much , for the man 
 be wise and very ancient , and by purity and abstinence , and the 
 contemplation of his innocent mind , have wear thin the veil between that 
 which we see and the great invisible truth , the whisper of whose wing 
 at time we hear as they sweep through the gross air of the world . 
 then - it be but a very few day after , I meet thee , my Kallikrates , 
 who hadst wander hither with the beautiful Egyptian Amenartas , and I 
 learn to love for the first and last time , once and for ever , so that 
 it enter into my mind to come hither with thee , and receive the gift 
 of Life for thee and I . therefore come we , with that Egyptian who would 
 not be leave behind , and , behold , we find the old man Noot lie but 
 newly dead . there he lay , and his white beard cover he like a 
 garment , " and she point to a spot near where I be sit ; " but 
 surely he hath long since crumble into dust , and the wind hath bear 
 his ash hence . " 

 here I put out my hand and feel in the dust , and presently my finger 
 touch something . it be a human tooth , very yellow , but sound . I hold 
 it up and show it to Ayesha , who laugh . 

 " yes , " she say , " it be his without a doubt . behold what remaineth of 
 Noot , and the wisdom of Noot - one little tooth ! and yet that man have all 
 life at his command , and for his conscience ' sake would have none of 
 it . well , he lie there newly dead , and we descend whither I shall lead 
 you , and then , gather up all my courage , and court death that 
 I might perchance win so glorious a crown of life , I step into the 
 flame , and behold ! life such as ye can never know until ye feel it 
 also , flow into I , and I come forth undye , and lovely beyond 
 imagining . then do I stretch out mine arm to thee , Kallikrates , 
 and bid thee take thine immortal bride , and behold , as I speak , thou , 
 blind by my beauty , didst turn from I , and throw thine arm about the 
 neck of Amenartas . and then a great fury fill I , and make I mad , 
 and I seize the javelin that thou didst bear , and stab thee , so that 
 there , at my very foot , in the place of life , thou didst groan and go 
 down into death . I know not then that I have strength to slay with mine 
 eye and by the power of my will , therefore in my madness slew I with 
 the javelin .   

      it will be observe that Ayesha 's account of the death 
  of Kallikrates differ materially from that write on the 
  potsherd by Amenartas . the writing on the sherd say , " then 
  in her rage do she smite he by her magic , and he die . " 
  we never ascertain which be the correct version , but it 
  will be remember that the body of Kallikrates have a spear- 
  wound in the breast , which seem conclusive , unless , indeed , 
  it be inflict after death . another thing that we never 
  ascertain be how the two woman - she and the Egyptian 
  Amenartas - be able to bear the corpse of the man they both 
  love across the dread gulf and along the shake spur . what 
  a spectacle the two distracted creature must have present 
  in their grief and loveliness as they toil along that 
  awful place with the dead man between they ! probably however 
  the passage be easy then . - L. H. H. 

 " and when thou wast dead , ah ! I weep , because I be undying and thou 
 wast dead . I weep there in the place of life so that have I be mortal 
 any more my heart have surely break . and she , the swart Egyptian - she 
 curse I by her god . by Osiris do she curse I and by isis , by 
 Nephthys and by Anubis , by Sekhet , the cat - head , and by Set , call 
 down evil on I , evil and everlasting desolation . ah ! I can see her dark 
 face now lower o'er I like a storm , but she could not hurt I , and 
 I - I know not if I could hurt she . I do not try ; it be naught to I 
 then ; so together we bear thee hence . and afterwards I send she - the 
 Egyptian - away through the swamp , and it seem that she live to bear 
 a son and to write the tale that should lead thee , her husband , back to 
 I , her rival and thy murderess . 

 " such be the tale , my love , and now be the hour at hand that shall set 
 a crown upon it . like all thing on the earth , it be compound of evil 
 and of good - more of evil than of good , perchance ; and writ in letter 
 of blood . it be the truth ; naught have I hide from thee , Kallikrates . 
 and now one thing before the final moment of thy trial . we go down 
 into the presence of death , for Life and death be very near together , 
 and - who knoweth ? - that might happen which should separate we for 
 another space of wait . I be but a woman , and no prophetess , and I 
 can not read the future . but this I know - for I learn it from the 
 lip of the wise man Noot - that my life be but prolong and make more 
 bright . it can not live for aye . therefore , before we go , tell I , oh 
 Kallikrates , that of a truth thou dost forgive I , and dost love I from 
 thy heart . see , Kallikrates : much evil have I do - perchance it be 
 evil but two night ago to strike that girl who love thee cold in 
 death - but she disobey I and anger I , prophesy misfortune to 
 I , and I smote . be careful when power come to thee also , lest thou 
 too shouldst smite in thine anger or thy jealousy , for unconquerable 
 strength be a sore weapon in the hand of err man . yea , I have 
 sin - out of the bitterness bear of a great love have I sin - but 
 yet do I know the good from the evil , nor be my heart altogether 
 harden . Thy love , Kallikrates , shall be the gate of my redemption , 
 even as aforetime my passion be the path down which I run to evil . for 
 deep love unsatisfie be the hell of noble heart and a portion of the 
 accursed , but love that be mirror back more perfect from the soul of 
 our desire doth fashion wing to lift we above ourselves , and make we 
 what we might be . therefore , Kallikrates , take I by the hand , and lift 
 my veil with no more fear than though I be some peasant girl , and not 
 the wise and most beauteous woman in this wide world , and look I in 
 the eye , and tell I that thou dost forgive I with all thine heart , 
 and that will all thine heart thou dost worship I . " 

 she pause , and the strange tenderness in her voice seem to hover 
 round we like a memory . I know that the sound of it move I more even 
 than her word , it be so very human - so very womanly . Leo , too , be 
 strangely touch . Hitherto he have be fascinate against his well 
 judgment , something as a bird be fascinate by a snake , but now I think 
 that all this pass away , and he realise that he really love this 
 strange and glorious creature , as , alas ! I love she also . at any rate , 
 I see his eye fill with tear , and he step swiftly to she and undo 
 the gauzy veil , and then take she by the hand , and , gaze into her deep 
 eye , say aloud - 

 " Ayesha , I love thee with all my heart , and so far as forgiveness be 
 possible I forgive thee the death of Ustane . for the rest , it be between 
 thee and thy Maker ; I know naught of it . I only know that I love thee as 
 I never love before , and that I will cleave to thee to the end . " 

 " now , " answer Ayesha , with proud humility - " now when my lord doth 
 speak thus royally and give with so free a hand , it can not become I to 
 lag behind in word , and be beggar of my generosity . Behold ! " and she 
 take his hand and place it upon her shapely head , and then bent herself 
 slowly down till one knee for an instant touch the ground - " Behold ! in 
 token of submission do I bow I to my lord ! Behold ! " and she kiss he 
 on the lip , " in token of my wifely love do I kiss my lord . Behold ! " 
 and she lay her hand upon his heart , " by the sin I sin , by my lonely 
 century of wait wherewith it be wipe out , by the great love 
 wherewith I love , and by the Spirit - the Eternal Thing that doth beget 
 all life , from whom it ebb , to whom it doth return again - I swear : - 

 " I swear , even in this most holy hour of complete Womanhood , that I 
 will abandon evil and cherish Good . I swear that I will be ever guide 
 by thy voice in the straight path of Duty . I swear that I will eschew 
 Ambition , and through all my length of endless day set Wisdom over I 
 as a guide star to lead I unto Truth and a knowledge of the right . 
 I swear also that I will honour and will cherish thee , Kallikrates , who 
 hast be sweep by the wave of time back into my arm , ay , till the very 
 end , come it soon or late . I swear - nay , I will swear no more , for what 
 be word ? yet shalt thou learn that Ayesha hath no false tongue . 

 " so I have swear , and thou , my Holly , art witness to my oath . here , too , 
 be we we d , my husband , with the gloom for bridal canopy - we d till the 
 end of all thing ; here do we write our marriage vow upon the rushing 
 wind which shall bear they up to heaven , and round and continually 
 round this rolling world . 

 " and for a bridal gift I crown thee with my beauty 's starry crown , and 
 endure life , and wisdom without measure , and wealth that none can 
 count . Behold ! the great one of the earth shall creep about thy foot , 
 and its fair woman shall cover up their eye because of the shin 
 glory of thy countenance , and its wise one shall be abase before thee . 
 thou shalt read the heart of man as an open writing , and hither and 
 thither shalt thou lead they as thy pleasure listeth . like that old 
 Sphinx of Egypt shalt thou sit aloft from age to age , and ever shall 
 they cry to thee to solve the riddle of thy greatness that doth not pass 
 away , and ever shalt thou mock they with thy silence ! 

 " Behold ! once more I kiss thee , and by that kiss I give to thee dominion 
 over sea and earth , over the peasant in his hovel , over the monarch in 
 his palace hall , and city crown with tower , and those who breathe 
 therein . Where'er the sun shake out his spear , and the lonesome water 
 mirror up the moon , where'er storm roll , and Heaven 's paint bow arch 
 in the sky - from the pure North clothe in snow , across the middle space 
 of the world , to where the amorous South , lie like a bride upon her 
 blue couch of sea , breathe in sigh make sweet with the odour of 
 myrtle - there shall thy power pass and thy dominion find a home . nor 
 sickness , nor icy - finger fear , nor sorrow , and pale waste of form and 
 mind hover ever o'er humanity , shall so much as shadow thee with the 
 shadow of their wing . as a God shalt thou be , hold good and evil in 
 the hollow of thy hand , and I , even I , I humble myself before thee . 
 such be the power of love , and such be the bridal gift I give unto thee , 
 Kallikrates , my Lord and Lord of All . 

 " and now it be do ; now for thee I loose my virgin zone ; and come 
 storm , come shine , come good , come evil , come life , come death , it 
 never , never can be undo . for , of a truth , that which be , be , and , 
 be do , be do for aye , and can not be alter . I have say - let we 
 hence , that all thing may be accomplish in their order ; " and , take 
 one of the lamp , she advance towards the end of the chamber that be 
 roof in by the sway stone , where she halt . 

 we follow she , and perceive that in the wall of the cone there be a 
 stair , or , to be more accurate , that some project knob of rock have 
 be so shaped as to form a good imitation of a stair . down this Ayesha 
 begin to climb , spring from step to step , like a chamois , and after 
 she we follow with less grace . when we have descend some fifteen 
 or sixteen step we find that they end in a tremendous rocky slope , 
 run first outward and then inwards - like the slope of an invert 
 cone , or tunnel . the slope be very steep , and often precipitous , but 
 it be nowhere impassable , and by the light of the lamp we go down it 
 with no great difficulty , though it be gloomy work enough travel on 
 thus , no one of we know whither , into the dead heart of a volcano . as 
 we go , however , I take the precaution of note our route as well as 
 I could ; and this be not so very difficult , owe to the extraordinary 
 and most fantastic shape of the rock that be strew about , many of 
 which in that dim light look more like the grim face carven upon 
 mediæval gargoyle than ordinary boulder . 

 for a long time we travel on thus , half an hour I should say , till , 
 after we have descend for many hundred of foot , I perceive that we 
 be reach the point of the invert cone . in another minute we be 
 there , and find that at the very apex of the funnel be a passage , so 
 low and narrow that we have to stoop as we creep along it in indian file . 
 after some fifty yard of this creeping , the passage suddenly widen 
 into a cave , so huge that we could see neither the roof nor the side . 
 we only know that it be a cave by the echo of our tread and the perfect 
 quiet of the heavy air . on we go for many minute in absolute awed 
 silence , like lose soul in the depth of Hades , Ayesha 's white and 
 ghost - like form flit in front of we , till once more the place end 
 in a passage which open into a second cavern much small than the 
 first . indeed , we could clearly make out the arch and stony bank of 
 this second cave , and , from their rent and jagged appearance , discover 
 that , like the first long passage down which we have pass through the 
 cliff before we reach the quivering spur , it have , to all appearance , 
 be tear in the bowel of the rock by the terrific force of some 
 explosive gas . at length this cave end in a third passage , through 
 which gleam a faint glow of light . 

 I hear Ayesha give a sigh of relief as this light dawn upon we . 

 " it be well , " she say ; " prepare to enter the very womb of the Earth , 
 wherein she doth conceive the life that ye see bring forth in man and 
 beast - ay , and in every tree and flower . " 

 swiftly she speed along , and after she we stumble as well we might , our 
 heart fill like a cup with mingled dread and curiosity . what be we 
 about to see ? we pass down the tunnel ; strong and strong the light 
 beam , reach we in great flash like the ray from a lighthouse , as 
 one by one they be throw wide upon the darkness of the water . nor be 
 this all , for with the flash come a soul - shake sound like that of 
 thunder and of crash tree . now we be through it , and - oh heaven ! 

 we stand in a third cavern , some fifty foot in length by perhaps as 
 great a height , and thirty wide . it be carpet with fine white sand , 
 and its wall have be wear smooth by the action of I know not what . the 
 cavern be not dark like the other , it be fill with a soft glow of 
 rise - colour light , more beautiful to look on than anything that can 
 be conceive . but at first we see no flash , and hear no more of the 
 thunderous sound . presently , however , as we stand in amaze , gaze at 
 the marvellous sight , and wonder whence the rosy radiance flow , a 
 dread and beautiful thing happen . across the far end of the 
 cavern , with a grind and crash noise - a noise so dreadful and 
 awe - inspiring that we all tremble , and Job actually sink to his 
 knee - there flame out an awful cloud or pillar of fire , like a rainbow 
 many - colour , and like the lightning bright . for a space , perhaps forty 
 second , it flame and roar thus , turn slowly round and round , and 
 then by degree the terrible noise cease , and with the fire it pass 
 away - I know not where - leave behind it the same rosy glow that we have 
 first see . 

 " draw near , draw near ! " cry Ayesha , with a voice of thrilling 
 exultation . " behold the very Fountain and Heart of Life as it beat in 
 the bosom of the great world . behold the substance from which all thing 
 draw their energy , the bright Spirit of the Globe , without which it 
 can not live , but must grow cold and dead as the dead moon . draw near , 
 and wash you in the living flame , and take their virtue into your poor 
 frame in all its virgin strength - not as it now feebly glow within 
 your bosom , filter thereto through all the fine strainer of a 
 thousand intermediate life , but as it be here in the very fount and 
 seat of earthly being . " 

 we follow she through the rosy glow up to the head of the cave , till 
 at last we stand before the spot where the great pulse beat and the 
 great flame pass . and as we go we become sensible of a wild and 
 splendid exhilaration , of a glorious sense of such a fierce intensity of 
 Life that the most buoyant moment of our strength seem flat and tame 
 and feeble beside it . it be the mere effluvium of the flame , the subtle 
 ether that it cast off as it pass , work on we , and make we feel 
 strong as giant and swift as eagle . 

 we reach the head of the cave , and gaze at each other in the glorious 
 glow , and laugh aloud - even Job laugh , and he have not laugh for a 
 week - in the lightness of our heart and the divine intoxication of our 
 brain . I know that I feel as though all the varied genius of which the 
 human intellect be capable have descend upon I . I could have speak 
 in blank verse of shakesperian beauty , all sort of great idea flash 
 through my mind ; it be as though the bond of my flesh have be 
 loosen and leave the spirit free to soar to the empyrean of its native 
 power . the sensation that pour in upon I be indescribable . I seem 
 to live more keenly , to reach to a high joy , and sip the goblet of a 
 subtler think than ever it have be my lot to do before . I be another 
 and most glorify self , and all the avenue of the possible be for a 
 space lay open to the footstep of the Real . 

 then , suddenly , whilst I rejoice in this splendid vigour of a new - find 
 self , from far , far away there come a dreadful muttering noise , that 
 grow and grow to a crash and a roar , which combine in itself all that 
 be terrible and yet splendid in the possibility of sound . Nearer it 
 come , and nearer yet , till it be close upon we , roll down like all 
 the thunder - wheel of heaven behind the horse of the lightning . on 
 it come , and with it come the glorious blinding cloud of many - colour 
 light , and stand before we for a space , turn , as it seem to we , 
 slowly round and round , and then , accompany by its attendant pomp of 
 sound , pass away I know not whither . 

 so astonishing be the wondrous sight that one and all of we , save 
  she , who stand up and stretch her hand towards the fire , sink down 
 before it , and hide our face in the sand . 

 when it be go , Ayesha speak . 

 " now , Kallikrates , " she say , " the mighty moment be at hand . when the 
 great flame come again thou must stand in it . first throw aside thy 
 garment , for it will burn they , though thee it will not hurt . Thou must 
 stand in the flame while thy sens will endure , and when it embrace 
 thee suck the fire down into thy very heart , and let it leap and play 
 around thy every part , so that thou lose no moiety of its virtue . 
 hear thou I , Kallikrates ? " 

 " I hear thee , Ayesha , " answer Leo , " but , of a truth - I be no 
 coward - but I doubt I of that rag flame . how know I that it will 
 not utterly destroy I , so that I lose myself and lose thee also ? 
 nevertheless will I do it , " he add . 

 Ayesha think for a minute , and then say - 

 " it be not wonderful that thou shouldst doubt . tell I , Kallikrates : 
 if thou se I stand in the flame and come forth unharmed , wilt thou 
 enter also ? " 

 " yes , " he answer , " I will enter even if it slay I . I have say that I 
 will enter now . " 

 " and that will I also , " I cry . 

 " what , my Holly ! " she laugh aloud ; " methought that thou wouldst naught 
 of length of day . why , how be this ? " 

 " Nay , I know not , " I answer , " but there be that in my heart that 
 calleth I to taste of the flame and live . " 

 " it be well , " she say . " thou art not altogether lose in folly . see now , 
 I will for the second time bathe I in this living bath . fain would I 
 add to my beauty and my length of day if that be possible . if it be not 
 possible , at the least it can not harm I . 

 " also , " she continue , after a momentary pause , " be there another and 
 a deep cause why I would once again dip I in the flame . when first I 
 taste of its virtue full be my heart of passion and of hatred of 
 that Egyptian Amenartas , and therefore , despite my striving to be rid 
 thereof , have passion and hatred be stamp upon my soul from that sad 
 hour to this . but now it be otherwise . now be my mood a happy mood , and 
 fill be I with the pure part of thought , and so would I ever be . 
 therefore , Kallikrates , will I once more wash and make I pure and 
 clean , and yet more fit for thee . therefore also , when thou dost in turn 
 stand in the fire , empty all thy heart of evil , and let soft contentment 
 hold the balance of thy mind . shake loose thy spirit 's wing , and take 
 thy stand upon the utter verge of holy contemplation ; ay , dream upon thy 
 mother 's kiss , and turn thee towards the vision of the high good that 
 hath ever sweep on silver wing across the silence of thy dream . for 
 from the germ of what thou art in that dread moment shall grow the fruit 
 of what thou shalt be for all unreckoned time . 

 " now prepare thee , prepare ! even as though thy last hour be at hand , 
 and thou wast to cross to the Land of Shadows , and not through the Gates 
 of glory into the realm of Life make beautiful . Prepare , I say ! " 



 XXVI 

 what we see 

 then come a few moment ' pause , during which Ayesha seem to be 
 gather up her strength for the fiery trial , while we cling to each 
 other , and wait in utter silence . 

 at last , from far far away , come the first murmur of sound , that grow 
 and grow till it begin to crash and bellow in the distance . as she hear 
 it , Ayesha swiftly throw off her gauzy wrap , loosen the golden 
 snake from her kirtle , and then , shake her lovely hair about she like 
 a garment , beneath its cover slip the kirtle off and replace the 
 snaky belt around she and outside the mass of her fall hair . there 
 she stand before we as Eve might have stand before Adam , clothe in nothing 
 but her abundant lock , hold round she by the golden band ; and no word 
 of mine can tell how sweet she look - and yet how divine . Nearer and 
 nearer come the thunder - wheel of fire , and as they come she push one 
 ivory arm through the dark mass of her hair and fling it round Leo 's 
 neck . 

 " oh , my love , my love ! " she murmur , " wilt thou ever know how I have 
 love thee ? " and she kiss he on the forehead , and then go and stand 
 in the pathway of the flame of Life . 

 there be , I remember , to my mind something very touch about her 
 word and that embrace upon the forehead . it be like a mother 's kiss , 
 and seem to convey a benediction with it . 

 on come the crash , rolling noise , and the sound of it be as the 
 sound of a forest be sweep flat by a mighty wind , and then toss 
 up like so much grass , and thunder down a mountain - side . Nearer and 
 near it come ; now flash of light , forerunner of the revolving 
 pillar of flame , be pass like arrow through the rosy air ; and now 
 the edge of the pillar itself appear . Ayesha turn towards it , and 
 stretch out her arm to greet it . on it come very slowly , and lap 
 her round with flame . I see the fire run up her form . I see she lift it 
 with both hand as though it be water , and pour it over her head . I 
 even see she open her mouth and draw it down into her lung , and a dread 
 and wonderful sight it be . 

 then she pause , and stretch out her arm , and stand there quite 
 still , with a heavenly smile upon her face , as though she be the very 
 Spirit of the Flame . 

 the mysterious fire play up and down her dark and rolling lock , 
 twining and twist itself through and around they like thread of 
 golden lace ; it gleam upon her ivory breast and shoulder , from which 
 the hair have slip aside ; it slide along her pillare throat and 
 delicate feature , and seem to find a home in the glorious eye that 
 shine and shine , more brightly even than the spiritual essence . 

 oh , how beautiful she look there in the flame ! no angel out of heaven 
 could have wear a great loveliness . even now my heart faint before 
 the recollection of it , as she stand and smile at our awed face , and 
 I would give half my remain time upon this earth to see she once like 
 that again . 

 but suddenly - more suddenly than I can describe - a kind of change come 
 over her face , a change which I could not define or explain , but none 
 the less a change . the smile vanish , and in its place there come a 
 dry , hard look ; the rounded face seem to grow pinch , as though some 
 great anxiety be leave its impress upon it . the glorious eye , too , 
 lose their light , and , as I think , the form its perfect shape and 
 erectness . 

 I rub my eye , think that I be the victim of some hallucination , 
 or that the refraction from the intense light produce an optical 
 delusion ; and , as I do so , the flame pillar slowly twist and 
 thunder off whithersoever it pass to in the bowel of the great 
 earth , leave Ayesha stand where it have be . 

 as soon as it be go , she step forward to Leo 's side - it seem to 
 I that there be no spring in her step - and stretch out her hand 
 to lay it on his shoulder . I gaze at her arm . where be its wonderful 
 roundness and beauty ? it be get thin and angular . and her face - by 
 Heaven ! - her face be grow old before my eye ! I suppose that Leo 
 see it also ; certainly he recoil a step or two . 

 " what be it , my Kallikrates ? " she say , and her voice - what be the 
 matter with those deep and thrilling note ? they be quite high and 
 crack . 

 " why , what be it - what be it ? " she say confusedly . " I feel daze . 
 surely the quality of the fire hath not alter . can the principle of 
 Life alter ? tell I , Kallikrates , be there aught wrong with my eye ? 
 I see not clear , " and she put her hand to her head and touch she 
 hair - and oh , horror of horror ! - it all fall upon the floor . 

 " oh , look ! - look ! - look ! " shriek Job , in a shrill falsetto of 
 terror , his eye nearly drop out of his head , and foam upon his 
 lip . " look ! - look ! - look ! she be shrivel up ! she be turn into 
 a monkey ! " and down he fall upon the ground , foaming and gnashing in a 
 fit . 

 true enough - I faint even as I write it in the live presence of that 
 terrible recollection - she be shrivel up ; the golden snake that 
 have encircle her gracious form slip over her hip and to the ground ; 
 small and small she grow ; her skin change colour , and in place of 
 the perfect whiteness of its lustre it turn dirty brown and yellow , 
 like an piece of withered parchment . she feel at her head : the 
 delicate hand be nothing but a claw now , a human talon like that of a 
 badly - preserve egyptian mummy , and then she seem to realise what kind 
 of change be pass over she , and she shriek - ah , she shriek ! - she 
 roll upon the floor and shriek ! 

 small she grow , and small yet , till she be no large than a monkey . 
 now the skin be pucker into a million wrinkle , and on the shapeless 
 face be the stamp of unutterable age . I never see anything like it ; 
 nobody ever see anything like the frightful age that be grave on that 
 fearful countenance , no big now than that of a two - month ' child , 
 though the skull remain the same size , or nearly so , and let all man 
 pray they never may , if they wish to keep their reason . 

 at last she lie still , or only feebly move . she , who but two minute 
 before have gaze upon we the lovely , noblest , most splendid woman the 
 world have ever see , she lie still before we , near the mass of her own 
 dark hair , no large than a big monkey , and hideous - ah , too hideous for 
 word . and yet , think of this - at that very moment I think of it - it 
 be the same woman ! 

 she be die : we see it , and thank God - for while she live she could 
 feel , and what must she have feel ? she raise herself upon her bony 
 hand , and blindly gaze around she , sway her head slowly from side 
 to side as a tortoise do . she could not see , for her whitish eye be 
 cover with a horny film . oh , the horrible pathos of the sight ! but she 
 could still speak . 

 " Kallikrates , " she say in husky , trembling note . " forget I not , 
 kallikrate . have pity on my shame ; I shall come again , and shall once 
 more be beautiful , I swear it - it be true ! oh - h - h - " and she fall 
 upon her face , and be still . 

 on the very spot where more than twenty century before she have slay 
 Kallikrates the priest , she herself fall down and die . 

         

 I know not how long we remain thus . many hour , I suppose . when at 
 last I open my eye , the other two be still outstretche upon 
 the floor . the rosy light yet beam like a celestial dawn , and the 
 thunder - wheel of the Spirit of Life yet roll upon their accustom 
 track , for as I awake the great pillar be pass away . there , too , lay 
 the hideous little monkey frame , cover with crinkle yellow parchment , 
 that once have be the glorious she . alas ! it be no hideous dream - it 
 be an awful and unparalleled fact ! 

 what have happen to bring this shocking change about ? have the nature 
 of the life - give Fire change ? do it , perhaps , from time to time send 
 forth an essence of death instead of an essence of life ? or be it that 
 the frame once charge with its marvellous virtue could bear no more , 
 so that be the process repeat - it matter not at what lapse of 
 time - the two impregnation neutralise each other , and leave the body 
 on which they act as it be before it ever come into contact with the 
 very essence of life ? this , and this alone , would account for the sudden 
 and terrible ageing of Ayesha , as the whole length of her two thousand 
 year take effect upon she . I have not the slight doubt myself but 
 that the frame now lie before I be just what the frame of a woman 
 would be if by any extraordinary mean life could be preserve in she 
 till she at length die at the age of two - and - twenty century . 

 but who can tell what have happen ? there be the fact . often since that 
 awful hour I have reflect that it require no great imagination to see 
 the finger of Providence in the matter . Ayesha lock up in her living 
 tomb wait from age to age for the coming of her lover work but a 
 small change in the order of the World . but Ayesha strong and happy in 
 her love , clothe in immortal youth and goddess beauty , and the wisdom 
 of the century , would have revolutionise society , and even perchance 
 have change the destiny of Mankind . thus she oppose herself against 
 the eternal law , and , strong though she be , by it be sweep back to 
 nothingness - sweep back with shame and hideous mockery ! 

 for some minute I lay faintly turn these terror over in my mind , 
 while my physical strength come back to I , which it quickly do in that 
 buoyant atmosphere . then I bethink I of the other , and stagger 
 to my foot , to see if I could arouse they . but first I take up Ayesha 's 
 kirtle and the gauzy scarf with which she have be will not to hide she 
 dazzle loveliness from the eye of man , and , avert my head so that 
 I might not look upon it , cover up that dreadful relic of the glorious 
 dead , that shocking epitome of human beauty and human life . I do this 
 hurriedly , fear lest Leo should recover , and see it again . 

 then , step over the perfumed mass of dark hair that lie upon the 
 sand , I stoop down by Job , who be lie upon his face , and turn he 
 over . as I do so his arm fall back in a way that I do not like , and 
 which send a chill through I , and I glance sharply at he . one look 
 be enough . our old and faithful servant be dead . his nerve , already 
 shatter by all he have see and undergone , have utterly break down 
 beneath this last dire sight , and he have die of terror , or in a fit 
 bring on by terror . I have only to look at his face to see it . 

 it be another blow ; but perhaps it may help people to understand how 
 overwhelmingly awful be the experience through which we have pass - we 
 do not feel it much at the time . it seem quite natural that the poor 
 fellow should be dead . when Leo come to himself , which he do with a 
 groan and trembling of the limb about ten minute afterwards , and I 
 tell he that Job be dead , he merely say , " oh ! " and , mind you , this 
 be from no heartlessness , for he and Job be much attach to each 
 other ; and he often talk of he now with the deep regret and 
 affection . it be only that his nerve would bear no more . a harp can 
 give out but a certain quantity of sound , however heavily it be smite . 

 well , I set myself to recover Leo , who , to my infinite relief , I 
 find be not dead , but only faint , and in the end I succeed , as I 
 have say , and he sit up ; and then I see another dreadful thing . when we 
 enter that awful place his curl hair have be of the ruddy gold , 
 now it be turn grey , and by the time we reach the outer air it be 
 snow white . besides , he look twenty year old . 

 " what be to be do , old fellow ? " he say in a hollow , dead sort of 
 voice , when his mind have clear a little , and a recollection of what 
 have happen force itself upon it . 

 " try and get out , I suppose , " I answer ; " that be , unless you would 
 like to go in there , " and I point to the column of fire that be once 
 more rolling by . 

 " I would go in if I be sure that it would kill I , " he say with a 
 little laugh . " it be my cursed hesitation that do this . if I have not 
 be doubtful she might never have try to show I the road . but I be 
 not sure . the fire might have the opposite effect upon I . it might make 
 I immortal ; and , old fellow , I have not the patience to wait a couple 
 of thousand year for she to come back again as she do for I . I have 
 rather die when my hour come - and I should fancy that it be not   far off 
 either - and go my way to look for she . do you go in if you like . " 

 but I merely shake my head , my excitement be as dead as ditch - water , 
 and my distaste for the prolongation of my mortal span have come back 
 upon I more strongly than ever . besides , we neither of we know what the 
 effect of the fire might be . the result upon she have not be of an 
 encouraging nature , and of the exact cause that produce that result we 
 be , of course , ignorant . 

 " well , my boy , " I say , " we can not stop here till we go the way of those 
 two , " and I point to the little heap under the white garment and to 
 the stiffing corpse of poor Job . " if we be go we have well go . but , 
 by the way , I expect that the lamp have burn out , " and I take one up 
 and look at it , and sure enough it have . 

 " there be some more oil in the vase , " say Leo indifferently - " if it be 
 not break , at least . " 

 I examine the vessel in question - it be intact . with a trembling 
 hand I fill the lamp - luckily there be still some of the linen wick 
 unburnt . then I light they with one of our wax match . while I do so 
 we hear the pillar of fire approach once more as it go on its 
 never - end journey , if , indeed , it be the same pillar that pass and 
 repasse in a circle . 

 " let us see it come once more , " say Leo ; " we shall never look upon its 
 like again in this world . " 

 it seem a bit of idle curiosity , but somehow I share it , and so we 
 wait till , turn slowly round upon its own axis , it have flame and 
 thunder by ; and I remember wonder for how many thousand of year 
 this same phenomenon have be take place in the bowel of the earth , 
 and for how many more thousand it would continue to take place . I 
 wonder also if any mortal eye would ever again mark its passage , or 
 any mortal ear be thrill and fascinate by the swell volume of its 
 majestic sound . I do not think that they will . I believe that we be the 
 last human being who will ever see that unearthly sight . presently it 
 have go , and we too turn to go . 

 but before we do so we each take Job 's cold hand in ours and shake it . 
 it be a rather ghastly ceremony , but it be the only mean in our 
 power of show our respect to the faithful dead and of celebrate his 
 obsequie . the heap beneath the white garment we do not uncover . we have 
 no wish to look upon that terrible sight again . but we go to the pile 
 of ripple hair that have fall from she in the agony of that hideous 
 change which be bad than a thousand natural death , and each of we 
 draw from it a shin lock , and these lock we still have , the sole 
 memento that be leave to we of Ayesha as we know she in the fulness of 
 her grace and glory . Leo press the perfumed hair to his lip . 

 " she call to I not to forget she , " he say hoarsely ; " and swear that 
 we should meet again . by Heaven ! I never will forget she . here I swear 
 that if we live to get out of this , I will not for all my day have 
 anything to say to another live woman , and that wherever I go I will 
 wait for she as faithfully as she wait for I . " 

 " yes , " I think to myself , " if she come back as beautiful as we know 
 she . but suppose she come back like that ! "   

      what a terrifying reflection it be , by the way , that 
  nearly all our deep love for woman who be not our kindre 
  depend - at any rate , in the first instance - upon their 
  personal appearance . if we lose they , and find they again 
  dreadful to look on , though otherwise they be the very 
  same , should we still love they ? - L. H. H. 

 Well , and then we go . we go , and leave those two in the presence of 
 the very well and spring of life , but gather to the cold company of 
 Death . how lonely they look as they lie there , and how ill assort ! 
 that little heap have be for two thousand year the wise , lovely , 
 proud creature - I can hardly call her woman - in the whole universe . 
 she have be wicked , too , in her way ; but , alas ! such be the frailty 
 of the human heart , her wickedness have not detract from her charm . 
 indeed , I be by no mean certain that it do not add to it . it be after 
 all of a grand order , there be nothing mean or small about Ayesha . 

 and poor Job too ! his presentiment have come true , and there be an end 
 of he . well , he have a strange burial - place - no Norfolk hind ever have a 
 stranger , or ever will ; and it be something to lie in the same sepulchre 
 as the poor remain of the imperial she . 

 we look our last upon they and the indescribable rosy glow in which 
 they lay , and then with heart far too heavy for word we leave they , and 
 creep thence break - down man - so broken down that we even renounce the 
 chance of practically immortal life , because all that make life valuable 
 have go from we , and we know even then that to prolong our day 
 indefinitely would only be to prolong our suffering . for we feel - yes , 
 both of we - that have once look Ayesha in the eye , we could not 
 forget she for ever and ever while memory and identity remain . we 
 both love she now and for all time , she be stamp and carven on our 
 heart , and no other woman or interest could ever raze that splendid 
 die . and I - there lie the sting - I have and have no right to think thus 
 of she . as she tell I , I be naught to she , and never shall be through 
 the unfathomed depth of Time , unless , indeed , condition alter , and 
 a day come at last when two man may love one woman , and all three be 
 happy in the fact . it be the only hope of my break - heartedness , and a 
 rather faint one . beyond it I have nothing . I have pay down this heavy 
 price , all that I be worth here and hereafter , and that be my sole 
 reward . with Leo it be different , and often and often I bitterly envy 
 he his happy lot , for if she be right , and her wisdom and knowledge 
 do not fail she at the last , which , argue from the precedent of her 
 own case , I think most unlikely , he have some future to look forward to . 
 but I have none , and yet - mark the folly and the weakness of the human 
 heart , and let he who be wise learn wisdom from it - yet I would not 
 have it otherwise . I mean that I be content to give what I have give 
 and must always give , and take in payment those crumb that fall from 
 my mistress 's table , the memory of a few kind word , the hope one day 
 in the far undreame future of a sweet smile or two of recognition , a 
 little gentle friendship , and a little show of thank for my devotion to 
 she - and Leo . 

 if that do not constitute true love , I do not know what do , and all 
 I have to say be that it be a very bad state of affair for a man on the 
 wrong side of middle age to fall into . 



 XXVII 

 we LEAP 

 we pass through the cave without trouble , but when we come to the 
 slope of the invert cone two difficulty star we in the face . the 
 first of these be the laborious nature of the ascent , and the next the 
 extreme difficulty of find our way . indeed , have it not be for the 
 mental note that I have fortunately take of the shape of various rock , 
 I be sure that we never should have manage it at all , but have wander 
 about in the dreadful womb of the volcano - for I suppose it must 
 once have be something of the sort - until we die of exhaustion and 
 despair . as it be we go wrong several time , and once nearly fall 
 into a huge crack or crevasse . it be terrible work creep about 
 in the dense gloom and awful stillness from boulder to boulder , 
 and examine it by the feeble light of the lamp to see if I could 
 recognise its shape . we rarely speak , our heart be too heavy 
 for speech , we simply stumble about , fall sometimes and cut 
 ourselves , in a rather dogged sort of way . the fact be that our spirit 
 be utterly crush , and we do not greatly care what happen to we . 
 only we feel bind to try and save our life whilst we could , and indeed 
 a natural instinct prompt we to it . so for some three or four hour , 
 I should think - I can not tell exactly how long , for we have no watch 
 leave that would go - we blunder on . during the last two hour we be 
 completely lose , and I begin to fear that we have get into the funnel of 
 some subsidiary cone , when at last I suddenly recognise a very large 
 rock which we have pass in descending but a little way from the top . 
 it be a marvel that I should have recognise it , and , indeed , we 
 have already pass it go at right angle to the proper path , when 
 something about it strike I , and I turn back and examine it in an 
 idle sort of way , and , as it happen , this prove our salvation . 

 after this we gain the rocky natural stair without much further 
 trouble , and in due course find ourselves back in the little chamber 
 where the benight Noot have live and die . 

 but now a fresh terror star we in the face . it will be remember that 
 owe to Job 's fear and awkwardness , the plank upon which we have cross 
 from the huge spur to the rock - stone have be whirl off into the 
 tremendous gulf below . 

 how be we to cross without the plank ? 

 there be only one answer - we must try and jump it , or else stop there 
 till we starve . the distance in itself be not so very great , between 
 eleven and twelve foot I should think , and I have see Leo jump over 
 twenty when he be a young fellow at collage ; but then , think of the 
 condition . two weary , wear - out man , one of they on the wrong side of 
 forty , a rock - stone to take off from , a trembling point of rock some 
 few foot across to land upon , and a bottomless gulf to be clear in a 
 rag gale ! it be bad enough , God know , but when I point out these 
 thing to Leo , he put the whole matter in a nutshell , by reply that , 
 merciless as the choice be , we must choose between the certainty of a 
 linger death in the chamber and the risk of a swift one in the air . 
 of course , there be no arguing against this , but one thing be clear , 
 we could not attempt that leap in the dark ; the only thing to do be to 
 wait for the ray of light which pierce through the gulf at sunset . 
 how near to or how far from sunset we might be , neither of we have the 
 faint notion ; all we do know be , that when at last the light come 
 it would not endure more than a couple of minute at the outside , so 
 that we must be prepare to meet it . accordingly , we make up our mind 
 to creep on to the top of the rock - stone and lie there in readiness . 
 we be the more easily reconcile to this course by the fact that our 
 lamp be once more nearly exhausted - indeed , one have go out bodily , 
 and the other be jump up and down as the flame of a lamp do when 
 the oil be do . so , by the aid of its die light , we hasten to crawl 
 out of the little chamber and clamber up the side of the great stone . 

 as we do so the light go out . 

 the difference in our position be a sufficiently remarkable one . 
 below , in the little chamber , we have only hear the roaring of the 
 gale overhead - here , lie on our face on the swing stone , we be 
 expose to its full force and fury , as the great draught draw first from 
 this direction and then from that , howl against the mighty precipice 
 and through the rocky cliff like ten thousand despairing soul . we lay 
 there hour after hour in terror and misery of mind so deep that I will 
 not attempt to describe it , and listen to the wild storm - voice 
 of that Tartarus , as , set to the deep undertone of the spur opposite 
 against which the wind hum like some awful harp , they call to each 
 other from precipice to precipice . no nightmare dream by man , no wild 
 invention of the romancer , can ever equal the live horror of that 
 place , and the weird crying of those voice of the night , as we clung 
 like shipwreck mariner to a raft , and toss on the black , unfathomed 
 wilderness of air . fortunately the temperature be not a low one ; 
 indeed , the wind be warm , or we should have perish . so we clung and 
 listen , and while we be stretch out upon the rock a thing happen 
 which be so curious and suggestive in itself , though doubtless a mere 
 coincidence , that , if anything , it add to , rather than deduct from , 
 the burden on our nerve . 

 it will be remember that when Ayesha be stand on the spur , before 
 we cross to the stone , the wind tear her cloak from she , and whirl 
 it away into the darkness of the gulf , we could not see whither . well - I 
 hardly like to tell the story ; it be so strange . as we lay there upon 
 the rock - stone , this very cloak come float out of the black space , 
 like a memory from the dead , and fall on Leo - so that it cover he 
 nearly from head to foot . we could not at first make out what it be , 
 but soon discover by its feel , and then poor Leo , for the first time , 
 give way , and I hear he sob there upon the stone . no doubt the 
 cloak have be catch upon some pinnacle of the cliff , and be thence 
 blow hither by a chance gust ; but still , it be a most curious and 
 touching incident . 

 shortly after this , suddenly , without the slight previous warning , 
 the great red knife of light come stab the darkness through and 
 through - strike the sway stone on which we be , and rest its sharp 
 point upon the spur opposite . 

 " now for it , " say Leo , " now or never . " 

 we rise and stretch ourselves , and look at the cloud - wreath stain 
 the colour of blood by that red ray as they tear through the sickening 
 depth beneath , and then at the empty space between the sway stone 
 and the quivering rock , and , in our heart , despair , and prepare for 
 death . surely we could not clear it - desperate though we be . 

 " who be to go first ? " say I. 

 " do you , old fellow , " answer Leo . " I will sit upon the other side of 
 the stone to steady it . you must take as much run as you can , and jump 
 high ; and God have mercy on we , say I. " 

 I acquiesce with a nod , and then I do a thing I have never do since 
 Leo be a little boy . I turn and put my arm round he , and kiss he 
 on the forehead . it sound rather french , but as a fact I be take my 
 last farewell of a man whom I could not have love more if he have be 
 my own son twice over . 

 " good - bye , my boy , " I say , " I hope that we shall meet again , wherever 
 it be that we go to . " 

 the fact be I do not expect to live another two minute . 

 next I retreat to the far side of the rock , and wait till one of the 
 chop gust of wind get behind I , and then I run the length of the 
 huge stone , some three or four and thirty foot , and spring wildly out 
 into the dizzy air . oh ! the sicken terror that I feel as I launch 
 myself at that little point of rock , and the horrible sense of despair 
 that shoot through my brain as I realise that I have jump short ! but 
 so it be , my foot never touch the point , they go down into space , 
 only my hand and body come in contact with it . I grip at it with 
 a yell , but one hand slip , and I swing right round , hold by the 
 other , so that I face the stone from which I have spring . wildly I 
 stretch up with my left hand , and this time manage to grasp a knob of 
 rock , and there I hang in the fierce red light , with thousand of foot 
 of empty air beneath I . my hand be hold to either side of 
 the under part of the spur , so that its point be touch my head . 
 therefore , even if I could have find the strength , I could not pull 
 myself up . the most that I could do would be to hang for about a minute , 
 and then drop down , down into the bottomless pit . if any man can imagine 
 a more hideous position , let he speak ! all I know be that the torture 
 of that half - minute nearly turn my brain . 

 I hear Leo give a cry , and then suddenly see he in mid air spring 
 up and out like a chamois . it be a splendid leap that he take under the 
 influence of his terror and despair , clear the horrible gulf as if it 
 be nothing , and , land well on to the rocky point , he throw himself 
 upon his face , to prevent his pitching off into the depth . I feel the 
 spur above I shake beneath the shock of his impact , and as it do so I 
 see the huge rock - stone , that have be violently depressed by he as 
 he sprang , fly back when relieve of his weight till , for the first time 
 during all these century , it get beyond its balance , fall with a 
 most awful crash right into the rocky chamber which have once serve the 
 philosopher Noot for a hermitage , and , I have no doubt , for ever seal 
 the passage that lead to the Place of Life with some hundred of ton 
 of rock . 

 all this happen in a second , and curiously enough , notwithstanding my 
 terrible position , I note it involuntarily , as it be . I even remember 
 think that no human being would go down that dread path again . 

 next instant I feel Leo seize I by the right wrist with both hand . by 
 lie flat on the point of rock he could just reach I . 

 " you must let go and swing yourself clear , " he say in a calm and 
 collect voice , " and then I will try and pull you up , or we will both 
 go together . be you ready ? " 

 by way of answer I let go , first with my left hand and then with the 
 right , and , as a consequence , sway out clear of the overshadow 
 rock , my weight hang upon Leo 's arm . it be a dreadful moment . he 
 be a very powerful man , I know , but would his strength be equal to 
 lift I up till I could get a hold on the top of the spur , when owe 
 to his position he have so little purchase ? 


 for a few second I swing to and fro , while he gather himself for the 
 effort , and then I hear his sinew crack above I , and feel myself 
 lift up as though I be a little child , till I get my left arm round 
 the rock , and my chest be rest on it . the rest be easy ; in two or 
 three more second I be up , and we be lie pant side by side , 
 tremble like leaf , and with the cold perspiration of terror pour 
 from our skin . 

 and then , as before , the light go out like a lamp . 

 for some half - hour we lie thus without speak a word , and then at 
 length begin to creep along the great spur as well we might in the dense 
 gloom . as we draw towards the face of the cliff , however , from which the 
 spur spring out like a spike from a wall , the light increase , though 
 only a very little , for it be night overhead . after that the gust of 
 wind decrease , and we get along rather well , and at last reach the 
 mouth of the first cave or tunnel . but now a fresh trouble star as 
 in the face : our oil be go , and the lamp be , no doubt , crush to 
 powder beneath the fallen rock - stone . we be even without a drop of 
 water to stay our thirst , for we have drink the last in the chamber 
 of Noot . how be we to see to make our way through this last 
 boulder - strew tunnel ? 

 clearly all that we could do be to trust to our sense of feeling , and 
 attempt the passage in the dark , so in we creep , fear that if 
 we delay to do so our exhaustion would overcome we , and we should 
 probably lie down and die where we be . 

 oh , the horror of that last tunnel ! the place be strew with rock , 
 and we fall over they , and knock ourselves up against they till we 
 be bleed from a score of wound . our only guide be the side of 
 the cavern , which we keep touch , and so bewildered do we grow in the 
 darkness that we be several time seize with the terrifying thought 
 that we have turn , and be travel the wrong way . on we go , 
 feebly , and still more feebly , for hour after hour , stop every few 
 minute to rest , for our strength be spend . once we fall asleep , and , I 
 think , must have sleep for some hour , for , when we wake , our limb be 
 quite stiff , and the blood from our blow and scratch have cake , and 
 be hard and dry upon our skin . then we drag ourselves on again , till 
 at last , when despair be enter into our heart , we once more see the 
 light of day , and find ourselves outside the tunnel in the rocky fold 
 on the outer surface of the cliff that , it will be remember , lead into 
 it . 

 it be early morning - that we could tell by the feel of the sweet air 
 and the look of the blessed sky , which we have never hop to see again . 
 it be , so near as we know , an hour after sunset when we enter the 
 tunnel , so it follow that it have take we the entire night to crawl 
 through that dreadful place . 

 " one more effort , Leo , " I gasp , " and we shall reach the slope where 
 Billali be , if he have not   go . come , do not   give way , " for he have cast 
 himself upon his face . he rise , and , lean on each other , we get down 
 that fifty foot or so of cliff - somehow , I have not the least notion 
 how . I only remember that we find ourselves lie in a heap at the 
 bottom , and then once more begin to drag ourselves along on our hand 
 and knee towards the grove where she have tell Billali to wait she 
 re - arrival , for we could not walk another foot . we have not go fifty 
 yard in this fashion when suddenly one of the mute emerge from 
 the tree on our left , through which , I presume , he have be take a 
 morning stroll , and come run up to see what sort of strange animal 
 we be . he star , and star , and then hold up his hand in horror , 
 and nearly fall to the ground . next , he start off as hard as he 
 could for the grove some two hundred yard away . no wonder that he be 
 horrify at our appearance , for we must have be a shocking sight . 
 to begin , Leo , with his golden curl turn a snowy white , his clothe 
 nearly rent from his body , his worn face and his hand a mass of 
 bruise , cut , and blood - encrust filth , be a sufficiently alarming 
 spectacle , as he painfully drag himself along the ground , and I 
 have no doubt that I be little well to look on . I know that two day 
 afterwards when I inspect my face in some water I scarcely recognise 
 myself . I have never be famous for beauty , but there be something 
 beside ugliness stamp upon my feature that I have never get rid 
 of until this day , something resemble that wild look with which a 
 startled person wake from deep sleep more than anything else that I can 
 think of . and really it be not to be wonder at . what I do wonder at be 
 that we escape at all with our reason . 

 presently , to my intense relief , I see old billali hurrying towards 
 we , and even then I could scarcely help smile at the expression of 
 consternation on his dignified countenance . 

 " oh , my Baboon ! my Baboon ! " he cry , " my dear son , be it indeed thee 
 and the Lion ? why , his mane that be ripe as corn be white like 
 the snow . whence come ye ? and where be the Pig , and where too 
  She - who - must - be - obey ? " 

 " dead , both dead , " I answer ; " but ask no question ; help we , and give 
 us food and water , or we too shall die before thine eye . seest thou not 
 that our tongue be black for want of water ? how , then , can we talk ? " 

 " dead ! " he gasp . " impossible . she who never die - dead , how can it 
 be ? " and then , perceive , I think , that his face be be watch by 
 the mute who have come run up , he check himself , and motion to 
 they to carry we to the camp , which they do . 

 fortunately when we arrive some broth be boil on the fire , and with 
 this Billali feed we , for we be too weak to feed ourselves , thereby 
 I firmly believe save we from death by exhaustion . then he bid the 
 mute wash the blood and grime from we with wet cloth , and after that 
 we be lay down upon pile of aromatic grass , and instantly fall into 
 the dead sleep of absolute exhaustion of mind and body . 



 xxviii 

 over the MOUNTAIN 

 the next thing I recollect be a feeling of the most dreadful stiffness , 
 and a sort of vague idea pass through my half - awaken brain that I 
 be a carpet that have just be beat . I open my eye , and the first 
 thing they fall on be the venerable countenance of our old friend 
 Billali , who be seat by the side of the improvise bed upon which I 
 be sleep , and thoughtfully stroke his long beard . the sight of 
 he at once bring back to my mind a recollection of all that we have 
 recently pass through , which be accentuate by the vision of poor 
 Leo lie opposite to I , his face knock almost to a jelly , and his 
 beautiful crowd of curl turn from yellow to white ,     and I shut my 
 eye again and groan . 

      curiously enough , Leo 's hair have lately be to some 
  extent regain its colour - that be to say , it be now a 
  yellowish grey , and I be not without hope that it will in 
  time come quite right . - L. H. H. 

 " Thou hast sleep long , my Baboon , " say old Billali . 

 " how long , my father ? " I ask . 

 " a round of the sun and a round of the moon , a day and a night hast thou 
 sleep , and the Lion also . see , he sleepeth yet . " 

 " blessed be sleep , " I answer , " for it swallow up recollection . " 

 " tell I , " he say , " what hath befall you , and what be this strange 
 story of the death of she who dieth not . bethink thee , my son : if this 
 be true , then be thy danger and the danger of the Lion very great - nay , 
 almost be the pot red wherewith ye shall be pot , and the stomach of 
 those who shall eat ye be already hungry for the feast . know thou 
 not that these Amahagger , my child , these dweller in the cave , 
 hate ye ? they hate ye as stranger , they hate ye more because of their 
 brother whom she put to the torment for your sake . assuredly , if once 
 they learn that there be naught to fear from Hiya , from the terrible 
 one - who - must - be - obey , they will slay ye by the pot . but let I hear 
 thy tale , my poor Baboon . " 

 this adjure , I set to work and tell he - not everything , indeed , for 
 I do not think it desirable to do so , but sufficient for my purpose , 
 which be to make he understand that she be really no more , have 
 fall into some fire , and , as I put it - for the real thing would have 
 be incomprehensible to he - be burn up . I also tell he some of the 
 horror we have undergo in effect our escape , and these produce a 
 great impression on he . but I clearly see that he do not believe in 
 the report of Ayesha 's death . he believe indeed that we think 
 that she be dead , but his explanation be that it have suit she to 
 disappear for a while . once , he say , in his father 's time , she have do 
 so for twelve year , and there be a tradition in the country that many 
 century back no one have see she for a whole generation , when she 
 suddenly reappear , and destroy a woman who have assume the position 
 of Queen . I say nothing to this , but only shake my head sadly . alas ! 
 I know too well that Ayesha would appear no more , or at any rate that 
 Billali would never see she again . 

 " and now , " conclude Billali , " what wouldst thou do , my Baboon ? " 

 " Nay , " I say , " I know not , my father . can we not escape from this 
 country ? " 

 he shake his head . 

 " it be very difficult . by K"r ye can not pass , for ye would be see , 
 and as soon as those fierce one find that ye be alone , well , " and 
 he smile significantly , and make a movement as though he be place a 
 hat on his head . " but there be a way over the cliff whereof I once spake 
 to thee , where they drive the cattle out to pasture . then beyond the 
 pasture be three day ' journey through the marsh , and after that 
 I know not , but I have hear that seven day ' journey from thence be 
 a mighty river , which floweth to the black water . if ye could come 
 thither , perchance ye might escape , but how can ye come thither ? " 

 " Billali , " I say , " once , thou know , I do save thy life . now pay 
 back the debt , my father , and save I mine and my friend 's , the Lion 's . 
 it shall be a pleasant thing for thee to think of when thine hour come , 
 and something to set in the scale against the evil doing of thy day , if 
 perchance thou hast do any evil . also , if thou be right , and if she 
 doth but hide herself , surely when she come again she shall reward 
 thee . " 

 " my son the Baboon , " answer the old man , " think not that I have an 
 ungrateful heart . well do I remember how thou didst rescue I when those 
 dog stand by to see I drown . measure for measure will I give thee , 
 and if thou canst be save , surely I will save thee . listen : by dawn 
 to - morrow be prepare , for litter shall be here to bear ye away across 
 the mountain , and through the marsh beyond . this will I do , say 
 that it be the word of she that it be do , and he who obeyeth not the 
 word of she food be he for the hyæna . then when ye have cross the 
 marsh , ye must strike with your own hand , so that perchance , if good 
 fortune go with you , ye may live to come to that black water whereof ye 
 tell I . and now , see , the Lion wake , and ye must eat the food I have 
 make ready for you . " 

 Leo 's condition when once he be fairly arouse prove not to be so 
 bad as might have be expect from his appearance , and we both of we 
 manage to eat a hearty meal , which indeed we need sadly enough . after 
 this we limp down to the spring and bath , and then come back and 
 sleep again till evening , when we once more eat enough for five . Billali 
 be away all that day , no doubt make arrangement about litter and 
 bearer , for we be awaken in the middle of the night by the arrival 
 of a considerable number of man in the little camp . 

 at dawn the old man himself appear , and tell we that he have by use 
  she be dreadful name , though with some difficulty , succeed in get 
 the necessary man and two guide to conduct we across the swamp , and 
 that he urge we to start at once , at the same time announce his 
 intention of accompany we so as to protect we against treachery . I 
 be much touch by this act of kindness on the part of that wily old 
 barbarian towards two utterly defenceless stranger . a three - or in 
 his case , for he would have to return , six - day ' journey through those 
 deadly swamp be no light undertaking for a man of his age , but he 
 consent to do it cheerfully in order to promote our safety . it show 
 that even among those dreadful Amahagger - who be certainly with their 
 gloom and their devilish and ferocious rite by far the most terrible 
 savage that I ever hear of - there be people with kindly heart . of 
 course , self - interest may have have something to do with it . he may have 
 think that she would suddenly reappear and demand an account of we 
 at his hand , but still , allow for all deduction , it be a great 
 deal more than we could expect under the circumstance , and I can only 
 say that I shall for as long as I live cherish a most affectionate 
 remembrance of my nominal parent , old Billali . 

 accordingly , after swallow some food , we start in the litter , 
 feeling , so far as our body go , wonderfully like our old self 
 after our long rest and sleep . I must leave the condition of our mind 
 to the imagination . 

 then come a terrible pull up the cliff . sometimes the ascent be more 
 natural , more often it be a zig - zag roadway cut , no doubt , in the first 
 instance by the old inhabitant of K"r . the Amahagger say they drive 
 their spare cattle over it once a year to pasture outside ; all I know be 
 that those cattle must be uncommonly active on their foot . of course the 
 litter be useless here , so we have to walk . 

 by midday , however , we reach the great flat top of that mighty wall of 
 rock , and grand enough the view be from it , with the plain of K"r , in 
 the centre of which we could clearly make out the pillare ruin of the 
 Temple of Truth to the one side , and the boundless and melancholy marsh 
 on the other . this wall of rock , which have no doubt once form the lip 
 of the crater , be about a mile and a half thick , and still cover with 
 clinker . nothing grow there , and the only thing to relieve our eye be 
 occasional pool of rain - water   for rain have lately fall   wherever 
 there be a little hollow . over the flat crest of this mighty rampart we 
 go , and then come the descent , which , if not so difficult a matter 
 as the getting up , be still sufficiently break - neck , and take we till 
 sunset . that night , however , we camp in safety upon the mighty slope 
 that roll away to the marsh beneath . 

 on the following morning , about eleven o'clock , begin our dreary journey 
 across those awful sea of swamp which I have already describe . 

 for three whole day , through stench and mire , and the all - prevail 
 flavour of fear , do our bearer struggle along , till at length we come 
 to open roll ground quite uncultivated , and mostly treeless , but 
 cover with game of all sort , which lie beyond that most desolate , 
 and without guide utterly impracticable , district . and here on the 
 follow morning we bade farewell , not without some regret , to old 
 Billali , who stroke his white beard and solemnly bless we . 

 " farewell , my son the Baboon , " he say , " and farewell to thee too , oh 
 Lion . I can do no more to help you . but if ever ye come to your country , 
 be advise , and venture no more into land that ye know not , lest ye 
 come back no more , but leave your white bone to mark the limit of your 
 journeying . farewell once more ; often shall I think of you , nor wilt 
 thou forget I , my Baboon , for though thy face be ugly thy heart be 
 true . " and then he turn and go , and with he go the tall and 
 sullen - look bearer , and that be the last that we see of the 
 Amahagger . we watch they wind away with the empty litter like a 
 procession bear dead man from a battle , till the mist from the marsh 
 gather round they and hide they , and then , leave utterly desolate in the 
 vast wilderness , we turn and gaze round we and at each other . 

 three week or so before four man have enter the marsh of K"r , and 
 now two of we be dead , and the other two have go through adventure 
 and experience so strange and terrible that death himself hath not a 
 more fearful countenance . three week - and only three week ! truly time 
 should be measure by event , and not by the lapse of hour . it seem 
 like thirty year since we see the last of our whale - boat . 

 " we must strike out for the Zambesi , Leo , " I say , " but God know if we 
 shall ever get there . " 

 Leo nod . he have become very silent of late , and we start with 
 nothing but the clothe we stand in , a compass , our revolver and 
 express rifle , and about two hundred round of ammunition , and so end 
 the history of our visit to the ancient ruin of mighty and imperial 
 K"r . 

 as for the adventure that subsequently befell we , strange and varied 
 as they be , I have , after deliberation , determine not to record they 
 here . in these page I have only try to give a short and clear account 
 of an occurrence which I believe to be unprecedented , and this I have 
 do , not with a view to immediate publication , but merely to put 
 on paper while they be yet fresh in our memory the detail of our 
 journey and its result , which will , I believe , prove interesting to 
 the world if ever we determine to make they public . this , as at present 
 advise , we do not intend should be do during our joint life . 

 for the rest , it be of no public interest , resemble as it do the 
 experience of more than one central african traveller . suffice it to 
 say , that we do , after incredible hardship and privation , reach the 
 Zambesi , which prove to be about a hundred and seventy mile south 
 of where Billali leave we . there we be for six month imprison by 
 a savage tribe , who believe we to be supernatural being , chiefly on 
 account of Leo 's youthful face and snow - white hair . from these people we 
 ultimately escape , and , cross the Zambesi , wander off southward , 
 where , when on the point of starvation , we be sufficiently fortunate 
 to fall in with a half - cast portuguese elephant - hunter who have follow 
 a troop of elephant far inland than he have ever be before . this 
 man treat we most hospitably , and ultimately through his assistance 
 we , after innumerable suffering and adventure , reach Delagoa Bay , 
 more than eighteen month from the time when we emerge from the marsh 
 of K"r , and the very next day manage to catch one of the steamboat 
 that run round the Cape to England . our journey home be a prosperous 
 one , and we set our foot on the quay at Southampton exactly two year 
 from the date of our departure upon our wild and seemingly ridiculous 
 quest , and I now write these last word with Leo lean over my 
 shoulder in my old room in my college , the very same into which some 
 two - and - twenty year ago my poor friend Vincey come stumble on the 
 memorable night of his death , bear the iron chest with he . 



 and that be the end of this history so far as it concern science and 
 the outside world . what its end will be as regard Leo and myself be 
 more than I can guess at . but we feel that be not reach yet . a story 
 that begin more than two thousand year ago may stretch a long way into 
 the dim and distant future . 

 be Leo really a reincarnation of the ancient Kallikrates of whom the 
 inscription tell ? or be Ayesha deceive by some strange hereditary 
 resemblance ? the reader must form his own opinion on this as on many 
 other matter . I have mine , which be that she make no such mistake . 

 often I sit alone at night , star with the eye of the mind into the 
 blackness of unborn time , and wonder in what shape and form the great 
 drama will be finally develop , and where the scene of its next act 
 will be lay . and when that final development ultimately occur , as I 
 have no doubt it must and will occur , in obedience to a fate that never 
 swerve and a purpose that can not be alter , what will be the part 
 play therein by that beautiful Egyptian Amenartas , the Princess of the 
 royal race of the Pharaohs , for the love of whom the Priest Kallikrates 
 break his vow to isis , and , pursue by the inexorable vengeance of the 
 outraged Goddess , flee down the coast of Libya to meet his doom at K"r ? 

