 far from the madding crowd 
 by Thomas Hardy , 1874 
 from the Penguin edition , 1978 
 CHAPTER I 
 description of FARMER OAK - AN INCIDENT 
 when Farmer Oak smile , the corner of his mouth 
 spread till they be within an unimportant distance of 
 his ear , his eye be reduce to chink , and diverging 
 wrinkle appear round they , extend upon his 
 countenance like the ray in a rudimentary sketch of 
 the rise sun . 
 his christian name be Gabriel , and on work 
 day he be a young man of sound judgment , easy 
 motion , proper dress , and general good character . on 
 sunday he be a man of misty view , rather give to 
 postpone , and hamper by his good clothe and 
 umbrella : upon the whole , one who feel himself to 
 occupy morally that vast middle space of laodicean 
 neutrality which lie between the Communion people 
 of the parish and the drunken section , - that is , he go 
 to church , but yawn privately by the time the con- 
 gegation reach the Nicene creed,- and think of 
 what there would be for dinner when he mean to be 
 listen to the sermon . or , to state his character as 
 it stand in the scale of public opinion , when his friend 
 and critic be in tantrum , he be consider rather a 
 bad man ; when they be pleased , he be rather a good 
 man ; when they be neither , he be a man whose 
 moral colour be a kind of pepper - and - salt mixture . 
 since he live six time as many working - day as 
 Sundays , Oak 's appearance in his old clothe be most 
 peculiarly his own - the mental picture form by his 
 neighbour in imagine he be always dress in 
 that way . he wear a low - crown feel hat , spread out 
 at the base by tight jamming upon the head for security 
 in high wind , and a coat like Dr. Johnson 's ; his low 
 extremity be encase in ordinary leather legging 
 and boot emphatically large , afford to each foot a 
 roomy apartment so construct that any wearer might 
 stand in a river all day long and know nothing of 
 damp - their maker be a conscientious man who 
 endeavour to compensate for any weakness in his cut 
 by unstinted dimension and solidity . 
 Mr. Oak carry about he , by way of watch,- 
 what may be call a small silver clock ; in other 
 word , it be a watch as to shape and intention , and 
 a small clock as to size . this instrument be several 
 year old than Oak 's grandfather , have the peculiarity 
 of go either too fast or not at all . the small 
 of its hand , too , occasionally slip round on the 
 pivot , and thus , though the minute be tell with 
 precision , nobody could be quite certain of the hour 
 they belong to . the stop peculiarity of his 
 watch Oak remedie by thump and shake , and he 
 escape any evil consequence from the other two 
 defect by constant comparison with and observation 
 of the sun and star , and by press his face close 
 to the glass of his neighbour ' window , till he could 
 discern the hour mark by the green - face timekeeper 
 within . it may be mention that Oak 's fob be 
 difficult of access , by reason of its somewhat high 
 situation in the waistband of his trouser   which also 
 lie at a remote height under his waistcoat , the watch 
 be as a necessity pull out by throw the body to 
 one side , compress the mouth and face to a mere 
 mass of ruddy flesh on account of the exertion , and 
 draw up the watch by its chain , like a bucket from a 
 well . 
 but some thoughtfull person , who have see he 
 walk across one of his field on a certain December 
 morning - sunny and exceedingly mild - might have 
 regard Gabriel Oak in other aspect than these . in 
 his face one might notice that many of the hue and 
 curve of youth have tarry on to manhood : there even 
 remain in his remoter crannie some relic of the boy . 
 his height and breadth would have be sufficient to 
 make his presence impose , have they be exhibit 
 with due consideration . but there be a way some man 
 have , rural and urban alike , for which the mind be more 
 responsible than flesh and sinew : it be a way of curtail- 
 e their dimension by their manner of show they . 
 and from a quiet modesty that would have become a 
 vestal which seem continually to impress upon he 
 that he have no great claim on the world 's room , Oak 
 walk unassumingly and with a faintly perceptible 
 bend , yet distinct from a bowing of the shoulder . 
 this may be say to be a defect in an individual if he 
 depend for his valuation more upon his appearance 
 than upon his capacity to wear well , which Oak do not . 
 he have just reach the time of life at which " young " 
 be cease to be the prefix of " man " in speak of one . 
 he be at the bright period of masculine growth , 
 for his intellect and his emotion be clearly separate : 
 he have pass the time during which the influence of 
 youth indiscriminately mingle they in the character 
 of impulse , and he have not yet arrive at the stage 
 wherein they become united again , in the character of 
 prejudice , by the influence of a wife and family . in 
 short , he be twenty - eight , and a bachelor . 
 the field he be in this morning slop to a 
 ridge call Norcombe Hill . through a spur of this 
 hill run the highway between Emminster and Chalk- 
 Newton . casually glance over the hedge , Oak see 
 come down the incline before he an ornamental 
 spring waggon , paint yellow and gaily mark , 
 draw by two horse , a waggoner walk alongside 
 bear a whip perpendicularly . the waggon be 
 laden with household good and window plant , and 
 on the apex of the whole sit a woman , " young " and 
 attractive . Gabriel have not behold the sight for more 
 than half a minute , when the vehicle be bring to a 
 standstill just beneath his eye . 
 " the tailboard of the waggon be go , Miss. " say the 
 waggoner . 
 " then I hear it fall . " say the girl , in a soft , though 
 not particularly low voice . " I hear a noise I could 
 not account for when we be come up the hill . " 
 " I will run back . " 
 " do . " she answer . 
 the sensible horse stand - perfectly still , and the 
 waggoner 's step sink fainter and fainter in the distance . 
 the girl on the summit of the load sit motionless , 
 surround by table and chair with their leg upwards , 
 back by an oak settle , and ornament in front by 
 pot of geranium , myrtle , and cactus , together with 
 a cage canary - all probably from the window of the 
 house just vacate . there be also a cat in a willow 
 basket , from the partly - open lid of which she gaze 
 with half - close eye , and affectionately - survey the 
 small bird around . 
 the handsome girl wait for some time idly in her 
 place , and the only sound hear in the stillness be the 
 hopping of the canary up - and down the perch of its 
 prison . then she look attentively downwards . it 
 be not at the bird , nor at the cat ; it be at an oblong 
 package tie in paper , and lie between they . she 
 turn her head to learn if the waggoner be come . 
 he be not yet in sight ; and her - eye creep back to 
 the package , her thought seem to run upon what 
 be inside it . at length she draw the article into her 
 lap , and untie the paper covering ; a small swing 
 look - glass be disclose , in which she proceed to 
 survey herself attentively . she part her lip and 
 smile . 
 it be a fine morning , and the sun light up to a 
 scarlet glow the crimson jacket she wear , and paint 
 a soft lustre upon her bright face and dark hair . the 
 myrtle , geranium , and cactuse pack around she 
 be fresh and green , and at such a leafless season they 
 invest the whole concern of horse , waggon , furniture , 
 and girl with a peculiar vernal charm . what possess 
 she to indulge in such a performance in the sight of the 
 sparrow , blackbird , and unperceived farmer who be 
 alone its spectator , - whether the smile begin as a 
 factitious one , to test her capacity in that art , - nobody 
 know ; it end certainly in a real smile . she blush 
 at herself , and see her reflection blush , blush the 
 more . 
 the change from the customary spot and necessary 
 occasion of such an act - from the dress hour in a 
 bedroom to a time of travel out of door - lend to 
 the idle deed a novelty it do not intrinsically possess . 
 the picture be a delicate one . woman 's prescriptive 
 infirmity have stalk into the sunlight , which have 
 clothe it in the freshness of an originality . a 
 cynical inference be irresistible by Gabriel Oak as he 
 regard the scene , generous though he fain would have 
 be . there be no necessity whatever for her look 
 in the glass . she do not adjust her hat , or pat her 
 hair , or press a dimple into shape , or do one thing to 
 signify that any such intention have be her motive in 
 take up the glass . she simply observe herself as a 
 fair product of Nature in the feminine kind , her thought 
 seem to glide into far - off though likely drama in 
 which man would play a part - vista of probable 
 triumph - the smile be of a phase suggest that 
 heart be imagine as lose and win . still , this be 
 but conjecture , and the whole series of action be so 
 idly put forth as to make it rash to assert that intention 
 have any part in they at all . 
 the waggoner 's step be hear return . she 
 put the glass in the paper , and the whole again into its 
 place . 
 when the waggon have pass on , Gabriel withdraw 
 from his point of espial , and descend into the road , 
 follow the vehicle to the turnpike - gate some way 
 beyond the bottom of the hill , where the object of his 
 contemplation now halt for the payment of toll . about 
 twenty step still remain between he and the gate , 
 when he hear a dispute . lt be a difference con- 
 cerne twopence between the person with the waggon 
 and the man at the toll - bar . 
 " Mis'ess 's niece be upon the top of the thing , and 
 she say that be enough that I have   offer ye , you great 
 miser , and she will not   pay any more . " these be the 
 waggoner 's word . 
 " very well ; then mis'ess 's niece can not   pass . " say the 
 turnpike - keeper , close the gate . 
 Oak look from one to the other of the disputant , 
 and fall into a reverie . there be something in the 
 tone of twopence remarkably insignificant . Threepence 
 have a definite value as money - it be an appreciable 
 infringement on a day 's wage , and , as such , a higgling 
 matter ; but twopence - " here . " he say , step 
 forward and hand twopence to the gatekeeper ; " let 
 the young woman pass . " he look up at she then ; 
 she hear his word , and look down . 
 Gabriel 's feature adhere throughout their form so 
 exactly to the middle line between the beauty of St. 
 John and the ugliness of Judas Iscariot , as represent 
 in a window of the church he attend , that not a single 
 lineament could be select and call worthy either of 
 distinction or notoriety . the redjacketed and dark- 
 haired maiden seem to think so too , for she carelessly 
 glance over he , and tell her man to drive on . she 
 might have look her thank to Gabriel on a minute 
 scale , but she do not speak they ; more probably she 
 feel none , for in gain she a passage he have lose she 
 her point , and we know how woman take a favour of 
 that kind . 
 the gatekeeper survey the retreating vehicle . 
 " that be a handsome maid " he say to Oak 
 " but she have her fault . " say Gabriel . 
 " true , farmer . " 
 " and the great of they be - well , what it be 
 always . " 
 " beat people down ? ay , ' tis so . " 
 " o no . " 
 " what , then ? " 
 Gabriel , perhaps a little pique by the comely 
 traveller 's indifference , glance back to where he have 
 witness her performance over the hedge , and say , 
 " vanity . " 
 CHAPTER II 
 NIGHT - the FLOCK - an interior - another interior 
 it be nearly midnight on the eve of St. Thomas 's , the 
 short day in the year . a desolate wind wander 
 from the north over the hill whereon Oak have watch 
 the yellow waggon and its occupant in the sunshine of 
 a few day early . 
 Norcombe Hill - not far from lonely Toller - Down 
  - be one of the spot which suggest to a passer - by 
 that he be in the presence of a shape approach the 
 indestructible as nearly as any to be find on earth . 
 it be a featureless convexity of chalk and soil - an 
 ordinary speciman of those smoothly - outline protuber- 
 ance of the globe which may remain undisturbed on 
 some great day of confusion , when far grander height 
 and dizzy granite precipice topple down . 
 the hill be cover on its northern side by an 
 ancient and decay plantation of beech , whose 
 upper verge form a line over the crest , fringe its 
 arched curve against the sky , like a mane . to - night 
 these tree shelter the southern slope from the keen 
 blast , which smite the wood and flounder through 
 it with a sound as of grumbling , or gush over its 
 crowning bough in a weakened moan . the dry leave 
 in the ditch simmer and boil in the same breeze , 
 a tongue of air occasionally ferret out a few , and 
 send they spin across the grass . a group or 
 two of the late in date amongst the dead multitude 
 have remain till this very mid - winter time on the twig 
 which bear they and in fall rattle against the trunk 
 with smart tap : 
 between this half - woode , half naked hill , and the 
 vague still horizon that its summit indistinctly com- 
 mande , be a mysterious sheet of fathomless shade 
  - the sound from which suggest that what it con- 
 ceale bore some reduce resemblance to feature here . 
 the thin grass , more or less coat the hill , be 
 touch by the wind in breeze of differ power , and 
 almost of differ nature - one rub the blade 
 heavily , another rake they piercingly , another brushing 
 they like a soft broom . the instinctive act of human- 
 kind be to stand and listen , and learn how the tree 
 to each other in the regular antiphony of a cathedral 
 choir ; how hedge and other shape to leeward they 
 catch the note , lower it to the tender sob ; and 
 how the hurrying gust then plunge into the south , to 
 be hear no more . 
 the sky be clear - remarkably clear - and the 
 twinkling of all the star seem to be but throb of 
 one body , time by a common pulse . the North Star 
 be directly in the wind 's eye , and since evening the 
 Bear have swing round it outwardly to the east , till he 
 be now at a right angle with the meridian . a 
 difference of colour in the stars - oftener read of than 
 see in England - be really perceptible here . the 
 sovereign brilliancy of Sirius pierce the eye with a steely 
 glitter , the star call Capella be yellow , Aldebaran and 
 Betelgueux shine with a fiery red . 
 to person stand alone on a hill during a clear 
 midnight such as this , the roll of the world eastward be 
 almost a palpable movement . the sensation may be 
 cause by the panoramic glide of the star past earthly 
 object , which be perceptible in a few minute of still- 
 ness , or by the well outlook upon space that a hill 
 afford , or by the wind , or by the solitude ; but whatever 
 be its origin , the impression of rid along be vivid and 
 abide . the poetry of motion be a phrase much in 
 use , and to enjoy the epic form of that gratification it 
 be necessary to stand on a hill at a small hour of the 
 night , and , have first expand with a sense of differ- 
 ence from the mass of civilised mankind , who be 
 dreamwrapt and disregardful of all such proceeding at 
 this time , long and quietly watch your stately progress 
 through the star . after such a nocturnal reconnoitre 
 it be hard to get back to earth , and to believe that the 
 consciousness of such majestic speeding be derive from 
 a tiny human frame . 
 suddenly an unexpected series of sound begin to 
 be hear in this place up against the sky . they have a 
 clearness which be to be find nowhere in the wind , 
 and a sequence which be to be find nowhere in 
 nature . they be the note of Farmer Oak 's flute . 
 the tune be not float unhindered into the open 
 air : it seem muffle in some way , and be altogether 
 too curtail in power to spread high or wide . it come 
 from the direction of a small dark object under the 
 plantation hedge - a shepherd 's hut - now present 
 an outline to which an uninitiated person might have 
 be puzzle to attach either meaning or use . 
 the image as a whole be that of a small Noah 's 
 Ark on a small ararat , allow the traditionary outline 
 and general form of the Ark which be follow by toy- 
 maker - and by these mean be establish in man 's 
 imagination among their firmest , because early im- 
 pression - to pass as an approximate pattern . the 
 hut stand on little wheel , which raise its floor about a 
 foot from the ground . such shepherd ' hut be drag 
 into the field when the lamb season come on , to 
 shelter the shepherd in his- enforce nightly attendance . 
 it be only latterly that people have begin to call 
 Gabriel " Farmer " Oak . during the twelvemonth pre- 
 cede this time he have be enable by sustained 
 effort of industry and chronic good spirit to lease the 
 small sheep farm of which Norcombe Hill be a portion , 
 and stock it with two hundred sheep . previously he 
 have be a bailiff for a short time , and early still a 
 shepherd only , have from his childhood assist his 
 father in tend the flock of large proprietor , till old 
 Gabriel sink to rest . 
 this venture , unaided and alone , into the path of 
 farming as master and not as man , with an advance of 
 sheep not yet pay for , be a critical juncture with 
 Gabriel Oak , and he recognise his position clearly . 
 the first movement in his new progress be the lambing 
 of his ewe , and sheep have be his speciality from 
 his " youth , he wisely refrain from depute - the task 
 of tend they at this season to a hireling or a novice . 
 the wind continue to beat - about the corner of the 
 hut , but the flute - playing cease . a rectangular space 
 of light appear in the side of the hut , and in the 
 opening the outline of Farmer Oak 's figure . he carry 
 a lantern in his hand , and close the door behind he , 
 come forward and busy himself about this nook of the 
 field for nearly twenty minute , the lantern light appear- 
 ing and disappear here and there , and brighten 
 he or darken he as he stand before or behind it . 
 Oak 's motion , though they have a quiet - energy , be 
 slow , and their deliberateness accord well with his 
 occupation . fitness be the basis of beauty , nobody 
 could - have deny that his steady swing and turn " 
 in and- about the flock have element of grace , yet , 
 although if occasion demand he could do or think a 
 thing with as mercurial a dash as can the man of town 
 who be more to the manner bear , his special power , 
 morally , physically , and mentally , be static , owe 
 little or nothing to momentum as a rule . 
 a close examination of the ground hereabout , even 
 by the wan starlight only , reveal how a portion of 
 what would have be casually call a wild slope have 
 be appropriate by Farmer Oak for his great purpose 
 this winter . detach hurdle thatch with straw 
 be stick into the ground at various scatter point , 
 amid and under which the whitish form of his meek 
 ewe move and rustle . the ring of the sheep - bell , 
 which have be silent during his absence , recommence , 
 in tone that have more mellowness than clearness , owe 
 to an increase growth of surround wool . this 
 continue till Oak withdraw again from the flock . he 
  - return to the hut , bring in his arm a new - bear 
 lamb , consist of four leg large enough for a full- 
 grow sheep , unite by a seemingly inconsiderable mem- 
 brane about half the substance of the leg collectively , 
 which constitute the animal 's entire body just at present . 
 the little speck of life he place on a wisp of hay 
 before the small stove , where a can of milk be simmer- 
 ing . Oak extinguish the lantern by blow into it 
 and then pinch the snuff , the cot be light 
 by a candle suspend by a twisted wire . a rather 
 hard couch , form of a few corn sack throw carelessly 
 down , cover half the floor of this little habitation , and 
 here the young man stretch himself along , loosen 
 his woollen cravat , and close his eye . in about the 
 time a person unaccustomed to bodily labour would have 
 decide upon which side to lie , Farmer Oak be asleep . 
 the inside of the hut , as it now present itself , be 
 cosy and alluring , and the scarlet handful of fire in 
 addition to the candle , reflect its own genial colour 
 upon whatever it could reach , flung association of 
 enjoyment even over utensil and tool . in the corner 
 stand the sheep - crook , and along a shelf at one side 
 be range bottle and canister of the simple prepara- 
 tion pertain to bovine surgery and physic ; spirit of 
 wine , turpentine , tar , magnesia , ginger , and castor - oil 
 be the chief . on a triangular shelf across the corner 
 stand bread , bacon , cheese , and a cup for ale or cider , 
 which be supply from a flagon beneath . beside the 
 provision lay the flute whose note have lately be 
 call forth by the lonely watcher to beguile a tedious 
 hour . the house be ventilate by two round hole , 
 like the light of a ship 's cabin , with wood slides- 
 the lamb , revive by the warmth begin to bleat " 
 instant meaning , as expect sound will . pass 
 from the profound sleep to the most alert wakefulness 
 with the same ease that have accompany the reverse 
 operation , he look at his watch , find that the hour- 
 hand have shift again , put on his hat , take the lamb 
 in his arm , and carry it into the darkness . after 
 place the little creature with its mother , he stand and 
 carefully examine the sky , to ascertain the time of 
 night from the altitude of the star . 
 the Dog - star and Aldebaran , point to the restless 
 Pleiades , be half - way up the southern sky , and between 
 they hang Orion , which gorgeous constellation never 
 burn more vividly than now , as it soar forth above 
 the rim of the landscape . castor and Pollux will 
 the north - west ; far away through the plantation Vega 
 and Cassiopeia 's chair stand daintily poise on the 
 uppermost bough . " one o'clock . " say Gabriel . 
 be a man not without a frequent consciousness 
 that there be some charm in this life he lead , he stand 
 still after look at the sky as a useful instrument , and 
 regard it in an appreciative spirit , as a work of art 
 superlatively beautiful . for a moment he seem 
 impressed with the speak loneliness of the scene , or 
 rather with the complete abstraction from all its compass 
 of the sight and sound of man . human shape , interference , 
 trouble , and joy be all as if they be not , and there 
 seem to be on the shaded hemisphere of the globe no sentient 
 be save himself ; he could fancy they all go round to the sunny side . 
 occupy this , with eye stretch afar , Oak gradually per- 
 ceive that what he have previously take to be a star low 
 down behind the outskirt of the plantation be in reality no 
 such thing . it be an artificial light , almost close at hand . 
 to find themselves utterly alone at night where company 
 be desirable and expect make some people fearful ; but a 
 case more try by far to the nerve be to discover some 
 mysterious companionship when intuition , sensation , memory , 
 analogy , testimony , probability , induction - every kind of 
 evidence in the logician 's list - have unite to persuade con- 
 sciousness that it be quite in isolation . 
 Farmer Oak go towards the plantation and push 
 through its low bough to the windy side . a dim mass under 
 the slope remind he that a shed occupy a place here , 
 the site be a cutting into the slope of the hill , so that at 
 its back part the roof be almost level with the ground . in 
 front it be form of board nail to post and cover with 
 tar as a preservative . through crevice in the roof and side 
 spread streak and spot of light , a combination of which make 
 the radiance that have attract he . Oak step up behind , 
 where , lean down upon the roof and put his eye close 
 to a hole , he could see into the interior clearly . 
 the place contain two woman and two cow . by the side 
 of the latter a steam bran - mash stand in a bucket . one 
 of the woman be past middle age . her companion be ap- 
 parently young and graceful ; he could form no decided opinion 
 upon her look , her position be almost beneath his eye , so 
 that he see she in a bird's - eye view , as Milton 's Satan first see 
 Paradise . she wear no bonnet or het , but have envelop her- 
 self in a large cloak , which be carelessly fling over her head 
 as a covering . 
 " there , now we will go home , " say the elder of the two , rest 
 her knuckle upon her hip , and look at their going - on as 
 a whole . " I do hope Daisy will fetch round again now . I have 
 never be more frightened in my life , but I do not   mind break- 
 e my rest if she recover . " 
 the young woman , whose eyelid be apparently inclined 
 to fall together on the small provocation of silence , yawn 
 in sympathy . 
 " I wish we be rich enough to pay a man to do these 
 thing , " she say . 
 " as we be not , we must do they ourselves , " say the other ; 
 " for you must help I if you stay . " 
 " well , my hat be go , however , " continue the young . " it 
 go over the hedge , I think . the idea of such a slight wind 
 catch it . " 
 the cow standing erect be of the Devon breed , and be 
 encase in a tight warm hide of rich indian red , as absolutely 
 uniform from eye to tail as if the animal have be dip in 
 a dye of that colour , her long back be mathematically level . 
 the other be spot , grey and white . beside her Oak now 
 notice a little calf about a day old , look idiotically at 
 the two woman , which show that it have not long be 
 accustomed to the phenomenon of eyesight , and often turn- 
 ing to the lantern , which it apparently mistook for the moon . 
 inherit instinct have as yet have little time for correction 
 by experience . between the sheep and the cow Lucina have 
 be busy on Norcombe hill lately . 
 " I think we have well send for some oatmeal , " say the 
 " yes , aunt ; and I will ride over for it as soon as it be light . " 
 " but there be no side - saddle . " 
 " I can ride on the other : trust I . " 
 Oak , upon hear these remark , become more 
 curious to observe her feature , but this prospect be 
 deny he by the hooding effect of the cloak , and by his 
 aerial position , he feel himself draw upon his fancy 
 for their detail . in make even horizontal and clear 
 inspection we colour and mould accord to the wart 
 within we whatever our eye bring in . have Gabriel 
 be able from the first to get a distinct view of her - 
 countenance , his estimate of it as very handsome or 
 slightly so would have be as his soul require a 
 divinity at the moment or be ready supply with one . 
 have for some time know the want of a satisfactory 
 form to fill an increase void within he , his position 
 moreover afford the wide scope for his fancy , he 
 paint she a beauty . 
 by one of those whimsical coincidence in which 
 nature , like a busy mother , seem to spare a moment 
 from her unremitting labour to turn and make she 
 child smile , the girl now drop the cloak , and 
 forth tumble rope of black hair over a red jacket . 
 Oak know she instantly as the heroine of the yellow 
 waggon , myrtle , and look - glass : prosily , as the 
 woman who owe he twopence . 
 they place the calf beside its mother again , take 
 up the lantern , and go out , the light sink down 
 the hill till it be no more than a nebula . Gabriel 
 Oak return to his flock . 
 CHAPTER III 
 a girl on HORSEBACK - CONVERSATION 
 the sluggish day begin to break . even its position 
 terrestrially be one of the element of a new interest , 
 and for no particular reason save that the incident of 
 the night have occur there , Oak go again into 
 the plantation . lingering and musing here , he hear 
 the step of a horse at the foot of the hill , and soon 
 there appear in view an auburn pony with a girl on 
 its back , ascend by the path lead past the cattle- 
 shed . she be the young woman of the night before . 
 Gabriel instantly think of the hat she have mention 
 as have lose in the wind ; possibly she have come to 
 look for it . he hastily scan the ditch and after 
 walk about ten yard along it , find the hat among the 
 leaf . Gabriel take it in his hand and return to his 
 hut . here he ensconce himself , and peep through 
 the loophole in the direction of the rider approach . 
 she come up and look around - then on the other 
 side of the hedge . Gabriel be about to advance and 
 restore the miss article when an unexpected per- 
 formance induce he to suspend the action for the 
 present . the path , after pass the cowshe , bisect 
 the plantation . it be not a bridle - path - merely a 
 pedestrian 's track , and the bough spread horizontally 
 at a height not great than seven foot above the ground , 
 which make it impossible to ride erect beneath they . 
 the girl , who wear no riding - habit , look around for 
 a moment , as if to assure herself that all humanity be 
 out of view , then dexterously drop backwards flat 
 upon the pony 's back , her head over its tail , her foot 
 against its shoulder , and her eye to the sky . the 
 rapidity of her glide into this position be that of a 
 kingfisher - its noiselessness that of a hawk . Gabriel 's 
 eye have scarcely be able to follow she . the tall lank 
 pony seem use to such doing , and amble 
 along unconcerned . thus she pass under the level bough . 
 the performer seem quite at home anywhere 
 between a horse 's head and its tail , and the necessity 
 for this abnormal attitude have cease with the 
 passage of the plantation , she begin to adopt another , 
 even more obviously convenient than the first . she have 
 no side - saddle , and it be very apparent that a firm 
 seat upon the smooth leather beneath she be un- 
 attainable sideways . spring to her accustom 
 perpendicular like a bow sapling , and satisfy she , 
 self that nobody be in sight , she seat herself in the 
 manner demand by the saddle , though hardly expect 
 of the woman , and trot off in the direction of Tewnell 
 Mill . 
 Oak be amuse , perhaps a little astonished , and 
 hang up the hat in his hut , go again among his 
 ewe . an hour pass , the girl return , properly 
 seat now , with a bag of bran in front of she . on 
 near the cattle - shed she be meet by a boy bring 
 a milking - pail , who hold the rein of the pony whilst 
 she slide off . the boy lead away the horse , leave the 
 pail with the young woman . 
 soon soft shirt alternate with loud shirt come 
 in regular succession from within the shed , the obvious 
 sound of a person milk a cow . Gabriel take the 
 lose hat in his hand , and wait beside the path she 
 would follow in leave the hill . 
 she come , the pail in one hand , hang against her 
 knee . the left arm be extend as a balance , enough 
 of it be show bare to make Oak wish that the event 
 ha happen in the summer , when the whole would 
 have be reveal . there be a bright air and manner 
 about she now , by which she seem to imply that the 
 desirability of her existence could not be question ; 
 and this rather saucy assumption fail in be offensive , 
 because a beholder feel it to be , upon the whole , true . 
 like exceptional emphasis in the tone of a genius , that 
 which would have make mediocrity ridiculous be an 
 addition to recognise power . it be with some 
 surprise that she see Gabriel 's face rise like the 
 moon behind the hedge . 
 the adjustment of the farmer 's hazy conception of her 
 charm to the portrait of herself she now present 
 he with be less a diminution than a difference . the 
 starting - point select by the judgment be . her height 
 she seem tall , but the pail be a small one , and the 
 hedge diminutive ; hence , make allowance for error 
 by comparison with these , she could have be not 
 above the height to be choose by woman as well . all 
 feature of consequence be severe and regular . it 
 may have be observe by person who go about the 
 shire with eye for beauty , that in Englishwoman a 
 classically - form face be seldom find to be unite 
 with a figure of the same pattern , the highly - finish 
 feature be generally too large for the remainder of 
 the frame ; that a graceful and proportionate figure of 
 eight head usually go off into random facial curve . 
 without throw a nymphean tissue over a milkmaid , 
 let it be say that here criticism check itself as out 
 of place , and look at her proportion with a long 
 consciousness of pleasure . from the contours of her 
 figure in its upper part , she must have have a beautiful 
 neck and shoulder ; but since her infancy nobody have 
 ever see they . have she be put into a low dress 
 she would have run and thrust her head into a bush . 
 yet she be not a shy girl by any mean ; it be merely 
 her instinct to draw the line divide the see from the 
 unseen high than they do it in town . 
 that the girl 's thought hover about her face 
 and form as soon as she catch Oak 's eye con the 
 same page be natural , and almost certain . the self- 
 consciousness show would have be vanity if a little 
 more pronounced , dignity if a little less . ray of male 
 vision seem to have a tickling effect upon virgin face 
 in rural district ; she brush hers with her hand , as if 
 Gabriel have be irritate its pink surface by actual 
 touch , and the free air of her previous movement be 
 reduce at the same time to a chastened phase of 
 itself . yet it be the man who blush , the maid not 
 at all . 
 " I find a hat . " say Oak . 
 " it be mine . " say she , and , from a sense of proportion , 
 keep down to a small smile an inclination to laugh dis- 
 tinctly : " it fly away last night . " 
 " one o'clock this morning ? " 
 " well - it be . " she be surprised . " how do you know ? " 
 she say . 
 " I be here . " 
 " you be Farmer Oak , be you not ? " 
 " that or thereabout . I be lately come to this place . " 
 " a large farm ? " she inquire , cast her eye round , 
 and swing back her hair , which be black in the 
 shade hollow of its mass ; but it be now an hour 
 past sunrise , the ray touch its prominent curve with 
 a colour of their own . 
 " no ; not large . about a hundred . "   in speak 
 of farm the word " acre " be omit by the native , by 
 analogy to such old expression as " a stag of ten . " 
 " I want my hat this morning . " she go on . 
 " I have to ride to Tewnell Mill . " 
 " yes you have . " 
 " how do you know ? " 
 " I see you ! " 
 " where ? " she inquire , a misgiving bring every 
 muscle of her lineament and frame to a standstill . 
 " here - go through the plantation , and all down 
 the hill . " say Farmer Oak , with an aspect excessively 
 know with regard to some matter in his mind , as he 
 gaze at a remote point in the direction name , and then 
 turn back to meet his colloquist 's eye . 
 a perception cause he to withdraw his own eye 
 from hers as suddenly as if he have be catch in a 
 theft . Recollection of the strange antic she have 
 indulge in when pass through the tree , be suc- 
 ceede in the girl by a nettled palpitation , and that by 
 a hot face . it be a time to see a woman redden who 
 be not give to redden as a rule ; not a point in 
 the milkmaid but be of the deep rose - colour . from 
 the Maiden 's Blush , through all variety of the Provence 
 down to the Crimson Tuscany , the countenance of Oak 's 
 acquaintance quickly graduate ; whereupon he , in con- 
 siderateness , turn away his head . 
 the sympathetic man still look the other way , and 
 wonder when she would recover coolness sufficient to 
 justify he in face she again . he hear what seem 
 to be the flitting of a dead leaf upon the breeze , and 
 look . she have go away . 
 with an air between that of Tragedy and Comedy ! 
 Gabriel return to his work . 
 five morning and evening pass . the young 
 woman come regularly to milk the healthy cow or to 
 attend to the sick one , but never allow her vision to 
 stray in the direction of Oak 's person . his want of 
 tact have deeply offend she - not by see what he 
 could not help , but by let she know that he have 
 see it . for , as without law there be no sin , without 
 eye there be no indecorum ; and she appear to feel 
 that Gabriel 's espial have make she an indecorous woman 
 without her own connivance . it be food for great regret 
 with he ; it be also a contretemp which touch into 
 life a latent heat he have experience in that direction . 
 the acquaintanceship might , however , have end in 
 a slow forgetting , but for an incident which occur at 
 the end of the same week . one afternoon it begin to 
 freeze , and the frost increase with evening , which draw 
 on like a stealthy tightening of bond . it be a time 
 when in cottage the breath of the sleeper freeze to 
 the sheet ; when round the drawing - room fire of a 
 thick - walled mansion the sitter ' back be cold , even 
 whilst their face be all aglow . many a small bird go 
 to bed supperless that night among the bare bough . 
 as the milking - hour draw near , Oak keep his usual 
 watch upon the cowshed . at last he feel cold , and 
 shake an extra quantity of bed round the yearle 
 ewe he enter the hut and heap more fuel upon 
 the stove . the wind come in at the bottom of the door , 
 and to prevent it Oak lay a sack there and wheel the 
 cot round a little more to the south . then the wind 
 spout in at a ventilate hole - of which there be one 
 on each side of the hut . 
 Gabriel have always know that when the fire be 
 light and the door close one of these must be keep 
 open - that choose be always on the side away from 
 the wind . close the slide to windward , he turn to 
 open the other ; on second - thought the farmer con- 
 sidere that he would first sit down leave both 
 close for a minute or two , till the temperature of the 
 hut be a little raise . he sit down . 
 his head begin to ache in an unwonted manner , and , 
 fancy himself weary by reason of the broken rest of 
 the precede night , Oak decide to get up , open the 
 slide , and then allow himself to fall asleep . he fall 
 asleep , however , without have perform the necessary 
 preliminary . 
 how long he remain unconscious Gabriel never 
 know . during the first stage of his return to percep- 
 tion peculiar deed seem to be in course of enactment . 
 his dog be howl , his head be ache fearfully - 
 somebody be pull he about , hand be loosen 
 his neckerchief . 
 on open his eye he find that evening have sink 
 to dusk in a strange manner of unexpectedness . the 
 young girl with the remarkably pleasant lip and white 
 tooth be beside he . More than this - astonishingly 
 more - his head be upon her lap , his face and neck 
 be disagreeably wet , and her finger be unbutton 
 his collar . 
 " whatever be the matter ? " say Oak , vacantly . 
 she seem to experience mirth , but of too insignifi- 
 can not a kind to start enjoyment . 
 " nothing now ' , she answer , ' since you be not 
 dead it be a wonder you be not , suffocate in this 
 hut of your . " 
 " ah , the hut ! " murmur Gabriel . " I give ten 
 pound for that hut . but I will sell it , and sit under 
 thatch hurdle as they do in old time , curl up 
 to sleep in a lock of straw ! it play I nearly the 
 same trick the other day ! " Gabriel , by way of emphasis , 
 bring down his fist upon the floor . 
 " it be not exactly the fault of the hut . " she ob- 
 serve in a tone which show she to be that novelty 
 among woman - one who finish a thought before 
 begin the sentence which be to convey it . " you 
 should I think , have consider , and not have be so 
 foolish as to leave the slide close . " 
 " yes I suppose I should . " say Oak , absently . he 
 be endeavour to catch and appreciate the sensation 
 of be thus with she , his head upon her dress , before 
 the event pass on into the heap of bygone thing . 
 he wish she know his impression ; but he would as 
 soon have think of carry an odour in a net as of 
 attempt to convey the intangibility of his feeling 
 in the coarse mesh of language . so he remain 
 silent . 
 she make he sit up , and then Oak begin wipe 
 his face and shake himself like a Samson . " how 
 can I thank ' ee ? " he say at last , gratefully , some of the 
 natural rusty red have return to his face . " oh , never mind that . " 
 say the girl , smile , and 
 allow her smile to hold good for Gabriel 's next 
 remark , whatever that might prove to be . 
 " how do you find I ? " 
 " I hear your dog howl and scratch at the 
 door of the hut when I come to the milking   it be so 
 lucky , Daisy 's milking be almost over for the season , and 
 I shall not come here after this week or the next . the 
 dog see I , and jump over to I , and lay hold of 
 my skirt . I come across and look round the hut the 
 very first thing to see if the slide be closed . my 
 uncle have a hut like this one , and I have hear he tell 
 his shepherd not to go to sleep without leave a slide 
 open . I open the door , and there you be like 
 dead . I throw the milk over you , as there be no 
 water , forget it be warm , and no use . " 
 " I wonder if I should have die ? " Gabriel say , in a 
 low voice , which be rather mean to travel back to 
 himself than to she . 
 " o no , " the girl reply . she seem to prefer a 
 less tragic probability ; to have save a man from death 
 involve talk that should harmonise with the dignity of 
 such a deed - and she shun it . 
 " I believe you save my life , Miss - - I do not   know 
 your name . I know your aunt 's , but not your . " 
 " I would just as soon not tell it - rather not . there 
 be no reason either why I should , as you probably will 
 never have much to do with I . " " still , I should like to know . " 
 " you can inquire at my aunt 's - she will tell you . " 
 " my name be Gabriel Oak . " 
 " and mine be not . you seem fond of yours in 
 speak it so decisively , Gabriel Oak . " 
 " you see , it be the only one I shall ever have , and I 
 must make the most of it . " 
 " I always think mine sound odd and disagreeable . " 
 " I should think you might soon get a new one . " 
 " mercy ! - how many opinion you keep about you 
 concern other people , Gabriel Oak . " 
 " well Miss - excuse the word - I think you 
 would like they but I can not   match you I know in 
 nap out my mind upon my tongue . I never be 
 very clever in my inside . but I thank you . come 
 give I your hand ! " 
 she hesitate , somewhat disconcert at Oak 's old- 
 fashioned earnest conclusion . to a dialogue lightly 
 carry on . "Very well . " she say , and give he her 
 hand , compress her lip to a demure impassivity . 
 he hold it but an instant , and in his fear of be too 
 demonstrative , swerve to the opposite extreme , touch 
 her finger with the lightness of a small - hearted person . 
 " I be sorry . " he say , the instant after . 
 " what for ? " 
 " you may have it again if you like ; there it be . " 
 she give he her hand again . 
 Oak hold it long this time - indeed , curiously long . 
 " how soft it be - be winter time , too - not chap 
 or rough or anything ! " he say . 
 " there - that be long enough . " say she , though with- 
 out pull it away " but I suppose you be think 
 you would like to kiss it ? you may if you want to . " 
 " I be not   think of any such thing . " say Gabriel , 
 simply ; " but I will " 
 " that you will not ! " she snatch back her hand . 
 Gabriel feel himself guilty of another want of tact . 
 " now find out my name . " she say , teasingly ; and 
 withdraw . 
 CHAPTER IV 
 GABRIEL 's RESOLVE - the VISIT - the mistake 
 the only superiority in woman that be tolerable to the 
 rival sex be , as a rule , that of the unconscious kind ; but 
 a superiority which recognize itself may sometimes 
 please by suggest possibility of capture to the 
 subordinated man . 
 this well - favour and comely girl soon make appre- 
 ciable inroad upon the emotional constitution of young 
 Farmer Oak . 
 Love , be an extremely exact usurer   a sense of 
 exorbitant profit , spiritually , by an exchange of heart , 
 be at the bottom of pure passion , as that of exorbi- 
 tant profit , bodily or materially , be at the bottom of 
 those of low atmosphere , every morning Oak 's feeling 
 be as sensitive as the money - market in calculation 
 upon his chance . his dog wait for his meal in a 
 way so like that in which Oak wait for the girl 's 
 presence , that the farmer be quite strike with the 
 resemblance , feel it lower , and would not look at the 
 dog . however , he continue to watch through the 
 hedge for her regular coming , and thus his sentiment 
 towards she be deepen without any corresponding 
 effect be produce upon herself . Oak have nothing 
 finished and ready to say as yet , and not be able 
 to frame love phrase which end where they begin ; 
 passionate tale - 
  - full of sound and fury 
  - signify nothing - 
 he say no word at all . 
 by make inquiry he find that the girl 's name 
 be Bathsheba Everdene , and that the cow would go 
 dry in about seven day . he dread the eight day . 
 at last the eighth day come . the cow have cease 
 to give milk for that year , and Bathsheba Everdene 
 come up the hill no more . Gabriel have reach a 
 pitch of existence he never could have anticipate a 
 short time before . he like say ` Bathsheba ' as a 
 private enjoyment instead of whistle ; turn over his 
 taste to black hair , though he have swear by brown ever 
 since he be a boy , isolate himself till the space he 
 fill in a possible strength in an actual weakness . marriage 
 transform a distraction into a support , the power of 
 which should be , and happily often be , in direct pro- 
 portion to the degree of imbecility it supplant . Oak 
 begin now to see light in this direction , and say to 
 himself , " I will make she my wife , or upon my soul I shall 
 be good for nothing ! " 
 all this while he be perplex himself about an 
 errand on which he might consistently visit the cottage 
 of Bathsheba 's aunt . 
 he find his opportunity in the death of a ewe , 
 mother of a live lamb . on a day which have a 
 summer face and a winter constitution - a fine January 
 morning , when there be just enough blue sky visible to 
 make cheerfully - dispose people wish for more , and an 
 occasional gleam of silvery sunshine , Oak put the lamb 
 into a respectable Sunday basket , and stalk across the 
 field to the house of Mrs. Hurst , the aunt - George , 
 the dog walk behind , with a countenance of great 
 concern at the serious turn pastoral affair seem to be 
 take . 
 Gabriel have watch the blue wood - smoke curling 
 from the chimney with strange meditation . at evening 
 he have fancifully trace it down the chimney to the 
 spot of its origin - see the hearth and Bathsheba 
 beside it - beside it in her out - door dress ; for the 
 clothe she have wear on the hill be by association 
 equally with her person include in the compass of his 
 affection ; they seem at this early time of his love a 
 necessary ingredient of the sweet mixture call bath- 
 sheba Everdene . 
 he have make a toilet of a nicely - adjust kind - of a 
 nature between the carefully neat and the carelessly 
 ornate - of a degree between fine - market - day and wet- 
 Sunday selection . he thoroughly clean his silver 
 watch - chain with whiting , put new lacing strap to his 
 boot , look to the brass eyelet - hole , go to the 
 inmost heart of the plantation for a new walking - stick , 
 and trim it vigorously on his way back ; take a new 
 handkerchief from the bottom of his clothe - box , put 
 on the light waistcoat pattern all over with sprig 
 of an elegant flower unite the beauty of both rise 
 and lily without the defect of either , and use all the 
 hair - oil he possess upon his usually dry , sandy , and 
 inextricably curly hair , till he have deepen it to a 
 splendidly novel colour , between that of guano and 
 roman cement , make it stick to his head like mace 
 round a nutmeg , or wet seaweed round a boulder after 
 the ebb . 
 nothing disturb the stillness of the cottage save 
 the chatter of a knot of sparrow on the eave ; one 
 might fancy scandal and rumour to be no less the 
 staple topic of these little coterie on roof than of 
 those under they . it seem that the omen be an 
 unpropitious one , for , as the rather untoward commence- 
 ment of Oak 's overture , just as he arrive by the garden 
 gate , he see a cat inside , go into various arched shape 
 and fiendish convulsion at the sight of his dog George . 
 the dog take no notice , for he have arrive at an age 
 at which all superfluous barking be cynically avoid 
 as a waste of breath - in fact he never bark even 
 at the sheep except to order , when it be do with 
 an absolutely neutral countenance , as a sort of com- 
 mination - service , which , though offensive , have to be 
 go through once now and then to frighten the flock 
 for their own good . 
 a voice come from behind some laurel - bush into 
 which the cat have run : 
 " poor dear ! do a nasty brute of a dog want to 
 kill it ; - do he poor dear ! " 
 " I beg your pardon . " say Oak to the voice , " but 
 George be walk on behind I with a temper as 
 mild as milk . " 
 almost before he have cease speak , Oak be 
 seize with a misgiving as to whose ear be the recipient 
 of his answer . nobody appear , and he hear the 
 person retreat among the bush . 
 Gabriel meditate , and so deeply that he bring 
 small furrow into his forehead by sheer force of 
 reverie . where the issue of an interview be as likely 
 to be a vast change for the bad as for the well , 
 any initial difference from expectation cause nipping 
 sensation of failure . Oak go up to the door a little 
 abash : his mental rehearsal and the reality have have 
 no common ground of opening . 
 Bathsheba 's aunt be indoor . " will you tell Miss 
 Everdene that somebody would be glad to speak to 
 she ? " say Mr. Oak .   call one 's self merely some- 
 body , without give a name , be not to be take as 
 an example of the ill - breeding of the rural world : it 
 spring from a refined modesty , of which townspeople , 
 with their card and announcement , have no notion 
 whatever . 
 Bathsheba be out . the voice have evidently be 
 her . 
 " will you come in , Mr. Oak ? " 
 " oh , thank ' ee , say Gabriel , follow she to the 
 fireplace . " I have   bring a lamb for Miss Everdene . 
 I think she might like one to rear ; girl do . " 
 " she might . " say Mrs. Hurst , musingly ; " though 
 she be only a visitor here . if you will wait a minute , 
 Bathsheba will be in . " 
 " yes , I will wait . " say Gabriel , sit down . " the 
 lamb be not   really the business I come about , Mrs. Hurst . 
 in short , I be go to ask she if she would like to be 
 marry . " 
 " and be you indeed ? " 
 " yes . because if she would , I should be very glad 
 to marry she . d'ye know if she be get any other young 
 man hang about she at all ? " 
 " let I think , " say Mrs. Hurst , poke the fire 
 superfluously .... " yes - bless you , ever so many young 
 man . you see , Farmer Oak , she be so good - look , and 
 an excellent scholar besides - she be go to be a 
 governess once , you know , only she be too wild . not 
 that her young man ever come here - but , Lord , in the 
 nature of woman , she must have a dozen ! " 
 " that be unfortunate . " say Farmer Oak , contemplate 
 a crack in the stone floor with sorrow . " I be only an 
 every - day sort of man , and my only chance be in be 
 the first comer ... , well , there be no use in my waiting , 
 for that be all I come about : so I will take myself off 
 home - along , Mrs. Hurst . " 
 when Gabriel have go about two hundred yard along the 
 down , he hear a " hoi - hoi ! " utter behind 
 he , in a piping note of more treble quality than that 
 in which the exclamation usually embody itself when 
 shout across a field . he look round , and see a girl 
 racing after he , wave a white handkerchief . 
 Oak stand still - and the runner draw nearer . it be 
 Bathsheba Everdene . Gabriel 's colour deepen : her 
 be already deep , not , as it appear , from emotion , 
 but from run . 
 " Farmer Oak - I - " she say , pause for want of 
 breath pull up in front of he with a slanted face 
 and put her hand to her side . 
 " I have just call to see you , " say Gabriel , pende 
 her further speech . 
 " yes - I know that ! " she say pant like a robin , 
 her face red and moist from her exertion , like a peony 
 petal before the sun dry off the dew . " I do not   know 
 you have come to ask to have I , or I should have come 
 in from the garden instantly . I run after you to say - 
 that my aunt make a mistake in send you away from 
 court I - - - " 
 Gabriel expand . "I'm sorry to have make you 
 run so fast , my dear . " he say , with a grateful sense of 
 favour to come . " wait a bit till you have   find your 
 breath . " 
 " - it be quite a mistake - aunt 's tell you I have 
 a young man " already . "- Bathsheba go on . " I have not 
 a sweetheart at all - and I never have one , and I think 
 that , as time go with woman , it be such a pity to send 
 you away think that I have several . " 
 " really and truly I be glad to hear that ! " say 
 Farmer Oak , smile one of his long special smile , and 
 blushing with gladness . he hold out his hand to take 
 her , which , when she have ease her side by press 
 it there , be prettily extend upon her bosom to still 
 her loud - beat heart . directly he seize it she put 
 it behind she , so that it slip through his finger like 
 an eel . " 
 " I have a nice snug little farm . " say Gabriel , with 
 half a degree less assurance than when he have seize 
 her hand . 
 " yes ; you have . " 
 " a man have advance I money to begin with , but 
 still , it will soon be pay off and though I be only an 
 every - day sort of man , I have get on a little since I be 
 a boy . " Gabriel utter " a little " in a tone to - show 
 she that it be the complacent form of " a great deal . " 
 e continue : " when we be marry , I be quite sure 
 I can work twice as hard as I do now . " 
 he go forward and stretch out his arm again . 
 Bathsheba have overtake he at a point beside which 
 stand a low stunt holly bush , now laden with red 
 berry . see his advance take the form of an attitude 
 threaten a possible enclosure , if not compression , of 
 her person , she edge off round the bush . 
 " why , Farmer Oak . " she say , over the top , look 
 at he with rounded eye , " I never say I be go to 
 marry you . " 
 " well - that be a tale ! " say Oak , with dismay . " to 
 run after anybody like this , and then say you do not 
 want he ! " 
 " what I mean to tell you be only this . " she say 
 eagerly , and yet half conscious of the absurdity of the 
 position she have make for herself - " that nobody have 
 get I yet as a sweetheart , instead of my have a 
 dozen , as my aunt say ; I hate to be think man 's 
 property in that way , though possibly I shall be have 
 some day . why , if I have want you I should not   have 
 run after you like this ; ' twould have be the forward 
 thing ! but there be no harm in ' hurrying to correct 
 a piece of false news that have be tell you . " 
 " oh , no - no harm at all . " but there be such a thing 
 as be too generous in express a judgment impuls- 
 ively , and Oak add with a more appreciative sense 
 of all the circumstance - " well , I be not quite certain 
 it be no harm . " 
 " indeed , I have not   time to think before start 
 whether I want to marry or not , for you would have be 
 go over the hill . " 
 " come . " say Gabriel , freshen again ; " think a 
 minute or two . I will wait a while , Miss Everdene . will 
 you marry I ? do , Bathsheba . I love you far more 
 than common ! " 
 " I will try to think . " she observe , rather more timor- 
 ously ; " if I can think out of door ; my mind spread 
 away so . " 
 " but you can give a guess . " 
 " then give I time . " Bathsheba look thought- 
 fully into the distance , away from the direction in which 
 Gabriel stand . 
 " I can make you happy , " say he to the back of her 
 head , across the bush . " you shall have as piano in a 
 year or two - farmer ' wife be get to have piano 
 now - and I will practise up the flute right well to play 
 with you in the evening . " 
 " yes ; I should like that . " 
 " and have one of those little ten - pound " gig for 
 market - and nice flower , and bird - cock and hen 
 I mean , because they be useful . " continue Gabriel , 
 feel balanced between poetry and practicality . 
 " I should like it very much . " 
 " and a frame for cucumber - like a gentleman and 
 lady . " 
 yes . " 
 " and when the wedding be over , we would have it put 
 in the newspaper list of marriage . " 
 " dearly I should like that ! " 
 " and the baby in the birth - every man jack of 
 " em ! and at home by the fire , whenever you look up , 
 there I shall be - and whenever I look up there will 
 be you . " 
 " wait wait and do not   be improper ! " 
 her countenance fall , and she be silent awhile . 
 he regard the red berry between they over and 
 over again , to such an extent , that holly seem in 
 his after life to be a cypher signify a proposal of 
 marriage . Bathsheba decisively turn to he . 
 " no ; " ' tis no use . " she say . " I do not   want to marry 
 you . " 
 " try . " 
 " I have try hard all the time I have   be think ; 
 for a marriage would be very nice in one sense . 
 People would talk about I , and think I have win my 
 battle , and I should feel triumphant , and all that , 
 but a husband - - - 
 " well ! " 
 " why , he would always be there , as you say ; whenever 
 I look up , there he would be . " 
 " of course he would - I , that be . " 
 " well , what I mean be that I should not   mind be 
 a bride at a wedding , if I could be one without have 
 a husband . but since a woman can not   show off in that 
 way by herself , I shall not   marry - at least yet . " 
 " that be a terrible wooden story . " 
 at this criticism of her statement Bathsheba make 
 an addition to her dignity by a slight sweep away 
 from he . 
 " upon my heart and soul , I do not   know what a 
 maid can say stupider than that . " say Oak . " but 
 dear . " he continue in a palliative voice , " do not   be 
 like it ! " Oak sigh a deep honest sigh - none the 
 less so in that , be like the sigh of a pine plantation , 
 it be rather noticeable as a disturbance of the atmo- 
 sphere . " why will not   you have I ? " he appeal , 
 creep round the holly to reach her side . 
 " I can not . " she say , retreat . 
 " but why ? " he persist , stand still at last in 
 despair of ever reach she , and face over the 
 bush . 
 " because I do not   love you . " 
 " yes , but - - " 
 she contract a yawn to an inoffensive smallness , 
 so that it be hardly ill - mannered at all . " I do not   love 
 you . " she say . " 
 " but I love you - and , as for myself , I be content 
 to be like . " 
 " o Mr. Oak - that be very fine ! you would get to despise I . " 
 " never . " say Mr Oak , so earnestly that he seem 
 to be come , by the force of his word , straight 
 through the bush and into her arm . " I shall do one 
 thing in this life - one thing certain - that is , love you , 
 and long for you , and keep want you till I die . " his 
 voice have a genuine pathos now , and his large brown 
 hand perceptibly tremble . 
 " it seem dreadfully wrong not to have you when 
 you feel so much ! " she say with a little distress , and 
 look hopelessly around for some mean of escape 
 from her moral dilemma . " h ow I wish I have not   run 
 after you ! " however she seem to have a short cut 
 for get back to cheerfulness , and set her face to 
 signify archness . " it would not   do , Mr Oak . I want 
 somebody to tame I ; I be too independent ; and 
 you would never be able to , I know . " 
 Oak cast his eye down the field in a way imply 
 that it be useless to attempt argument . 
 " Mr. Oak . " she say , with luminous distinctness and 
 common sense , " you be well off than I. I have 
 hardly a penny in the world - I be stay with my 
 aunt for my bare sustenance . I be well educate 
 than you - and I do not   love you a bit : that be my side 
 of the case . now your : you be a farmer just begin- 
 ing ; and you ought in common prudence , if you marry 
 at all   which you should certainly not think of do 
 at present   to marry a woman with money , who would 
 admiration . 
 " that be the very thing I have be think myself ! " 
 he naively say . 
 Farmer Oak have one - and - a - half christian character- 
 istic too many to succeed with Bathsheba : his humility , 
 and a superfluous moiety of honesty . Bathsheba be 
 decidedly disconcert , 
 " well , then , why do you come and disturb I ? " 
 she say , almost angrily , if not quite , an enlarging red 
 spot rise in each cheek . 
 " I can not   do what I think would be - would be - - " 
 " right ? " 
 " no : wise . " 
 " you have make an admission now , Mr. Oak . " she 
 exclaim , with even more hauteur , and rock she 
 head disdainfully . " after that , do you think I could 
 marry you ? not if I know it . " 
 he break in passionately . " but do not   mistake I 
 like that ! because I be open enough to own what 
 every man in my shoe would have think of , you 
 make your colour come up your face , and get crab 
 with I . that about your not be good enough for 
 I be nonsense . you speak like a lady - all the parish 
 notice it , and your uncle at Weatherbury be , I have 
 heerd , a large farmer - much large than ever I shall 
 be . may I call in the evening , or will you walk along 
 with I o ' sunday ? I do not   want you to make - up 
 your mind at once , if you would rather not . " 
 " no - no - I can not . do not   press I any more - 
 do not . I do not   love you - so ' twould be ridiculous , " 
 he say , with a laugh . 
 no man like to see his emotion the sport of a 
 merry - go - round of skittishness . " very well . " say Oak , 
 firmly , with the bearing of one who be go to give " 
 his day and night to Ecclesiastes for ever . " then 
 I will ask you no more . " 
 CHAPTER v 
 departure of BATHSHEBA - a PASTORAL TRAGEDY 
 the news which one day reach Gabriel , that Bath- 
 sheba Everdene have leave the neighbourhood , have an 
 influence upon he which might have surprise any 
 who never suspect that the more emphatic the renun- 
 ciation the less absolute its character . 
 it may have be observe that there be no regula 
 path for get out of love as there be for get in . 
 some people look upon marriage as a short cut that way , 
 but it have be know to fail . separation , which be 
 the mean that chance offer to Gabriel Oak by 
 Bathsheba 's disappearance though effectual with people 
 of certain humour be apt to idealise the removed object 
 with other - notably those whose affection , placid and 
 regular as it may be flow deep and long . Oak belong 
 to the even - temper order of humanity , and feel the 
 secret fusion of himself in Bathsheba to be burn with 
 a fine flame now that she be go - that be all . 
 his incipient friendship with her aunt - have be 
 nip by the failure of his suit , and all that Oak learn 
 of Bathsheba 's movement be do indirectly . it ap- 
 peare that she have go to a place call Weatherbury , 
 more than twenty mile off , but in what capacity - 
 whether as a visitor , or permanently , he could not 
 discover . 
 Gabriel have two dog . George , the elder , exhibit 
 an ebony - tip nose , surround by a narrow margin 
 of pink flesh , and a coat mark in random splotch 
 approximating in colour to white and slaty grey ; but the 
 grey , after year of sun and rain , have be scorch and 
 wash out of the more prominent lock , leave they 
 of a reddish - brown , as if the blue component of the grey 
 have fade , like the indigo from the same kind of colour in 
 Turner 's picture . in substance it have originally be 
 hair , but long contact with sheep seem to be turn 
 it by degree into wool of a poor quality and staple . 
 this dog have originally belong to a shepherd of 
 inferior moral and dreadful temper , and the result be 
 that George know the exact degree of condemnation 
 signify by curse and swearing of all description 
 well than the wicked old man in the neighbourhood . 
 long experience have so precisely teach the animal the 
 difference between such exclamation as " come in ! " 
 and " D - - ye , come in ! " that he know to a hair 's 
 breadth the rate of trot back from the ewe ' tail 
 that each call involve , if a staggerer with the sheep 
 crook be to be escape . though old , he be clever 
 and trustworthy still . 
 the young dog , George 's son , might possibly have 
 be the image of his mother , for there be not much 
 resemblance between he and George . he be learn- 
 e the sheep - keep business , so as to follow on at 
 the flock when the other should die , but have get no 
 far than the rudiment as yet - still find an 
 insuperable difficulty in distinguish between do a 
 thing well enough and do it too well . so earnest 
 and yet so wrong - headed be this young dog   he have no , 
 name in particular , and answer with perfect readiness 
 to any pleasant interjection , that if send behind the 
 flock to help they on , he do it so thoroughly that he 
 would have chase they across the whole county with 
 the great pleasure if not call off or remind when 
 to step by the example of old George . 
 thus much for the dog . on the further side of 
 Norcombe Hill be a chalk - pit , from which chalk have 
 be draw for generation , and spread over adjacent 
 farm . two hedge converge upon it in the form of 
 a v , but without quite meeting . the narrow opening 
 left , which be immediately over the brow of the pit , 
 be protect by a rough railing . 
 one night , when Farmer Oak have return to , his 
 house , believe there would be no further necessity for 
 his attendance on the down , he call as usual to the 
 dog , previously to shut they up in the outhouse till 
 next morning . only one respond - old George ; the 
 other - could not be find , either in the house , lane , or 
 garden . - Gabriel then remember that he have leave the 
 two dog on the hill eat a dead lamb   a kind of meat 
 he usually keep from they , except when other food - run 
 finish his meal , he go indoor to the luxury of a bed , 
 which latterly he have only enjoy on Sundays . 
 it be a still , moist night . just before dawn he be 
 assist in wake by the abnormal reverberation of 
 familiar music . to the shepherd , the note of the sheep " 
 chronic sound that only make itself notice by cease 
 ever distant , that all be well in the fold . in the solemn 
 this exceptional ringing may be cause in two way - 
 by the rapid feeding of the sheep bear the bell , as 
 when the flock break into new pasture , which give it 
 an intermittent rapidity , or by the sheep start off in 
 a run , when the sound have a regular palpitation . the 
 experienced ear of Oak know the sound he now hear 
 to be cause by the running of the flock with great 
 velocity . 
 he jump out of bed , dress , tear down the lane 
 through a foggy dawn , and ascend the hill . the 
 forward ewe be keep apart from those among which 
 the fall of lamb would be later , there be two hundred 
 of the latter class in Gabriel 's flock . these two hundred 
 seem to have absolutely vanish from the hill . there 
 be the fifty with their lamb , enclose at the other end 
 as he have leave they , but the rest , form the bulk of 
 the flock , be nowhere . Gabriel call at the top of 
 his voice the shepherd 's call . 
 " Ovey , ovey , ovey ! " 
 not a single bleat . he go to the hedge - a gap 
 have be break through it , and in the gap be the 
 footprint of the sheep . rather surprised to find 
 they break fence at this season , yet put it down 
 instantly to their great fondness for ivy in winter - time , 
 of which a great deal grow in the plantation , he follow 
 through the hedge . they be not in the plantation . 
 he call again : the valley and farth hill resound 
 as when the sailor invoke the lost Hylas on the Mysian 
 shore ; but no sheep . he pass through the tree and 
 along the ridge of the hill . on the extreme summit , 
 where the end of the two converging hedge of which 
 we have speak be stop short by meet the brow 
 of the chalk - pit , he see the young dog stand against 
 the sky - dark and motionless as Napoleon at St. 
 Helena . 
 a horrible conviction dart through Oak . with 
 a sensation of bodily faintness he advance : at one 
 point the rail be break through , and there he see 
 the footprint of his ewe . the dog come up , lick 
 his hand , and make sign imply that he expect 
 some great reward for signal service render . Oak 
 look over the precipice . the ewe lie dead and die 
 at its foot - a heap of two hundred mangle carcass , 
 represent in their condition just now at least two 
 hundred more . 
 Oak be an intensely humane man : indeed , his 
 humanity often tear in piece any politic intention of 
 his which border on strategy , and carry he on as 
 by gravitation . a shadow in his life have always be 
 that his flock end in mutton - that a day come and 
 find every shepherd an arrant traitor to his defenseless 
 sheep . his first feeling now be one of pity for the 
 untimely fate of these gentle ewe and their unborn 
 lamb . 
 it be a second to remember another phase of the 
 matter . the sheep be not insure . all the saving 
 of a frugal life have be disperse at a blow ; his hope 
 of be an independent farmer be lay low - possibly 
 for ever . Gabriel 's energy , patience , and industry have 
 be so severely tax during the year of his life between 
 eighteen and eight - and - twenty , to reach his present stage 
 of progress that no more seem to be leave in he . he 
 hand . 
 stupor , however , do not last for ever , and Farmer 
 Oak recover from his . it be as remarkable as it be 
 characteristic that the one sentence he utter be in 
 thankfulness : - 
 " thank God I be not married : what would she have 
 do in the poverty now come upon I ! " 
 Oak raise his head , and wonder what he could 
 do listlessly survey the scene . by the outer margin 
 of the Pit be an oval pond , and over it hang the 
 attenuate skeleton of a chrome - yellow moon which 
 have only a few day to last - the morning star dog 
 she on the left hand . the pool glitter like a dead 
 man 's eye , and as the world awake a breeze blew , 
 shake and elongate the reflection of the moon 
 without break it , and turn the image of the star 
 to a phosphoric streak upon the water . all this Oak 
 see and remember . 
 as far as could be learn it appear that the poor 
 young dog , still under the impression that since he be 
 keep for run after sheep , the more he run after 
 they the well , have at the end of his meal off the 
 dead lamb , which may have give he additional energy 
 and spirit , collect all the ewe into a corner , drive 
 the timid creature through the hedge , across the upper 
 field , and by main force of worry have give they 
 momentum enough to break down a portion of the 
 rotten railing , and so hurl they over the edge . 
 George 's son have do his work so thoroughly that 
 he be consider too good a workman to live , and be , 
 in fact , take and tragically shoot at twelve o'clock that 
 same day - another instance of the untoward fate which 
 so often attend dog and other philosopher who 
 follow out a train of reasoning to its logical conclusion , 
 and attempt perfectly consistent conduct in a world 
 make up so largely of compromise . 
 Gabriel 's farm have be stock by a dealer - on the 
 strength of Oak 's promising look and character - who 
 be receive a percentage from the farmer till such 
 time as the advance should be clear off Oak found- 
 that the value of stock , plant , and implement which 
 be really his own would be about sufficient to pay his 
 debt , leave himself a free man with the clothe he 
 stand up in , and nothing more . 
 CHAPTER VI 
 the FAIR - the JOURNEY - the FIRE 
 two month pass away . we be bring on to a 
 day in February , on which be hold the yearly statute 
 or hire fair in the county - town of Casterbridge . 
 at one end of the street stand from two to three 
 hundred blithe and hearty labourer wait upon Chance 
  - all man of the stamp to whom labour suggest nothing 
 bad than a wrestle with gravitation , and pleasure 
 nothing well than a renunciation of the same among 
 these , carter and waggoner be distinguish by 
 have a piece of whip - cord twisted round their hat ; 
 thatcher wear a fragment of weave straw ; shepherd 
 hold their sheep - crook in their hand ; and thus the 
 situation require be know to the hirer at a 
 glance . 
 in the crowd be an athletic young fellow of some- 
 what superior appearance to the rest - in fact , his 
 superiority be mark enough to lead several ruddy 
 peasant stand by to speak to he inquiringly , as to 
 a farmer , and to use ` Sir ' as a finishing word . his 
 answer always be , 
 " I be look for a place myself - a bailiff 's . do 
 Ye know of anybody who want one ? " 
 Gabriel be pale now . his eye be more medi- 
 tative , and his expression be more sad . he have 
 pass through an ordeal of wretchedness which have 
 give he more than it have take away . he have sink 
 from his modest elevation as pastoral king into the very 
 slime - pit of Siddim ; but there be leave to he a digni- 
 fie calm he have never before know , and that indiffer- 
 ence to fate which , though it often make a villain of 
 a man , be the basis of his sublimity when it do not . 
 and thus the abasement have be exaltation , and the 
 loss gain . 
 in the morning a regiment of cavalry have leave the 
 town , and a sergeant and his party have be beat up 
 for recruit through the four street . as the end of the 
 day draw on , and he find himself not hire , Gabriel 
 almost wish that he have join they , and go off to 
 serve his country . weary of stand in the market- 
 place , and not much mind the kind of work he 
 turn his hand to , he decide to offer himself in some 
 other capacity than that of bailiff . 
 all the farmer seem to be want shepherd . 
 Sheep - tending be Gabriel 's speciality . turn down 
 an obscure street and enter an obscurer lane , he go 
 up to a smith 's shop . 
 " how long would it take you to make a shepherd 's 
 crook ? " 
 " twenty minute . " 
 " how much ? " 
 " two shilling . " 
 he sit on a bench and the crook be make , a stem 
 be give he into the bargain . 
 he then go to a ready - make clothe ' shop , the 
 owner of which have a large rural connection . as the 
 crook have absorb most of Gabriel 's money , he 
 attempt , and carry out , an exchange of his overcoat 
 for a shepherd 's regulation smock - frock . 
 this transaction have be complete , he again 
 hurry off to the centre of the town , and stand on the 
 kerb of the pavement , as a shepherd , crook in hand . 
 now that Oak have turn himself into a shepherd , it 
 seem that bailif be most in demand . however , two 
 or three farmer notice he and draw near . dialogue 
 follow , more or lessin the subjoin for : - 
 " where do you come from ? " 
 " Norcombe . " 
 " that be a long way . 
 " fifteen mile . " 
 " who be farm be you upon last ? " 
 " my own . " 
 this reply invariably operate like a rumour of 
 cholera . the inquire farmer would edge away and 
 shake his head dubiously . Gabriel , like his dog , be 
 too good to be trustworthy , . and he never make advance 
 beyond this point . 
 it be safe to accept any chance that offer itself , and 
 extemporize a procedure to fit it , than to get a good 
 shepherd , but have lay himself out for anything in the 
 whole cycle of labour that be require in the fair . it 
 grow dusk . some merry man be whistle and 
 singing by the corn - exchange . Gabriel 's hand , which 
 have lie for some time idle in his smock - frock pocket , 
 touch his flute which he carry there . here be 
 an opportunity for put his dearly buy wisdom 
 into practice . 
 he draw out his flute and begin to play " jockey to 
 the Fair " in the style of a man who have never know 
 moment 's sorrow . Oak could pipe with arcadian 
 sweetness and the sound of the well - know note 
 cheer his own heart as well as those of the lounger . 
 he play on with spirit , and in half an hour have 
 earn in pence what be a small fortune to a destitute 
 man . 
 by make inquiry he learn that there be another 
 fair at Shottsford the next day . 
 " how far be Shottsford ? " 
 " ten mile t'other side of Weatherbury . " 
 Weatherbury ! it be where Bathsheba have go 
 two month before . this information be like come 
 from night into noon . 
 " how far be it to Weatherbury ? " 
 " five or six mile . " 
 Bathsheba have probably leave Weatherbury long before 
 this time , but the place have enough interest attach 
 to it to lead Oak to choose Shottsford fair as his next 
 field of inquiry , because it lie in the Weatherbury 
 quarter . moreover , the Weatherbury folk be by no 
 mean unintereste intrinsically . if report speak truly 
 they be as hardy , merry , thriving , wicke a set as 
 any in the whole county . Oak resolve to sleep at 
 Weatherbury - that - night on his way to Shottsford , 
 and strike out at once - into the - high road which have 
 be recommend as the direct route to the village in 
 question . 
 the road stretch through water - meadow traverse 
 by little brook , whose quivering surface be braid 
 along their centre , and fold into crease at the side ; 
 or , where the flow be more rapid , the stream be pie 
 with spot of white froth , which ride on in undisturbed 
 serenity . on the high level the dead and dry carcass 
 of leaf tap the ground as they bowl along helter- 
 skelter upon the shoulder of the wind , and little bird 
 in the hedge be rustle their feather and tuck 
 themselves in comfortably for the night , retain their 
 place if Oak keep move , but fly away if he 
 stop to look at they . he pass by Yalbury - Wood 
 where the game - bird be rise to their roost , and 
 hear the crack - voice cock - pheasant " cu - uck , cuck , " 
 and the wheezy whistle of the hen . 
 by the time he have walk three or four mile every 
 shape in the - landscape have assume a uniform hue of 
 blackness . he descend Yalbury Hill and could just 
 discern ahead of he a waggon , draw up under a great 
 over - hang tree by the roadside . 
 on come close , he find there be no horse 
 attach to it , the spot be apparently quite deserted . 
 the waggon , from its position , seem to have be leave 
 there for the night , for beyond about half a truss of hay 
 which be heap in the bottom , it be quite empty . 
 Gabriel sit down on the shaft of the vehicle and con- 
 sidere his position . he calculate that he have walk 
 a very fair proportion of the journey ; and have be 
 on foot since daybreak , he feel tempt to lie down upon 
 the hay in the waggon instead of push on to the 
 village of Weatherbury , and have to pay for a lodging . 
 eat his las slice of bread and ham , and drink 
 from the bottle of cider he have take the precaution to 
 bring with he , he get into the lonely waggon . here 
 he spread half of the hay as a bed , and , as well as he 
 could in the darkness , pull the other half over he 
 by way of bed - clothe , cover himself entirely , and 
 feeling , physically , as comfortable as ever he have be 
 in his life . inward melancholy it be impossible for 
 a man like Oak , introspective far beyond his neighbour , 
 to banish quite , whilst con the present . untoward 
 page of his history . so , think of his misfortune , 
 amorous and pastoral he fall asleep , shepherd enjoy , 
 in common with sailor , the privilege of be able to 
 summon the god instead of have to wait for he . 
 on somewhat suddenly awake after a sleep of 
 whose length he have no idea , Oak find that the waggon 
 be in motion . he be be carry along the road 
 at a rate rather considerable for a vehicle without 
 spring , and under circumstance of physical uneasiness , 
 his head be dandle up and down on the bed of 
 the waggon like a kettledrum - stick . he then dis- 
 tinguishe voice in conversation , come from the 
 forpart of the waggon . his concern at this dilemma 
  which would have be alarm , have he be a thriving 
 man ; but - misfortune be a fine opiate to personal terror 
 lead he to peer cautiously from the hay , and the first 
 sight he beheld be the star above he . Charles 's 
 Wain be get towards a right angle with the Pole 
 star , and Gabriel conclude that it must be about nine 
 o'clock - in other word , that he have sleep two hour . 
 this small astronomical calculation be make without 
 any positive effort , and whilst he be stealthily turn 
 to discover , if possible , into whose hand he have fall . 
 two figure be dimly visible in front , sit with 
 their leg outside the waggon , one of whom be drive . 
 Gabriel soon find that this be the waggoner , and it 
 appear they have come from Casterbridge fair , like 
 himself . 
 a conversation be in progress , which continue 
 thus : - 
 " be as ' twill , she be a fine handsome body as far 's 
 look be concern . but that be only the skin of the 
 woman , and these dandy cattle be as - proud as a lucifer 
 in their inside . " 
 " ay - so ' a do seem , Billy smallbury - so ' a do seem . " 
 this utterance be very shaky by nature , and more so 
 by circumstance , the jolting of the waggon not being- 
 without its effect upon the speaker 's larynx . it come 
 " from the man who hold the rein . 
 " she be a very vain feymell - so ' tis say here and 
 there . " 
 " ah , now . if so be ' tis like that , I can not   look she in 
 the face . Lord , no : not i - heh - heh - heh ! such a shy 
 man as I be ! " 
 " yes - she be very vain . ' Tis say that every night at 
 go to bed she look in the glass to put on her night- 
 cap properly . " 
 " and not a married woman . oh , the world ! " 
 " and ' a can play the peanner , so ' tis say . can 
 play so clever that ' a can make a psalm tune sound as 
 well as the merry loose song a man can wish for . " 
 " d'ye tell o't ! a happy time for we , and I feel quite 
 a new man ! and how do she play ? " 
 " that I do not   know , Master Poorgrass . " 
 on hear these and other similar remark , a wild 
 thought flash into Gabriel 's mind that they might 
 be speak of Bathsheba . there be , however , no 
 ground for retain such a supposition , for the waggon , 
 though go in the direction of Weatherbury , might be 
 go beyond it , and the woman allude to seem to be 
 the mistress of some estate . they be now apparently 
 close upon Weatherbury and not to alarm the speaker 
 unnecessarily , Gabriel slip out of the waggon unseen . 
 he turn to an opening in the hedge , which he 
 find to be a gate , and mount thereon , he sit 
 meditate whether to seek a cheap lodging in the 
 village , or to ensure a cheap one by lie under 
 some hay or corn - stack . the crunch jangle of the 
 waggon die upon his ear . he be about to walk on , 
 when he notice on his left hand an unusual light - 
 appear about half a mile distant . Oak watch it , 
 and the glow increase . something be on fire . 
 Gabriel again mount the gate , and , leap down 
 on the other side upon what he find to be plough 
 soil , make across the field in the exact direction of the 
 fire . the blaze , enlarge in a double ratio by his 
 approach and its own increase , show he as he draw 
 nearer the outline of rick beside it , light up to great 
 distinctness . a rick - yard be the source of the fire . 
 his weary face now begin to be paint over with a 
 rich orange glow , and the whole front of his smock- 
 frock and gaiter be cover with a dancing shadow 
 pattern of thorn - twig - the light reach he through 
 a leafless intervene hedge - and the metallic curve of 
 his sheep - crook shone silver - bright in the same abound- 
 ing ray . he come up to the boundary fence , and 
 stand to regain breath . it seem as if the spot be 
 unoccupied by a live soul . 
 the fire be issue from a long straw - stack , which 
 be so far go as to preclude a possibility of save it . 
 a rick burn differently from a house . as the wind 
 blow the fire inward , the portion in flame completely 
 disappear like melt sugar , and the outline be lose 
 to the eye . however , a hay or a wheat - rick , well put 
 together , will resist combustion for a length of time , if 
 it begin on the outside . 
 this before Gabriel 's eye be a- rick of straw , loosely 
 put together , and the flame dart into it with lightning 
 swiftness . it glow on the windward side , rise and 
 fall in intensity , like the coal of a cigar . then a 
 superincumbent bundle roll down , with a whisk 
 noise ; flame elongate , and bent themselves about 
 with a quiet roar , but no crackle . bank of smoke 
 go off horizontally at the back like pass cloud , 
 and behind these burn hidden pyre , illuminate 
 the semi - transparent sheet of smoke to a lustrous yellow 
 uniformity . individual straw in the foreground be 
 consume in a creep movement of ruddy heat , as 
 if they be knot of red worm , and above shone 
 imaginary fiery face , tongue hang from lip , glare 
 eye , and other impish form , from which at interval 
 spark fly in cluster like bird from a nest , 
 Oak suddenly cease from be a mere spectator 
 by discover the case to be more serious than he have 
 at first imagine . a scroll of smoke blow aside and 
 reveal to he a wheat - rick in startling juxtaposition 
 with the decay one , and behind this a series of 
 other , compose the main corn produce of the farm ; 
 so that instead of the straw - stack standing , as he have 
 imagine comparatively isolate , there be a regular 
 connection between it and the remain stack of the 
 group . 
 Gabriel leapt over the hedge , and see that he be 
 not alone . the first man he come to be run 
 about in a great hurry , as if his thought be several 
 yard in advance of his body , which they could never 
 drag on fast enough . 
 " o , man - fire , fire ! a good master and a. bad 
 servant be fire , fire ! - I mane a bad servant and a good 
 master O , Mark Clark - come ! and you , Billy 
 smallbury - and you , Maryann Money - and you , Jan 
 Coggan , and Matthew there ! " other figure now 
 appear behind this shout man and among the 
 smoke , and Gabriel find that , far from be alone 
 he be in a great company - whose shadow dance 
 merrily up and down , time by the jigging of the 
 flame , and not at all by their owner ' movement . 
 the assemblage - belong to that class of society 
 which cast its thought into the form of feeling , and 
 its feeling into the form of commotion - set to work 
 with a remarkable confusion of purpose . 
 " stop the draught under the wheat - rick ! " cry 
 Gabriel to those near to he . the corn stand on 
 stone staddle , and between these , tongue of yellow 
 hue from the burn straw lick and dart playfully . 
 if the fire once get under this stack , all would be 
 lose . 
 " get a tarpaulin - quick ! " say Gabriel . 
 a rick - cloth be bring , and they hang it like a 
 curtain across the channel . the flame immediately 
 cease to go under the bottom of the corn - stack , and 
 stand up vertical . 
 " stand here with a bucket of water and keep the 
 cloth wet . " say Gabriel again . 
 the flame , now drive upwards , begin to attack 
 the angle of the huge roof cover the wheat - stack . 
 " a ladder . " cry Gabriel . 
 " the ladder be against the straw - rick and be burn 
 to a cinder . " say a spectre - like form in the smoke . 
 Oak seize the cut end of the sheaf , as if he 
 be go to engage in the operation of " reed - drawing , " 
 and dig in his foot , and occasionally stick in the 
 stem of his sheep - crook , he clamber up the beetle 
 face . he at once sit astride the very apex , and begin 
 with his crook to beat off the fiery fragment which have 
 lodge thereon , shout to the other to get he a 
 bough and a ladder , and some water . 
 Billy Smallbury - one of the man who have be on 
 the waggon - by this time have find a ladder , which 
 Mark Clark ascend , hold on beside Oak upon the 
 thatch . the smoke at this corner be stifle , and 
 Clark , a nimble fellow , have be hand a bucket 
 of water , bath Oak 's face and sprinkle he generally , 
 whilst Gabriel , now with a long beech - bough in one 
 hand , in addition to his crook in the other , keep 
 sweep the stack and dislodge all fiery particle . 
 on the ground the group of villager be still 
 occupy in do all they could to keep down the 
 conflagration , which be not much . they be all 
 ting orange , and back up by shadow of vary 
 pattern . round the corner of the large stack , out 
 of the direct ray of the fire , stand a pony , bear a 
 young woman on its back . by her side be another 
 woman , on foot . these two seem to keep at a 
 distance from the fire , that the horse might not become 
 restive . 
 " he be a shepherd . " say the woman on foot . " yes - 
 he be . see how his crook shin as he beat the rick 
 with it . and his smock - frock be burn in two hole , I 
 declare ! a fine young shepherd he be too , ma'am . " 
 " whose shepherd be he ? " say the equestrian in a 
 clear voice . 
 " do not   know , ma'am . " " do not   any of the other know ? " 
 " nobody at all - I have   ask them . quite a stranger , 
 they say . " 
 the young woman on the pony ride out from the 
 shade and look anxiously around . 
 " do you think the barn be safe ? " she say . 
 " D'ye think the barn be safe , Jan Coggan ? " say 
 the second woman , pass on the question to the 
 near man in that direction . 
 " Safe -now - leastwise I think so . if this rick have 
 go the barn would have follow . ' tis- that bold 
 shepherd up there that have do the most good - he 
 sit on the top o ' rick , whiz his great long - arm 
 about like a windmill . " 
 " he do work hard . " say the young woman on 
 horseback , look up at Gabriel through her thick 
 woollen veil . " I wish he be shepherd here . do not 
 any of you know his name . " 
 " never hear the man 's name in my life , or seed 
 his form afore . " 
 the fire begin to get worst , and Gabriel 's elevated 
 position be no long require of he , he make as 
 if to descend . 
 " Maryann . " say the girl on horseback , " go to he 
 as he come down , and say that the farmer wish to 
 thank he for the great service he have do . " 
 Maryann stalk off towards the rick and meet 
 Oak at the foot of the ladder . she deliver she 
 message . 
 " where be your master the farmer ? " ask Gabriel , 
 kindling with the idea of get employment that 
 seem to strike he now . 
 " ' tisn't   a master ; ' tis a mistress , shepherd . " 
 " a woman farmer ? " 
 " ay , ' a b'lieve , and a rich one too ! " say a by- 
 stander . " lately ' a come here from a distance . take 
 on her uncle 's farm , who die suddenly . use to 
 measure his money in half - pint cup . they say now 
 that she've   business in every bank in Casterbridge , and 
 think no more of play pitch - and - toss sovereign than 
 you and I , do pitch - halfpenny - not a bit in the world , 
 shepherd . " 
 " that be she , back there upon the pony . " say Mary- 
 ann . " wi ' her face a - cover up in that black cloth with 
 hole in it . " 
 Oak , his feature smudge , grimy , and undiscoverable 
 from the smoke and heat , his smock - frock burn - into 
 hole and dripping with water , the ash stem of his sheep- 
 crook char six inch short , advanse with the 
 humility stern adversity have thrust upon he up to 
 the slight female form in the saddle . he lift his 
 hat with respect , and not without gallantry : step 
 close to her hang foot he say in a hesitate voice , - 
 " do you happen to want a shepherd , ma'am ? " 
 she lift the wool veil tie round her face , and 
 look all astonishment . Gabriel and his cold - hearted 
 darling , Bathsheba Everdene , be face to face . 
 Bathsheba do not speak , and he mechanically 
 repeat in an abashed and sad voice , - 
 " do you want a shepherd , ma'am ? " 
 CHAPTER VII 
 RECOGNITION - a TIMID girl 
 BATHSHEBA withdraw into the shade . she scarcely 
 know whether most to be amuse at the singularity of 
 the meeting , or to be concern at its awkwardness . 
 there be room for a little pity , also for a very little 
 exultation : the former at his position , the latter at her 
 own . embarrassed she be not , and she " remember 
 Gabriel 's declaration of love to she at Norcombe only 
 to think she have nearly forget it . 
 " yes , " she murmur , put on an air of dignity , 
 and turn again to he with a little warmth of cheek ; 
 " I do want a shepherd . but - - " 
 " he be the very man , ma'am . " say one of the villager , 
 quietly . 
 conviction breed conviction . " ay , that ' a be . " say 
 a second , decisively . 
 " the man , truly ! " say a third , with heartiness . " 
 " he be all there ! " say number four , fervidly . " 
 then will you tell he to speak to the bailiff , say 
 Bathsheba . 
 all " be practical again now . a summer eve and 
 loneliness would have be necessary to give the 
 meeting its proper fulness of romance . 
 the palpitation within his breast at discover that this 
 Ashtoreth of strange report be only a modification of 
 Venus the well - know and admire , retire with he to 
 talk over the necessary preliminary of hire . 
 the fire before they waste away . " Men . " say 
 Bathsheba , " you shall take a little refreshment after this 
 extra work . will you come to the house ? " 
 " we could knock in a bit and a drop a good deal 
 free , Miss , if so be ye'd send it to Warren 's Malthouse , " 
 reply the spokesman . 
 Bathsheba then ride off into the darkness , and the 
 man straggle on to the village in two and three - Oak 
 and the bailiff be leave by the rick alone . 
 " and now . " say the bailiff , finally , " all be settle , I 
 think , about your coming , and I be go home - along . 
 good - night to ye , shepherd . " 
 " can you get I a lodging ? " inquire Gabriel . 
 " that I can not , indeed , " he say , move past Oak as 
 a christian edge past an offertory - plate when he do 
 not mean to contribute . " if you follow on the road till 
 you come to Warren 's Malthouse , where they be all 
 go to have their snap of victual , I daresay some of 
 them will tell you of a place . good - night to ye , shepherd . " 
 the bailiff who show this nervous dread of love 
 his neighbour as himself , go up the hill , and Oak 
 walk on to the village , still astonish at the ren- 
 counter with Bathsheba , glad of his nearness to she , and 
 perplex at the rapidity with which the unpractised girl 
 of Norcombe have develop into the supervising and cool 
 woman here . but some woman only require an emerg- 
 ency to make they fit for one . 
 oblige , to some extent , to forgo dream in order 
 to find the way , he reach the churchyard , and pass 
 round it under the wall where several ancient tree grow . 
 there be a wide margin of grass along here , and 
 Gabriel 's footstep be deaden by its softness , even 
 at this indurating period of the year . when abreast of 
 a trunk which appear to be the old of the old , he 
 become aware that a figure be stand behind it . 
 Gabriel do not pause in his walk , and in another 
 moment he accidentally kick a loose stone . the noise 
 be enough to disturb the motionless stranger , who 
 start and assume a careless position . 
 it be a slim girl , rather thinly clad . 
 " good - night to you . " say Gabriel , heartily . 
 " good - night . " say the girl to Gabriel . 
 the voice be unexpectedly attractive ; it be " the 
 low and dulcet note suggestive of romance , " common in 
 description , rare in experience . 
 " I will thank you to tell I if I be in the way for 
 Warren 's Malthouse ? " Gabriel resume , primarily to gain 
 the information , indirectly to get more of the music . 
 " quite right . it be at the bottom of the hill . and 
 do you know - - " the girl hesitate and then go 
 on again . " do you know how late they keep open 
 the Buck 's Head Inn ? " she seem " to be win by 
 Gabriel 's heartiness , as Gabriel have be win by her 
 modulation . 
 " I do not   know where the Buck 's Head be , or anything 
 about it . do you think of go there to - night ? " 
 " yes - - " the woman again pause . there be 
 no necessity for any continuance of speech , and the fact 
 that she do add more seem to proceed from an 
 unconscious desire to show unconcern by make a 
 remark , which be noticeable in the ingenuous when they 
 be act by stealth . " you be not a Weatherbury man ? " 
 she say , timorously . 
 " I be not . I be the new shepherd - just arrive . " 
 " only a shepherd - and you seem almost a farmer by 
 your way . " 
 " only a shepherd . " Gabriel repeat , in a dull cadence 
 of finality . " his thought be direct to the past , his 
 eye to the foot of the girl ; and for the first time he 
 see lie there a bundle of some sort . she may have 
 perceive the direction of his face , for she say 
 coaxingly , - 
 " you will not   say anything in the parish about have 
 see I here , will you - at least , not for a day or two ? " 
 " I will not   if you wish I not to . " say Oak . 
 " thank you , indeed . " the other reply . "I be 
 rather poor , and I do not   want people to know anything 
 about I . " then she be silent and shiver . 
 " you ought to have a cloak on such a cold night , " 
 Gabriel observe . " I would advise ' ee to get indoor . " 
 " o no ! would you mind go on and leave I ? 
 I thank you much for what you have tell I . " 
 " I will go on . " he say ; add hesitatingly , - " since 
 you be not very well off , perhaps you would accept this 
 trifle from I . it be only a shilling , but it be all I have 
 to spare . " 
 " yes , I will take it . " say the stranger , gratefully . 
 she extend her hand ; Gabriel his . in feeling for 
 each other 's palm in the gloom before the money could 
 be pass , a minute incident occur which tell much . 
 Gabriel 's finger alight on the young woman 's wrist . 
 it be beat with a throb of tragic intensity . he have 
 frequently feel the same quick , hard beat in the femoral 
 artery of - his lamb when overdriven . it suggest a 
 consumption too great of a vitality which , to judge from 
 her figure and stature , be already too little . 
 " what be the matter ? " 
 " nothing . " 
 " but there be ? " 
 " no , no , no ! let your have see I be a secret ! " 
 " very well ; I will . good - night , again . " 
 " good - night . " 
 the young girl remain motionless by the tree , and 
 Gabriel descend into the village of Weatherbury , or 
 Lower Longpuddle as it be sometimes call . he 
 fancy that he have feel himself in the penumbra of a 
 very deep sadness when touch that slight and fragile 
 creature . but wisdom lie in moderate mere impres- 
 sion , and Gabriel endeavour to think little of this . 
 CHAPTER VIII 
 the MALTHOUSE - the CHAT - NEWS 
 WARREN 's Malthouse be enclose by an old wall 
 inwrap with ivy , and though not much of the exterior 
 be visible at this hour , the character and purpose of 
 the building be clearly enough show by its outline 
 upon the sky . from the wall an overhang thatch 
 roof slop up to a point in the centre , upon which rise 
 a small wooden lantern , fit with louvre - board on all 
 the four side , and from these opening a mist be dimly 
 perceive to be escape into the night air . there be 
 no window in front ; but a square hole in the door be 
 glaze with a single pane , through which red , comfortable 
 ray now stretch out upon the ivied wall in front . 
 voice be to be hear inside . 
 Oak 's hand skim the surface of the door with 
 finger extend to an Elymas - the - Somerer pattern , till 
 he find a leathern strap , which he pull . this lift 
 a wooden latch , and the door swing open . 
 the room inside be light only by the , ruddy glow 
 from the kiln mouth , which shine over , the floor with 
 the streaming , horizontality of the set sun , and throw 
 upward the shadow of all facial irregularity in those 
 assemble around . the stone - flag floor be wear into 
 a path from the doorway to the kiln , and into undula- 
 tion everywhere . a curved settle of unplaned oak 
 stretch along one side , and in a remote corner be a 
 small bed and bedstead , the owner and frequent occupier 
 of which be the maltster . 
 this aged man be now sit opposite the fire , his 
 frosty white hair and beard overgrow his gnarl 
 figure like the grey moss and lichen upon a leafless 
 apple - tree . he wear breech and the lace - up shoe 
 call ankle - jack ; he keep his eye fix upon the 
 fire . 
 Gabriel 's nose be greet by an atmosphere laden 
 with the sweet smell of new malt . the conversation 
  which seem to have be concern the origin of the 
 fire   immediately cease , and every one ocularly criticise 
 he to the degree express by contract the flesh of 
 their forehead and look at he with narrow eye- 
 lid , as if he have be a light too strong for their sight . 
 Several exclaim meditatively , after this operation have 
 be complete : - 
 " oh , ' tis the new shepherd , ' a b'lieve . " 
 " we think we hear a hand paw about the 
 door for the bobbin , but be not   sure ' twere not a dead 
 leaf blow across . " say another . " come in , shepherd ; 
 sure ye be welcome , though we do not   know yer name . " 
 " Gabriel Oak , that be my name , neighbour . " 
 the ancient maltster sit in the midst turn up 
 this - his turning be as the turning of a rusty 
 crane . 
 " that be never Gable Oak 's grandson over at Nor- 
 combe - never ! " he say , as a formula expressive of 
 surprise , which nobody be suppose to take literally ' . 
 " my father and my grandfather be old man of the 
 name of Gabriel . " say the shepherd , placidly . 
 " Thought I know the man 's face as I seed he 
 on the rick ! - think I do ! and where be ye trading 
 o't to now , shepherd ? " 
 " I be think of biding here . " say Mr. Oak . 
 " knowed yer grandfather for year and year ! " 
 continue the maltster , the word come forth of their 
 own accord as if the momentum previously impart 
 have be sufficient . 
 " ah - and do you ! " 
 " Knowed yer grandmother . " 
 " and her too ! " 
 " likewise know yer father when he be a child . 
 why , my boy Jacob there and your father be swear 
 brother - that they be sure - be not   ye , Jacob ? " 
 " ay , sure . " say his son , a young man about sixty- 
 five , with a semi - bald head and one tooth in the left 
 centre of his upper jaw , which make much of itself by 
 standing prominent , like a milestone in a bank . " but 
 " twa Joe have most to do with he . however , my son 
 William must have know the very man afore we - 
 do not   ye , Billy , afore ye leave Norcombe ? " 
 " no , ' twa Andrew . " say Jacob 's son Billy , a child 
 of forty , or thereabout , who manifest the peculiarity 
 of possess a cheerful soul in a gloomy body , and 
 whose whisker be assume a chinchilla shade here 
 and there . 
 " I can mind Andrew . " say Oak , " as be a man in 
 the place when I be quite a child . " 
 " ay - the other day I and my young daughter , 
 Liddy , be over at my grandson 's christening . " continue 
 Billy . " we be talk about this very family , and 
 " twa only last Purification Day in this very world , when 
 the use - money be gi away to the second - good poor 
 folk , you know , shepherd , and I can mind the day 
 because they all have to traypse up to the vestry - yes , 
 this very man 's family . " 
 " come , shepherd , and drink . ' tis gape and 
 swaller with us - a drap of sommit , but not of much 
 account . " say the maltster , remove from the fire his 
 eye , which be vermilion - red and blear by gaze 
 into it for so many year . " take up the God - forgive- 
 I , Jacob . see if ' tis warm , Jacob . " 
 Jacob stoop to the God - forgive - I , which be a 
 two - handle tall mug stand in the ash , crack 
 and char with heat : it be rather fur with ex- 
 traneous matter about the outside , especially in the 
 crevice of the handle , the innermost curve of which 
 may not have see daylight for several year by reason 
 of this encrustation thereon - form of ash accident- 
 ally wet with cider and bake hard ; but to the mind 
 of any sensible drinker the cup be no bad for that , 
 be incontestably clean on the inside and about the 
 rim . it may be observe that such a class of mug be 
 call a God - forgive - I in Weatherbury and its vicinity 
 for uncertain reason ; probably because its size make 
 any give toper feel ashamed of himself when he see 
 its bottom in drink it empty . 
 Jacob , on receive the order to see if the liquor be 
 warm enough , placidly dip his forefinger into it by 
 way of thermometer , and have pronounce it nearly 
 of the proper degree , raise the cup and very civilly 
 attempt to dust some of the ash from the bottom 
 with the skirt of his smock - frock , because Shepherd Oak 
 be a stranger . 
 " a clane cup for the shepherd . " say the maltster 
 commandingly . 
 " no - not at all , " say Gabriel , in a reprove tone 
 of considerateness . " I never fuss about dirt in its pure 
 state , and when I know what sort it be . " take the 
 mug he drink an inch or more from the depth of its 
 content , and duly pass it to the next man . 
 would not   think of give such trouble to neighbour in 
 washing up when there be so much work to be do in 
 the world already . " continue Oak in a moister tone , 
 after recover from the stoppage of breath which be 
 occasion by pull at large mug . 
 " a right sensible man . " say Jacob . 
 " true , true ; it can not   be gainsay ! " observe a brisk 
 young man - Mark Clark by name , a genial and pleasant 
 gentleman , whom to meet anywhere in your travel be 
 to know , to know be to drink with , and to drink with 
 be , unfortunately , to pay for . 
 " and here be a mouthful of bread and bacon that 
 mis'ess have send , shepherd . the cider will go down 
 well with a bit of victual . do not   ye chaw quite close , 
 shepherd , for I let the bacon fall in the road outside as 
 I be bring it along , and may be ' tis rather gritty . 
 there , ' tis clane dirt ; and we all know what that be , 
 as you say , and you bain't   a particular man we see , 
 shepherd . " 
 " true , true - not at all . " say the friendly Oak . 
 " do not   let your tooth quite meet , and you will not   feel 
 the sandiness at all . ah ! ' tis wonderful what can be 
 do by contrivance ! " 
 " my own mind exactly , neighbour . " 
 " ah , he be his grandfer 's own grandson ! - his grandfer 
 be just such a nice unparticular man ! " say the maltster . 
 " Drink , Henry Fray - drink . " magnanimously say 
 Jan Coggan , a person who hold Saint - simonian notion 
 of share and share alike where liquor be concern , as 
 the vessel show sign of approach he in its gradual 
 revolution among they . 
 have at this moment reach the end of a wistful 
 gaze into mid - air , Henry do not refuse . he be a man 
 of more than middle age , with eyebrow high up in his 
 forehead , who lay it down that the law of the world 
 be bad , with a long - suffer look through his listener 
 at the world allude to , as it present itself to his 
 imagination . he always sign his name " Henery " - 
 strenuously insist upon that spelling , and if any 
 pass schoolmaster venture to remark that the second 
 " e " be superfluous and old - fashioned , he receive the 
 reply that " H - e - n - e - r - y " be the name he be christen 
 and the name he would stick to - in the tone of one 
 to whom orthographical difference be matter which 
 have a great deal to do with personal character . 
 Mr. Jan Coggan , who have pass the cup to Henery , 
 be a crimson man with a spacious countenance , and 
 private glimmer in his eye , whose name have appear 
 on the marriage register of Weatherbury and neighbour- 
 ing parish as good man and chief witness in countless 
 union of the previous twenty year ; he also very 
 frequently fill the post of head godfather in baptism 
 of the subtly - jovial kind . 
 " come , Mark Clark - come . Ther 's plenty more 
 in the barrel . " say Jan. 
 " ay - that I will , ' tis my only doctor . " reply Mr. 
 Clark , who , twenty year young than Jan Coggan , 
 revolve in the same orbit . he secrete mirth on all 
 occasion for special discharge at popular party . 
 " why , Joseph Poorgrass , ye han't   have a drop ! " say 
 Mr. Coggan to a self - conscious man in the background , 
 thrust the cup towards he . 
 " such a modest man as he be ! " say Jacob Smallbury . 
 " why , ye've   hardly have strength of eye enough to look 
 in our young mis'ess 's face , so I hear , Joseph ? " 
 all look at Joseph Poorgrass with pity reproach . 
 " no - I have   hardly look at she at all . " simper 
 Joseph , reduce his body small whilst talk , 
 apparently from a meek sense of undue prominence . 
 " and when I seed she , ' twa nothing but blush with 
 I ! " 
 " poor feller . " say Mr. Clark . 
 " ' tis a curious nature for a man . " say Jan Coggan . 
 " yes . " continue Joseph Poorgrass - his shyness , 
 which be so painful as a defect , fill he with a 
 mild complacency now that it be regard as an 
 interesting study . " ' twere blush , blush , blush with 
 I every minute of the time , when she be speak 
 to I . " 
 " I believe ye , Joseph Poorgrass , for we all know ye 
 to be a very bashful man . " 
 " ' tis a ' awkward gift for a man , poor soul . " say the 
 maltster . " and ye have suffer from it a long time , 
 we know . " 
 " ay ever since I be a boy . yes - mother be 
 concerned to her heart about it - yes . but twa all 
 nought . " 
 " do ye ever go into the world to try and stop it , 
 Joseph Poorgrass ? " 
 " oh ay , try all sort o ' company . they take I 
 to Greenhill Fair , and into a great gay jerry - go - nimble 
 show , where there be woman - folk rid round - 
 stand upon horse , with hardly anything on but their 
 smock ; but it do not   cure I a morsel . and then I 
 be put errand - man at the Women 's Skittle Alley at the 
 back of the Tailor 's arm in Casterbridge . ' twas a 
 horrible sinful situation , and a very curious place for a 
 good man . I have to stand and look ba'dy people in 
 the face from morning till night ; but ' twa no use - I 
 be just as - bad as ever after all . Blushes hev be 
 in the family for generation . there , ' tis a happy pro- 
 vidence that I be no bad . " 
 " true . " say Jacob Smallbury , deepen his thought 
 to a profounder view of the subject . " ' tis a thought 
 to look at , that ye might have be bad ; but even 
 as you be , ' tis a very bad affliction for ' ee , Joseph . for 
 ye see , shepherd , though ' tis very well for a woman , 
 dang it all , ' tis awkward for a man like he , poor 
 feller ? " 
 " ' tis - ' tis . " say Gabriel , recover from a medita- 
 tion . " yes , very awkward for the man . " 
 " ay , and he be very timid , too . " observe Jan Coggan . 
 " once he have be work late at Yalbury Bottom , 
 and have have a drap of drink , and lose his way as he be 
 come home - along through Yalbury Wood , do not   ye , 
 Master Poorgrass ? " 
 " no , no , no ; not that story ! " expostulate the 
 modest man , force a laugh to bury his concern . 
 " - - and so ' a lose himself quite . " continue Mr 
 Coggan , with an impassive face , imply that a true 
 narrative , like time and tide , must run its course and 
 would respect no man . " and as he be come along 
 in the middle of the night , much afeared , and not able 
 to find his way out of the tree nohow , ' a cry out , 
 " man - a - lose ! man - a - lost ! " a owl in a tree happen 
 to be cry " Whoo - whoo - whoo ! " as owl do , you 
 know , shepherd "   Gabriel nod , " and Joseph , all 
 in a tremble , say , " Joseph Poorgrass , of Weatherbury , 
 sir ! " 
 " no , no , now - that be too much ! " say the timid 
 man , become a man of brazen courage all of a sudden . 
 " I do not   say sir . I will tike my oath I do not   say " Joseph 
 Poorgrass o ' Weatherbury , sir . " no , no ; what be right 
 be right , and I never say sir to the bird , know very 
 well that no man of a gentleman 's rank would be 
 holler there at that time o ' night . " Joseph poor- 
 grass of Weatherbury , " - that be every word I say , and 
 I should not   ha ' say that if ' t have not   be for Keeper 
 Day 's metheglin .... there , ' twas a merciful thing it 
 end where it do . " 
 the question of which be right be tacitly waive 
 by the company , Jan go on meditatively : - 
 " and he be the fearfull man , bain't   ye , Joseph ? 
 ay , another time ye be lose by Lambing - Down Gate , 
 be not   ye , Joseph ? " 
 " I be . " reply Poorgrass , as if there be some 
 condition too serious even for modesty to remember 
 itself under , this be one . 
 " yes ; that be the middle of the night , too . the 
 gate would not open , try how he would , and know 
 there be the Devil 's hand in it , he kneel down . " 
 " ay . " say Joseph , acquire confidence from the 
 warmth of the fire , the cider , and a perception of the 
 narrative capability of the experience allude to . 
 " my heart die within I , that time ; but I kneel 
 down and say the Lord 's Prayer , and then the Belie 
 right through , and then the Ten Commandments , in 
 earnest prayer . but no , the gate would not   open ; and 
 then I go on with dearly Beloved Brethren , and , 
 think I , this make four , and ' tis all I know out of 
 book , and if this do not   do it nothing will , and I be a 
 lose man . well , when I get to say after I , I 
 rise from my knee and find the gate would open 
  - yes , neighbour , the gate open the same as ever . " 
 a meditation on the obvious inference be indulge 
 in by all , and during its continuance each direct his 
 vision into the ashpit , which glow like a desert in 
 the tropic under a vertical sun , shape their eye long 
 and liny , partly because of the light , partly from the 
 depth of the subject discuss . 
 Gabriel break the silence . " what sort of a place 
 be this to live at , and what sort of a mis'ess be she to 
 work under ? " Gabriel 's bosom thrill gently as he 
 thus slip under the notice of the assembly the inner- 
 most subject of his heart . 
 " we d ' know little of she - nothing . she only 
 show herself a few day ago . her uncle be take 
 bad , and the doctor be call with his world - wide 
 skill ; but he could not   save the man . as I take it , 
 she be go to keep on the farm . 
 " that be about the shape o't , ' a b'lieve . " say Jan 
 uncle be a very fair sort of man . do ye know en , 
 be under them as under one here and there . her 
 uncle be a very fair sort of man . do ye know ' en , 
 shepherd - a bachelor - man ? " 
 " not at all . " 
 " I use to go to his house a - court my first wife , 
 Charlotte , who be his dairymaid . well , a very good- 
 hearted man be Farmer Everdene , and I be a 
 respectable young fellow be allow to call and see 
 she and drink as much ale as I like , but not to carry 
 away any - outside my skin I mane of course . " 
 " ay , ay , Jan Coggan ; we know yer meaning . " 
 " and so you see ' twa beautiful ale , and I wish 
 to value his kindness as much as I could , and not to 
 be so ill - mannered as to drink only a thimbleful , which 
 would have be insult the man 's generosity - - " 
 " true , Master Coggan , ' twould so . " corroborate 
 Mark Clark . 
 " - - and so I use to eat a lot of salt fish afore 
 go , and then by the time I get there I be as dry 
 as a lime - basket - so thorough dry that that ale would 
 slip down - ah , ' twould slip down sweet ! happy 
 time ! heavenly time ! such lovely drunk as I 
 use to have at that house ! you can mind , Jacob ? 
 you use to go wi ' I sometimes . " 
 " I can - I can . " say Jacob . " that one , too , that 
 we have at Buck 's Head on a White Monday be a 
 pretty tipple . " 
 " ' twas . but for a wet of the well class , that 
 bring you no nearer to the horn man than you be 
 afore you begin , there be none like those in Farmer 
 Everdene 's kitchen . not a single damn allow ; no , 
 not a bare poor one , even at the most cheerful moment 
 when all be blindest , though the good old word of 
 sin throw in here and there at such time be a great 
 relief to a merry soul . " 
 " true . " say the maltster . " Nater require she 
 swearing at the regular time , or she be not herself ; and 
 unholy exclamation be a necessity of life . " 
 " but Charlotte . " continue Coggan - " not a word of 
 the sort would Charlotte allow , nor the small item of 
 take in vain .... ay , poor Charlotte , I wonder if she 
 have the good fortune to get into Heaven when ' a die ! 
 but ' a be never much in luck 's way , and perhaps ' a 
 go downwards after all , poor soul . " 
 " and do any of you know Miss Everdene's - father 
 and mother ? " inquire the shepherd , who find some 
 difficulty in keep the conversation in the desire 
 channel . 
 " I know they a little . " say Jacob Smallbury ; " but 
 they be townsfolk , and do not   live here . they have 
 be dead for year . Father , what sort of people be 
 mis'ess ' father and mother ? " 
 " well . " say the maltster , " he be not   much to look 
 at ; but she be a lovely woman . he be fond enough 
 of she as his sweetheart . " 
 " use to kiss her score and long - hundred o time , 
 so ' twa say . " observe Coggan . 
 " he be very proud of she , too , when they be 
 marry , as I have   be tell . " say the maltster . 
 " ay . " say Coggan . " he admire she so much that 
 he use to light the candle three time a night to look 
 at she . " 
 " boundless love ; I should not   have suppose it in the 
 universe ! " murmere Joseph Poorgrass , who habitually 
 speak on a large scale in his moral reflection . 
 " well , to be sure . " say Gabriel . 
 " oh , ' tis true enough . I know the man and 
 woman both well . Levi Everdene - that be the man 's 
 name , sure . " Man . " saith I in my hurry , but he be 
 of a high circle of life than that - ' a be a gentleman- 
 tailor really , worth score of pound . and he become 
 a very celebrated bankrupt two or three time . " 
 " oh , I think he be quite a common man ! " say 
 Joseph . 
 " o no , no ! that man fail for heap of money ; 
 hundred in gold and silver . " 
 the maltster be rather short of breath , Mr. Coggan , 
 after absently scrutinise a coal which have fall among 
 the ash , take up the narrative , with a private twirl of 
 his eye : - 
 " well , now , you would hardly believe it , but that man - 
 husband alive , after a while . understand ? ' a do not 
 want to be fickle , but he could not   help it . the poor 
 feller be faithful and true enough to she in his wish , 
 but his heart would rove , do what he would . he speak 
 to I in real tribulation about it once . " Coggan , " 
 he say , " I could never wish for a handsomer woman 
 than I have   get , but feel she be ticket as my lawful 
 wife , I can not   help my wicked heart wander , do what 
 I will . " but at last I believe he cure it by make she 
 take off her wedding - ring and call she by her maiden 
 name as they sit together after the shop be shut , and 
 so ' a would get to fancy she be only his sweetheart , and 
 not married to he at all . and as soon as he could 
 thoroughly fancy he be do wrong and commit 
 the seventh , ' a get to like she as well as ever , and they 
 live on a perfect picture of mutel love . " 
 " well , ' twas a most ungodly remedy . " murmur 
 Joseph Poorgrass ; " but we ought to feel deep cheerful- 
 ness that a happy Providence keep it from be any 
 bad . you see , he might have go the bad road and 
 give his eye to unlawfulness entirely - yes , gross un- 
 lawfulness , so to say it . " 
 " you see . " say Billy Smallbury , " the man 's will be 
 to do right , sure enough , but his heart do not   chime in . " 
 " he get so much well , that he be quite godly 
 in his later year , be not   he , Jan ? " say Joseph poor- 
 grass . " he get himself confirm over again in a more 
 serious way , and take to say " amen " almost as loud 
 as the clerk , and he like to copy comfort verse 
 from the tombstone . he use , too , to hold the money- 
 plate at let your light so Shine , and stand godfather 
 to poor little come - by - chance child ; and he keep a 
 missionary box upon his table to nab folk unawares 
 when they call ; yes , and he would - box the charity- 
 boy ' ear , if they laugh in church , till they could 
 hardly stand upright , and do other deed of piety 
 natural to the saintly inclined . " 
 " ay , at that time he think of nothing but high 
 thing . " add Billy Smallbury . " one day Parson thirdly 
 meet he and say , " good - Morning , Mister Everdene ; ' tis 
 a fine day ! " " amen " say Everdene , quite absent- 
 like , think only of religion when he seed a parson- 
 " their daughter be not at all a pretty chile at that 
 time . " say Henery Fray . " never should have . think 
 she would have grow up such a handsome body as she be . " 
 " ' tis to be hop her temper be as good as her face . " 
 " well , yes ; but the baily will have most to do with 
 the business and ourselves . ah ! " Henery gaze into 
 the ashpit , and smile volume of ironical knowledge . 
 " a queer Christian , like the Devil 's head in a cowl , 
 " he be . " say Henery , imply that irony must cease 
 at a certain point . " between we two , man and man , I 
 believe that man would as soon tell a lie sunday as 
 working - day - that I do so . " 
 " good faith , you do talk ! " say Gabriel . 
 " true enough . " say the man of bitter mood , look 
 round upon the company with the antithetic laughter 
 that come from a keener appreciation of the misery 
 of life than ordinary man be capable of . ' ah , there be 
 people of one sort , and people of another , but that man 
  - bless your soul ! " 
 Gabriel think fit to change the subject . " you 
 must be a very aged man , malter , to have son grow 
 mild and ancient " he remark . 
 " Father 's so old that ' a can not   mind his age , can ye , 
 father ? " interpose Jacob . " and he growl terrible 
 crook too , lately " Jacob continue , survey his 
 father 's figure , which be rather more bowed than his own . 
 " really one may say that father there be three - double . " 
 " crooked folk will last a long while . " say the maltster , 
 grimly , and not in the good humour . 
 " Shepherd would like to hear the pedigree of yer 
 life , father - would not   ye , shepherd ? 
 " ay that I should . " say Gabriel with the heartiness 
 of a man who have long to hear it for several month . 
 " what may your age be , malter ? " 
 the maltster clear his throat in an exaggerated 
 form for emphasis , and elongate his gaze to the 
 remotest point of the ashpit ! say , in the slow speech 
 justifiable when the importance of a subject be so 
 generally feel that any mannerism must be tolerate 
 in get at it , " well , I do not   mind the year I be 
 bear in , but perhaps I can reckon up the place I have 
 live at , and so get it that way . I bode at Upper long- 
 puddle across there "   nod to the north   " till I be 
 eleven . I bode seven at Kingsbere "   nod to the 
 east   " where I take to malting . I go therefrom to 
 Norcombe , and malt there two - and - twenty year , and- 
 two - and - twenty year I be there turnip - hoe and 
 harvesting . ah , I know that old place , Norcombe , 
 year afore you be think of , Master Oak "   Oak smile 
 sincere belief in the fact . " then I malt at Dur- 
 nover four year , and four year turnip - hoeing ; and 
 I be fourteen time eleven month at Millpond St. 
 Jude 's "   nod north - west - by - north . " Old Twills 
 would not   hire I for more than eleven month at a 
 time , to keep I from be chargeable to the parish 
 if so be I be disabled . then I be three year at 
 Mellstock , and I have   be here one - and - thirty year come 
 Candlemas . how much be that ? " 
 " hundred and seventeen . " chuckle another old 
 gentleman , give to mental arithmetic and little con- 
 versation , who have hitherto sit unobserved in a corner . 
 " well , then , that be my age . " say the maltster , em- 
 phatically . 
 " o no , father ! " say Jacob . " your turnip - hoeing 
 be in the summer and your malting in the winter of 
 the same year , and ye do not   ought to count - both half 
 father . " 
 " Chok ' it all ! I live through the summer , do not 
 I ? that be my question . I suppose ye'll say next I be 
 no age at all to speak of ? " 
 " sure we shall not . " say Gabriel , soothingly . 
 " ye be a very old aged person , malter . " attest Jan 
 must have a wonderful talented constitution to be able 
 to live so long , must not   he , neighbour ? " 
 " true , true ; ye must , malter , wonderful , " say the 
 meeting unanimously . 
 the maltster , be know pacify , be even generous 
 enough to voluntarily disparage in a slight degree the 
 virtue of have live a great many year , by mention 
 that the cup they be drink out of be three year 
 old than he . 
 while the cup be be examine , the end of 
 Gabriel Oak 's flute become visible over his smock - frock 
 I seed you blow into a great flute by now at Caster- 
 bridge ? " 
 " you do . " say Gabriel , blush faintly . " I have   be 
 in great trouble , neighbour , and be drive to it . 
 take it careless - like , shepherd and your time will come 
 tired ? " 
 " neither drum nor trumpet have I hear since 
 Christmas . " say Jan Coggan . " come , raise a tune , 
 Master Oak ! " 
 " that I will . " say Gabriel , pull out his flute and 
 put it together . " a poor tool , neighbour ; but 
 such as I can do ye shall have and welcome . " 
 Oak then strike up " jockey to the Fair . " and play 
 that sparkle melody three time through accent the 
 note in the third round in a most artistic and lively 
 manner by bend his body in small jerk and tap 
 with his foot to beat time . 
 " he can blow the flute very well - that ' a can . " say 
 a young married man , who have no individuality worth 
 mentioning be know as " Susan Tall 's husband . " he 
 continue , " I would as lief as not be able to blow into a 
 flute as well - as that . " 
 " he be a clever man , and ' tis a true comfort for we to 
 have such a shepherd . " murmur Joseph Poorgrass , in 
 a soft cadence . " we ought to feel full o ' thanksgiving 
 that he be not a player of ba'dy song ' instead of these 
 merry tune ; for ' twould have be just as easy for God 
 to have make the shepherd a loose low man - a man of 
 iniquity , so to speak it - as what he be . yes , for our wife " 
 and daughter ' sake we should feel real thank give . " 
 " true , true , - real thanksgiving ! " dash in Mark 
 Clark conclusively , not feel it to be of any conse- 
 quence to his opinion that he have only hear about a 
 word and three - quarter of what Joseph have say . 
 " yes . " add Joseph , begin to feel like a man in 
 the Bible ; " for evil do thrive so in these time that ye 
 may be as much deceive in the clean shave and 
 whitest shirt man as in the raggedest tramp upon the 
 turnpike , if I may term it so . " 
 " ay , I can mind yer face now , shepherd . " say 
 Henery Fray , criticise Gabriel with misty eye as he 
 enter upon his second tune . " yes - now I see ' ee 
 blow into the flute I know ' ee to be the same man 
 I see play at Casterbridge , for yer mouth be scrimp 
 up and yer eye a - star out like a strangle man 's - 
 just as they be now . " 
 " ' tis a pity that play the flute should make a man 
 look such a scarecrow . " observe Mr. Mark Clark , with 
 additional criticism of Gabriel 's countenance , the latter 
 person jerk out , with the ghastly grimace require by 
 the instrument , the chorus of " Dame Durden ! 
 " I hope you do not   mind that young man 's bad 
 manner in name your feature ? " whisper Joseph to 
 Gabriel . 
 " not at all . " say Mr. Oak . 
 " for by nature ye be a very handsome man , 
 shepherd . " continue Joseph Poorgrass , with win 
 sauvity . 
 " ay , that ye be , shepard . " say the company . 
 " thank you very much . " say Oak , in the modest 
 tone good manner demand , think , however , that 
 he would never let Bathsheba see he play the 
 flute ; in this severe show a discretion equal to that 
 relate to its sagacious inventress , the divine Minerva 
 herself . 
 " ah , when I and my wife be marry at Norcombe 
 Church . " say the old maltster , not pleased at find 
 himself leave out of the subject " we be call the 
 handsome couple in the neighbourhood - everybody 
 say so . " 
 " dange if ye bain't   alter now , malter . " say a voice 
 with the vigour natural to the enunciation of a remark- 
 ably evident truism . it come from the old man in the 
 background , whose offensiveness and spiteful way be 
 barely atone for by the occasional chuckle he con- 
 tribute to general laugh . 
 " o no , no . " say Gabriel . 
 " do not   ye play no more shepherd " say Susan Tall 's 
 husband , the young married man who have speak once 
 before . " I must be move and when there be tune 
 go on I seem as if hang in wire . if I think after 
 I would leave that music be still play , and I not there , I 
 should be quite melancholy - like . " 
 " what be yer hurry then , Laban ? " inquire Coggan . 
 " you use to bide as late as the late . " 
 " well , ye see , neighbour , I be lately married to a 
 woman , and she be my vocation now , and so ye see - - " 
 the young man hat lamely . 
 " New Lords new law , as the saying be , I suppose , " 
 remark Coggan . 
 " ay , ' a b'lieve - ha , ha ! " say Susan Tall 's husband , 
 in a tone intend to imply his habitual reception of 
 joke without mind they at all . the young man 
 then wish they good - night and withdraw . 
 Henery Fray be the first to follow . then Gabriel 
 arise and go off with Jan Coggan , who have offer 
 he a lodging . a few minute later , when the remain 
 one be on their leg and about to depart , Fray come 
 back again in a hurry . flourish his finger ominously 
 he throw a gaze teem with tiding just - where his eye 
 alight by accident , which happen to be in Joseph 
 Poorgrass 's face . 
 " o - what be the matter , what be the matter , Henery ? " 
 say Joseph , start back . 
 " what be a - brewing , Henrey ? " ask Jacob and Mark 
 Clark . 
 " Baily Pennyways - Baily Pennyways - I say so ; yes , 
 I say so ! " 
 " what , find out steal anything ? " 
 " steal it be . the news be , that after Miss 
 Everdene get home she go out again to see all be 
 safe , as she usually do , and come in find Baily 
 Pennyways creep down the granary step with half a 
 a bushel of barley . she fleed at he like a cat - never 
 such a tomboy as she be - of course I speak with closed 
 door ? " 
 " you do - you do , Henery . " 
 " she fleed at he , and , to cut a long story short , 
 he own to have carry off five sack altogether , upon 
 her promising not to persecute he . well , he be turn 
 out neck and crop , and my question be , who be go to 
 be baily now ? " 
 the question be such a profound one that Henery 
 be oblige to drink there and then from the large 
 cup till the bottom be distinctly visible inside . before 
 he have replace it on the table , in come the young man , 
 Susan Tall 's husband , in a still great hurry . 
 " have ye hear the news that be all over parish ? " 
 " About Baily Pennyways ? " 
 " but besides that ? " 
 " no - not a morsel of it ! " they reply , look into 
 the very midst of Laban Tall as if to meet his word 
 half - way down his throat . 
 " what a night of horror ! " murmur Joseph poor- 
 grass , wave his hand spasmodically . " I have   have the 
 news - bell ring in my left ear quite bad enough for a 
 murder , and I have   see a magpie all alone ! " 
 " Fanny Robin - Miss everdene 's young servant - 
 can not   be find . they have   be want to lock up the 
 door these two hour , but she be not   come in . and they 
 do not   know what to do about go to he d for fear of 
 lock she out . they would not   be so concerned if she 
 have not   be notice in such low spirit these last few 
 day , and Maryann d'think the beginning of a crowner 's 
 inquest have happen to the poor girl . " 
 " o - ' tis burn - ' tis burn ! " come from Joseph 
 Poorgrass 's dry lip . 
 " no - ' tis drown ! " say Tall . 
 " or ' tis her father 's razor ! " suggest Billy Smallbury , 
 with a vivid sense of detail . 
 " well - Miss Everdene want to speak to one or two 
 of we before we go to bed . what with this trouble about 
 the baily , and now about the girl , mis'ess be almost wild . " 
 they all hasten up the lane to the farmhouse , 
 except the old maltster , whom neither news , fire , 
 rain , nor thunder could draw from his hole . there , as 
 the other ' footstep die away he sit down again and 
 continue gaze as usual into the furnace with his red , 
 bleared eye . 
 from the bedroom window above their head bath- 
 sheba 's head and shoulder , rob in mystic white , be 
 dimly see extend into the air . 
 " be any of my man among you ? " she say anxiously . 
 " yes , ma'am , several . " say Susan Tall 's husband . 
 " tomorrow morning I wish two or three of you to 
 make inquiry in the village round if they have see 
 such a person as Fanny Robin . do it quietly ; there be 
 no reason for alarm as yet . she must have leave whilst 
 we be all at the fire . " 
 " I beg yer pardon , but have she any young man court- 
 e she in the parish , ma'am ? " ask Jacob Smallbury . 
 " I do not   know . " say Bathsheba . 
 " I have   never hear of any such thing , ma'am . " say 
 two or three . 
 " it be hardly likely , either . " continue Bathsheba . 
 " for any lover of hers might have come to the house if 
 he have be a respectable lad . the most mysterious 
 matter connect with her absence - indeed , the only 
 thing which give I serious alarm - be that she be 
 see to go out of the house by Maryann with only her 
 indoor working gown on - not even a bonnet . " 
 " and you mean , ma'am , excuse my word , that a 
 young woman would hardly go to see her young man 
 without dress up . " say Jacob , turn his mental 
 vision upon past experience . " that be true - she would 
 not , ma'am . " 
 " she have , I think , a bundle , though I could not   see 
 very well . " say a female voice from another window , 
 which seem that of Maryann . " but she have no 
 young man about here . hers live in Casterbridge , and 
 I believe he be a soldier . " 
 " do you know his name ? " Bathsheba say . 
 " no , mistress ; she be very close about it . " 
 " perhaps I might be able to find out if I go to 
 Casterbridge barrack . " say William Smallbury . 
 " very well ; if she do not   return tomorrow , mind 
 you go there and try to discover which man it be , and 
 see he . I feel more responsible than I should if she 
 have have any friend or relation alive . I do hope she 
 have come to no harm through a man of that kind .... 
 and then there be this disgraceful affair of the bailiff - 
 but I can not   speak of he now . " 
 Bathsheba have so many reason for uneasiness that 
 it seem she do not think it worth while to dwell 
 upon any particular one . " do as I tell you , then " 
 she say in conclusion , close the casement . 
 " ay , ay , mistress ; we will . " they reply , and move 
 away . 
 that night at Coggan 's , Gabriel Oak , beneath the 
 screen of closed eyelid , be busy with fancy , and full 
 of movement , like a river flow rapidly under its ice . 
 Night have always be the time at which he see Bath- 
 sheba most vividly , and through the slow hour of 
 shadow he tenderly regard her image now . it be 
 rarely that the pleasure of the imagination will compen- 
 sate for the pain of sleeplessness , but they possibly do 
 with Oak to - night , for the delight of merely see she 
 effaced for the time his perception of the great differ- 
 ence between see and possessing . 
 he also think of Plans for fetch his few utensil 
 and book from Norcombe . the Young Man 's Best 
 Companion , the Farrier 's Sure Guide , the Veterinary 
 Surgeon , Paradise Lost , the Pilgrim 's Progress , Robinson 
 Crusoe , Ash 's Dictionary , the Walkingame 's Arithmetic , 
 constitute his library ; and though a limited series , it be 
 one from which he have acquire more sound informa- 
 tion by diligent perusal than many a man of opportunity 
 have do from a furlong of laden shelf . 
 CHAPTER IX 
 the HOMESTEAD - a visitor - HALF - confidences 
 by daylight , the Bower of Oak 's new - find mistress , 
 Bathsheba Everdene , present itself as a hoary build- 
 ing , of the early stage of Classic Renaissance as regard 
 its architecture , and of ' a proportion which tell at a 
 glance that , as be so frequently the case , it have once 
 be the memorial hall upon a small estate around it , 
 now altogether efface as a distinct property , and merge 
 in the vast tract of a non - resident landlord , which com- 
 prise several such modest demesne . 
 fluted pilaster , work from the solid stone , 
 decorate its front , and above the roof the chimney 
 be panel or columnar , some cop gable with 
 finial and like feature still retain trace of their 
 gothic extraction . Soft Brown moss , like fade 
 velveteen , form cushion upon the stone tiling , and 
 tuft of the houseleek or sengreen sprout from the 
 eave of the low surround building . a gravel walk 
 lead from the door to the road in front be encrust 
 at the side with more moss - here it be a silver - green 
 variety , the nut - brown of the gravel be visible to the 
 width of only a foot or two in the centre . this circum- 
 stance , and the generally sleepy air of the whole prospect 
 here , together with the animate and contrast state 
 of the reverse facade , suggest to the imagination that 
 on the adaptation of the building for farming purpose 
 the vital principle ' of the house have turn round inside 
 its body to face the other way . reversal of this kind , 
 strange deformity , tremendous paralysis , be often see 
 to be inflict by trade upon edifice - either individual 
 or in the aggregate as street and town - which be 
 originally plan for pleasure alone . 
 lively voice be hear this morning in the upper 
 room , the main staircase to which be of hard oak , the 
 baluster , heavy as bed - post , be turn and mould 
 in the quaint fashion of their century , the handrail as 
 stout as a parapet - top , and the stair themselves con- 
 tinually twist round like a person try to look over 
 his shoulder . go up , the floor above be find 
 to have a very irregular surface , rise to ridge , sink 
 into valley ; and be just then uncarpeted , the face 
 of the board be see to be eat into innumerable 
 the opening and shutting of every door a tremble 
 follow every bustling movement , and a creak accom- 
 panie a walker about the house like a spirit , wherever- 
 he go . 
 in the room from which the conversation proceed , 
 Bathsheba and her servant - companion , Liddy Small- 
 bury be to be discover sit upon the floor , and 
 sort a complication of paper , book , bottle , and 
 rubbish spread out thereon - remnant from the house- 
 hold store of the late occupier . Liddy , the maltster 's 
 great - granddaughter , be about Bathsheba 's equal in 
 age , and her face be a prominent advertisement of the 
 feature ' might have lack in form be amply make up 
 for by perfection of hue , which at this winter - time be 
 the soften ruddiness on a surface of high rotundity 
 and , like the presentation of those great colourist , it 
 be a face which keep well back from the boundary 
 between comeliness and the ideal . though elastic in 
 nature she be less daring than Bathsheba , and occa- 
 sionally show some earnestness , which consist half 
 of genuine feeling , and half of mannerliness superadde 
 by way of duty . 
 through a partly - open door the noise of a scrubbing- 
 brush lead up to the charwoman , Maryann Money , a person 
 who for a face have a circular disc , furrow less by age 
 than by long gaze of perplexity at distant object . to 
 think of she be to get good - humour ; to speak of 
 she be to raise the image of a dry Normandy 
 pippin . 
 " stop your scrub a moment . " say Bathsheba 
 through the door to she . " I hear something . " 
 Maryann suspend the brush . 
 the tramp of a horse be apparent , approach the 
 front of the building . the pace slacken , turn in 
 at the wicket , and , what be most unusual , come up 
 the mossy path close to the door . the door be 
 tap with the end of a crop or stick . 
 " what impertinence ! " say Liddy , in a low voice . 
 " to ride up the footpath like that ! why do not   he 
 stop at the gate ? Lord ! ' tis a gentleman ! I see the 
 top of his hat . " 
 " be quiet ! " say Bathsheba . 
 the further expression of Liddy 's concern be con- 
 tinue by aspect instead of narrative . 
 " why do not   Mrs. Coggan go to the door ? " bath- 
 sheba continue . 
 rat - tat - tat - tat , resound more decisively from bath- 
 sheba 's oak . 
 " Maryann , you go ! " say she , flutter under the 
 onset of a crowd of romantic possibility . 
 " o ma'am - see , here be a mess ! " 
 the argument be unanswerable after a glance at 
 Maryann . 
 " Liddy - you must . " say Bathsheba . 
 Liddy hold up her hand and arm , coat with dust 
 from the rubbish they be sort , and look implor- 
 ingly at her mistress . 
 " there - Mrs. Coggan be go ! " say Bathsheba , 
 exhale her relief in the form of a long breath which 
 have lie in her bosom a minute or more . 
 the door open , and a deep voice say - 
 " be Miss Everdene at home ? " 
 " I will see , sir . " say Mrs. Coggan , and in a minute 
 appear in the room . 
 " dear , what a thirtover place this world be ! " con- 
 tinue Mrs. Coggan   a wholesome - look lady who 
 have a voice for each class of remark accord to the 
 emotion involve ; who could toss a pancake or twirl 
 a mop with the accuracy of pure mathematic , and 
 who at this moment show hand shaggy with frag- 
 ment of dough and arm encrust with flour . " I 
 be never up to my elbow , Miss , in make a pudding 
 but one of two thing do happen - either my nose must 
 need begin tickle , and I can not   live without scratch 
 a woman 's dress be a part of her countenance , 
 and any disorder in the one being of the same nature 
 with a malformation or wound in the other , Bathsheba 
 say at once - 
 " I can not   see he in this state . whatever shall I do ? " 
 not - at - home be hardly naturalize in Weatherbury 
 farmhouse , so Liddy suggest - " say you be a fright 
 with dust , and can not   come down . " 
 " yes - that sound very well . " say Mrs. Coggan , 
 critically . 
 " say I can not   see he - that will do . " 
 Mrs. Coggan go downstairs , and return the 
 answer as request , add , however , on her own 
 responsibility , " Miss be dust bottle , sir , and be quite 
 a object - that be why ' tis . " 
 " oh , very well . " say the deep voice . " indifferently . 
 " all I want to ask be , if anything have be hear 
 of Fanny Robin ? " 
 " nothing , sir - but we may know to - night . William 
 Smallbury be go to Casterbridge , where her young 
 man live , as be suppose , and the other man be inquir- 
 ing about everywhere . " 
 the horse 's tramp then recommenced and -retreated , 
 and the door close . 
 " who be Mr. Boldwood ? " say Bathsheba . 
 " a gentleman - farmer at Little Weatherbury . " 
 " married ? " 
 " no , miss . " 
 " how old be he ? " 
 " Forty , I should say - very handsome - rather stern- 
 look - and rich . " 
 " what a bother this dusting be ! I be always in 
 some unfortunate plight or other , " Bathsheba say , 
 complainingly . " why should he inquire about Fanny ? " 
 " oh , because , as she have no friend in her childhood , 
 he take she and put she to school , and get she her 
 place here under your uncle . he be a very kind man 
 that way , but Lord - there ! " 
 " what ? " 
 " never be such a hopeless man for a woman ! 
 he be be court by six and seven - all the girl , 
 gentle and simple , for mile round , have try he . Jane 
 Perkins work at he for two month like a slave , 
 and the two Miss Taylors spend a year upon he , 
 and he cost Farmer Ives 's daughter night of tear 
 and twenty pound ' worth of new clothe ; but Lord - 
 the money might as well have be throw out of the 
 window . " 
 a little boy come up at this moment and look in 
 upon they . this child be one of the Coggans who , 
 with the Smallburys , be as common among the 
 family of this district as the Avons and derwent 
 among our river . he always have a loosened tooth or 
 a cut finger to show to particular friend , which he do 
 with an air of be thereby elevate above the common 
 herd of afflictionless humanity - to which exhibition 
 of congratulation as well as pity . 
 " I have   get a pen - nee ! " say Master Coggan in a 
 scan measure . 
 " well - who give it you , Teddy ? " say Liddy . 
 " mis - terr bold - wood ! he give it to I for open 
 the gate . " 
 " what do he say ? " 
 " he say " where be you go , my little man ? ' " 
 and I say , " to Miss Everdene 's please , " and he say , 
 " she be a staid woman , be not   she , my little man ? " and 
 I say , " yes . " 
 " you naughty child ! what do you say that for ? " 
 " cause he give I the penny ! " 
 " what a pucker everything be in ! " say Bathsheba , 
 discontentedly when the child have go . ' get away , 
 thing ! you ought to be marry by this time , and not 
 here trouble I ! " 
 " ay , mistress - so I do . but what between the poor 
 man I will not   have , and the rich man who will not   have I , 
 I stand as a pelicon in the wilderness ! " 
 " do anybody ever want to marry you miss ? " Liddy 
 venture to ask when they be again alone . " lot of 
 " em , I daresay . ? " 
 Bathsheba pause , as if about to refuse a reply , but 
 the temptation to say yes , since it be really in her 
 power be irresistible by aspire virginity , in spite of 
 her spleen at have be publish as old . 
 " a man want to once . " she say , in a highly experi- 
 ence tone and the image of Gabriel Oak , as the farmer , 
 rise before she . 
 " how nice it must seem ! " say Liddy , with the fix 
 feature of mental realization . " and you would not   have 
 he ? " 
 " he be not   quite good enough for I . " 
 " how sweet to be able to disdain , when most of we 
 be glad to say , " thank you ! " I seem I hear it . 
 " no , sir - I be your well . " or " kiss my foot , sir ; my 
 face be for mouth of consequence . " and do you love 
 he , miss ? " 
 " oh , no . but I rather like he . " 
 " do you now ? " 
 " of course not - what footstep be those I hear ? " 
 Liddy look from a back window into the courtyard 
 behind , which be now get low - toned and dim with 
 the early film of night . a crooked file of man be 
 approach the back door . the whole string of trail 
 individual advance in the complete balance of inten- 
 tion , like the remarkable creature know as Chain 
 Salpae , which , distinctly organize in other respect , have 
 one will common to a whole family . some be , as 
 usual , in snow - white smock - frock of Russia duck , and 
 some in whitey - brown one of drabbet - mark on the 
 wrist , breast , back , and sleeve with honeycomb - work . 
 two or three woman in patten bring up the rear . 
 " the Philistines be upon we . " say Liddy , make her 
 nose white against the glass . 
 " oh , very well . Maryann , go down and keep they 
 in the kitchen till I be dress , and then show they in 
 to I in the hall . " 
 CHAPTER x 
 HALF - AN - hour later Bathsheba , in finished dress , 
 and follow by Liddy , enter the upper end of the old 
 hall to find that her man have all deposit themselves on 
 a long form and a settle at the low extremity . she sit 
 down at a table and open the time - book , pen in her 
 hand , with a canvas money - bag beside she . from this 
 she pour a small heap of coin . Liddy choose a 
 position at her elbow and begin to sew , sometimes 
 pause and look round , or with the air of a privileged 
 person , take up one of the half - sovereign lie before 
 she and survey it merely as a work of art , while 
 strictly prevent her countenance from express any 
 wish to possess it as money . 
 " now before I begin , man . " say Bathsheba , " I have 
 two matter to speak of . the first be that the bailiff be 
 dismiss for thieving , and that I have form a resolu- 
 tion to have no bailiff at all , but to manage everything 
 with my own head and hand . " 
 the man breathe an audible breath of amazement . 
 " the next matter be , have you hear anything of 
 Fanny ? " 
 " nothing , ma'am . 
 " have you do anything ? " 
 " I meet Farmer Boldwood . " say Jacob Smallbury , ' and 
 I go with he and two of his man , and drag new- 
 mill Pond , but we find nothing . " 
 " and the new shepherd have be to Buck 's Head , 
 by Yalbury , think she have go there , but nobody 
 have seed she . " say Laban Tall . 
 " have not   William Smallbury be to Casterbridge ? " 
 " yes , ma'am , but he be not yet come home . he 
 promise to be back by six . " 
 " it want a quarter to six at present . " say Bathsheba , 
 look at her watch . " I daresay he will be in directly . 
 well , now then " - she look into the book - " Joseph 
 Poorgrass , be you there ? " 
 " yes , sir - ma'am I mane . " say the person address . 
 " I be the personal name of Poorgrass . " 
 " and what be you ? " 
 " nothing in my own eye . in the eye of other people 
  - well , I do not   say it ; though public thought will out . " 
 " what do you do on the farm ? " 
 " I do do cart thing all the year , and in seed time I 
 shoot the rook and sparrow , and help at pig - killing , sir . " 
 " how much to you ? " 
 " please nine and ninepence and a good halfpenny 
 where ' twas a bad one , sir - ma'am I mane . " 
 " quite correct . now here be ten shilling in addi- 
 tion as a small present , as I be a new comer . " 
 Bathsheba blush slightly at the sense of be 
 generous in public , and Henery Fray , who have draw 
 up towards her chair , lift his eyebrow and finger to 
 express amazement on a small scale . 
 " how much do I owe you - that man in the corner - 
 what be your name ? " continue Bathsheba . 
 " Matthew Moon , ma'am . " say a singular framework of 
 clothe with nothing of any consequence inside they , 
 which advance with the toe in no definite direction 
 forward , but turn in or out as they chance to swing . 
 " Matthew Mark , do you say ? - speak out - I shall 
 not hurt you . " inquire the young farmer , kindly . 
 " Matthew Moon mem " say Henery Fray , correct- 
 ingly , from behind her chair , to which point he have 
 edge himself . 
 " Matthew Moon . " murmur Bathsheba , turn she 
 bright eye to the book . " ten and twopence halfpenny 
 be the sum put down to you , I see ? " 
 " yes , mis'ess . " say Matthew , as the rustle of wind 
 among dead leaf . 
 " here it be and ten shilling . now -the next - Andrew 
 Randle , you be a new man , I hear . how come you to 
 leave your last farm ? " 
 " p - p - p - p - p - pl - pl - pl - pl - l - l - l - l - ease , ma'am , p - p - p - p - pl - pl- 
 pl - pl - please , ma'am - please'm - please'm - - " 
 " ' A be a stammer man , mem . " say Henery Fray in 
 an undertone , " and they turn he away because the 
 only time he ever do speak plain he say his soul be 
 his own , and other iniquity , to the squire . " a can cuss , 
 mem , as well as you or I , but ' a can not   speak a common 
 speech to save his life . " 
 " Andrew Randle , here be yours - finish thank I 
 in a day or two . Temperance Miller - oh , here be another , 
 soberness - both woman I suppose ? " 
 " Yes'm . here we be , ' a b'lieve . " be echo in shrill 
 unison . 
 " what have you be do ? " 
 " tend thrashing - machine and wimbling haybond , 
 and say " Hoosh ! " to the cock and hen when they 
 go upon your seed and plant Early Flourballs and 
 Thompson 's wonderful with a dibble . " 
 " yes - I see . be they satisfactory woman ? " she 
 inquire softly of Henery Fray . 
 " o mem - do not   ask I ! yield woman ? " as 
 scarlet a pair as ever be ! " groan Henery under his 
 breath . 
 " sit down . 
 " who , mem ? " 
 " sit down , " 
 Joseph Poorgrass , in the background twitch , and 
 his lip become dry with fear of some terrible conse- 
 quence , as he see Bathsheba summarily speak , and 
 Henery slink off to a corner . 
 " now the next . Laban Tall , you will stay on work 
 for I ? " 
 " for you or anybody that pay I well , ma'am , " 
 reply the young married man . 
 " true - the man must live ! " say a woman in the 
 back quarter , who have just enter with click patten . 
 " what woman be that ? " Bathsheba ask . 
 " I be his lawful wife ! " continue the voice with 
 great prominence of manner and tone . this lady 
 call herself five - and - twenty , look thirty , pass as 
 thirty - five , and be forty . she be a woman who never , 
 like some newly marry , show conjugal tenderness in 
 public , perhaps because she have none to show . 
 " oh , you be . " say Bathsheba . " well , Laban , will 
 you stay on ? " 
 " yes , he will stay , ma'am ! " say again the shrill tongue 
 of Laban 's lawful wife . 
 " well , he can speak for himself , I suppose . " 
 " o Lord , not he , ma'am ! a simple tool . well 
 enough , but a poor gawkhamm mortal . " the wife reply 
 " heh - heh - heh ! " laugh the married man with a 
 hideous effort of appreciation , for he be as irrepressibly 
 good - humour under ghastly snub as a parliamentary 
 candidate on the husting . 
 the name remain be call in the same 
 manner . 
 " now I think I have do with you . " say Bathsheba , 
 close the book and shake back a stray twine of hair . 
 " have William Smallbury return ? " 
 " no , ma'am . " 
 " the new shepherd will want a man under he , " 
 suggest Henery Fray , try to make himself official 
 again by a sideway approach towards her chair . 
 " oh - he will . who can he have ? " 
 " Young Cain Ball be a very good lad . " Henery say , 
 " and Shepherd Oak do not   mind his youth ? " he add , 
 turn with an apologetic smile to the shepherd , who 
 have just appear on the scene , and be now lean 
 against the doorpost with his arm fold . 
 " no , I do not   mind that . " say Gabriel . 
 " how do Cain come by such a name ? " ask 
 Bathsheba . 
 " oh you see , mem , his pore mother , not be a 
 scripture - read woman make a mistake at his christening , 
 thinking ' twa Abel kill Cain , and call en Cain , 
 but ' twa too late , for the name could never be get rid 
 of in the parish . ' tis very unfortunate for the boy . " 
 " it be rather unfortunate . " 
 " yes . however , we soften it down as much as we 
 can , and call he Cainey . ah , pore widow - woman ! 
 she cry her heart out about it almost . she be 
 bring up by a very heathen father and mother , who 
 never send she to church or school , and it show how 
 the sin of the parent be visit upon the child , 
 mem . " 
 Mr. Fray here draw up his feature to the mild degree 
 of melancholy require when the person involve in 
 the give misfortune do not belong to your own family . 
 " very well then , Cainey Ball to be under - shepherd 
 and you quite understand your duty ? - you I mean , 
 Gabriel Oak ? " 
 " quite well , I thank you Miss Everdene . " say 
 Shepard Oak from the doorpost . " if I do not , I will 
 inquire . " Gabriel be rather stagger by the remark- 
 able coolness of her manner . certainly nobody without 
 previous information would have dream that Oak and 
 the handsome woman before whom he stand have ever 
 be other than stranger . but perhaps her air be 
 the inevitable result of the social rise which have advance 
 she from a cottage to a large house and field . the 
 case be not unexampled in high place . when , in the 
 writing of the later poet , Jove and his family be find 
 to have move from their cramp quarter on the peak 
 of Olympus into the wide sky above it , their word show 
 a proportionate increase of arrogance and reserve . 
 footstep be hear in the passage , combine in 
 their character the quality both of weight and measure , 
 rather at the expense of velocity . 
  All .   " here 's Billy Smallbury come from Caster- 
 bridge . " 
 " and what be the news ? " say Bathsheba , as William , 
 after march to the middle of the hall , take a hand- 
 kerchief from his hat and wipe his forehead from its 
 centre to its remoter boundary . 
 " I should have be soon , miss . " he say , " if it 
 have not   be for the weather . " he then stamp with 
 each foot severely , and on look down his boot be 
 perceive to be clog with snow . 
 " come at last , be it ? " say Henery . 
 " well , what about Fanny ? " say Bathsheba . 
 " well , ma'am , in round number , she be run away with 
 the soldier . " say William . 
 " no ; not a steady girl like Fanny ! " 
 " I will tell ye all particular . when I get to Caster , 
 bridge Barracks , they say , " the Eleventh Dragoon- 
 Guards be go away , and new troop have come . " 
 the Eleventh leave last week for Melchester and onwards . 
 the Route come from Government like a thief in the 
 night , as be his nature to , and afore the Eleventh know 
 it almost , they be on the march . they pass near 
 here . " 
 Gabriel have listen with interest . " I see they go , " 
 he say . 
 " yes . " continue William , " they prance down the 
 street play " the Girl I leave behind I . " so ' tis 
 say , in glorious note of triumph . every looker - on 's 
 inside shake with the blow of the great drum to his 
 deep vital , and there be not a dry eye throughout 
 the town among the public - house people and the name- 
 less woman ! " 
 " but they be not go to any war ? " 
 " no , ma'am ; but they be go to take the place 
 of they who may , which be very close connected . and 
 so I say to myself , Fanny 's young man be one of the 
 regiment , and she be go after he . there , ma'am , 
 that be it in black and white . " 
 Gabriel remain muse and say nothing , for he 
 be in doubt . 
 " well , we be not likely to know more to - night , at 
 any rate . " say Bathsheba . " but one of you have well 
 run across to Farmer Boldwood 's and tell he that 
 much . " 
 she then rise ; but before retire , address a few 
 word to they with a pretty dignity , to which she 
 mourning dress add a soberness that be hardly to 
 be find in the word themselves . 
 " now mind , you have a mistress instead of a master 
 I do not   yet know my power or my talent in farming ; 
 but I shall do my good , and if you serve I well , so 
 shall I serve you . do not   any unfair one among you 
  if there be any such , but I hope not   suppose that 
 because I be a woman I do not   understand the difference 
 between bad going - on and good . " 
  All .   " Nom ! " 
  Liddy .   " Excellent well say . " 
 " I shall be up before you be awake ; I shall be 
 afield before you be up ; and I shall have breakfast 
 before you be afield . in short , I shall astonish you all . 
  All .   " Yes'm ! " 
 " and so good - night . " 
  All .   " good - night , ma'am . " 
 then this small - thesmothete step from the table , 
 and surge out of the hall , her black silk dress lick 
 up a few straw and drag they along with a scratch- 
 ing noise upon the floor . biddy , elevate her feeling 
 to the occasion from a sense of grandeur , float off 
 behind Bathsheba with a milder dignity not entirely 
 free from travesty , and the door be close . 
 CHAPTER XI 
 OUTSIDE the BARRACKS - SNOW - a meeting 
 for dreariness nothing could surpass a prospect in the 
 outskirt of a certain town and military station , many 
 mile north of Weatherbury , at a later hour on this 
 same snowy evening - if that may be call a prospect 
 of which the chief constituent be darkness . 
 it be a night when sorrow may come to the 
 bright without cause any great sense of incongruity : 
 when , with impressible person , love become solicitous- 
 ness , hope sink to misgiving , and faith to hope : when 
 the exercise of memory do not stir feeling of regret 
 at opportunity for ambition that have be pass by , 
 and anticipation do not prompt to enterprise . 
 the scene be a public path , border on the left 
 hand by a river , behind which rise a high wall . on 
 the right be a tract of land , partly meadow'and partly 
 moor , reach , at its remote verge , to a wide undulating 
 uplan . 
 the change of the season be less obtrusive on 
 spot of this kind than amid woodland scenery . still , 
 to a close observer , they be just as perceptible ; the 
 difference be that their medium of manifestation be less 
 trite and familiar than such well - know one as the 
 bursting of the bud or the fall of the leaf . many be 
 not so stealthy and gradual as we may be apt to 
 imagine in consider the general torpidity of a moor 
 or waste . winter , in come to the country hereabout , 
 advance in well - mark stage , wherein might have 
 be successively observe the retreat of the snake , 
 the transformation of the fern , the filling of the pool , 
 a rise of fog , the embrowning by frost , the collapse 
 of the fungus , and an obliteration by snow . 
 this climax of the series have be reach to - night on 
 the aforesaid moor , and for the first time in the season 
 its irregularity be form without feature ; suggestive 
 of anything , proclaim nothing , and without more 
 character than that of be the limit of something 
 else - the low layer of a firmament of snow . from 
 this chaotic skyful of crowd flake the mead and 
 moor momentarily receive additional clothing , only 
 to appear momentarily more naked thereby . the vast 
 arch of cloud above be strangely low , and form as 
 it be the roof of a large dark cavern , gradually sink 
 in upon its floor ; for the instinctive thought be that 
 the snow line the heaven and that encrust the 
 earth would soon unite into one mass without any 
 intervening stratum of air at all . 
 we turn our attention to the left - hand characteristic ; 
 which be flatness in respect of the river , verticality 
 in respect of the wall behind it , and darkness as to 
 both . these feature make up the mass . if anything 
 could be dark than the sky , it be the wall , and if any 
 thing could be gloomy than the wall it be the river 
 beneath . the indistinct summit of the facade be 
 notch and pronge by chimney here and there , and 
 upon its face be faintly signify the oblong shape 
 of window , though only in the upper part . below , 
 down to the water 's edge , the flat be unbroken by 
 hole or projection . 
 an indescribable succession of dull blow , perplex 
 in their regularity , send their sound- with difficulty 
 through the fluffy atmosphere . it be a neighbouring 
 clock strike ten the bell be in the open air , and 
 be overlay with several inch of muffle snow , have 
 lose its voice for the time . 
 about this hour the snow abate : ten flake fall 
 where twenty have fall , then one have the room of 
 ten . not long after a form move by the brink of 
 the river . 
 by its outline upon the colourless background , a close 
 observer might have see that it be small . this be 
 all that be positively discoverable , though it seem 
 human . 
 the shape go slowly along , but without much 
 exertion , for the snow , though sudden , be not as yet 
 more than two inch deep . at this time some word 
 be speak aloud : - 
 " one . two . three . four . five . " 
 between each utterance the little shape advance 
 about half a dozen yard . it be evident now that 
 the window high in the wall be be count . 
 the word " five " represent the fifth window from 
 the end of the wall . 
 here the spot stop , and dwindle small . the 
 figure be stoop . then a morsel of snow fly 
 across the river towards the fifth window . it smack 
 against the wall at a point several yard from its mark . 
 the throw be the idea of a man conjoin with the 
 execution of a woman . no man who have ever see bird , 
 rabbit , or squirrel in his childhood , could possibly have 
 throw with such utter imbecility as be show here . 
 another attempt , and another ; till by degree the 
 wall must have become pimple with the adhering 
 lump of snow at last one fragment strike the fifth 
 window . 
 the river would have be ; see by day to be of 
 that deep smooth sort which race middle and side 
 with the same gliding precision , any irregularity of 
 speed be immediately correct by a small whirl- 
 pool . nothing be hear in reply to the signal but 
 the gurgle and cluck of one of these invisible wheel - 
 together with a few small sound which a sad man 
 would have call moan , and a happy man laughter - 
 cause by the flapping of the water against trifle 
 object in other part of the stream . 
 the window be strike again in the same manner . 
 then a noise be hear , apparently produce by 
 the opening of the window . this be follow by a 
 voice from the same quarter . 
 " who be there ? " 
 the tone be masculine , and not those of surprise . 
 the high wall be that of a barrack , and marriage 
 be look upon with disfavour in the army , assigna- 
 tion and communication have probably be make 
 across the river before tonight . 
 " be it Sergeant Troy ? " say the blurred spot in the 
 snow , tremulously . 
 this person be so much like a mere shade upon 
 the earth , and the other speaker so much a part of 
 the building , that one would have say the wall be 
 hold a conversation with the snow . 
 " yes . " come suspiciously from the shadow . " what 
 girl be you ? " 
 " O , Frank - do not   you know I ? " say the spot . 
 " your wife , Fanny Robin . " 
 " Fanny ! " say the wall , in utter astonishment . 
 " yes . " say the girl , with a half - suppress gasp of 
 emotion . 
 there be something in the woman 's tone which be 
 not that of the wife , and there be a mannerin the man 
 which be rarely a husband 's . the dialogue go on : 
 " how do you come here ? " 
 " I ask which be your window . forgive I ! " 
 " I do not expect you to - night . indeed , I do not 
 think you would come at all . it be a wonder you 
 find I here . I be orderly to - morrow . " 
 " you say I be to come . " 
 " well - I say that you might . " 
 " yes , I mean that I might . you be glad to see I , 
 Frank ? " 
 " o yes - of course . " 
 " can you - come to I ! " 
 my dear Fan , no ! the bugle have sound , the 
 barrack gate be closed , and I have no leave . we be 
 all of we as good as in the county gaol till to - morrow 
 morning . " 
 " then I shall not   see you till then ! " the words- be 
 in a falter tone of disappointment . 
 " how do you get here from Weatherbury ? " 
 " I walk - some part of the way - the rest by the 
 carrier . " 
 " I be surprised . " 
 " yes - so be I. and Frank , when will it be ? " 
 " what ? " 
 " that you promise . " 
 " I do not   quite recollect . " 
 " o you do ! do not   speak like that . it weigh I 
 to the earth . it make I say what ought to be say 
 first by you . " 
 " never mind - say it . " 
 " o , must I ? - it be , when shall we be marry , 
 Frank ? " 
 " oh , I " see . well - you have to get proper 
 clothe . " 
 " I have money . will it be by bann or license ? " 
 " Banns , I should think . " 
 " and we live in two parish . " 
 " do we ? what then ? " 
 " my lodging be in St. Mary 's , and this be not . so 
 they will have to be publish in both . " 
 " be that the law ? " 
 " yes . o Frank - you think I forward , I be 
 afraid ! do not , dear Frank - will you - for I love you so . 
 and you say lot of time you would marry I , and 
 and - I - I - I - - " 
 " do not   cry , now ! it be foolish . if I say so , of 
 course I will . " 
 " and shall I put up the bann in my parish , and will 
 you in your ? " 
 " yes " 
 " to - morrow ? " 
 " not tomorrow . we will settle in a few day . " 
 " you have the permission of the officer ? " 
 " no , not yet . " 
 " o - how be it ? you say you almost have before 
 you leave Casterbridge . " 
 " the fact be , I forget to ask . your come like this 
 I will go away now . will you    qode , and seq be to - morroy 
 be so sudden and unexpected . " 
 " yes - yes - it be . it be wrong of I to worry you . 
 I will go away now . will you come and see I to - morrow , 
 at Mrs. Twills 's , in North Street ? I do not   like to come 
 to the Barracks . there be bad woman about , and they 
 think I one . " 
 " quite , so . I will come to you , my dean good - night . " 
 " good - night , Frank - good - night ! " 
 and the noise be again hear of a window closing 
 the little spot move away . when she pass the 
 corner a subdue exclamation be hear inside the 
 wall . 
 " Ho - ho - Sergeant - ho - ho ! " an expostulation 
 follow , but it be indistinct ; and it become lose amid 
 a low peal of laughter , which be hardly distinguishable 
 from the gurgle of the tiny whirlpool outside . 
 CHAPTER XII 
 FARMERS - a rule - in EXCEPTION 
 the first public evidence of Bathsheba 's decision to 
 be a farmer in her own person and by proxy no more 
 be her appearance the follow market - day in . the 
 cornmarket at Casterbridge . 
 the low though extensive hall , support by beam 
 and pillar , and latterly dignified by - the name of Corn Ex- 
 change , be throng with hot man who talk among 
 each other in two and three , the speaker of the minute 
 look sideway into his auditor 's face and concentrate 
 his argument by a contraction of one eyelid during de- 
 livery . the great number carry in their hand 
 ground - ash sapling , use they partly as walking - stick 
 and partly for poke up pig , sheep , neighbour with 
 their back turn , and restful thing in general , which 
 seem to require such treatment in the course of their 
 peregrination . during conversation each subject 
 his sapling to great variety of usage - bend it round 
 his back , form an"arch of it between his two hand , 
 overweighte it on the ground till it reach nearly a 
 semicircle ; or perhaps it be hastily tuck under the 
 arm whilst the sample - bag be pull forth and a hand- 
 ful of corn pour into the palm , which , after criticism , 
 be fling upon the floor , an issue of event perfectly 
 well know to half - a - dozen acute town - breed fowl which 
 have as usual creep into the building unobserve , and 
 wait the fulfilment of their anticipation with a high- 
 stretch neck and oblique eye . 
 among these heavy yeoman a feminine figure glide , 
 the single one of her sex that the room contain . she 
 be prettily and even daintily dressed . she move 
 between they as a chaise between cart , be hear after 
 they as a romance after sermon , be feel among they 
 like a breeze among furnace . it have require a little 
 determination - far more than she have at first imagine 
  - to take up a position here , for at her first entry the 
 lumber dialogue have cease , nearly every face have 
 be turn towards she , and those that be already 
 turn rigidly fix there . 
 two or three only of the farmer be personally 
 know to Bathsheba , and to these she have make she 
 way . but if she be to be the practical woman she have 
 intend to show herself , business must be carry on , 
 introduction or none , and she ultimately acquire con- 
 fidence enough to speak and reply boldly to man merely 
 know to she by hearsay . Bathsheba too have she 
 sample - bag , and by degree adopt the professional 
 pour into the hand - hold up the grain in her narrow 
 palm for inspection , in perfect Casterbridge manner . 
 something in the exact arch of her upper unbroken 
 row of tooth , and in the keenly point corner of her 
 red mouth when , with part lip , she somewhat 
 defiantly turn up her face to argue a point with a 
 tall man , suggest that there be potentiality enough 
 in that lithe slip of humanity for alarm exploit of 
 sex , and dare enough to carry they out . but her eye 
 have a softness - invariably a softness - which , have they 
 not be dark , would have seem mistiness ; as they 
 be , it lower an expression that might have be 
 pierce to simple clearness , 
 strange to say of a woman in full bloom and vigor , 
 she always allow her interlocutor to finish their state- 
 ment before rejoin with her . in argue on price , 
 he hold to her own firmly , as be natural in a dealer , 
 and reduce theirs persistently , as be inevitable in a 
 oman . but there be an elasticity in her firmness 
 which remove it from obstinacy , as there be a naivete 
 in her cheapening which save it from meanness . 
 those of the farmer with whom she have no dealing 
 by far the great part   be continually ask each 
 other , " who be she ? " the reply would be - 
 " Farmer Everdene 's niece ; take on Weatherbury 
 Upper Farm ; turn away the baily , and swear she will do 
 everything herself . " 
 the other man would then shake his head . 
 " yes , ' tis a pity she be so headstrong . " the first would 
 say . " but we ought to be proud of she here - she 
 lighten up the old place . ' tis such a shapely maid , 
 however , that she will soon get pick up . " 
 it would be ungallant to suggest that the novelty of 
 her engagement in such an occupation have almost as 
 much to do with the magnetism as have the beauty of 
 her face and movement . however , the interest be 
 general , and this Saturday 's debut in the forum , whatever 
 it may have be to Bathsheba as the buying and sell 
 farmer , be unquestionably a triumph to she as the 
 maiden . indeed , the sensation be so pronounce that 
 her instinct on two or three occasion be merely to 
 walk as a queen among these god of the fallow , like a 
 little sister of a little jove , and to neglect closing price 
 altogether . 
 the numerous evidence of - her power to attract be 
 only throw into great relief by a marked exception . 
 woman seem to have eye in their ribbon for such 
 matter as these . Bathsheba , without look within 
 a right angle of he , be conscious of a black sheep 
 among the flock . 
 it perplex her first . if there have be a respect- 
 able minority on either side , the case would have be 
 most natural . if nobody have regard she , she would 
 have - take the matter indifferently - such case have 
 occur . if everybody , this man include , she would 
 have take it as a matter of course - people have do 
 so before . but the smallness of the exception make the 
 mystery . 
 she soon know thus much of the recusant 's appear- 
 ance . he be a gentlemanly man , with full and 
 distinctly outlined roman feature , the prominence 
 of which glow in the sun with a bronze - like richness 
 of tone . he be erect in attitude , and quiet in 
 demeanour . one characteristic pre - eminently mark 
 he - dignity . 
 apparently he have some time ago reach that 
 entrance to middle age at which a man 's aspect naturally 
 cease to alter for the term of a dozen year or so ; and , 
 artificially , a woman't   do likewise . thirty - five and 
 fifty be his limit of variation - he might have be 
 either , or anywhere between the two . 
 it may be say that married man of forty be usually 
 ready and generous enough to fle pass glance at 
 any speciman of moderate beauty they may discern by 
 the way . probably , as with person play whist for 
 love , the consciousness of a certain immunity under 
 any circumstance from that bad possible ultimate , 
 the having to pay , make they unduly speculative . 
 Bathsheba be convince that this unmoved person 
 be not a married man . 
 when marketing be over , she rush off to Liddy , 
 who be wait for she - beside the yellowing in which 
 they have drive to town . the horse be put in , and 
 on they trot Bathsheba 's sugar , tea , and drapery 
 parcel be pack behind , and express in some 
 indescribable manner , by their colour , shape , and 
 general lineament , that they be that young lady- 
 farmer 's property , and the grocer 's and draper no 
 more . 
 " I have   be through it , Liddy , and it be over . I shall not 
 mind it again , for they will all have grow accustom 
 to see I there ; but this morning it be as bad as 
 be marry - eye everywhere ! " 
 " I know it would . be . " Liddy say " man be such 
 a terrible class of society to look at a body . " 
 " but there be one man who have more sense than 
 to waste his time upon I . " the information be put 
 in this form that Liddy might not for a moment suppose 
 her mistress be at all pique . " a very good - look 
 man . " she continue , " upright ; about forty , I should 
 think . do you know at all who he could be ? " 
 Liddy could not   think . 
 " can not   you guess at all ? " say Bathsheba with some 
 disappointment . 
 " I have not   a notion ; besides , ' tis no difference , since 
 he take less notice of you than any of the rest . now , 
 if he have take more , it would have matter a great deal . " 
 Bathsheba be suffer from the reverse feeling just 
 then , and they bowl along in silence . a low carriage , 
 bowling along still more rapidly behind a horse of un- 
 impeachable breed , overtook and pass they . 
 " why , there he be ! " she say . 
 Liddy look . " that ! that be Farmer Boldwood - 
 of course ' tis - the man you could not   see the other day 
 when he call . " 
 " oh , Farmer Boldwood . " murmur Bathsheba , and 
 look at he as he outstrip they . the farmer have 
 never turn his head once , but with eye fix on the 
 most advanced point along the road , pass as uncon- 
 sciously and abstractedly as if Bathsheba and her charm 
 be thin air . 
 " he be an interesting man - do not   you think so ? " she 
 remark . 
 " o yes , very . everybody own it . " reply Liddy . 
 " I wonder why he be so wrapt up and indifferent , and 
 seemingly so far away from all he see around he , " 
 " it be say - but not know for certain - that he meet 
 with some bitter disappointment when he be a young 
 man and merry . a woman jilt he , they say . " 
 " People always say that - and we know very well 
 woman scarcely ever jilt man ; ' tis the man who jilt we . 
 I expect it be simply his nature to be so reserved . " 
 " simply his nature - I expect so , miss - nothing else 
 in the world . " 
 " still , ' tis more romantic to think he have be serve 
 cruelly , poor thing ' ! perhaps , after all , he have ! I 
 " depend upon it he have . o yes , miss , he have ! 
 feel he must have . " 
 " however , we be very apt to think extreme of 
 people . I - should not   wonder after all if it be not   a 
 little of both - just between the two - rather cruelly 
 use and rather reserved . " 
 " o dear no , miss - I can not   think it between the 
 two ! " 
 " that be most likely . " 
 " well , yes , so it be . I be convince it be most likely . 
 you may - take my word , miss , that that be what be the 
 matter with he . " 
 CHAPTER XIII 
 sorte SANCTORUM - the VALENTINE 
 it be Sunday afternoon in the farmhouse , on the 
 thirteenth of February . dinner be over , Bathsheba , 
 for want of a well companion , have ask Liddy to 
 come and sit with she . the mouldy pile be dreary 
 in winter - time before the candle be light and the 
 shutter close ; the atmosphere of the place seem 
 as old as the wall ; every nook behind the furniture 
 have a temperature of its own , for the fire be not 
 kindle in this part of the house early in the day ; 
 and Bathsheba 's new piano , which be an old one 
 in other annal , look particularly slop and out 
 of level on the warped floor before night throw a 
 shade over its less prominent angle and hide the 
 unpleasantness . Liddy , like a little brook , though 
 shallow , be always ripple ; her presence have not so 
 much weight as to task thought , and yet enough to 
 exercise it . 
 on the table lie an old quarto Bible , bind in 
 leather . Liddy look at it say , - 
 " do you ever find out , miss , who you be go to 
 marry by mean of the Bible and key ? , 
 " do not   be so foolish , Liddy . as if such thing 
 could be . " 
 " well , there be a good deal in it , all the same . " 
 " nonsense , child . " 
 " and it make your heart beat fearful . some believe 
 in it ; some do not ; I do . " 
 " very well , let us try it . " say Bathsheba , bound 
 from her seat with that total disregard of consistency 
 which can be indulge in towards a dependent , and 
 enter into the spirit of divination at once . " go and 
 get the front door key . " 
 Liddy fetch it . " I wish it be not   Sunday . " she 
 say , on return . " perhaps ' tis wrong . " 
 " what be right week day be right sunday . " reply she 
 mistress in a tone which be a proof in itself . 
 the book be open - the leaf , drab with age , 
 be quite wear away at much - read verse by the fore " 
 finger " of unpractised reader in former day , where they 
 be move along under the line as an aid to the vision . 
 the special verse in the Book of Ruth be seek out 
 by Bathsheba , and the sublime word meet her eye . they 
 slightly thrill and abash she . it be Wisdom in 
 the abstract face Folly in the concrete . folly in the 
 concrete blush , persist in her intention , and place 
 the key on -the book . a rusty patch immediately upon 
 the verse , cause by previous pressure of an iron 
 substance thereon , tell that this be not the first time 
 the old volume have be use for the purpose . 
 " now keep steady , and be silent . " say Bathsheba . 
 the ' ve rse be repeat ; the book turn round ; 
 Bathsheba blush guiltily . 
 " who do you try ? " say Liddy curiously . 
 " I shall not tell you . " 
 " do you notice Mr. Boldwood 's doing in church 
 this morning , miss?"Liddy continue , adumbrate by 
 the remark the track her thought have take . 
 " no , indeed . " say Bathsheba , with serene indifference 
 " his pew be exactly opposite your , miss . " 
 " I know it . " 
 " and you do not see his going on ! , " 
 certainly I do not , I tell you . " 
 Liddy assume a small physiognomy , and shut 
 her lip decisively . 
 this move be unexpected , and proportionately dis 
 concerting . " what do he do ? " Bathsheba say perforce . 
 " do not   turn his head to look at you once all the 
 service . 
 " why should he ? " again demand her mistress , 
 wear a nettled look . " I do not   ask he to . 
 " oh no . but everybody else be notice you ; and 
 it be odd he do not . there , ' tis like he . rich and 
 gentlemanly , what do he care ? " 
 Bathsheba drop into a silence intend to ex- 
 press that she have opinion on the matter too abstruse 
 for Liddy 's comprehension , rather than that she have 
 nothing to say . 
 " dear I - I have nearly forget the valentine 
 I buy yesterday . " she exclaim at length . 
 " Valentine ! who for , miss ? " say Liddy . " Farmer 
 Boldwood ? " 
 it be the single name among all possible wrong 
 one that just at this moment seem to Bathsheba 
 more pertinent than the right . 
 " well , no . it be only for little Teddy Coggan . 
 have promise he something , and this will be a pretty 
 surprise for he . Liddy , you may as well bring I 
 my desk and I will direct it at once . " 
 Bathsheba take from her desk a gorgeously illumin- 
 ate and embossed design in post - octavo , which have 
 be " buy on the previous market - day at the chief 
 stationer 's in Casterbridge . in the centre be a small 
 oval enclosure ; this be leave blank , that the sender 
 might insert tender word more appropriate to the 
 special occasion than any generality by a printer 
 could possibly be . 
 " here be a place for writing . " say Bathsheba . " what 
 shall I put ? " 
 " something of this sort , I should think ' , return 
 Liddy promptly : - 
 " the rose be red , 
 the violet blue , 
 Carnation 's sweet , 
 and so be you . " 
 " yes , that shall be it . it just suit itself to a chubby- 
 face child like he . " say Bathsheba . she insert the 
 word in a small though legible handwriting ; enclose 
 the sheet in an envelope , and dip she pen for the 
 direction . 
 " what fun it would be to send it to the stupid old 
 Boldwood , and how he would wonder ! " say the 
 irrepressible Liddy , lift her eyebrow , and indulge 
 in an awful mirth on the verge of fear as she think 
 of the moral and social magnitude of the man contem- 
 plat . 
 Bathsheba pause to regard the idea at full length . 
 Boldwood 's have begin to be a troublesome image - a 
 specie of Daniel in her kingdom who persist in 
 kneeling eastward when reason and common sense 
 say that he might just as well follow suit with the 
 rest , and afford she the official glance of admiration 
 which cost nothing at all . she be far from be 
 seriously concerned about his nonconformity . still , 
 it be faintly depressing that the most dignified and 
 valuable man in the parish should withhold his eye , 
 and that a girl like Liddy should talk about it . so 
 Liddy 's idea be at first rather harass than piquant . 
 " no , I will not   do that . he would not   see any humour 
 in it . " 
 " he would worry to death . " say the persistent Liddy . 
 " really , I do not   care particularly to send it to 
 Teddy . " remark her mistress . " he be rather a naughty 
 child sometimes . " 
 " yes - that he be . " 
 " let us toss as man do . " say Bathsheba , idly . " now 
 then , head , Boldwood ; tail , Teddy . no , we will not   toss 
 money on a Sunday that would be tempt the devil 
 indeed . " 
 " toss this hymn - book ; there can not   be no sinfulness 
 in that , miss . " 
 " very well . open , Boldwood - shut , Teddy . no ; 
 it be more likely to fall open . open , Teddy - shut , 
 Boldwood . " 
 the book go flutter in the air and come down shut . 
 Bathsheba , a small yawn upon her mouth , take the 
 pen , and with off - hand serenity direct the missive to 
 Boldwood . 
 " now light a candle , Liddy . which seal shall we 
 use ? here be a unicorn 's head - there be nothing in 
 that . what be this ? - two dove - no . it ought to be 
 something extraordinary , ought it not , Liddy ? here be 
 one with a motto - I remember it be some funny one , 
 but I can not   read it . we will try this , and if it do not 
 do we will have another . " 
 a large red seal be duly affix . Bathsheba look 
 closely at the hot wax to discover the word . 
 " Capital ! " she exclaim , throw down the letter 
 frolicsomely . " ' twould upset the solemnity of a parson 
 the same evening the letter be send , and be duly 
 return to Weatherbury again in the morning . 
 of love as a spectacle Bathsheba have a fair knowledge ; 
 but of love subjectively she know nothing . 
 CHAPTER XIV 
 effect of the LETTER - SUNRISE 
 AT dusk , on the evening of St. Valentine 's day , bold- 
 wood sit down to supper as usual , by a beam fire 
 of aged log . upon the mantel - shelf before he be 
 a time - piece , surmount by a spread eagle , and upon 
 the eagle 's wing be the letter Bathsheba have send . 
 here the bachelor 's gaze be continually fasten 
 itself , till the large red seal become as a blot of blood 
 on the retina of his eye ; and as he eat and drink he 
 still read in fancy the word thereon , although they 
 be too remote for his sight - 
 " MARRY ME . " 
 the pert injunction be like those crystal substance 
 which , colourless themselves , assume the tone of object 
 about they . here , in the quiet of Boldwood 's parlour , 
 where everything that , be not grave be extraneous , 
 and where the atmosphere be that of a Puritan Sunday 
 last all the week , the letter and its dictum change " 
 their tenor from the thoughtlessness of their origin to 
 a deep solemnity , imbibe from their accessory 
 now . 
 since the receipt of the missive in the morning , 
 Boldwood have feel the symmetry of his existence to 
 be slowly get distort in the direction of an ideal 
 passion . the disturbance be as the first float 
 weed to Columbus - the eontemptibly little suggest 
 possibility of the infinitely great . 
 the letter must have have an origin and a motive . 
 that the latter be of the small magnitude com- 
 patible with its existence at all , Boldwood , of course , 
 do not know . and such an explanation do not 
 strike he as a possibility even . it be foreign to a 
 mystify condition of mind to realize of the mystifier 
 that the process of approve a course suggest by 
 circumstance , and of strike out a course from inner 
 impulse , would look the same in the result . the vast 
 difference between start a train of event , and direct- 
 ing into a particular groove a series already start , be 
 rarely apparent to the person confound by the 
 issue . 
 when Boldwood go to bed he place the valen- 
 tine in the corner of the look - glass . he be 
 conscious of its presence , even when his back be 
 turn upon it . it be the first time in Boldwood 's 
 life that such an event have occur . the same 
 fascination that cause he to think it an act which have 
 a deliberate motive prevent he from regard it as 
 an impertinence . he look again at the direction . 
 the mysterious influence of night invest the writing 
 with the presence of the unknown writer . somebody 's 
 some woman 's - hand have travel softly over the 
 paper bear his name ; her unrevealed eye have 
 watch every curve as she form it ; her brain have 
 see he in imagination the while . why should 
 she have imagine he ? her mouth - be the lip 
 red or pale , plump or crease ? - have curve itself to a 
 certain expression as the pen go on - the corner have 
 move with all their natural tremulousness : what have 
 be the expression ? 
 the vision of the woman write , as a supplement to 
 the word write , have no individuality . she be a 
 misty shape , and well she might be , consider that 
 her original be at that moment sound asleep and 
 oblivious of all love and letter - writing under the sky . 
 whenever Boldwood doze she take a form , and com- 
 paratively cease to be a vision : when he awake there 
 be the letter justify the dream . 
 the moon shine to - night , and its light be not of 
 a customary kind . his window admit only a 
 reflection of its ray , and the pale sheen have that 
 reverse direction which snow give , come upward 
 and light up his ceiling in an unnatural way , cast 
 shadow in strange place , and put light where 
 shadow have use to be . 
 the substance of the epistle have occupy he but 
 little in comparison with the fact of its arrival . he 
 suddenly wonder if anything more might be find in 
 the envelope than what he have withdraw . he jump 
 out of bed in the weird light , take the letter , pull out 
 the flimsy sheet , shake the envelope - search it . 
 nothing more be there . Boldwood look , as he 
 have a hundred time the precede day , at the insistent red 
 seal : " marry I . " he say aloud . 
 the solemn and reserved yeoman again close the 
 letter , and stick it in the frame of the glass . in do 
 so he catch sight of his reflected feature , wan in 
 expression , and insubstantial in form . he see how 
 closely compressed be his mouth , and that his eye 
 be wide - spread and vacant . feel uneasy and dis- 
 satisfied with himself for this nervous excitability , he 
 return to bed . 
 then the dawn draw on . the full power of the 
 clear heaven be not equal to that of a cloudy sky at 
 noon , when Boldwood arise and dress himself . he 
 descend the stair and go out towards the gate of 
 a field to the east , lean over which he pause and 
 look around . 
 it be one of the usual slow sunrise of this time of 
 the year , and the sky , pure violet in the zenith , be 
 leaden to the northward , and murky to the east , where , 
 over the snowy down or ewe - lease on Weatherbury 
 Upper Farm , and apparently rest upon the ridge , the 
 only half of the sun yet visible burn rayless , like a red 
 and flameless fire shin over a white hearthstone . 
 the whole effect resemble a sunset as childhood 
 resemble age . 
 in other direction , the field and sky be so much 
 of one colour by the snow , that it be difficult in a 
 hasty glance to tell whereabouts the horizon occur ; 
 and in general there be here , too , that before - mention 
 preternatural inversion of light and shade which attend 
 the prospect when the garish brightness commonly in 
 the sky be find on the earth , and the shade of earth 
 be in the sky . over the west hang the wasting moon , 
 now dull and greenish - yellow , like tarnished brass . 
 Boldwood be listlessly note how the frost have 
 harden and glaze the surface of the snow , till it 
 shine in the red eastern light wit - h the polish of marble ; 
 how , in some portion of the slope , wither grass - bent , 
 encase in icicle , bristle through the smooth wan 
 coverlet in the twisted and curved shape of old 
 venetian glass ; and how the footprint of a few bird , 
 which have hop over the snow whilst it lie in the 
 state of a soft fleece , be now freeze to a short perma- 
 nency . a half - muffle noise of light wheel interrupt 
 he . Boldwood turn back into the road . it be 
 the mail - cart - a crazy , two - wheel vehicle , hardly 
 heavy enough to resist a puff of wind . the driver hold 
 out a letter . Boldwood seize it and open it , ex- 
 pecte another anonymous one - so greatly be people 's 
 idea of probability a mere sense that precedent will 
 repeat itself . 
 " I do not   think it be for you , sir . " say the man , when 
 he see Boldwood 's action . " though there be no name 
 I think it be for your shepherd . " 
 Boldwood look then at the address - 
 to the new Shepherd , 
 Weatherbury Farm , 
 Near Casterbridge . 
 " oh - what a mistake ! - it be not mine . nor be it 
 for my shepherd . it be for Miss Everdene 's . " you have 
 well take it on to he - Gabriel Oak - and say I open 
 it in mistake . " 
 at this moment , on the ridge , up against the blaze 
 sky , a figure be visible , like the black snuff in the 
 midst of a candle - flame . then it move and begin to 
 bustle about vigorously from place to place , carry 
 square skeleton mass , which be riddle by the same 
 ray . a small figure on all four follow behind . the 
 tall form be that of Gabriel Oak ; the small one that 
 of George ; the article in course of transit be hurdle . 
 " wait , " say Boldwood . " that be the man on the hill . 
 I will take the letter to he myself . " 
 to Boldwood it be now no long merely a letter to 
 I another man . it be an opportunity . exhibit a 
 face pregnant with intention , he enter the snowy field . 
 Gabriel , at that minute , descend the hill towards 
 the right . the glow stretch down in this direction 
 now , and touch the distant roof of Warren 's Malthouse 
 whither the shepherd be apparently bent : Boldwood 
 follow at a distance . 
 CHAPTER XV 
 the scarlet and orange light outside the malthouse do 
 not penetrate to its interior , which be , as usual , light 
 by a rival glow of similar hue , radiate from the hearth . 
 the maltster , after have lain down in his clothe 
 for a few hour , be now sit beside a three - legged 
 table , breakfast of bread and bacon . this be 
 eat on the plateless system , which be perform by 
 place a slice of bread upon the table , the meat flat 
 upon the bread , a mustard plaster upon the meat , and 
 a pinch of salt upon the whole , then cut they 
 vertically downwards with a large pocket - knife till wood 
 be reach , when the sever lamp be impale on the 
 knife , elevated , and send the proper way of food . 
 the maltster 's lack of tooth appear not to sensibly 
 diminish his power as a mill . he have be without 
 they for so many year that toothlessness be feel less 
 to be a defect than hard gum an acquisition . indeed , 
 he seem to approach the grave as a hyperbolic curve 
 approach a straight line - less directly as he get near , 
 till it be doubtful if he would ever reach it at all . 
 in the ashpit be a heap of potato roast , and a 
 boiling pipkin of charred bread , call " coffee . " for the 
 benefit of whomsoever should call , for Warren 's be a 
 sort of clubhouse . use as an alternative to the in ! 
 " I say , say I , we get a fine day , and then down 
 come a snapper at night . " be a remark now suddenly 
 hear spread into the malthouse from the door , which 
 have be open the previous moment . the form of 
 Henery Fray advance to the fire , stamp the snow 
 from his boot when about half - way there . the speech 
 and entry have not seem to be at all an abrupt begin- 
 ne to the maltster , introductory matter be often 
 omit in this neighbourhood , both from word and 
 deed , and the maltster have the same latitude allow 
 he , do not hurry to reply . he pick up a fragment 
 of cheese , by peck upon it with his knife , as a butcher 
 pick up skewer . 
 Henery appear in a drab kerseymere great - coat , 
 button over his smock - frock , the white skirt of the 
 latter be visible to the distance of about a foot below 
 the coat - tail , which , when you get use to the style of 
 dress , look natural enough , and even ornamental - it 
 certainly be comfortable . 
 Matthew Moon , Joseph Poorgrass , and other carter 
 and waggoner follow at his heel , with great lantern 
 dangle from their hand , which show that they have 
 just come from the cart - horse stable , where they have 
 be busily engage since four o'clock that morning . 
 " and how be she get on without a baily ? " the 
 maltster inquire . 
 Henery shake his head , and smile one of the bitter 
 smile , drag all the flesh of his forehead into a 
 corrugate heap in the centre . 
 " she will rue it - surely , surely ! " he say " Benjy 
 Pennyways be not a true man or an honest baily - 
 as big a betrayer as Judas Iscariot himself . but to think 
 she can carr ' on alone ! " he allow his head to swing 
 laterally three or four time in silence . " never in all my 
 creep up - never ! " 
 this be recognize by all as the conclusion of some 
 gloomy speech which have be express in thought 
 alone during the shake of the head ; Henery meanwhile 
 retain several mark of despair upon his face , to 
 imply that they would be require for use again directly 
 he should go on speak . 
 " all will be ruin , and ourselves too , or there be no 
 meat in gentleman 's house ! " say Mark Clark . 
 " a headstrong maid , that be what she be - and will not 
 listen to no advice at all . pride and vanity have ruin 
 many a cobbler 's dog . dear , dear , when I think o ' it , 
 I sorrow like a man in travel ! " 
 " true , Henery , you do , I have   hear ye . " say Joseph 
 Poorgrass in a voice of thorough attestation , and with 
 a wire - draw smile of misery . 
 " ' twould do a martel man no harm to have what be 
 under her bonnet . " say Billy Smallbury , who have just 
 enter , bear his one tooth before he . " she can 
 spaik real language , and must have some sense some- 
 where . do ye foller I ? " 
 " I do : but no baily - I deserve that place . " wail 
 Henery , signify waste genius by gaze blankly at 
 vision of a high destiny apparently visible to he on 
 Billy Smallbury 's smock - frock . " there , ' twa to be , I 
 suppose . your lot be your lot , and scripture be nothing ; 
 for if you do good you do not   get reward accord to 
 your work , but be cheat in some mean way out of 
 your recompense . " 
 " no , no ; I do not   agree with'ee there . " say Mark 
 Clark . God be a perfect gentleman in that respect . " 
 " good work good pay , so to speak it . " attest 
 Joseph Poorgrass . 
 a short pause ensue , and as a sort of entr'acte 
 Henery turn and blow out the lantern , which the 
 increase of daylight render no long necessary even 
 in the malthouse , with its one pane of glass . 
 " I wonder what a farmer - woman can want with a 
 harpsichord , dulcimer , pianner , or whatever ' tis they d'call 
 it ? " say the maltster . " Liddy saith she've   a new one . " 
 " got a pianner ? " 
 " ay . seem her old uncle 's thing be not good 
 enough for she . She've   buy all but everything new . 
 there be heavy chair for the stout , weak and wiry one 
 for the slender ; great watch , get on to the size 
 of clock , to stand upon the chimbley - piece . " 
 picture , for the most part wonderful frame . " 
 " and long horse - hair settle for the drunk , with horse- 
 hair pillow at each end . " say Mr. Clark . " likewise 
 look - glass for the pretty , and lie book for the 
 wicked . " 
 firm loud tread be now hear stamp outside ; 
 the door be open about six inch , and somebody on 
 the other side exclaim - 
 " neighbour , have ye get room for a few new - bear 
 lambs?"Ay , sure , shepherd . " say the conclave . 
 the door be fling back till it kick the wall and 
 tremble from top to bottom with the blow . Mr. 
 Oak appear in the entry with a steaming face , hay- 
 band wound about his ankle to keep out the snow , a 
 leather strap round his waist outside the smock - frock , 
 and look altogether an epitome of the world 's health 
 and vigour . four lamb hang in various embarrassing 
 attitude over his shoulder , and the dog George , whom 
 Gabriel have contrive to fetch from Norcombe , stalk 
 solemnly behind . 
 " well , Shepherd Oak , and how be lamb this year , 
 if I mid say it ? " inquire Joseph Poorgrass . 
 " terrible trying , " say Oak . " I have   be wet through 
 twice a - day , either in snow or rain , this last fortnight . 
 Cainy and I have not   tin our eye to - night . " 
 " a good few twin , too , I hear ? " 
 " too many by half . yes ; ' tis a very queer lamb 
 this year . we shall not   have do by Lady Day . " 
 " and last year ' twer all over by Sexajessamine 
 Sunday . " Joseph remark . 
 " bring on the rest Cain . " say Gabriel , " and then run 
 back to the ewe . I will follow you soon . " 
 Cainy Ball - a cheery - faced young lad , with a small 
 circular orifice by way of mouth , advanced and deposit 
 two other , and retire as he be bid . Oak lower 
 the lamb from their unnatural elevation , wrap they 
 in hay , and place they round the fire . 
 " we have   no lambing - hut here , as I use to have at 
 Norcombe . " say Gabriel , " and ' tis such a plague to bring 
 the weakly one to a house . if ' twasn't   for your place 
 here , malter , I do not   know what I should do ! this keen 
 weather . and how be it with you to - day , malter ? " 
 " oh , neither sick nor sorry , shepherd , but no 
 young . " 
 " ay - I understand . " 
 " sit down , Shepherd Oak , " continue the ancient man 
 of malt . " and how be the old place at Norcombe , 
 when ye go for your dog ? I should like to see the 
 old familiar spot ; but faith , I should not " know a soul 
 there now . " 
 " I suppose you would not . ' tis alter very much . " 
 " be it true that Dicky Hill 's wooden cider - house be 
 pull down ? " 
 " o yes - year ago , and Dicky 's cottage just above it . " 
 " well , to be sure ! , 
 " yes ; and Tompkins 's old apple - tree be root that 
 use to bear two hogshead of cider ; and no help from 
 other tree . " 
 " rooted ? - you do not   say it ! ah ! stir time we 
 live in - stir time . " 
 and you can mind the old well that use to be in 
 the middle of the place ? that be turn into a solid 
 iron pump with a large stone trough , and all complete . " 
 " dear , dear - how the face of nation alter , and 
 what we live to see nowadays ! yes - and ' tis the same 
 here . they have   be talk but now of the mis'ess 's 
 strange doing . " 
 " what have you be say about she ? " inquire 
 Oak , sharply turn to the rest , and get very 
 warm . 
 " these middle - aged man have be pull she over 
 the coal for pride and vanity . " say Mark Clark ; " but 
 I say , let she have rope enough . bless she pretty face 
 should not   I like to do so - upon her cherry lip ! " 
 the gallant Mark Clark here make a peculiar and well 
 know sound with his own . 
 " Mark . " say Gabriel , sternly , " now you mind this ! 
 none of that dalliance - talk - that smack - and - coddle style 
 of yours - about Miss Everdene . I do not   allow it . do 
 you hear ? " 
 " with all my heart , as I have   get no chance . " reply 
 Mr. Clark , cordially . 
 " I suppose you have   be speak against she ? " say 
 Oak , turn to Joseph Poorgrass with a very grim 
 look . 
 " no , no - not a word i - ' tis a real joyful thing that 
 she be no bad , that be what I say . " say Joseph , tremble 
 and blush with terror . " Matthew just say - - " 
 " Matthew Moon , what have you be say ? " ask 
 Oak . 
 " I ? why ye know I would not   harm a worm - no , 
 not one underground worm ? " say Matthew Moon , 
 look very uneasy . 
 " well , somebody have - and look here , neighbour . " 
 Gabriel , though one of the quiet and most gentle 
 man on earth , rise to the occasion , with martial 
 promptness and vigour . " that be my fist . " here he 
 place his fist , rather small in size than a common 
 loaf , in the mathemarical centre of the maltster 's little 
 table , and with it give a bump or two thereon , as if 
 to ensure that their eye all thoroughly take in the 
 idea of fistiness before he go far . " now - the 
 first man in the parish that I hear prophesy bad of 
 our mistress , why "   here the fist be raise and let fall 
 as T'hor might have do with his hammer in assay 
 it   - " he will smell and taste that - or I be a Dutchman . " 
 all earnestly express by their feature that their 
 mind do not wander to Holland for a moment on 
 account of this statement , but be deplore the 
 difference which give rise to the figure ; and Mark 
 Clark cry " hear , hear ; just what I should ha ' say . " 
 the dog George look up at the same time after the 
 shepherd 's menace , and though he understand English 
 but imperfectly , begin to growl . 
 " now , do not   ye take on so , shepherd , and sit down ! " 
 say Henery , with a deprecate peacefulness equal to 
 anything of the kind in Christianity . 
 " we hear that ye be a extraordinary good and 
 clever man , shepherd . " say Joseph Poorgrass with 
 considerable anxiety from behind the maltster 's bed- 
 stead whither he have retire for safety . " ' tis a great 
 thing to be clever , I be sure . " he add , make move- 
 ment associate with state of mind rather than body ; 
 " we wish we be , do not   we , neighbour ? " 
 " ay , that we do , sure . " say Matthew Moon , with 
 a small anxious laugh towards Oak , to show how very 
 friendly disposed he be likewise . 
 " who be be tell you I be clever ? " say Oak . 
 " ' tis blow about from pillar to post quite common , " 
 say Matthew . " we hear that ye can tell the time as 
 well by the star as we can by the sun and moon , 
 shepherd . " 
 " yes , I can do a little that way . " say Gabriel , as a 
 man of medium sentiment on the subject . 
 name upon their waggon almost like copper - plate , 
 with beautiful flourish , and great long tail . a 
 excellent fine thing for ye to be such a clever man , 
 shepherd . Joseph Poorgrass use to prent to Farmer 
 James Everdene 's waggon before you come , and ' a 
 could never mind which way to turn the J 's and E 's 
  - could ye , Joseph ? " Joseph shake his head to express 
 how absolute be the fact that he could not . " and so 
 you use to do them the wrong way , like this , do not   ye , 
 Joseph ? " Matthew mark on the dusty floor with his 
 whip - handle . 
 " and how Farmer James would cuss , and call thee a 
 fool , would not   he , Joseph , when ' a seed his name 
 look so inside - out - like ? " continue Matthew Moon 
 with feeling . 
 " ay - ' a would . " say Joseph , meekly . " but , you see , 
 I be not   so much to blame , for they J 's and E 's be 
 such try son o ' witch for the memory to mind 
 whether they face backward or forward ; and I always 
 have such a forgetful memory , too . " 
 " ' tis a bad afiction for ye , be such a man of 
 calamitie in other way . " 
 " well , ' tis ; but a happy Providence order that it 
 should be no bad , and I feel my thank . as to 
 shepherd , there , I be sure mis'ess ought to have make 
 ye her baily - such a fitting man for't as you be . " 
 " I do not   mind own that I expect it . " say Oak , 
 frankly . " indeed , I hop for the place . at the same 
 time , Miss Everdene have a right to be own baily if 
 she choose - and to keep I down to be a common 
 shepherd only . " Oak draw a slow breath , look sadly 
 into the bright ashpit , and seem lose in thought not 
 of the most hopeful hue . 
 the genial warmth of the fire now begin to stimulate 
 the nearly lifeless lamb to bleat and move their limb 
 briskly upon the hay , and to recognize for the first time 
 the fact that they be bear . their noise increase to a 
 chorus of baas , upon which Oak pull the milk - can from 
 before the fire , and take a small tea - pot from the pocket 
 of his smock - frock , fill it with milk , and teach those of 
 the helpless creature which be not to be restore to 
 their dam how to drink from the spout - a trick they 
 acquire with astonishing aptitude . 
 " and she do not   even let ye have the skin of the 
 dead lamb , I hear ? " resume Joseph Poorgrass , his 
 eye linger on the operation of Oak with the neces- 
 sary melancholy . 
 " I do not   have they . " say Gabriel . 
 " Ye be very badly use , shepherd . " hazard Joseph 
 again , in the hope of get Oak as an ally in lamenta- 
 tion after all . " I think she be take against ye - that 
 I do . " 
 " o no - not at all . " reply Gabriel , hastily , and a 
 sigh escape he , which the deprivation of lamb skin 
 could hardly have cause . 
 before any further remark have be add a shade 
 darken the door , and Boldwood enter the malthouse , 
 bestow upon each a nod of a quality between friendli- 
 ness and condescension . 
 " ah ! Oak , I think you be here . " he say . " I 
 meet the mail - cart ten minute ago , and a letter be put 
 into my hand , which I open without read the 
 address . I believe it be yours . you must excuse the 
 accident please . " 
 " o yes - not a bit of difference , Mr. Boldwood - 
 not a bit . " say Gabriel , readily . he have not a corre- 
 spondent on earth , nor be there a possible letter come 
 to he whose content the whole parish would not have 
 be welcome to persue . 
 Oak step aside , and read the following in an 
 unknown hand : - 
 " DEAR FRIEND , - I do not know your name , but l think 
 these few line will reach you , which I write to thank you 
 for your kindness to I the night I leave Weatherbury in a 
 reckless way . I also return the money I owe you , which 
 you will excuse my not keep as a gift . all have end 
 well , and I be happy to say I be go to be married to 
 the young man who have court I for some time - Sergeant 
 Troy , of the 11th Dragoon Guards , now quarter in this 
 town . he would , I know , object to my have receive 
 anything except as a loan , be a man of great respecta- 
 bility and high honour - indeed , a nobleman by blood . 
 " I should be much oblige to you if you would keep the 
 content of this letter a secret for the present , dear friend . 
 we mean to surprise Weatherbury by come there soon 
 as husband and wife , though l blush to state it to one nearly 
 a stranger . the sergeant grow up in Weatherbury . thank- 
 e you again for your kindness , 
 " I be , your sincere well - wisher , 
 " FANNY ROBIN . " 
 " have you read it , Mr. Boldwood ? " say Gabriel ; 
 " if not , you have well do so . I know you be interested 
 in Fanny Robin . " 
 Boldwood read the letter and look grieve . 
 " fanny - poor Fanny ! the end she be so confident 
 of have not yet come , she should remember - and may 
 never come . I see she give no address . " 
 " what sort of a man be this Sergeant Troy ? " say 
 Gabriel . 
 " H'm - I be afraid not one to build much hope upon 
 in such a case as this . " the farmer murmur , " though 
 he be a clever fellow , and up to everything . a slight 
 romance attache to he , too . his mother be a french 
 governess , and it seem that a secret attachment exist 
 between she and the late Lord Severn . she be marry 
 to a poor medical man , and soon after an infant be 
 horn ; and while money be forthcoming all go on 
 well . unfortunately for her boy , his good friend die ; 
 and he get then a situation as second clerk at a lawyer 's 
 in Casterbridge . he stay there for some time , and 
 might have work himself into a dignified position of 
 some sort have he not indulge in the wild freak of 
 enlist . I have much doubt if ever little Fanny will 
 surprise we in the way she mention - very much doubt 
 a silly girl ! - silly girl ! " 
 the door be hurriedly burst open again , and in 
 come run Cainy Ball out of breath , his mouth red 
 and open , like the bell of a penny trumpet , from which 
 he cough with noisy vigour and great distension of face . 
 " now , Cain Ball . " say Oak , sternly , " why will you 
 run so fast and lose your breath so ? I be always tell 
 you of it . " 
 " oh - I - a puff of mee breath - go - the - wrong 
 way , please , Mister Oak , and make I cough - hok - 
 hok ! " 
 " well - what have you come for ? " 
 " I have   run to tell ye . " say the junior shepherd , 
 support his exhausted youthful frame against the 
 doorpost , " that you must come directly ' . two more ewe 
 have twin - that be what be the matter , Shepherd Oak . " 
 " oh , that be it . " say Oak , jump up , and dimisse 
 for the present his thought on poor Fanny . " you be 
 a good boy to run and tell I , Cain , and you shall 
 smell a large plum pudding some day as a treat . but , 
 before we go , Cainy , bring the tarpot , and we will mark 
 this lot and have do with them . " 
 Oak take from his illimitable pocket a mark iron , 
 dip it into the pot , and imprintcd on the buttock 
 of the infant sheep the initial of she he delight to 
 muse on - " B. E .. " which signify to all the region 
 round that henceforth the lamb belong to Farmer 
 Bathsheba Everdene , and to no one else . 
 " now , Cainy , shoulder your two , and off good 
 morning , Mr. Boldwood . " the shepherd lift the 
 sixteen large leg and four small body he have himself 
 bring , and vanish with they in the direction of 
 the lamb field hard by - their frame be now in a 
 sleek and hopeful state , pleasantly contrast with their 
 death's - door plight of half an hour before . 
 Boldwood follow he a little way up the field , 
 hesitate , and turn back . he follow he again 
 with a last resolve , annihilate return . on approach 
 the nook in which the fold be construct , the farmer 
 draw out - his pocket - book , unfastened - it , and allow it 
 to lie open on his hand . a letter be reveal - Bath- 
 sheba 's . 
 " I be go to ask you , Oak . " he say , with unreal 
 carelessness , " if you know whose write this be ? " 
 Oak glance into the book , and reply instantly , 
 with a flushed face , " Miss Everdene 's . " 
 Oak have colour simply at the consciousness of 
 sound her name . he now feel a strangely distressing 
 qualm from a new thought . " the letter could of course 
 be no other than anonymous , or the inquiry would not 
 have be necessary . 
 Boldwood mistook his confusion : sensitive person 
 be always ready with their " be it I ? " in preference to 
 objective reasoning . 
 " the question be perfectly fair . " he return - and 
 there be something incongruous in the serious earnest- 
 ness with which he apply himself to an argument on 
 a valentine . " you know it be always expect that 
 privy inquiry will be make : that be where the - fun 
 lie . " if the word " fun " have be " torture . " it could 
 not have be utter with a more constrained and 
 restless countenance than be Boldwood 's then . " 
 soon part from Gabriel , the lonely and reserved 
 man return to his house to breakfast - feel twinge 
 of shame and regret at have so far expose his mood 
 by those fevere question to a stranger . he again 
 place the letter on the mantelpiece , and sit down to 
 think of the circumstance attend it by the light of 
 Gabriel 's information . 
 CHAPTER XVI 
 all saint ' and all soul ' 
 on a week - day morning a small congregation , con- 
 siste mainly of woman and girl , rise from its knee 
 in the mouldy nave of a church call all saint ' , in 
 the distant barrack - town before mention , at the end 
 of a service without a sermon . they be about to 
 disperse , when a smart footstep , enter the porch and 
 come up the central passage , arrest their attention . 
 the step echo with a ring unusual in a church ; it 
 be the clink of spur . everybody look . a young 
 cavalry soldier in a red uniform , with the three chevron 
 of a sergeant upon his sleeve , stride up the aisle , with 
 an embarrassment which be only the more marked 
 by the intense vigour of his step , and by the deter- 
 mination upon his face to show none . a slight flush 
 have mount his cheek by the time he have run the 
 gauntlet between these woman ; but , pass on through 
 the chancel arch , he never pause till he come close 
 to the altar railing . here for a moment he stand 
 alone . 
 the officiating curate , who have not yet doff his 
 surplice , perceive the new - comer , and follow he 
 to the communion - space . he whisper to the soldier , 
 and then beckon to the clerk , who in his turn 
 whisper to an elderly woman , apparently his wife , and 
 they also go up the chancel step . 
 " ' tis a wedding ! " murmur some of the woman , 
 brightening . " let us wait ! " 
 the majority again sit down . 
 there be a creaking of machinery behind , and 
 some of the young one turn their head . from the 
 interior face of the west wall of the tower project a 
 little canopy with a quarter - jack and small bell beneath 
 it , the automaton be drive by the same clock 
 machinery that strike the large bell in the tower . be- 
 tween the tower and the church be a close screen , the 
 door of which be keep shut during service , hiding 
 this grotesque clockwork from sight . at present , how- 
 ever , the door be open , and the egress of the jack , the 
 blow on the bell , and the mannikin 's retreat into.the 
 nook again , be visible to many , and audible through- 
 out the church . 
 the jack have strike half - past eleven . 
 " where be the woman ? " whisper some of the 
 spectator . 
 the young sergeant stand still with the abnormal 
 rigidity of the old pillar around . he face the south- 
 east , and be as silent as he be still . 
 the silence grow to be a noticeable thing as the 
 minute go on , and nobody else appear , and not a 
 soul move . the rattle of the quarter - jack again from 
 its niche , its blow for three - quarter , its fussy retreat , 
 be almost painfully abrupt , and cause many of the 
 congregation to start palpably . 
 " I wonder where the woman be ! " a voice whisper 
 again . 
 there begin now that slight shifting of foot , that 
 artificial coughing among several , which betray a 
 nervous suspense . at length there be a titter . but 
 the soldier never move . there he stand , his face to 
 the south - east , upright as a column , his cap in his hand . 
 the clock tick on . the woman throw off their 
 nervousness , and titter and giggle become more 
 frequent . then come a dead silence . every one be 
 wait for the end . some person may have notice 
 how extraordinarily the striking of quarter . seem to 
 quicken the flight of time . it be hardly credible that 
 the jack have not get wrong with the minute when the 
 rattle begin again , the puppet emerge , and the four 
 quarter be strike fitfully as before : one could al- 
 most be positive that there be a malicious leer upon 
 the hideous creature 's face , and a mischievous delight 
 in its twitching . then , follow the dull and remote 
 resonance of the twelve heavy stroke in the tower 
 above . the woman be impressed , and there be no 
 giggle this time . 
 the clergyman glide into the vestry , and the clerk 
 vanish . the sergeant have not yet turn ; every 
 woman in the church be wait to see his face , and 
 he appear to know it . at last he do turn , and 
 stalk resolutely down the nave , brave they all , 
 with a compress lip . two bow and toothless old 
 almsmen then look at each other and chuckle , 
 innocently enough ; but the sound have a strange weird 
 effect in that place . 
 opposite to the church be a paved square , around 
 which several overhang wood building of old time 
 cast a picturesque shade . the young man on leave 
 the door go to cross the square , when , in the middle , 
 he meet a little woman . the expression of her face , 
 which have be one of intense anxiety , sink at the 
 sight of his nearly to terror . 
 " well ? " he say , in a suppress passion , fixedly 
 look at she . 
 " O , Frank - I make a mistake ! - I think that 
 church with the spire be all saint ' , and I be at the 
 door at half - past eleven to a minute as you say . 
 wait till a quarter to twelve , and find then that I 
 be in all soul ' . but I be not   much frightened , for 
 I think it could be to - morrow as well . " 
 " you fool , for so fool I ! but say no more . " 
 " shall it be to - morrow , Frank ? " she ask blankly . 
 " to - morrow ! " and he give vent to a hoarse laugh . 
 " I do not   go through that experience again for some 
 time , I warrant you ! " 
 " but after all . " she expostulate in a trembling voice , 
 " the mistake be not such a terrible thing ! now , dear 
 Frank , when shall it be ? " 
 " ah , when ? God know ! " he say , with a light 
 irony , and turn from she walk rapidly away . 
 CHAPTER XVII 
 in the market - PLACE 
 ON Saturday Boldwood be in Casterbridge market 
 house as usual , when the disturber of his dream enter 
 and become visible to he . Adam have awaken from 
 his deep sleep , and behold ! there be Eve . the 
 farmer take courage , and for the first time really look 
 at she . 
 material cause and emotional effect be not to be 
 arrange in regular equation . the result from capital 
 employ in the production of any movement of a 
 mental nature be sometimes as tremendous as the cause 
 itself be absurdly minute . when woman be in a freakish 
 mood , their usual intuition , either from carelessness or 
 inherent defect , seemingly fail to teach they this , and 
 hence it be that Bathsheba be fat to be astonish 
 today . 
 Boldwood look at she - not slily , critically , or 
 understandingly , but blankly at gaze , in the way a 
 reaper look up at a pass train - as something foreign 
 to his element , and but dimly understand . to bold- 
 wood woman have be remote phenomenon rather than 
 necessary complement - comet of such uncertain 
 aspect , movement , and permanence , that whether 
 their orbit be as geometrical , unchangeable , and 
 as subject to law as his own , or as absolutely erratic 
 as they superficially appear , he have not deem it 
 his duty to consider . 
 he see her black hair , her correct facial curve 
 and profile , and the roundness of her chin and throat . 
 he see then the side of her eyelid , eye , and lash , 
 and the shape of her ear . next he notice her figure , 
 her skirt , and the very sol of her shoe . 
 Boldwood think she beautiful , but wonder 
 whether he be right in his thought , for it seem 
 impossible that this romance in the flesh , if so sweet 
 as he imagine , could have be go on long without 
 create a commotion of delight among man , and pro- 
 voke more inquiry than Bathsheba have do , even 
 though that be not a little . to the good of his judge- 
 ment neither nature nor art could improve this perfect 
 one of an imperfect many . his heart begin to move 
 within he . Boldwood , it must be remember , though 
 forty year of age , have never before inspect a woman 
 with the very centre and force of his glance ; they have 
 strike upon all his sens at wide angle . 
 be she really beautiful ? he could not assure 
 himself that his opinion be true even now . he fur- 
 tively say to a neighbour , " be Miss Everdene consider 
 handsome ? " 
 " o yes ; she be a good deal notice the first 
 time she come , if you remember . a very handsome 
 girl indeed . " 
 a man be never more credulous than in receive 
 favourable opinion on the beauty of a woman he be 
 half , or quite , in love with ; a mere child 's word on the 
 point have the weight of an R.A. 's . Boldwood be 
 satisfied now . 
 and this charming woman have in effect say to 
 he , " marry I . " why should she have do that 
 strange thing ? Boldwood 's blindness to the difference 
 between approve of what circumstance suggest , and 
 originate what they do not suggest , be well match 
 by Bathsheba 's insensibility to the possibly great issue 
 of little beginning . 
 she be at this moment coolly deal with a dashing 
 young farmer , add up account with he as indiffer- 
 ently as if his face have be the page of a ledger . it 
 be evident that such a nature as his have no attraction 
 for a woman of Bathsheba 's taste . but Boldwood grow 
 hot down to his hand with an incipient jealousy ; he 
 trod for the first time the threshold of " the injure 
 lover 's hell . " his first impulse be to go and thrust 
 himself between they . this could be do , but only 
 in one way - by ask to see a sample of her corn . 
 Boldwood renounce the idea . he could not make 
 the request ; it be debase loveliness to ask it to 
 buy and sell , and jar with his conception of she . 
 all this time Bathsheba be conscious of have 
 break into that dignified stronghold at last . his 
 eye , she know , be follow she everywhere . this 
 be a triumph ; and have it come naturally , such a 
 triumph would have be the sweet to she for this 
 piquing delay . but it have be bring about by 
 misdirect ingenuity , and she value it only as she 
 value an artificial flower or a wax fruit . 
 be a woman with some good sense in reasoning 
 on subject wherein her heart be not involve , bath- 
 sheba genuinely repent that a freak which have owe 
 its existence as much to Liddy as to herself , should 
 ever have be undertake , to disturb the placidity of 
 a man she respect too highly to deliberately tease . 
 she that day nearly form the intention of beg 
 his pardon on the very next occasion of their meeting . 
 the bad feature of this arrangement be that , if 
 he think she ridicule he , an apology would in- 
 crease the offence by be disbelieve ; and if he 
 think she want he to woo she , it would read 
 like additional evidence of her forwardness . 
 CHAPTER xviii 
 boldwood in MEDITATION - REGRET 
 BOLDWOOD be tenant of what be call Little 
 Weatherbury Farm , and his person be the near ap- 
 proach to aristocracy that this remoter quarter of the 
 parish could boast of . genteel stranger , whose god 
 be their town , who might happen to be compel to 
 linger about this nook for a day , hear the sound of 
 light wheel , and pray to see good society , to the 
 degree of a solitary lord , or squire at the very least , 
 but it be only Mr. Boldwood go out for the day . 
 they hear the sound of wheel yet once more , and 
 be re - animate to expectancy : it be only Mr. bold- 
 wood come home again . 
 his house stand recess from the road , and the 
 stable , which be to a farm what a fireplace be to a 
 room , be behind , their low portion be lose 
 amid bush of laurel . inside the blue door , open 
 half - way down , be to be see at this time the back 
 and tail of half - a - dozen warm and contented horse 
 stand in their stall ; and as thus view , they pre- 
 sente alternation of roan and bay , in shape like a 
 Moorish arch , the tail be a streak down the midst 
 of each . over these , and lose to the eye gaze in 
 from the outer light , the mouth of the same animal 
 could be hear busily sustain the above - name 
 warmth and plumpness by quantity of oats and hay . 
 the restless and shadowy figure of a colt wander 
 about a loose - box at the end , whilst the steady grind 
 of all the eater be occasionally diversify by the 
 rattle of a rope or the stamp of a foot . 
 pace up and down at the heel of the animal be 
 Farmer Boldwood himself . this place be his almonry 
 and cloister in one : here , after look to the feeding 
 of his four - footed dependant , the celibate would walk 
 and meditate of an evening till the moon 's ray stream 
 in through the cobwebbe window , or total darkness 
 envelop the scene . 
 his square - frame perpendicularity show more fully 
 now than in the crowd and bustle of the market - house . 
 in this meditative walk his foot meet the floor with heel 
 and toe simultaneously , and his fine reddish - flesh face 
 be bent downwards just enough to render obscure the 
 still mouth and the well - rounded though rather prominent 
 and broad chin . a few clear and thread - like horizontal 
 line be the only interruption to the otherwise smooth 
 surface of his large forehead . 
 the phase of Boldwood 's life be ordinary enough , 
 but his be not an ordinary nature . that stillness , 
 which strike casual observer more than anything else 
 in his character and habit , and seem so precisely 
 like the rest of inanition , may have be the perfect 
 balance of enormous antagonistic force - positive and 
 negative in fine adjustment . his equilibrium disturb , 
 he be in extremity at once . if an emotion possess 
 he at all , it rule he ; a feeling not master he 
 be entirely latent . stagnant or rapid , it be never 
 slow . he be always hit mortally , or he be miss . 
 he have no light and careless touch in his constitu- 
 tion , either for good or for evil . stern in the outline of 
 action , mild in the detail , he be serious throughout all . 
 he see no absurd side to the folly of life , and thus , 
 though not quite companionable in the eye of merry 
 man and scoffer , and those to whom all thing show 
 life as a jest , he be not intolerable to the earnest and 
 those acquaint with grief . be a man -who read 
 all the drama of life seriously , if he fail to please 
 when they be comedy , there be no frivolous treat- 
 ment to reproach he for when they chance to end 
 tragically . 
 Bathsheba be far from dream that the dark and 
 silent shape upon which she have so carelessly throw a 
 seed be a hotbed of tropic intensity . have she know 
 Boldwood 's mood , her blame would have be fearful , 
 and the stain upon her heart ineradicable . moreover , 
 have she know her present power for good or evil over 
 this man , she would have tremble at her responsibility . 
 luckily for her present , unluckily for her future tran- 
 quillity , her understanding have not yet tell she what 
 Boldwood be . nobody know entirely ; for though it 
 be possible to form guess concern his wild capa- 
 bilitie from old floodmark faintly visible , he have never 
 be see at the high tide which cause they . 
 Farmer Boldwood come to the stable - door and look 
 forth across the level field . beyond the first enclosure 
 be a hedge , and on the other side of this a meadow 
 belong to Bathsheba 's farm . 
 it be now early spring - the time of go to grass 
 with the sheep , when they have the first feed of the 
 meadow , before these be lay up for mow . the 
 wind , which have be blow east for several week , 
 have veer to the southward , and the middle of spring 
 have come abruptly - almost without a beginning . it 
 be that period in the vernal quarter when we map 
 suppose the Dryads to be wake for the season . the 
 vegetable world begin to move and swell and the sap 
 to rise , till in the complete silence of lone gardens 
 and trackless plantation , where- everything seem -help- 
 less and still after the bond and slavery of frost , there 
 be bustling , straining , united thrust , and pull - all- 
 together , in comparison with which the powerful tug of 
 crane and pulley in a noisy city be but pigmy effort . 
 Boldwood , look into the distant meadow , see 
 there three figure . they be those of Miss Everdene , 
 Shepherd Oak , and Cainy Ball . 
 when Bathsheba 's figure shine upon the farmer 's 
 eye it light he up as the moon light up a great 
 tower . a man 's body be as the shell ; or the tablet , of 
 his soul , as he be reserve or ingenuous , overflowing or 
 self - contain . there be a change in Boldwood 's 
 exterior from its former impassibleness ; and his face 
 show that he be now live outside his defence 
 for the first time , and with a fearful sense of exposure . 
 it be the usual experience of strong nature when they 
 love . 
 at last he arrive at a conclusion . it be to go 
 across and inquire boldly of she . 
 the insulation of his heart by reserve during these 
 many year , without a channel of any kind for disposable 
 emotion , have work its effect . it have be observe 
 more than once that the cause of love be chiefly 
 subjective , and Boldwood be a live testimony to 
 the truth of the proposition . no mother exist to 
 absorb his devotion , no sister for his tenderness , no 
 idle tie for sense . he become surcharge with the 
 compound , which be genuine lover 's love . 
 he approach the gate of the meadow . beyond 
 it the ground be melodious with ripple , and the sky 
 with lark ; the low bleating of the flock mingle with 
 both . mistress and man be engage in the operation 
 of make a lamb " take . " which be perform whenever 
 an ewe have lose her own offspring , one of the twin of 
 another ewe be give she as a substitute . Gabriel 
 have skin the dead lamb , and be tie the skin 
 over the body of the live lamb , in the customary manner , 
 whilst Bathsheba be hold open a little pen of four 
 hurdle , into which the Mother and foist lamb be 
 drive , where they would remain till the old sheep 
 conceive an affection for the young one . 
 Bathsheba look up at the completion of the 
 manouvre , and see the farmer by the gate , where he 
 be overhang by a willow tree in full bloom . Gabriel , 
 to whom her face be as the uncertain glory of an April 
 day , be ever regardful of its faint change , and 
 instantly discern thereon the mark of some influence 
 from without , in the form of a keenly self - conscious 
 reddening . he also turn and beheld Boldwood . 
 at onee connect these sign with the letter bold- 
 wood have show he , Gabriel suspect she of some 
 coquettish procedure begin by that mean , and carry 
 on since , he know not how . 
 Farmer Boldwood have read the pantomime denoting 
 that they be aware of his presence , and the perception 
 be as too much light turn upon his new sensibility . 
 he be still in the road , and by move on he hop 
 that neither would recognize that he have originally 
 intend to enter the field . he pass by with an 
 utter and overwhelming sensation of ignorance , shyness , 
 and doubt . perhaps in her manner there be sign 
 that she wish to see he - perhaps not - he could not 
 read a woman . the cabala of this erotic philosophy 
 seem to consist of the subtle meaning express in 
 misleading way . every turn , look , word , and accent 
 contain a mystery quite distinct from its obvious 
 import , and not one have ever be ponder by he 
 until now . 
 as for Bathsheba , she be not deceive into the 
 belief that Farmer Boldwood have walk by on business 
 or in idleness . she collect the probability of the 
 case , and conclude that she be herself responsible for 
 Boldwood 's appearance there . it trouble her much 
 to see what a great flame a little Wildfire be likely to 
 kindle . Bathsheba be no schemer for marriage , nor 
 be she deliberately a trifl with the affection of man , 
 and a censor 's experience on see an actual flirt after 
 observe she would have be a feeling of surprise 
 that Bathsheba could be so different from such a one , 
 and yet so like what a flirt be suppose to be . 
 she resolve never again , by look or by sign , to 
 interrupt the steady flow of this man 's life . but a 
 resolution to avoid an evil be seldom frame till the evil 
 be so far advanced as to make avoidance impossible . 
 CHAPTER XIX 
 the SHEEP - WASHING - the OFFER 
 BOLDWOOD do eventually call upon she . she be 
 not at home . " of course not . " he murmur . in con- 
 template Bathsheba as a woman , he have forget the 
 accident of her position as an agriculturist - that be 
 as much of a farmer , and as extensive a farmer , as 
 himself , her probable whereabout be out - of - door at 
 this time of the year . this , and the other oversight 
 Boldwood be guilty of , be natural to the mood , and 
 still more natural to the circumstance . the great aid 
 to idealization in love be present here : occasional 
 observation of she from a distance , and the absence of 
 social intercourse with her - visual familiarity , oral 
 strangeness . the small human element be keep 
 out of sight ; the pettiness that enter so largely into 
 all earthly living and do be disguise by the 
 accident of lover and love - one not be on visit 
 term ; and there be hardly awaken a thought in 
 Boldwood that sorry household reality appertain to 
 she , or that she , like all other , have moment of 
 commonplace , when to be least plainly see be to be 
 most prettily remember . thus a mild sort of 
 apotheosis take place in his fancy , whilst she still live 
 and breathe within his own horizon , a troubled creature 
 like himself . 
 it be the end of May when the farmer determine 
 to be no long repulse by triviality or distract by 
 suspense . he have by this time grow use to be in 
 love ; the passion now startle he less even when it 
 torture he more , and he feel himself adequate to the 
 situation . on inquire for she at her house they have 
 tell he she be at the sheepwashing , and he go off 
 to seek she there . 
 the sheep - wash pool be a perfectly circular basin 
 of brickwork in the meadow , full of the clear water . 
 to bird on the wing its glassy surface , reflect the 
 light sky , must have be visible for mile around as a 
 glisten Cyclops ' eye in a green face . the grass 
 about the margin at this season be a sight to remember 
 long - in a minor sort of way . its activity in suck 
 the moisture from the rich damp sod . be almost a pro- 
 cess observable by the eye . the outskirt of this level 
 water - meadow be diversify by rounded and hollow 
 pasture , where just now every flower that be not a 
 buttercup be a daisy . the river slide along noiselessly 
 as a shade , the swell reed and sedge form a 
 flexible palisade upon its moist brink . to the north 
 of the mead be tree , the leaf of which be new , 
 soft , and moist , not yet have stiffen and darken 
 under summer sun and drought , their colour being 
 yellow beside a green - green beside a yellow . 
 from the recess of this knot of foliage the loud 
 note of three cuckoo be resound through the 
 still air . 
 Boldwood go meditate down the slope with his 
 eye on his boot , which the yellow pollen from the 
 buttercup have bronze in artistic gradation . a tribu- 
 tary of the main stream flow through the basin of the 
 pool by an inlet and outlet at opposite point of its 
 diameter . Shepherd Oak , Jan Coggan , Moon , poor- 
 grass , Cain Ball , and several other be assemble 
 here , all dripping wet to the very root of their hair , 
 and Bathsheba be stand by in a new riding - habit - 
 the most elegant she have ever wear - the rein of her 
 horse be loop over her arm . flagon of cider 
 be roll about upon the green . the meek sheep 
 be push into the pool by Coggan and Matthew 
 Moon , who stand by the low hatch , immerse to their 
 waist ; then Gabriel , who stand on the brink , thrust 
 they under as they swam along , with an instrument 
 like a crutch , form for the purpose , and also for 
 assist the exhausted animal when the wool become 
 saturate and they begin to sink . they be let out 
 against the stream , and through the upper opening , all 
 impurity flow away below . Cainy Ball and Joseph , 
 who perform this latter operation , be if possible 
 wetter than the rest ; they resemble dolphin under a 
 fountain , every protuberance and angle of their clothe 
 dribble forth a small rill . 
 Boldwood come close and bade her good - morning , with 
 such constraint that she could not but think he have 
 step across to the washing for its own sake , hop 
 not to find she there ; more , she fancy his brow severe 
 and his eye slighting . Bathsheba immediately contrive 
 to withdraw , and glide along by the river till she be 
 a stone 's throw off . she hear footstep brush the 
 grass , and have a consciousness that love be encircle 
 she like a perfume . instead of turn or wait , 
 Bathsheba go far among the high sedge , but 
 Boldwood seem determine , and press on till they 
 be completely past the bend of the river . here , 
 without be see , they could hear the splashing and 
 shout of the washer above . 
 " Miss Everdene ! " say the farmer . 
 she tremble , turn , and say " good morning . " 
 his tone be so utterly remove from all she have 
 expect as a beginning . it be lowness and quiet 
 accentuate : an emphasis of deep meaning , their form , 
 at the same time , be scarcely express . silence 
 have sometimes a remarkable power of show itself as 
 the disembodied soul of feel wander without its 
 carcase , and it be then more impressive than speech . 
 in the same way , to say a little be often to tell more 
 than to say a great deal . Boldwood tell everything in 
 that word . 
 as the consciousness expand on learn that what 
 be fancy to be the rumble of wheel be the reverbera- 
 tion of thunder , so do Bathsheba 's at her intuitive 
 conviction . 
 " I feel - almost too much - to think . " he say , with a 
 solemn simplicity . " I have come to speak to you with- 
 out preface . my life be not my own since I have behold 
 you clearly , Miss Everdene - I come to make you an 
 offer of marriage . " 
 Bathsheba try to preserve an absolutely neutral 
 countenance , and all the motion she make be that of 
 closing lip which have previously be a little parted . 
 " I be now forty - one year old . " he go on . " I may 
 have be call a confirmed bachelor , and I be a 
 confirm bachelor . I have never any view of myself 
 as a husband in my early day , nor have I make any 
 calculation on the subject since I have be old . 
 but we all change , and my change , in this matter , come 
 with see you . I have feel lately , more and more , 
 that my present way of living be bad in every respect . 
 beyond all thing , I want you as my wife . " 
 " I feel , Mr. Boldwood , that though I respect you 
 much , I do not feel - what would justify I to - in 
 accept your offer . " she stammer . 
 this give back of dignity for dignity seem to 
 open the sluice of feeling that Boldwood have as yet 
 keep close . 
 " my life be a burden without you . " he exclaim , in 
 a low voice . " I want you - I want you to let I say 
 I love you again and again ! " 
 Bathsheba answer nothing , and the mare upon 
 her arm seem so impressed that instead of crop 
 the herbage she look up . 
 " I think and hope you care enough for I to listen 
 to what I have to tell ! " 
 Bathsheba 's momentary impulse at hear this be 
 to ask why he think that , till she remember that , 
 far from be a conceited assumption on Boldwood 's 
 part , it be but the natural conclusion of serious reflec- 
 tion base on deceptive premise of her own offering . 
 " I wish I could say courteous flattery to you . " the 
 farmer continue in an easy tone , " and put my rugged 
 feeling into a graceful shape : but I have neither power 
 nor patience to learn such thing . I want you for my 
 wife - so wildly that no other feeling can abide in I ; 
 but I should not have speak out have I not be lead 
 to hope . " 
 the valentine again ! o that valentine ! " she 
 say to herself , but not a word to he . 
 " if you can love I say so , Miss Everdene . if not 
  - do not   say no ! " 
 " Mr. Boldwood , it be painful to have to say I be 
 surprised , so that I do not   know how to answer you with 
 propriety and respect - but be only just able to speak 
 out my feeling - I mean my meaning ; that I be afraid 
 I can not   marry you , much as I respect you . you be too 
 dignified for I to suit you , sir . " 
 " but , Miss Everdene ! " 
 " I - I do not   - I know I ought never to have dream 
 of send that valentine - forgive I , sir - it be a 
 wanton thing which no woman with any self - respect 
 should have do . if you will only pardon my thought- 
 lessness , I promise never to - - " 
 " no , no , no . do not   say thoughtlessness ! make I 
 think it be something more - that it be a sort of 
 prophetic instinct - the beginning of a feeling that you 
 would like I . you torture I to say it be do in 
 thoughtlessness - I never think of it in that light , and 
 I can not   endure it . ah ! I wish I know how to win you ! 
 but that I can not   do - I can only ask if I have already get 
 you . if I have not , and it be not true that you have 
 come unwittingly to I as I have to you , I can say no 
 more . " 
 " I have not fall in love with you , Mr. Boldwood - 
 certainly I must say that . " she allow a very small 
 smile to creep for the first time over her serious face in 
 say this , and the white row of upper tooth , and keenly- 
 cut lip already notice , suggest an idea of heartless- 
 ness , which be immediately contradict by the pleasant 
 eye . 
 " but you will just think - in kindness and conde- 
 scension think - if you can not bear with I as a husband ! 
 I fear I be too old for you , but believe I I will take 
 more care of you than would many a man of your own 
 age . I will protect and cherish you with all my strength 
  - I will indeed ! you shall have no care - be worry 
 by no household affair , and live quite at ease , Miss 
 Everdene . the dairy superintendence shall be do by 
 a man - I can afford it will - you shall never have so 
 much as to look out of door at haymake time , or to 
 think of weather in the harvest . I rather cling ; to the 
 chaise , because it be he same my poor father and mother 
 drive , but if you do not   like it I will sell it , and you shall 
 have a pony - carriage of your own . I can not say how 
 far above every other idea and object on earth you seem 
 to I - nobody know - God only know - how much 
 you be to I ! " 
 Bathsheba 's heart be young , and it swell with 
 sympathy for the deep - natured man who speak so 
 simply . 
 " do not   say it ! do not ! I can not bear you to feel so 
 much , and I to feel nothing . and I be afraid they 
 will notice we , Mr. Boldwood . will you let the matter 
 rest now ? I can not think collectedly . I do not know 
 you be go to say this to I . o , I be wicked to 
 have make you suffer so ! " she be frightened as well 
 as agitated at his vehemence . 
 " say then , that you do not   absolutely refuse . do not 
 quite refuse ? " 
 " I can do nothing . I can not answer . "I may speak to you again on the 
 subject ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " I may think of you ? " 
 " yes , I suppose you may think of I . " 
 " and hope to obtain you ? " 
 " no - do not hope ! let we go on . " 
 " I will call upon you again to - morrow . " 
 " no - please not . give I time . " 
 " yes - I will give you any time . " he say earnestly and 
 gratefully . " I be happy now . " 
 " no - I beg you ! do not   be happy if happiness 
 only come from my agreeing . be neutral , Mr. Bold- 
 wood ! I must think . " 
 " I will wait . " he say . 
 and then she turn away . Boldwood drop his 
 gaze to the ground , and stand long like a man who do not 
 know where he be . reality then return upon he 
 like the pain of a wound receive in an excitement 
 which eclipse it , and he , too , then go on . 
 CHAPTER XX 
 perplexity - grind the SHEARS - A quarrel 
 " he be so disinterested and kind to offer I all that I 
 can desire . " Bathsheba muse . 
 yet Farmer Boldwood , whether by nature kind or 
 the reverse to kind , do not exercise kindness , here . 
 the rare offering of the pure love be but a self- 
 indulgence , and no generosity at all . 
 Bathsheba , not be the least in love with he , be 
 eventually able to look calmly at his offer . it be one 
 which many woman of her own station in the neighbour- 
 hood , and not a few of high rank , would have be 
 wild to accept and proud to publish . in every point of 
 view , range from politic to passionate , it be desirable 
 that she , a lonely girl , should marry , and marry this 
 earnest , well - to - do , and respected man . he be close 
 to her door : his standing be sufficient : his quality 
 be even supererogatory . have she feel , which she do 
 not , any wish whatever for the married state in the 
 abstract , she could not reasonably have reject he , 
 be a woman who frequently appeal to she under , 
 stand for deliverance from her whim . Boldwood as 
 a means to marriage be unexceptionable : she esteem 
 and like he , yet she do not want he . it appear 
 that ordinary man take wife because possession be not 
 possible without marriage , and that ordinary woman 
 accept husband because marriage be not possible with , 
 out possession ; with totally differ aim the method be 
 the same on both side . but the understand incentive 
 on the woman 's part be want here . besides , bath- 
 sheba 's position as absolute mistress of a farm and house 
 be a novel one , and the novelty have not yet begin to 
 wear off . 
 but a disquiet fill she which be somewhat to her 
 credit , for it would have affect few . beyond the men- 
 tione reason with which she combat her objection , 
 she have a strong feeling that , have be the one who 
 begin the game , she ought in honesty to accept the conse- 
 quence . still the reluctance remain . she say in the 
 same breath that it would be ungenerous not to marry 
 Boldwood , and that she could not   do it to save her life . 
 Bathsheba 's be an impulsive nature under a delibera- 
 tive aspect . an Elizabeth in brain and a Mary Stuart 
 in spirit , she often perform action of the great 
 temerity with a manner of extreme discretion . many of 
 her thought be perfect syllogism ; unluckily they 
 always remain thought . only a few be irrational 
 assumption ; but , unfortunately , they be the one 
 which most frequently grow into deed . 
 the next day to that of the declaration she find 
 Gabriel Oak at the bottom of her garden , grind his 
 shear for the sheep - shearing . all the surround 
 cottage be more or less scene of the same operation ; 
 the scurr of whet spread into the sky from all part 
 of the village as from an armury previous to a campaign . 
 peace and war kiss each other at their hour of prepara- 
 tion - sickle , scythe , shear , and pruning - hook , rank 
 with sword , bayonet , and lance , in their common 
 necessity for point and edge . 
 Cainy Ball turn the handle of Gabriel 's grindstone , 
 his head perform a melancholy see - see up and down 
 with each turn of the wheel . Oak stand somewhat as 
 Eros be represent when in the act of sharpen his 
 arrow : his figure slightly bent , the weight of his body 
 throw over on the shear , and his head balance side- 
 way , with a critical compression of the lip and contrac- 
 tion of the eyelid to crown the attitude . 
 his mistress come up and look upon they in 
 silence for a minute or two ; then she say - 
 " Cain , go to the low mead and catch the bay mare . 
 I will turn the winch of the grindstone . I want to speak 
 to you , Gabriel . 
 Cain depart , and Bathsheba take the handle . 
 Gabriel have glance up in intense surprise , quell its 
 expression , and look down again . Bathsheba turn 
 the winch , and Gabriel apply the shear . 
 the peculiar motion involve in turn a wheel 
 have a wonderful tendency to benumb the mind . it 
 be a sort of attenuate variety of Ixion 's punishment , 
 and contribute a dismal chapter to the history of 
 heavy , and the body 's centre of gravity seem to 
 settle by degree in a leaden lump somewhere be- 
 tween the eyebrow and the crown . Bathsheba feel 
 the unpleasant symptom after two or three dozen 
 turn . 
 " will you turn , Gabriel , and let I hold the shear ? " 
 she say . " my head be in a'whirl , and I can not   talk . 
 Gabriel turn . Bathsheba then begin , with some 
 awkwardness , allow her thought to stray occasion- 
 ally from her story to attend to the shear , which 
 require a little nicety in sharpen . 
 " I want to ask you if the man make any observa- 
 tion on my go behind the sedge with Mr. Boldwood 
 yesterday ? " 
 " yes , they do . " say Gabriel . " you do not   hold 
 the shear right , miss - I know you would not   know the 
 way - hold like this . " 
 he relinquish the winch , and inclose her two 
 hand completely in his own   take each as we some- 
 time slap a child 's hand in teach he to write , 
 grasp the shear with she . " incline the edge so , " 
 he say . 
 hand and shear be inclined to suit the word , 
 and hold thus for a peculiarly long time by the in- 
 structor as he speak . 
 " that will do . " exclaim Bathsheba . " loose my 
 hand . I will not   have they hold ! turn the winch . " 
 Gabriel free her hand quietly , retire to his 
 handle , and the grinding go on . 
 " do the man think it odd ? " she say again . 
 " Odd be not the idea , miss . " 
 " what do they say ? " 
 " that Farmer Boldwood 's name and your own 
 be likely to be fling over pulpit together before the 
 year be out . " 
 " I think so by the look of they ! why , there be 
 nothing in it . a more foolish remark be never make , 
 and I want you to contradict it ! that be what I come for . " 
 Gabriel look incredulous and sad , but between 
 his moment of incredulity , relieve . 
 " they must have hear our conversation . " she 
 continue . 
 " well , then , Bathsheba ! " say Oak , stop the 
 handle , and gaze into her face with astonishment . 
 " Miss Everdene , you mean , " she say , with dignity . 
 " I mean this , that if Mr. Boldwood really speak of 
 marriage , I bain't   go to tell a story and say he 
 do not   to please you . I have already try to please 
 you too much for my own good ! " 
 Bathsheba regard he with round - eyed perplexity . 
 she do not know whether to pity he for disappointed 
 love of she , or to be angry with he for have get 
 over it - his tone be ambiguous . 
 " I say I want you just to mention that it be 
 not true I be go to be married to he . " she mur- 
 mure , with a slight decline in her assurance . 
 " I can say that to they if you wish , Miss Everdene . 
 and I could likewise give an opinion to ' ee on what 
 you have do . " 
 " I daresay . but I do not   want your opinion . "I suppose not . " say Gabriel 
 bitterly , and go on 
 with his turning , his word rise and fall in a 
 regular swell and cadence as he stoop or rise with 
 the winch , which direct they , accord to his 
 position , perpendicularly into the earth , or horizontally 
 along the garden , his eye be fix on a leaf upon 
 the ground . 
 with Bathsheba a hastened act be a rash act ; 
 but , as do not always happen , time gain be 
 prudence insure . it must be add , however , that 
 time be very seldom gain . at this period the 
 single opinion in the parish on herself and her doing 
 that she value as sounder than her own be Gabriel 
 Oak 's . and the outspoken honesty of his character 
 be such- that on any subject even that of her love 
 for , or marriage with , another man , the same disinter- 
 estedness of opinion might be calculate on , and be 
 have for the asking . thoroughly convinced of the 
 impossibility of his own suit , a high resolve constrain 
 he not to injure that of another . this be a lover 's 
 most stoical virtue , as the lack of it be a lover 's most 
 venial sin . know he would reply truly , she ask 
 the question , painful as she must have know the sub- 
 ject would be . such be the selfishness of some charm- 
 ing woman . perhaps it be some excuse for she thus 
 torture honesty to her own advantage , that she have 
 absolutely no other sound judgment within easy reach . 
 " well , what be your opinion of my conduct . " she 
 say , quietly . 
 " that it be unworthy of any thoughtful , and meek , 
 and comely woman . " 
 in an instant Bathsheba 's face colour with the 
 angry crimson of a danby sunset . but she forbore 
 to utter this feeling , and the reticence of her tongue 
 only make the loquacity of her face the more notice- 
 able . 
 the next thing Gabriel do be to make a mistake . 
 " perhaps you do not   like the rudeness of my repri- 
 mande you , for I know it be rudeness ; but I think 
 it would do good . " 
 she instantly reply sarcastically - 
 " on the contrary , my opinion of you be so low , that 
 I see in your abuse the praise of discern people ! " 
 " I be glad you do not   mind it , for I say it honestly 
 and with every serious meaning . " 
 " I see . but , unfortunately , when you try not to 
 speak in jest you be amusing - just as when you wish 
 to avoid seriousness you sometimes say a sensible word 
 it be a hard hit , but Bathsheba have unmistakably 
 lose her temper , and on that account Gabriel have 
 never in his life keep his own well . he say nothing . 
 she then break out - 
 " I may ask , I suppose , where in particular my 
 unworthiness lie ? in my not marry you , perhaps ! 
 " not by any mean . " say Gabriel quietly . " I have 
 long give up thinking of that matter . "Or wish it , I suppose . " she 
 say ; and it be 
 apparent that she expect an unhesitating denial of 
 this supposition . 
 whatever Gabriel feel , he coolly echo her word - 
 " or wish it either . " 
 a woman may be treat with a bitterness which 
 be sweet to she , and with a rudeness which be not 
 offensive . Bathsheba would have submit to an 
 indignant chastisement for her levity have Gabriel pro- 
 test that he be love she at the same time ; the 
 impetuosity of passion unrequited be bearable , even if 
 it sting and anathematize there be a triumph in the 
 humiliation , and a tenderness in the strife . this be 
 what she have be expect , and what she have not 
 get . to be lecture because the lecturer see she in 
 the cold morning light of open - shuttered disillusion 
 be exasperate . he have not finish , either . he 
 continue in a more agitated voice : - 
 " my opinion be   since you ask it   that you be 
 greatly to blame for play prank upon a man like 
 Mr. Boldwood , merely as a pastime . lead on a 
 man you do not   care for be not a praiseworthy action . 
 and even , Miss Everdene , if you seriously incline 
 towards he , you might have let he find it out in 
 some way of true loving - kindness , and not by send 
 he a valentine 's letter . " 
 Bathsheba lay down the shear . 
 " I can not allow any man to - to criticise my private 
 Conduct ! " she exclaim . " nor will I for a minute . 
 so you will please leave the farm at the end of the week ! " 
 it may have be a peculiarity - at any rate it be 
 a fact - that when Bathsheba be sway by an emotion 
 of an earthly sort her low lip tremble : when by a 
 refine emotion , her upper or heavenward one . her 
 nether lip quiver now . 
 " very well , so I will . " say Gabriel calmly . he have 
 be hold to she by a beautiful thread which it pain 
 he to spoil by breaking , rather than by a chain he 
 could not break . " I should be even well pleased to 
 go at once . " he add . 
 " go at once then , in Heaven 's name ! " say she , her 
 eye flash at his , though never meet they . 
 " do not   let I see your face any more . " 
 " very well , Miss Everdene - so it shall be . " 
 and he take his shear and go away from she in 
 placid dignity , as Moses leave the presence of Pharaoh . 
 CHAPTER XXI 
 TROUBLES in the FOLD - A message 
 GABRIEL OAK have cease to feed the Weatherbury 
 flock for about four - and - twenty hour , when on Sunday 
 afternoon the elderly gentleman Joseph Poorgrass , 
 Matthew Moon , Fray , and half - a - dozen other , come 
 run up to the house of the mistress of the Upper 
 Farm . 
 " whatever be the matter , man ? " she say , meet 
 they at the door just as she be come out on her 
 way to church , and cease in a moment from the close 
 compression of her two red lip , with which she have 
 accompany the exertion of pull on a tight glove . 
 " Sixty ! " say Joseph Poorgrass . 
 " Seventy ! " say Moon . 
 " fifty - nine ! " say Susan Tall 's husband . 
 " - Sheep have break fence . " say Fray . 
 " - and get into a field of young clover . " say Tall . 
 " - young clover ! " say Moon . 
 " - Clover ! " say Joseph Poorgrass . 
 " and they be get blast . " say Henery Fray . 
 " that they be . " say Joseph . 
 " and will all die as dead as nit , if they bain't   get 
 out and cured!'said Tall . 
 Joseph 's countenance be draw into line and 
 pucker by his concern . Fray 's forehead be wrinkle 
 both perpendicularly and crosswise , after the pattern of 
 a portculli , expressive of a double despair . Laban 
 Tall 's lip be thin , and his face be rigid . Matthew 's 
 jaw sink , and his eye turn whichever way the 
 strong muscle happen to pull they . 
 " yes . " say Joseph , " and I be sit at home , 
 look for Ephesians , and say I to myself , " ' tis 
 nothing but Corinthians and Thessalonians in this 
 dange Testament . " when who should come in but 
 Henery there : " Joseph , " he say , " the sheep have 
 with Bathsheba it be a moment when think be 
 blast theirselve - " 
 with Bathsheba it be a moment when think be 
 speech and speech exclamation . moreover , she have 
 hardly recover her equanimity since the disturbance 
 which she have suffer from Oak 's remark . 
 " that be enought - that be enough ! - oh , you fool ! " 
 she cry , throw the parasol and Prayer - book into 
 the passage , and run out of door in the direction 
 signify . " to come to I , and not go and get they 
 out directly ! oh , the stupid numskull ! " 
 her eye be at their darkest and brightest now . 
 Bathsheba 's beauty belong rather to the demonian 
 than to the angelic school , she never look so well as 
 when she be angry - and particularly when the effect 
 be heighten by a rather dash velvet dress , care- 
 fully put on before a glass . 
 all the ancient man run in a jumbled throng after 
 she to the clover - field , Joseph sink down in the 
 midst when about half - way , like an individual withering 
 in a world which be more and more insupportable . 
 have once receive the stimulus that her presence 
 always give they they go round among the sheep 
 with a will . the majority of the afflicted animal be 
 lie down , and could not be stir . these be 
 bodily lift out , and the other drive into the adjoining 
 field . here , after the lapse of a few minute , several 
 more fall down , and lie helpless and livid as the rest . 
 Bathsheba , with a sad , burst heart , look at these 
 primest specimen of her prime flock as they roll 
 there - 
 Swoln with wind and the rank mist they draw . 
 many of they foam at the mouth , their breathing 
 be quick and short , whilst the body of all be 
 fearfully distend . 
 " o , what can I do , what can I do ! " say Bathsheba , 
 helplessly . " Sheep be such unfortunate animal ! - 
 there be always something happen to they ! I never 
 know a flock pass a year without get into some scrape 
 or other . " 
 " there be only one way of save they . " say Tall . 
 " what way ? tell I quick ! " 
 " they must be pierce in the side with a thing make 
 on purpose . " 
 " can you do it ? can I ? " 
 " no , ma'am . we can not , nor you neither . it must 
 be do in a particular spot . if ye go to the right or 
 leave but an inch you stab the ewe and kill she . not 
 even a shepherd can do it , as a rule . " 
 " then they must die . " she say , in a resign tone . 
 " only one man in the neighbourhood know the way , " 
 say Joseph , now just come up . " he could cure them 
 all if he be here . " 
 " who be he ? let us get he ! " 
 " Shepherd Oak , " say Matthew . " ah , he be a clever 
 man in talent ! " 
 " ah , that he be so ! " say Joseph Poorgrass . 
 " true - he be the man . " say Laban Tall . 
 " how dare you name that man in my presence ! " she 
 say excitedly . " I tell you never to allude to he , nor 
 shall you if you stay with I . ah ! " she add , brighten- 
 ing , " Farmer Boldwood know ! " 
 " o no , ma'am " say Matthew . " two of his store 
 ewe get into some vetch t'other day , and be just 
 like these . he send a man on horseback here post - haste 
 for Gable , and Gable go and save them , Farmer 
 Boldwood hev get the thing they do it with . ' tis a 
 holler pipe , with a sharp pricker inside . be not   it , 
 Joseph ? " 
 " ay - a holler pipe . " echo Joseph . " that be what 
 ' tis . " 
 " ay , sure - that be the machine . " chime in Henery 
 Fray , reflectively , with an oriental indifference to the 
 flight of time . 
 " well , " burst out Bathsheba , " do not   stand there with 
 your " aye " and your ' sure " talk at I ! get 
 somebody to cure the sheep instantly ! " 
 all then stalk or in consternation , to get some- 
 body as direct , without any idea of who it be to be . 
 in a minute they have vanish through the gate , and 
 she stand alone with the die flock . 
 " never will I send for he never ! " she say firmly . 
 one of the ewe here contract its muscle horribly , 
 extend itself , and jump high into the air . the 
 leap be an astonishing one . the ewe fall heavily , and 
 lay still . 
 Bathsheba go up to it . the sheep be dead . 
 " o , what shall I do - what shall I do ! " she again 
 exclaim , wring her hand . " I will not   send for he . 
 no , I will not ! " 
 the most vigorous expression of a resolution do 
 not always coincide with the great vigour of the 
 resolution itself . it be often fling out as a sort of prop 
 to support a decaying conviction which , whilst strong , 
 require no enunciation to prove it so . the " no , I 
 will not " of Bathsheba mean virtually , " I think I must . " 
 she follow her assistant through the gate , and 
 lift her hand to one of they . Laban answer to her 
 signal . 
 " where be Oak stay ? " 
 " across the valley at Nest Cottage ! " 
 " jump on the bay mare , and ride across , and say he 
 must return instantly - that I say so . " 
 Tall scramble off to the field , and in two minute 
 be on Poll , the bay , bare - back , and with only a 
 halter by way of rein . he diminish down the 
 hill . 
 Bathsheba watch . so do all the rest . tall 
 cantered along the bridle - path through Sixteen Acres , 
 sheepland , Middle Field the Flats , Cappel 's Piece , 
 shrink almost to a point , cross the bridge , and 
 ascend from the valley through Springmead and 
 whitepit on the other side . the cottage to which 
 Gabriel have retire before take his final departure 
 from the locality be visible as a white spot on the 
 opposite hill , back by blue fir . Bathsheba walk 
 up and down . the man enter the field and 
 endeavour to ease the anguish of the dumb creature 
 by rub they . nothing avail . 
 Bathsheba continue walk . the horse be see 
 descend the hill , and the wearisome series have to be 
 repeat in reverse order : whitepit , Springmead , 
 Cappel 's Piece , the Flats , Middle Field , Sheeplands , 
 Sixteen Acres . she hop Tall have have presence of 
 mind enough to give the mare up to Gabriel , and return 
 himself on foot . the rider near they . it be tall . 
 " o , what folly ! " say Bathsheba . 
 Gabriel be not visible anywhere . 
 " perhaps he be already go ! " she say . 
 Tall come into the inclosure , and leapt off , his face 
 tragic as Morton 's after the battle of Shrewsbury . 
 " well ? " say Bathsheba , unwilling to believe that 
 her verbal lettre - de - cachet could possibly have miscarry . 
 " he say beggar must not   be chooser . " reply Laban . 
 " what ! " say the young farmer , open her eye 
 and draw in her breath for an outburst . Joseph 
 Poorgrass retire a few step behind a hurdle . 
 " he say he shall not come unless you request en 
 to come civilly and in a proper manner , as become any 
 " woman beg a favour . " 
 " oh , oh , that be his answer ! where do he get his 
 air ? who be I , then , to be treat like that ? shall 
 I beg to a man who have beg to I ? " 
 another of the flock spring into the air , and fall 
 dead . 
 the man look grave , as if they suppress opinion . 
 Bathsheba turn aside , her eye full of tear . the 
 strait she be in through pride and shrewishness could 
 not be disguise long : she burst out cry bitterly ; 
 they all see it ; and she attempt no further concealment . 
 " I would not   cry about it , miss . " say William Small- 
 bury , compassionately . " why not ask he soft like ? 
 I be sure he would come then . Gable be a true man in that 
 way . " 
 Bathsheba check her grief and wipe her eye . 
 " o , it be a wicked cruelty to I - it be - it be ! " she 
 murmur . " and he drive I to do what I would not ; 
 yes , he do ! - tall , come indoor . " 
 after this collapse , not very dignified for the head 
 of an establishment , she go into the house , Tall at 
 her heel . here she sit down and hastily scribble a 
 note between the small convulsive sob of convalescence 
 which follow a fit of cry as a ground - swell follow a 
 storm . the note be none the less polite for be 
 write in a hurry . she hold it at a distance , be 
 about to fold it , then add these word at the 
 bottom : - 
 " do not desert I , Gabriel ! " 
 she look a little redder in refolde it , and close 
 her lip , as if thereby to suspend till too late the action 
 of conscience in examine whether such strategy be 
 justifiable . the note be despatch as the message 
 have be , and Bathsheba wait indoor for the result . 
 it be an anxious quarter of an hour that intervene 
 between the messenger 's departure and the sound of the 
 horse 's tramp again outside . She- could not watch this 
 time , but , lean over the old bureau at which she have 
 write the letter , close her eye , as if to keep out both 
 hope and fear . 
 the case , however , be a promising one . Gabriel 
 be not angry : he be simply neutral , although her first 
 command have be so haughty . such imperiousness 
 would have damn a little less beauty ; and on the 
 other hand , such beauty would have redeem a little 
 less imperiousness . 
 she go out when the horse be hear , and look 
 up . a mount figure pass between she and the 
 sky , and draw on towards the field of sheep , the rider 
 turn his face in recede . Gabriel look at she . 
 it be a moment when a woman 's eye and tongue tell 
 distinctly opposite tale . Bathsheba look full of 
 gratitude , and she say : - 
 " o , Gabriel , how could you serve I so unkindly ! " 
 such a tenderly - shaped reproach for his previous 
 delay be the one speech in the language that he could 
 pardon for not be commendation of his readiness 
 now . 
 Gabriel murmur a confused reply , and hasten 
 on . she know from the look which sentence in her 
 note have bring he . Bathsheba follow to the 
 field . 
 Gabriel be already among the turgid , prostrate form . 
 he have fling off his coat , roll up his shirt - sleeve , 
 and take from his pocket the instrument of salvation . 
 it be a small tube or trochar , with a lance pass 
 down the inside ; and Gabriel begin to use it with a 
 dexterity that would have grace a hospital surgeon . 
 pass his hand over the sheep 's left flank , and 
 select the proper point , he puncture the skin and 
 ruman with the lance as it stand in the tube ; then he 
 suddenly withdraw the lance , retain the tube in its 
 place . a current of air rush up the tube , forcible 
 enough to have extinguish a candle hold at the 
 orifice . 
 it have be say that mere ease after torment be de- 
 light for a time ; and the countenance of these poor 
 creature express it now . forty - nine operation be 
 successfully perform . owe to the great hurry 
 necessitate by the far - go state of some of the flock , 
 Gabriel miss his aim in one case , and in one only - 
 striking wide of the mark , and inflict a mortal blow 
 at once upon the suffering ewe . four have die ; three 
 recover without an operation . the total number of 
 sheep which have thus stray and injure themselves 
 so dangerously be fifty - seven . 
 when the love - lead man have cease from his labour , 
 Bathsheba come and look he in the face . 
 " Gabriel , will you stay on with I ? " she , say , 
 smile winningly , and not troubling to bring her lip 
 quite together again at the end , because there be go 
 to be another smile soon . 
 " I will . " say Gabriel . 
 and she smile on he again . 
 CHAPTER XXII 
 the great BARN and the SHEEP - shearer 
 man thin away to insignificance and oblivion quite as 
 often by not make the most of good spirit when they 
 have they as by lack good spirit when they be 
 indispensable . Gabriel lately , for the first time since 
 his prostration by misfortune , have be independent in 
 thought and vigorous in action to a marked extent - 
 condition which , powerless without an opportunity as 
 an opportunity without they be barren , would have 
 give he a sure lift upwards when the favourable - con- 
 junction should have occur . but this incurable 
 loitering beside Bathsheba Everdene steal his time 
 ruinously . the spring tide be go by without 
 float he off , and the neap might soon come which 
 could not . 
 it be the first day of June , and the sheep - shear 
 season culminate , the landscape , even to the lean 
 pasture , be all health and colour . every green be 
 young , every pore be open , and every stalk be swollen 
 with race current of juice . God be palpably present 
 in the country , and the devil have go with the world 
 to town . flossy catkin of the later kind , fern - sprout 
 like bishop ' crozier , the square - head moschatel , the 
 odd cuckoo - pint , - like an apoplectic saint in a niche 
 of malachite , - snow - white ladies'-smocks , the toothwort , 
 approximate to human flesh , the enchanter 's night- 
 shade , and the black - petale doleful - bell , be among 
 the quainter object of the vegetable world in and about 
 Weatherbury at this teem time ; and of the animal , 
 the metamorphose figure of Mr. Jan Coggan , the 
 master - shearer ; the second and third shearer , who 
 travel in the exercise of their calling , and do not re- 
 quire definition by name ; Henery Fray the fourth 
 shearer , Susan Tall 's husband the fifth , Joseph Poorgrass 
 the sixth , young Cain Ball as assistant - shearer , and 
 Gabriel Oak as general supervisor . none of these be 
 clothe to any extent worth mention , each appear 
 to have hit in the matter of raiment the decent mean 
 between a high and low caste Hindoo . an angularity 
 of lineament , and a fixity of facial machinery in general , 
 proclaim that serious work be the order of the day . 
 they shear in the great barn , call for the nonce 
 the Shearing - barn , which on ground - plan resemble a 
 church with transept . it not only emulate the form 
 of the neighbouring church of the parish , but vie with 
 it in antiquity . whether the barn have ever form one 
 of a group of conventual building nobody seem to be 
 aware ; no trace of such surrounding remain . the 
 vast porch at the side , lofty enough to admit a waggon 
 laden to its high with corn in the sheaf , be span 
 by heavy - pointed arch of stone , broadly and boldly cut , 
 whose very simplicity be the origin of a grandeur not 
 apparent in erection where more ornament have be 
 attempt . the dusky , filmed , chestnut roof , brace 
 and tie in by huge collar , curve , and diagonal , be 
 far nobler in design , because more wealthy in material , 
 than nine - tenth of those in our modern church . 
 along each side wall be a range of stride buttress , 
 throw deep shadow on the space between they , 
 which be perforate by lancet opening , combine 
 in their proportion the precise requirement both of 
 beauty and ventilation . 
 one could say about this barn , what could hardly 
 be say of either the church or the castle , akin to it in 
 age and style , that the purpose which have dictate its 
 original erection be the same with that to which it 
 be still apply . unlike and superior to either of 
 those two typical remnant of mediaevalism , the old 
 barn embody practice which have suffer no mutila- 
 tion at the hand of time . here at least the spirit of 
 the ancient builder be at one with the spirit of the 
 modern beholder . stand before this abrade pile , 
 the eye regard its present usage , the mind - dwelt upon 
 its past history , with a satisfied sense of functional 
 continuity throughout - a feeling almost of gratitude , 
 and quite of pride , at the permanence of the idea 
 which have heap it up . the fact that four century 
 have neither prove it to be found on a mistake , 
 inspire any hatred of its purpose , nor give rise to 
 any reaction that have batter it down , invest this 
 simple grey effort of old mind with a repose , if not a 
 grandeur , which a too curious reflection be apt to 
 disturb in its ecclesiastical and military compeer . for 
 once medievalism and modernism have a common stand- 
 point . the lanccolate window , the time - eat arch- 
 stone and chamfer , the orientation of the axis , the 
 misty chestnut work of the rafter , refer to no exploded 
 fortifying art or wear - out religious creed . the defence 
 and salvation of the body by daily bread be still a study , 
 a religion , and a desire . 
 to - day the large side door be throw open 
 towards the sun to admit a bountiful light to the 
 immediate spot of the shearer ' operation , which be 
 the wood threshing - floor in the centre , form of thick 
 oak , black with age and polish by the beating of flail 
 for many generation , till it have grow as slippery and 
 as rich in hue as the state - room floor of an Elizabethan 
 mansion . here the shearer knelt , the sun slant in 
 upon their bleached shirt , tan arm , and the polished 
 shear they flourish , cause these to bristle with a 
 thousand ray strong enough to blind a weak - eyed man . 
 beneath they a captive sheep lay pant , quicken 
 its pant as misgive merge in terror , till it quiver 
 like the hot landscape outside . 
 this picture of to - day in its frame of four hundred 
 year ago do not produce that mark contrast between 
 ancient and modern which be imply by the contrast 
 of date . in comparison with city , Weatherbury be 
 immutable . the citizen 's then be the rustic 's now . 
 in London , twenty or thirty - year ago be old time ; 
 in Paris ten year , or five ; in Weatherbury three or 
 four score year be include in the mere present , 
 and nothing less than a century set a mark on its 
 face or tone . five decade hardly modify the cut of 
 a gaiter , the embroidery of a smock - frock , by the breadth 
 of a hair . ten generation fail to alter the turn of 
 a single phrase . in these Wessex nook the busy out- 
 sider 's ancient time be only old ; his old time be still 
 new ; his present be futurity . 
 so the barn be natural to the shearer , and the 
 shearer be in harmony with the barn . 
 the spacious end of the building , answer ecclesi- 
 astically to nave and chancel extremity , be fence 
 off with hurdle , the sheep be all collect in a crowd 
 within these two enclosure ; and in one angle a catching- 
 pen be form , in which three or four sheep be 
 continuously keep ready for the shearer to seize without 
 loss of time . in the background , mellow by tawny 
 shade , be the three woman , Maryann Money , and 
 Temperance and Soberness Miller , gather up the 
 fleece and twist rope of wool with a wimble for 
 tie they round . they be indifferently well assist 
 by the old maltster , who , when the malting season from 
 October to April have pass , make himself useful upon 
 any of the border farmstead . 
 " behind all be Bathsheba , carefully watch the 
 man to see that there be no cutting or wound 
 through carelessness , and that the animal be shorn 
 close . Gabriel , who flit and hover under her 
 bright eye like a moth , do not shear continuously , 
 half his time be spend in attend to the other 
 and select the sheep for they . at the present 
 moment he be engage in hand round a mug of 
 mild liquor , supply from a barrel in the corner , 
 and cut piece of bread and cheese . 
 Bathsheba , after throw a glance here , a caution 
 there , and lecture one of the young operator who 
 have allow his last finished sheep to go off among 
 the flock without re - stamp it with her initial , come 
 again to Gabriel , as he put down the luncheon to drag 
 a frightened ewe to his shear - station , fling it over 
 upon its back with a dexterous twist of the arm 
 he lop off the tress about its head , and open 
 up the neck and collar , his mistress quietly look 
 on : 
 " she blush at the insult . " murmur Bathsheba , 
 watch the pink flush which arise and overspread 
 the neck and shoulder of the ewe where they be 
 leave bare by the click shear - a flush which be 
 enviable , for its delicacy , by many queen of coterie , 
 and would have be creditable , for its promptness , to 
 any woman in the world . 
 Poor Gabriel 's soul be feed with a luxury of content 
 by have she over he , her eye critically regard 
 his skilful shear , which apparently be go to gather 
 up a piece of the flesh at every close , and yet never do 
 so . like Guildenstern , Oak be happy in that he be 
 not over happy . he have no wish to converse with she : 
 that his bright lady and himself form one group , 
 exclusively their own , and contain no other in the 
 world , be enough . 
 so the chatter be all on her side . there be a 
 loquacity that tell nothing , which be Bathsheba 's ; 
 and there be a silence which say much : that be 
 Gabriel 's . full of this dim and temperate bliss , he 
 go on to fle the ewe over upon her other side , 
 cover her head with his knee , gradually run 
 the shear line after line round her dewlap ; thence 
 about her flank and back , and finish over the tail . 
 " well do , and do quickly ! " say Bathsheba , 
 look at her watch as the last snip resound . 
 " how long , miss ? " say Gabriel , wipe his brow . 
 " three - and - twenty minute and a half since you take 
 the first lock from its forehead . it be the first time that 
 I have ever see one do in less than half an hour . " 
 the clean , sleek creature arise from its fleece - how 
 perfectly like Aphrodite rise from the foam should 
 have be see to be realize - look startled and 
 shy at the loss of its garment , which lie on the floor 
 in one soft cloud , unite throughout , the portion visible 
 be the inner surface only , which , never before expose , 
 be white as snow , and without flaw or blemish of the 
 minute kind . 
 " Cain Ball ! " 
 " yes , Mister Oak ; here I be ! " 
 Cainy now run forward with the tar - pot . " B. E. " be 
 newly stamp upon the shorn skin , and away the simple 
 dam leap , pant , over the board into the shirtless 
 flock outside . then up come Maryann ; throw the 
 loose lock into the middle of the fleece , roll it up , 
 and carry it into the background as three - and - a - half 
 pound of unadulterated warmth for the winter enjoy- 
 ment of person unknown and far away , who will , 
 however , never experience the superlative comfort 
 derivable from the wool as it here exist , new and pure 
  - before the unctuousness of its nature whilst in a 
 live state have dry , stiffen , and be wash out 
  - render it just now as superior to anything woollen 
 as cream be superior to milk - and - water . 
 but heartless circumstance could not leave entire 
 Gabriel 's happiness of this morning . the ram , old 
 ewe , and two - shear ewe have duly undergo their 
 stripping , and the man be proceed with the shear- 
 ling and hog , when Oak 's belief that she be go to 
 stand pleasantly by and time he through another 
 performance be painfully interrupt by Farmer bold- 
 wood 's appearance in the extreme corner of the barn . 
 nobody seem to have perceive his entry , but there 
 he certainly be . Boldwood always carry with he a 
 social atmosphere of his own , which everybody feel who 
 come near he ; and the talk , which Bathsheba 's 
 presence have somewhat suppress , be now totally 
 suspend . 
 he cross over towards Bathsheba , who turn to 
 greet he with a carriage of perfect ease . he speak to 
 she in low tone , and she instinctively modulate she 
 own to the same pitch , and her voice ultimately even 
 catch the inflection of his . she be far from have 
 a wish to appear mysteriously connect with he ; but 
 woman at the impressionable age gravitate to the large 
 body not only in her choice of word , which be apparent 
 every day , but even in her shade of tone and humour , 
 when the influence be great . 
 what they converse about be not audible to 
 Gabriel , who be too independent to get near , though 
 too concerned to disregard . the issue of their dialogue 
 be the taking of her hand by the courteous farmer to 
 help she over the spreading - board into the bright June 
 sunlight outside . stand beside the sheep already 
 shorn , they go on talk again . concern the 
 flock ? apparently not . Gabriel theorize , not without 
 truth , that in quiet discussion of any matter within reach 
 of the speaker ' eye , these be usually fix upon it . 
 Bathsheba demurely regard a contemptible straw lie 
 upon the ground , in a way which suggest less ovine 
 criticism than womanly embarrassment . she become 
 more or less red in the cheek , the blood waver in 
 uncertain flux and reflux over the sensitive space between 
 ebb and flood . Gabriel shear on , constrain and 
 sad . 
 she leave Boldwood 's side , and he walk up and 
 down alone for nearly a quarter of an hour . then she 
 reappear in her new riding - habit of myrtle - green , which 
 fit she to the waist as a rind fit its fruit ; and young 
 Bob Coggan lead -on -her mare , Boldwood fetch his 
 own horse from the tree under which it have be tie . 
 Oak 's eye could not forsake they ; and in en- 
 deavouring to continue his shearing at the same time 
 that he watch Boldwood 's manner , he snip the 
 sheep in the groin . the animal plunge ; Bathsheba 
 instantly gaze towards it , and see the blood . 
 " O , Gabriel ! " she exclaim , with severe remon- 
 strance you who be so strict with the other man - see 
 what you be do yourself ! " 
 to an outsider there be not much to complain of 
 in this remark ; but to Oak , who " know Bathsheba to be 
 well aware that she herself be the cause of the poor 
 ewe 's wound , because she have wound the ewe 's shearer 
 in a - still more vital part , it have a sting which the abide 
 sense of his inferiority to both herself and Boldwood be 
 not calculate to heal . but a manly resolve to recognize 
 boldly that he have no long a lover 's interest in she , 
 help he occasionally to conceal a feeling . 
 " Bottle ! " he shout , in an unmoved voice of routine . 
 Cainy Ball run up , the wound be anoint , and the 
 shearing continue . 
 Boldwood gently toss Bathsheba into the saddle , 
 and before they turn away she again speak out to Oak 
 with the same dominative and tantalizing graciousness . 
 " I be go now to see Mr. Boldwood 's Leicesters . 
 take my place in the barn , Gabriel , and keep the man 
 carefully to their work . " 
 the horse ' head be put about , and they trot 
 away . 
 Boldwood 's deep attachment be a matter of great 
 interest among all around he ; but , after have be 
 point out for so many year as the perfect exemplar 
 of thriving bachelorship , his lapse be an anticlimax 
 somewhat resemble that of St. John Long 's death by 
 consumption in the midst of his proof that it be not 
 a fatal disease . 
 " that mean matrimony . " say Temperance Miller , 
 follow they out of sight with her eye . 
 " I reckon that be the size o't . " say Coggan , work 
 along without look up . 
 " well , well we d over the mixen than over the moor , " 
 say Laban Tall , turn his sheep . 
 Henery Fray speak , exhibit miserable eye at the 
 same time : " I do not   see why a maid should take a 
 husband when she be bold enough to fight her own 
 battle , and do not   want a home ; for ' tis keep another 
 woman out . but let it be , for ' tis a pity he and she 
 should trouble two house . " 
 as usual with decide character , Bathsheba invari- 
 ably provoke the criticism of individual like Henery 
 Fray . her emblazoned fault be to be too pronounce 
 in her objection , and not sufficiently overt in her 
 liking . we learn that it be not the ray which body 
 absorb , but those which they reject , that give they the 
 colour they be know by ; and win the same way people 
 be specialize by their dislike and antagonism , whilst 
 their goodwill be look upon as no attribute at all . 
 Henery continue in a more complaisant mood : " I 
 once hint my mind to she on a few thing , as nearly 
 as a batter frame dare to do so to such a froward 
 piece . you all know , neighbour , what a man I be , 
 and how I come down with my powerful word when 
 my pride be boil wi ' scarn ? " 
 " we do , we do , Henery . " 
 " so I say , " Mistress Everdene , there be place empty , 
 and there be gifted man willing ; but the spite - no . not 
 the spite - I do not   say spite - " but the villainy of the 
 contrarikind . " I say   mean womankind , " keep them 
 out . " that be not   too strong for she , say ? " 
 " passably well put . " 
 " yes ; and I would have say it , have death and 
 salvation overtake I for it . such be my spirit when I 
 have a mind . " 
 " a true man , and proud as a lucifer . " 
 " you see the artfulness ? why , ' twa about be 
 baily really ; but I do not   put it so plain that she could 
 understand my meaning , so I could lay it on all the 
 strong . that be my depth ! ... however , let she 
 marry an she will . perhaps ' tis high time . I believe 
 Farmer Boldwood kiss she behind the spear - bed at the 
 sheep - wash t'other day - that I do . " 
 " what a lie ! " say Gabriel . 
 " ah , neighbour Oak - how'st know ? " say , Henery , 
 mildly . 
 " because she tell I all that pass . " say Oak , with 
 a pharisaical sense that he be not as other shearer in 
 this matter . 
 " Ye have a right to believe it . " say Henery , with 
 dudgeon ; " a very true right . but I mid see a little 
 distance into thing ! to be long - head enough for a 
 baily 's place be a poor mere trifle - yet a trifle more than 
 nothing . however , I look round upon life quite cool . 
 do you heed I , neighbour ? my word , though make 
 as simple as I can , mid be rather deep for some head . " 
 " o yes , Henery , we quite heed ye . " 
 " a strange old piece , goodman - whirl about from 
 here to yonder , as if I be nothing ! a little warp , 
 too . but I have my depth ; ha , and even my great 
 depth ! I might gird at a certain shepherd , brain to 
 brain . but no - o no ! " 
 " a strange old piece , ye say ! " interpose the maltster , 
 in a querulous voice . " at the same time ye be no old 
 man worth naming - no old man at all . yer tooth 
 bain't   half go yet ; and what be a old man 's standing 
 if se be his tooth bain't   go ? be not   I stale in 
 wedlock afore ye be out of arm ? ' tis a poor thing 
 to be sixty , when there be people far past four - score - a 
 boast'weak as water . " 
 it be the unvaye custom in Weatherbury to 
 sink minor difference when the maltster have to be 
 pacify . 
 " weak as - water ! yes . " say Jan Coggan.- " Malter , 
 we feel ye to be a wonderful veteran man , and nobody 
 can gainsay it . " 
 " nobody . " say Joseph Poorgrass . " ye be a very 
 rare old spectacle , malter , and we all admire ye for that 
 gift . " 
 " ay , and as a young man , when my sens be in 
 prosperity , I be likewise like by a good - few who 
 know I . " say the maltster . 
 " ' ithout doubt you be - ' ithout doubt . " 
 the bent and hoary ' man be satisfied , and so 
 apparently be Henery Frag . that matter should 
 continue pleasant Maryann speak , who , what with her 
 brown complexion , and the work wrapper of rusty 
 linsey , have at present the mellow hue of an old sketch 
 in oil - notably some of Nicholas Poussin 's : - 
 " do anybody know of a crooked man , or a lame , or 
 any second - hand fellow at all that would do for poor 
 I ? " say Maryann . " a perfect one I do not   expect to 
 at my time of life . if I could hear of such a thing 
 twould do I more good than toast and ale . " 
 Coggan furnish a suitable reply . Oak go on 
 with his shearing , and say not another word . pestilent 
 mood have come , and tease away his quiet . Bathsheba 
 have show indication of anoint he above his 
 fellow by instal he as the bailiff that the farm 
 imperatively require . he do not covet the post 
 relatively to the farm : in relation to herself , as belove 
 by he and unmarrie to another , he have covet it . 
 his reading of she seem now to be vapoury and 
 indistinct . his lecture to she be , he think , one of 
 the absurd mistake . far from coquet with 
 Boldwood , she have trifle with himself in thus feign 
 that she have trifle with another . he be inwardly 
 convince that , in accordance with the anticipation of 
 his easy - go and worse - educate comrade , that day 
 would see Boldwood the accept husband of Miss 
 Everdene . Gabriel at this time of his life have out- 
 grow the instinctive dislike which every Christian 
 boy have for read the Bible , peruse it now quite 
 frequently , and he inwardly say , " I find more bitter 
 than death the woman whose heart be snare and 
 net ! " this be mere exclamation - the froth of the 
 storm . he adore Bathsheba just the same . 
 " we workfolk shall have some lordly- junket 
 to - night . " say Cainy Ball , cast forth his thought in 
 a new direction . " this morning I see'em make the 
 great pudden in the milking - pail - lump of fat as big 
 as yer thumb , Mister Oak ! I have   never seed such 
 splendid large knob of fat before in the day of my 
 life - they never use to be big then a horse - bean . 
 and there be a great black crock upon the brandish 
 with his leg a - stick out , but I do not   know what be 
 in within . " 
 " and there be two bushel of biffin for apple - pie , " 
 say Maryann . 
 " well , I hope to do my duty by it all . " say Joseph 
 Poorgrass , in a pleasant , masticate manner of anticipa- 
 tion . " yes ; victual and drink be a cheerful thing , 
 and give nerve to the nerveless , if the form of word 
 may be use . ' tis the gospel of the body , without 
 which we perish , so to speak it . " 
 CHAPTER XXIII 
 EVENTIDE - a second declaration 
 for the shearing - supper a long table be place on the 
 grass - plot beside the house , the end of the table be 
 thrust over the sill of the wide parlour window and a 
 foot or two into the room . Miss Everdene sit inside 
 the window , face down the table . she be thus at 
 the head without mingle with the man . 
 this evening Bathsheba be unusually excited , her 
 red cheek and lip contrast lustrously with the mazy 
 skein of her shadowy hair . she seem to expect 
 assistance , and the seat at the bottom of the table be 
 at her request leave vacant until after they have begin 
 and the duty appertain to that end , which he do 
 with great readiness . 
 at this moment Mr. Boldwood come in at the gate , 
 and cross the green to Bathsheba at the window . 
 he apologize for his lateness : his arrival be evidently 
 by arrangement . 
 " Gabriel . " say she , " will you move again , please , 
 and let Mr. Boldwood come there ? " 
 Oak move in silence back to his original seat . 
 the gentleman - farmer be dress in cheerful style , 
 in a new coat and white waistcoat , quite contrast 
 with his usual sober suit of grey . Inwardy , too , he 
 be blithe , and consequently chatty to an exceptional 
 degree . so also be Bathsheba now that he have come , 
 though the uninvited presence of Pennyways , the bailiff 
 who have be dismiss for theft , disturb her equan- 
 imity for a while . 
 supper be end , Coggan begin on his own 
 private account , without reference to listener : - 
 l've   lose my love and l care not , 
 I have   lose my love , and l care not ; 
 I shall soon have another 
 that be well than t'other ! 
 I have   lose my love , and I care not . 
 this lyric , when conclude , be receive with a 
 silently appreciative gaze at the table , imply that the 
 performance , like a work by those establish author 
 who be independent of notice in the paper , be a 
 well - know delight which require no applause . 
 " now , Master Poorgrass , your song ! " say Coggan . 
 " I be all but in liquor , and the gift be want in 
 I . " say Joseph , diminish himself . 
 " nonsense ; wou'st never be so ungrateful , Joseph - 
 never ! " say Coggan , express hurt feeling by an 
 inflection of voice . " and mistress be look hard at 
 ye , as much as to say , " sing at once , Joseph poor- 
 grass . " 
 " faith , so she be ; well , I must suffer it ! ... just 
 eye my feature , and see if the tell - tale blood overheat 
 I much , neighbour ? " 
 " no , yer blush be quite reasonable . " say Coggan . 
 " I always try to keep my colour from rise when 
 a beauty 's eye get fix on I . " say Joseph , differently ; 
 " but if so be ' tis willed they do , they must . " 
 " now , Joseph , your song , please . " say Bathsheba , 
 from the window . 
 " well , really , ma'am . " he reply , in a yield tone , 
 " I do not   know what to say . it would be a poor plain 
 ballet of my own composure . " 
 hear , hear ! " say the supper - party . 
 Poorgrass , thus assure , trill forth a flickering yet 
 commendable piece of sentiment , the tune of which 
 consist of the key - note and another , the latter be 
 the sound chiefly dwelt upon . this be so successful 
 that he rashly plunge into a second in the same 
 breath , after a few false start : - 
 I sow'-e th'-e 
 I sow'-ed 
 I sow'-e the'-e seed ' of love ' , 
 I - it be ' all ' i'-in the'-e spring ' , 
 i - in a'-pril ' , Ma'-ay , a'-nd sun'-ny ' June ' , 
 when sma'-all bi'-ird they ' do ' sing . 
 " well put out of hand . " say Coggan , at the end of the 
 verse . ` they do sing ' be a very take paragraph . " 
 " ay ; and there be a pretty place at ' seed of 
 love . " and ' twa well heave out . though " love " be 
 a nasty high corner when a man 's voice be get 
 craze . next verse , Master Poorgrass . " 
 but during this render young Bob Coggan ex- 
 hibite one of those anomaly which will afflict little 
 people when other person be particularly serious : in 
 try to check his laughter , he push down his throat 
 as much of the tablecloth as he could get hold of , when , 
 after continue hermetically seal for a short time , his 
 mirth burst out through his nose . Joseph perceive it , 
 and with hectic cheek of indignation instantly cease 
 singing . Coggan box Bob 's ear immediately . 
 " go on , Joseph - go on , and never mind the young 
 scamp . " say Coggan . " ' tis a very catch ballet . 
 now then again - the next bar ; I will help ye to flourish 
 up the shrill note where yer wind be rather wheezy : - 
 o the wi'-il - lo'-ow tree ' will ' twist ' , 
 and the wil'-low ' tre'-ee wi'ill twine ' . 
 but the singer could not be set go again . Bob 
 Coggan be send home for his ill manner , and tran- 
 quility be restore by Jacob Smallbury , who volunteer 
 a ballad as inclusive and interminable as that with which 
 the worthy toper old Silenus amuse on a similar occasion 
 the swain Chromis and Mnasylus , and other jolly dog 
 of his day . 
 it be still the beam time of evening , though 
 night be stealthily make itself visible low down upon 
 the ground , the western line of light take the earth 
 without alight upon it to any extent , or illuminate 
 the dead level at all . the sun have creep round the 
 tree as a last effort before death , and then begin to 
 sink , the shearer ' low part become steep in 
 embrowning twilight , whilst their head and shoulder 
 be still enjoy day , touch with a yellow of self- 
 sustained brilliancy that seem inherent rather than 
 acquire . 
 the sun go down in an ochreous mist ; but they 
 sit , and talk on , and grow as merry as the god in 
 Homer 's heaven . Bathsheba still remain enthrone 
 inside the window , and occupy herself in knitting , 
 from which she sometimes look up to view the fade 
 scene outside . the slow twilight expand and envelop 
 they completely before the sign of move be show . 
 Gabriel suddenly miss Farmer Boldwood from his 
 place at the bottom of the table . how long he have 
 be go Oak do not know ; but he have apparently 
 withdraw into the encircle dusk . whilst he be 
 think of this , Liddy bring candle into the back 
 part of the room overlook the shearer , and their 
 lively new flame shine down the table and over the 
 man , and disperse among the green shadow behind . 
 Bathsheba 's form , still in its original position , be now 
 again distinct between their eye and the light , which 
 reveal that Boldwood have go inside the room , and 
 be sit near she . 
 Next come the question of the evening . would Miss 
 Everdene sing to they the song she always sing so 
 charmingly - " the Banks of Allan Water " - before they 
 go home ? 
 after a moment 's consideration Bathsheba assent , 
 beckoning to Gabriel , who hasten up into the coveted 
 atmosphere . 
 " have you bring your flute ? " she whisper . 
 " yes , miss . " 
 " play to my singing , then . " 
 she stand up in the window - opening , face the 
 man , the candle behind she , Gabriel on her right hand , 
 immediately outside the sash - frame . Boldwood have 
 draw up on she left , within the room . her singing 
 be soft and rather tremulous at first , but it soon swell 
 to a steady clearness . subsequent event cause one 
 of the verse to be remember for many month , and 
 even year , by more than one of those who be gather 
 there : - 
 for his bride a soldier seek she , 
 and a win tongue have he : 
 on the bank of Allan Water 
 none be gay as she ! 
 in addition to the dulcet piping of Gabriel 's flute , 
 Boldwood supply a bass in his customary profound 
 voice , utter his note so softly , however , as to abstain 
 entirely from make anything like an ordinary duet of 
 the song ; they rather form a rich unexplored shadow , 
 which throw her tone into relief . the shearer recline 
 against each other as at supper in the early age of the 
 world , and so silent and absorb be they that her 
 breathing could almost be hear between the bar ; and 
 at the end of the ballad , when the last tone loiter on 
 to an inexpressible close , there arise that buzz of 
 pleasure which be the attar of applause . 
 it be scarcely necessary to state that Gabriel could 
 not avoid note the farmer 's bearing to - night towards 
 their entertainer . yet there be nothing exceptional in 
 his action beyond what appertain to his time of 
 perform they . it be when the rest be all look 
 away that Boldwood observe she ; when they regard 
 she he turn aside ; when they thank or praise he 
 be silent ; when they be inattentive he murmur 
 his thank . the meaning lie in the difference between 
 action , none of which have any meaning of itself ; 
 and the necessity of be jealous , which lover be 
 trouble with , do not lead Oak to underestimate these 
 sign . 
 Bathsheba then wish they good - night , withdraw 
 from the window , and retire to the back part of the 
 room , Boldwood thereupon close the sash and the 
 shutter , and remain inside with she . Oak wander 
 away under the quiet and scented tree . recover 
 from the soft impression produce by Bathsheba 's 
 voice , the shearer rise to leave , Coggan turn to 
 Pennyways as he push back the bench to pass out : - 
 " I like to give praise where praise be due , and the 
 man deserve it - that ' a do so . " he remark , look at 
 the worthy thief , as if he be the masterpiece of some 
 world - renowne artist . 
 " I be sure I should never have believe it if we have not 
 prove it , so to allude , " hiccupped Joseph Poorgrass , " that 
 every cup , every one of the good knife and fork , and 
 every empty bottle be in their place as perfect now as 
 at the beginning , and not one stole at all . 
 " I be sure I do not   deserve half the praise you give 
 I . " say the virtuous thief , grimly . 
 " well , I will say this for Pennyways . " add Coggan , 
 " that whenever he do really make up his mind to do a 
 noble thing in the shape of a good action , as I could 
 see by his face he . do to - night afore sit down , he be 
 generally able to carry it out . yes , I be proud to say . 
 neighbour , that he be stole nothing at all . 
 " well . " - ' tis an honest deed , and we thank ye for it , 
 Pennyways . " say Joseph ; to which opinion the remainder 
 of the company subscribe unanimously . 
 at this time of departure , when nothing more be 
 visible of the inside of the parlour than a thin and still 
 chink of light between the shutter , a passionate scene 
 be in course of enactment there . " 
 Miss Everdene and Boldwood be alone . her 
 cheek have lose a great deal of their healthful fire from 
 the very seriousness of her position ; but her eye be 
 bright with the excitement of a triumph - though it be 
 a triumph which have rather be contemplate than 
 desire . 
 she be stand behind a low arm - chair , from which 
 she have just rise , and he be kneel in it - incline 
 himself over its back towards she , and hold her hand 
 in both his own . his body move restlessly , and it be 
 with what Keats daintily call a too happy happiness . 
 this unwonted abstraction by love of all dignity from 
 a man of whom it have ever seem the chief component , 
 be , in its distressing incongruity , a pain to she which 
 quench much of the pleasure she derive from the 
 proof that she be idolize . 
 " I will try to love you . " she be say , in a trembling 
 voice quite unlike her usual self - confidence . " and if I 
 can believe in any way that I shall make you a good 
 wife I shall indeed be willing to marry you . but , Mr. 
 Boldwood , hesitation on so high a matter be honourable 
 in any woman , and I do not   want to give a solemn 
 promise to - night . I would rather ask you to wait a few 
 week till I can see my situation well . "but you have every reason to 
 believe that then - - " 
 " I have every reason to hope that at the end of the five or 
 six week , between this time and harvest , that 
 you say you be go to be away from home , I shall be 
 able to promise to be your wife . " she say , firmly . " but 
 remember this distinctly , I do not   promise yet . " 
 " it be enough I do not   ask more . I can wait on 
 those dear word . and now , Miss Everdene , good- 
 night ! " 
 " good - night . " she say , graciously - almost tenderly ; 
 and Boldwood withdraw with a serene smile . 
 Bathsheba know more of he now ; he have entirely 
 bar his heart before she , even until he have almost 
 wear in her eye the sorry look of a grand bird without 
 the feather that make it grand . she have be awe- 
 strike at her past temerity , and be struggle to make 
 amend without think whether the sin quite deserve 
 the penalty she be school herself to pay . to have 
 bring all this about her ear be terrible ; but after a 
 while the situation be not without a fearful joy . the 
 facility with which even the most timid woman some- 
 time acquire a relish for the dreadful when that be 
 amalgamate with a little triumph , be marvellous . 
 CHAPTER XXIV 
 the same night - the FIR PLANTATION 
 among the multifarious duty which Bathsheba have 
 voluntarily impose upon herself by dispense with the 
 service of a bailiff , be the particular one of look 
 round the homestead before go to bed , to see that 
 all be right and safe for the night . Gabriel have almost 
 constantly precede she in this tour every evening , 
 watch her affair as carefully as any specially appoint 
 officer of surveillance could have do ; but this tender 
 devotion be to a great extent unknown to his mistress , 
 and as much as be know be somewhat thanklessly 
 receive . woman be never tired of bewail man 's 
 fickleness in love , but they only seem to snub his con- 
 stancy . 
 as watch be well do invisibly , she usually carry 
 a dark lantern in her hand , and every now and then 
 turn on the light to examine nook and corner with 
 the coolness of a metropolitan policeman . this cool- 
 ness may have owe its existence not so much to she 
 fearlessness of expected danger as to her freedom from 
 the suspicion of any ; her worst anticipate discovery 
 be that a horse might not be well bed , the fowl 
 not all in , or a door not close . 
 this night the building be inspect as usual , 
 and she go round to the farm paddock . here the 
 only sound disturb the stillness be steady munch- 
 ing of many mouth , and stentorian breathing from all 
 but invisible nose , end in snore and puff like the 
 blowing of bellow slowly . then the munching would 
 recommence , when the lively imagination might assist 
 the eye to discern a group of pink - white nostril , shape 
 as cavern , and very clammy and humid on their sur- 
 face , not exactly pleasant to the touch until one get 
 use to they ; the mouth beneath have a great 
 partiality for close upon any loose end of Bathsheba 's 
 apparel which come within reach of their tongue . 
 above each of these a still keener vision suggest a 
 brown forehead and two star though not unfriendly 
 eye , and above all a pair of whitish crescent - shape 
 horn like two particularly new moon , an occasional 
 stolid " moo ! " proclaim beyond the shade of a doubt 
 that these phenomenon be the feature and person of 
 Daisy , Whitefoot , Bonny - lass , Jolly - O , Spot , Twinkle - eye , 
 etc . , etc . - the respectable dairy of Devon cow belong 
 to Bathsheba aforesaid . 
 her way back to the house be by a path through a 
 young plantation of taper fir , which have be plant 
 some year early to shelter the premise from the north 
 wind . by reason of the density of the interwoven foliage 
 overhead , it be gloomy there at cloudless noontide , 
 twilight in the evening , dark as midnight at dusk , and 
 black as the ninth plague of Egypt at midnight . to 
 describe the spot be to call it a vast , low , naturally form 
 hall , the plumy ceiling of which be support by slender 
 pillar of live wood , the floor be cover with a soft 
 dun carpet of dead spikelet and mildew cone , with 
 a tuft of grass - blade here and there . 
 this bit of the path be always the crux of the 
 night 's ramble , though , before start , her apprehen- 
 sion of danger be not vivid enough to lead she to 
 take a companion . slip along here covertly as 
 Time , Bathsheba fancy she could hear footstep enter- 
 e the track at the opposite end . it be certainly a 
 rustle of footstep . her own instantly fall as gently as 
 snowflake . she reassure herself by a remembrance 
 that the path be public , and that the traveller be 
 probably some villager return home ; regette , at 
 the same time , that the meeting should be about to 
 occur in the dark point of her route , even though 
 only just outside her own door . 
 the noise approach , come close , and a figure be 
 apparently on the point of glide past she when some- 
 thing tug at her skirt and pin it forcibly to the 
 ground . the instantaneous check nearly throw bath- 
 sheba off her balance . in recover she strike against 
 warm clothe and button . 
 " a rum start , upon my soul ! " say a masculine voice , 
 a foot or so above her head . " have I hurt you , mate ? " 
 " no . " say Bathsheba , attempt to shrink a way . 
 " we have get hitch together somehow , I think . " 
 " yes . " 
 " be you a woman ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " a lady , I should have say . " 
 " it do not   matter . " 
 " I be a man . " 
 " oh ! " 
 Bathsheba softly tug again , but to no purpose . 
 " be that a dark lantern you have ? I fancy so . " say 
 the man . 
 " yes . " 
 " if you will allow I I will open it , and set you free . " 
 a hand seize the lantern , the door be open , the 
 ray burst out from their prison , and Bathsheba behold 
 her position with astonishment . 
 the man to whom she be hook be brilliant in 
 brass and scarlet . he be a soldier . his sudden 
 appearance be to darkness what the sound of a trumpet 
 be to silense . gloom , the genius loci at all time hitherto , 
 be now totally overthrown , less by the lantern - light 
 than by what the lantern light . the contrast of this 
 revelation with her anticipation of some sinister figure 
 in sombre garb be so great that it have upon her the 
 effect of a fairy transformation . 
 it be immediately apparent that the military man 's 
 spur have become entangle in the gimp which decorate 
 the skirt of her dress . he catch a view of her face . 
 " I will unfasten you in one moment , miss . " he say , 
 with new - bear gallantry . 
 " o no - I can do it , thank you . " she hastily reply , 
 and stoop for the performance . 
 the unfastening be not such a trifling affair . the 
 rowel of the spur have so wound itself among the gimp 
 cord in those few moment , that separation be likely 
 to be a matter of time . 
 he too stoop , and the lantern stand on the 
 ground betwixt they throw the gleam from its open side 
 among the fir - tree needle and the blade of long damp 
 grass with the effect of a large glowworm . it radiate 
 upwards into their face , and send over half the planta- 
 tion gigantic shadow of both man and woman , each 
 dusky shape become distort and mangle upon the 
 tree - trunk till it waste to nothing . 
 he look hard into her eye when she raise they 
 for a moment ; Bathsheba look down again , for his 
 gaze be too strong to be receive point - blank with her 
 own . but she have obliquely notice that he be young 
 and slim , and that he wear three chevron upon his 
 sleeve . 
 Bathsheba pull again . 
 " you be a prisoner , miss ; it be no use blink the 
 matter . " say the soldier , drily . " I must cut your dress 
 if you be in such a hurry . " 
 " yes - please do ! " she exclaim , helplessly . " 
 " it would not   be necessary if you could wait a 
 moment , " and he unwound a cord from the little 
 wheel . she withdraw her own hand , but , whether by 
 accident or design , he touch it . Bathsheba be 
 vex ; she hardly know why . 
 his unravelling go on , but it nevertheless seem 
 come to no end . she look at he again . 
 " thank you for the sight of such a beautiful face ! " 
 say the young sergeant , without ceremony . 
 she colour with embarrassment . " ' twas un- 
 willingly show . " she reply , stiffly , and with as much 
 dignity - which be very little - as she could infuse into 
 a position of captivity 
 " I like you the well for that incivility , miss . " he 
 say . 
 " I should have like - I wish - you have never show 
 yourself to I by intrude here ! " she pull again , 
 and the gather of her dress begin to give way like 
 liliputian musketry . 
 " I deserve the chastisement your word give I . 
 but why should such a fair and dutiful girl have such 
 an aversion to her father 's sex ? " 
 " go on your way , please . " 
 " what , Beauty , and drag you after I ? do but 
 look ; I never see such a tangle ! " 
 " o , ' tis shameful of you ; you have be make 
 it bad on purpose to keep I here - you have ! " 
 " indeed , I do not   think so . " say the sergeant , with a 
 merry twinkle . 
 " I tell you you have ! " she exclaim , in high 
 temper . I insist upon undo it . now , allow I ! " 
 " certainly , miss ; I be not of steel . " he add a 
 sigh which have as much archness in it as a sigh could 
 possess without lose its nature altogether . " I be 
 thankful for beauty , even when ' tis throw to I like 
 a bone to a dog . these moment will be over too 
 soon ! " 
 she close her lip in a determined silence . 
 Bathsheba be revolve in her mind whether by a 
 bold and desperate rush she could free herself at the 
 risk of leave her skirt bodily behind she . the 
 thought be too dreadful . the dress - which she have 
 put on to appear stately at the supper - be the head 
 and front of her wardrobe ; not another in her stock 
 become she so well . what woman in Bathsheba 's 
 position , not naturally timid , and within call of her 
 retainer , would have buy escape from a dashing 
 soldier at so dear a price ? 
 " all in good time ; it will soon be do , I perceive , " 
 say her cool friend . 
 " this trifling provoke , and - and - - " 
 " not too cruel ! " 
 " - insult I ! " 
 " it be do in order that I may have the pleasure 
 of apologize to so charming a woman , which I 
 straightway do most humbly , madam . " he say , bow 
 low . 
 Bathsheba really know not what to say . 
 " I have   see a good many woman in my time , 
 continue the young man in a murmur , and more 
 thoughtfully than hitherto , critically regard her bent 
 head at the same time ; " but I have   never see a woman 
 so beautiful as you . take it or leave it - be offend 
 or like it - I do not   care . " 
 " who be you , then , who can so well afford to 
 despise opinion ? " 
 " no stranger . Sergeant Troy . I be stay in 
 this place . - there ! it be undo at last , you see . 
 your light finger be more eager than mine . I wish it 
 have be the knot of knot , which there be no untying ! " 
 this be bad and bad . she start up , and so 
 do he . how to decently get away from he - that 
 be her difficulty now . she sidle off inch by inch , 
 the lantern in her hand , till she could see the redness 
 of his coat no long . 
 " ah , Beauty ; good - bye ! " he say . 
 she make no reply , and , reach a distance of 
 twenty or thirty yard , turn about , and run indoor . 
 Liddy have just retire to rest . in ascend to her 
 own chamber , Bathsheba open the girl 's door an 
 inch or two , and , panting , say - 
 " Liddy , be any soldier stay in the village - 
 sergeant somebody - rather gentlemanly for a sergeant , 
 and good looking - a red coat with blue facing ? " 
 " no , miss ... no , I say ; but really it might be 
 Sergeant Troy home on furlough , though I have not 
 see he . he be here once in that way when the 
 regiment be at Casterbridge . " 
 " yes ; that be the name . have he a moustache - no 
 whisker or beard ? " 
 " he have . " 
 " what kind of a person be he ? " 
 " o ! miss - I blush to name it - a gay man ! but 
 I know he to be very quick and trim , who might have 
 make his thousand , like a squire . such a clever 
 young dandy as he be ! he be a doctor 's son by name , 
 which be a great deal ; and he be an earl 's son by 
 nature ! " 
 " which be a great deal more . fancy ! be it true ? " 
 " yes . and , he be bring up so well , and send to 
 Casterbridge Grammar School for year and year . 
 learn all language while he be there ; and it be 
 say he get on so far that he could take down Chinese 
 in shorthand ; but that I do not   answer for , as it be 
 only report . however , he waste his gifted lot , 
 and list a soldier ; but even then he rise to be a 
 sergeant without try at all . ah ! such a blessing it 
 be to be high - bear ; nobility of blood will shine out even 
 in the rank and file . and be he really come home , 
 miss ? " 
 " I believe so . good - night , Liddy . " 
 after all , how could a cheerful wearer of skirt 
 be permanently offend with the man ? there be 
 occasion when girl like Bathsheba will put up with 
 a great deal of unconventional behaviour . when they 
 want to be praise , which be often , when they want to 
 be master , which be sometimes ; and when they want 
 no nonsense , which be seldom . just now the first 
 feeling be in the ascendant with Bathsheba , with a dash 
 of the second . moreover , by chance or by devilry , the 
 ministrant be antecedently make interesting by be 
 a handsome stranger who have evidently see well 
 day . 
 so she could not clearly decide whether it be her 
 opinion that he have insult she or not . " 
 " be ever anything so odd ! " she at last exclaim 
 to herself , in her own room . " and be ever anything 
 so meanly do as what I do do to sulk away like that 
 from a man who be only civil and kind ! " clearly she 
 do not think his bareface praise of her person an 
 insult now . 
 it be a fatal omission of Boldwood 's that he have 
 never once tell she she be beautiful . 
 CHAPTER XXV 
 the new ACQUAINTANCE DESCRIBED 
 IDIOSYNCRASY and vicissitude have combine to 
 stamp Sergeant Troy as an exceptional being . 
 he be a man to whom memory be an in- 
 cumbrance , and anticipation a superfluity . simply 
 feeling , consider , and care for what be before his 
 eye , he be vulnerable only in the present . his out- 
 look upon time be as a transient flash of the eye now 
 and then : that projection of consciousness into day 
 go by and to come , which make the past a synonym 
 for the pathetic and the future a word for circum- 
 spection , be foreign to Troy . with he the past 
 be yesterday ; the future , to - morrow ; never , the day 
 after . 
 on this account he might , in certain light , have 
 be regard as one of the most fortunate of his 
 order . for it may be argue with great plausibility 
 that reminiscence be less an endowment than a disease , 
 and that expectation in its only comfortable form - that 
 of absolute faith - be practically an impossibility ; whilst 
 in the form of hope and the secondary compound , 
 patience , impatience , resolve , curiosity , it be a constant 
 fluctuation between pleasure and pain . 
 Sergeant Troy , be entirely innocent of the 
 practice of expectation , be never disappoint . to 
 set against this negative gain there may have be 
 some positive loss from a certain narrowing of the 
 high taste and sensation which it entail . but 
 limitation of the capacity be never recognize as a loss 
 by the loser therefrom : in this attribute moral or 
 aesthetic poverty contrast plausibly with material , since 
 those who suffer do not mind it , whilst those who mind 
 it soon cease to suffer . it be not a denial of anything 
 to have be always without it , and what Troy have 
 never enjoy he do not miss ; but , be fully 
 conscious that what sober people miss he enjoy , 
 his capacity , though really less , seem great than 
 theirs . 
 he be moderately truthful towards man , but to 
 woman lie like a Cretan - a system of ethic above all 
 other calculate to win popularity at the first flush of 
 admission into lively society ; and the possibility of the 
 favour gain be transitory have reference only to 
 the future . 
 he never pass the line which divide the spruce 
 vice from the ugly ; and hence , though his moral have 
 hardly be applaud , disapproval of they " have fre- 
 quently be temper with a smile . this treatment 
 have lead to his become a sort of regrater of other 
 man 's gallantry , to his own aggrandizement as a 
 Corinthian , rather than to the moral profit of his 
 hearer . 
 his reason and his propensity have seldom any 
 reciprocate influence , have separate by mutual 
 consent long ago : thence it sometimes happen that , 
 while his intention be as honourable as could be 
 wish , any particular deed form a dark background 
 which throw they into fine relief . the sergeant 's 
 vicious phase be the offspring of impulse , and 
 his virtuous phase of cool meditation , the latter 
 have a modest tendency to be oftener hear of than 
 see . 
 Troy be full of activity , but his activity be less of 
 a locomotive than a vegetative nature ; and , never be 
 base upon any original choice of foundation or direc- 
 tion , they be exercise on whatever object chance 
 might place in their way . hence , whilst he sometimes 
 reach the brilliant in speech because that -wa 
 spontaneous , he fall below the commonplace in action , 
 from inability to guide incipient effort . he have a 
 quick comprehension and considerable force of char- 
 acter ; but , be without the power to combine they , 
 the comprehension become engage with triviality 
 whilst wait for the will to direct it , and the force 
 waste itself in useless groove through unheede the 
 comprehension . 
 he be a fairly well - educate man for one of middle 
 class - exceptionally well educate for a common soldier . 
 he speak fluently and unceasingly . he could in this 
 way be one thing and seem another : for instance , he 
 could speak of love and think of dinner ; call on the 
 intend to owe . 
 the wondrous power of flattery in passado at woman 
 be a perception so universal as to be remark upon by 
 many people almost as automatically as they repeat a 
 proverb , or say that they be Christians and the like , 
 without think much of the enormous corollary 
 which spring from the proposition . still less be it act 
 upon for the good of the complemental be allude 
 to . with the majority such an opinion be shelve with 
 all those trite aphorism which require some catastrophe 
 to bring their tremendous meaning thoroughly home . 
 when express with some amount of reflectiveness it 
 seem co - ordinate with a belief that this flattery must 
 be reasonable to be effective . it be to the credit of 
 man that few attempt to settle the question by experi- 
 ment , and it be for their happiness , perhaps , that accident 
 have never settle it for they . nevertheless , that a 
 male dissembler who by deluge she with untenable 
 fiction charm the female wisely , may acquire power 
 reach to the extremity of perdition , be a truth teach 
 to many by unsought and wringing occurrence . and 
 some profess to have attain to the same knowledge 
 by experiment as aforesaid , and jauntily continue their 
 indulgence in such experiment with terrible effect . 
 Sergeant Troy be one . 
 he have be know to observe casually that in 
 deal with womankind the only alternative to flattery 
 be curse and swearing . there be no third method . 
 " treat they fairly , and you be a lost man . " he would 
 say . 
 this philosopher 's public appearance in Weatherbury 
 promptly follow his arrival there . a week or two 
 after the shearing , Bathsheba , feel a nameless relief 
 of spirit on account of Boldwood 's absence , approach 
 her hayfield and look over the hedge towards the 
 haymaker . they consist in about equal proportion 
 of gnarled and flexuous form , the former be the 
 man , the latter the woman , who wear tilt bonnet 
 cover with nankeen , which hang in a curtain upon 
 their shoulder . Coggan and Mark Clark be mow 
 in a less forward meadow , Clark hum a tune to 
 the stroke of his scythe , to which Jan make no attempt 
 to keep time with his . in the first mead they be 
 already load hay , the woman rake it into cock 
 and windrow , and the man toss it upon the 
 waggon . 
 from behind the waggon a bright scarlet spot 
 emerge , and go on load unconcernedly with the 
 rest . it be the gallant sergeant , who have come hay- 
 make for pleasure ; and nobody could deny that he 
 be do the mistress of the farm real knight - service 
 by this voluntary contribution of his labour at a busy 
 time . 
 as soon as she have enter the field Troy see she , 
 and stick his pitchfork into the ground and pick 
 up his crop or cane , he come forward . Bathsheba 
 blush with half - angry embarrassment , and adjust 
 her eye as well as her foot to the direct line of her 
 path . 
 CHAPTER XXVI 
 SCENE on the VERGE of the hay - MEAD 
 " AH , Miss Everdene ! " say the sergeant , touch his 
 diminutive cap . " little do I think it be you I be 
 speak to the other night . and yet , if I have reflect , 
 the " queen of the corn - market "   truth be truth at any 
 hour of the day or night , and I hear you so name in 
 Casterbridge yesterday , the " queen of the corn - market . " 
 I say , could be no other woman . I step across now to 
 beg your forgiveness a thousand time for have be 
 lead by my feeling to express myself too strongly for a 
 stranger . to be sure I be no strange to the place - 
 I be Sergeant Troy , as I tell you , and I have assist 
 your uncle in these field no end of time when I be a 
 lad . I have be do the same for you today . " 
 " I suppose I must thank you for that , Sergeant 
 Troy . " say the Queen of the corn - market , in an in- 
 differently grateful tone . 
 the sergeant look hurt and sad . " indeed you 
 must not , Miss Everdene . " he say . " why could you 
 think such a thing necessary ? " 
 " I be glad it be not . " 
 " why ? if I may ask without offence . " 
 " because I do not   much want to thank you for any " 
 thing . " 
 " I be afraid I have make a hole with my tongue 
 that my heart will never mend . o these intolerable 
 time : that ill - luck should follow a man for honestly 
 tell a woman she be beautiful ! ' twas the most I 
 say - you must own that ; and the least I could say - 
 that I own myself . " 
 " there be some talk I could do without more easily 
 than money . " 
 " indeed . that remark be a sort of digression . " 
 " no . it mean that I would rather have your room 
 than your company . " 
 " and I would rather have curse from you than 
 kiss from any other woman ; so I will stay here . " 
 Bathsheba be absolutely speechless . and yet she 
 could not help feel that the assistance he be render- 
 ing forbid a harsh repulse . 
 " well . " continue Troy , " I suppose there be a praise 
 which be rudeness , and that may be mine . at the 
 same time there be a treatment which be injustice , and 
 that may be yours . because a plain blunt man , who 
 have never be teach concealment , speak out his 
 mind without exactly intend it , he be to be snap 
 off like the son of a sinner . " 
 " indeed there be no such case between we . " she say , 
 turn away . " I do not   allow stranger to be bold and 
 impudent - even in praise of I . " 
 " ah - it be not the fact but the method which offend 
 you . " he say , carelessly . " but I have the sad satis- 
 faction of know that my word , whether pleasing or 
 offensive , be unmistakably true . would you have have 
 I look at you , and tell my acquaintance that you be 
 quite a common - place woman , to save you the embar- 
 rassment of be star at if they come near you ? 
 not I. I could not   tell any such ridiculous lie about 
 a beauty to encourage a single woman in England in 
 too excessive a modesty . " 
 " it be all pretence - what you be say ! " exclaim 
 Bathsheba , laugh in spite of herself at the sergeant 's 
 sly method . " you have a rare invention , Sergeant 
 Troy . why could not   you have pass by I that 
 night , and say nothing ? - that be all I mean to 
 reproach you for . " 
 " because I be not   go to . half the pleasure of 
 a feeling lie in be able to express it on the spur of 
 the moment , and I let out mine . it would have be 
 just the same if you have be the reverse person - ugly 
 and old - I should have exclaim about it in the same 
 way . " 
 " how long be it since you have be so afflict with 
 strong feeling , then ? " 
 " oh , ever since I be big enough to know loveliness 
 from deformity . " 
 " ' tis to be hop your sense of the difference you 
 speak of do not   stop at face , but extend to moral as 
 well . " 
 " I will not   speak of moral or religion - my own or 
 anybody else 's . though perhaps I should have be a 
 very good Christian if you pretty woman have not   make 
 I an idolater . " 
 Bathsheba move on to hide the irrepressible dimp- 
 ling of merriment . Troy follow , whirl his crop . 
 " but - Miss Everdene - you do forgive I ? " 
 " hardly . " 
 " why ? " 
 " you say such thing . " 
 " I say you be beautiful , and I will say so still ; for , 
 by - so you be ! the most beautiful ever I see , or 
 may I fall dead this instant ! why , upon my - - " 
 " do not   - do not ! I will not   listen to you - you be so 
 profane ! " she say , in a restless state between distress 
 at hear he and a penchant to hear more . 
 " I again say you be a most fascinating woman . 
 there be nothing remarkable in my saying so , be there ? 
 I be sure the fact be evident enough . Miss Everdene , 
 my opinion may be too forcibly let out to please you , 
 and , for the matter of that , too insignificant to convince 
 you , but surely it be honest , and why can not   it be ex- 
 cuse ? " 
 " because it - it be not   a correct one . " she femininely 
 murmur . 
 " o , fie - fie- ! be I any bad for break the 
 third of that terrible ten than you for break the 
 ninth ? " 
 " well , it do not   seem quite true to I that I be 
 fascinating . " she reply evasively . 
 " not so to you : then I say with all respect that , if 
 so , it be owe to your modesty , Miss Everdene . but 
 surely you must have be tell by everybody of what 
 everybody notice ? and you should take their word 
 for it . " 
 " they do not   say so exactly . " 
 " o yes , they must ! " 
 " well , I mean to my face , as you do . " she go on , 
 allow herself to be far lure into a conversation 
 that intention have rigorously forbid . 
 " but you know they think so ? " 
 " no - that be - I certainly have hear Liddy say 
 they do , but - - " she pause . 
 capitulation - that be the purport of the simple 
 reply , guard as it be - capitulation , unknown to her- 
 self . never do a fragile tailless sentence convey a 
 more perfect meaning . the careless sergeant smile 
 within himself , and probably too the devil smile from 
 a loop - hole in Tophet , for the moment be the turning- 
 point of a career . her tone and mien signify beyond 
 mistake that the seed which be to lift the foundation 
 have take root in the chink : the remainder be a mere 
 question of time and natural change . 
 " there the truth come out ! " say the soldier , in 
 reply . " never tell I that a young lady can live in a 
 buzz of admiration without know something about it . 
 ah . " well , Miss Everdene , you be - pardon my blunt 
 way - you be rather an injury to our race than other- 
 wise . 
 " how - indeed ? " she say , open her eye . 
 " o , it be true enough . I may as well be hang for 
 a sheep as a lamb   an old country say , not of much 
 account , but it will do for a rough soldier , and so I 
 will speak my mind , regardless of your pleasure , and 
 without hop or intend to get your pardon . why , 
 Miss Everdene , it be in this manner that your good 
 look may do more . harm than good in the world . " 
 the sergeant look down the mead in critical abstrac- 
 ion . " probably some one man on an average fall in " 
 love , with each ordinary woman . she can marry he : 
 he be content , and lead a useful life . such woman as 
 you a hundred man always covet - your eye will be- 
 witch score on score into an unavaile fancy for you 
 you can only marry one of that many . out of these 
 say twenty will endeavour to . drown the bitterness of 
 espise love in drink ; twenty more will mope away 
 their life without a wish or attempt to make a mark in 
 he world , because they have no ambition apart from 
 their attachment to you ; twenty more - the susceptible 
 person myself possibly among they - will be always 
 draggle after you , get where they may just see 
 you , do desperate thing . man be such constant 
 fool ! the rest may try to get over their passion with 
 more or less success . but all these man will be 
 sadden . and not only those ninety - nine man , but 
 the ninety - nine woman they might have marry be 
 sadden with they . there be my tale . that be why I 
 say that a woman so charming as yourself , Miss Ever- 
 dene , be hardly a blessing to her race . " 
 the handsome sergeant 's feature be during this 
 speech as rigid and stern as John Knox 's in address 
 his gay young queen . 
 see she make no reply , he say , " do you read 
 French ? " 
 " no ; I begin , but when I get to the verbs , father 
 die . " she say simply . 
 " I do - when I have an opportunity , which latterly 
 have not be often   my mother be a Parisienne   - and 
 there be a proverb they have , Qui aime bien chatie bien 
  - " he chasten who love well . " do you understand 
 I ? 
 " ah ! " she reply , and there be even a little tremu- 
 lousness in the usually cool girl 's voice ; " if you can 
 only fight half as winningly as you can talk , you be 
 able to make a pleasure of a bayonet wound ! " and 
 then poor Bathsheba instantly perceive her slip in 
 make this admission : in hastily try to retrieve it , 
 she go from bad to bad . " do not , however , suppose 
 that I derive any pleasure from what you tell I . " 
 " I know you do not - I know it perfectly . " say Troy , 
 with much hearty conviction on the exterior of his face : 
 and alter the expression to moodiness ; " when a 
 dozen man arfe ready to speak tenderly to you , and 
 give the admiration you deserve without add the 
 warning you need , it stand to reason that my poor 
 rough - and - ready mixture of praise and blame can not 
 convey much pleasure . fool as I may be , I be not so 
 conceite as to suppose that ! " 
 " I think you - be conceited , nevertheless . " say 
 Bathsheba , look askance at a reed she be fitfully 
 pull with one hand , have lately grow feverish 
 under the soldier 's system of procedure - not because 
 the nature of his cajolery be entirely unperceive , but 
 because its vigour be overwhelming . 
 " I would not own it to anybody else - nor do I 
 exactly to you . still , there might have be some self- 
 conceit in my foolish supposition the other night . I 
 know that what I say in admiration might be an 
 opinion too often force upon you to give any pleasure 
 but I certainly do think that the kindness of your 
 nature might prevent you judge an uncontrolled 
 tongue harshly - which you have do - and thinking 
 badly of I and wound I this morning , when I 
 be work hard to save your hay . " 
 " well , you need not think more of that : perhaps you 
 do not mean to be rude to I by speak out your 
 mind : indeed , I believe you do not . " say the shrewd 
 woman , in painfully innocent earnest . " and I thank 
 you for give help here . but - but mind you do not 
 speak to I again in that way , or in any other , unless 
 I speak to you . " 
 " o , Miss Bathsheba ! that be to hard ! " 
 " no , it be not . why be it ? " 
 " you will never speak to I ; for I shall not be 
 here long . I be soon go back again to the miser- 
 able monotony of drill - and perhaps our regiment will 
 be order out soon . and yet you take away the one 
 little ewe - lamb of pleasure that I have in this dull life 
 of mine . well , perhaps generosity be not a woman 's 
 most marked characteristic . " 
 " when be you go from here ? " she ask , with 
 some interest . 
 " in a month . " 
 " but how can it give you pleasure to speak to I ? " 
 " can you ask Miss Everdene - know as you do 
  - what my offence be base on ? " 
 " I you do care so much for a silly trifle of that 
 kind , then , I do not   mind do it . " she uncertainly and 
 doubtingly answer . " but you can not   really care for a 
 word from I ? you only say so - I think you only 
 say so . " 
 " that be unjust - but I will not   repeat the remark . I 
 be too gratified to get such a mark of your friendship 
 at any price to cavil at the tone . I do Miss Everdene , 
 care for it . you may think a man foolish to want a 
 mere word - just a good morning . perhaps he be - I 
 do not   know . but you have never be a man look 
 upon a woman , and that woman yourself . " 
 " well . " 
 " then you know nothing of what such an experience 
 be like - and Heaven forbid that you ever should ! " 
 " nonsense , flatterer ! what be it like ? I be 
 interested in know . " 
 " put shortly , it be not be able to think , hear , or 
 look in any direction except one without wretchedness , 
 nor there without torture . " 
 " ah , sergeant , it will not   do - you be pretend ! " she 
 say , shake her head . " your word be too dashing 
 to be true . " 
 " I be not , upon the honour of a soldier " 
 " but why be it so ? - of course I ask for mere pas- 
 time . " 
 because you be so distract - and I be so 
 distracted . " 
 " you look like it . " 
 " I be indeed . " 
 " why , you only see I the other night ! " 
 " that make no difference . the lightning work in- 
 stantaneously . I love you then , at once - as I do now . " 
 Bathsheba survey he curiously , from the foot 
 upward , as high as she like to venture her glance , 
 which be not quite so high as his eye . 
 " you can not and you do not . " she say demurely . 
 " there be - no such sudden feeling in people . I will not 
 listen to you any long . hear I , I wish I know what 
 o'clock it be - I be go - I have waste too much time 
 here already ! " 
 the sergeant look at his watch and tell she . 
 " what , have not   you a watch , miss ? " he inquire . 
 " I have not just at present - I be about to get a 
 new one . " 
 " no . you shall be give one . yes - you shall . 
 a gift , Miss Everdene - a gift . " 
 and before she know what the young - man be 
 intend , a heavy gold watch be in her hand . 
 " it be an unusually good one for a man like I to 
 possess . " he quietly say . " that watch have a history . 
 press the spring and open the back . " 
 she do so . 
 " what do you see ? " 
 " a crest and a motto . " 
 " a coronet with five point , and beneath , Cedit amor 
 rebus - " love yield to circumstance . " it be the motto 
 of the Earls of Severn . that watch belong to the 
 last lord , and be give to my mother 's husband , a 
 medical man , for his use till I come of age , when it be 
 to be give to I . it be all the fortune that ever I 
 inherit . that watch have regulate imperial interest 
 in its time - the stately ceremonial , the courtly assigna- 
 tion , pompous travel , and lordly sleep . now it be 
 your . 
 " but , Sergeant Troy , I can not take this - I can not ! " 
 she exclaim , with round - eyed wonder . " a gold watch ! 
 what be you do ? do not   be such a dissembler ! " 
 the sergeant retreat to avoid receive back his 
 gift , which she hold out persistently towards he . 
 Bathsheba follow as he retire . 
 " keep it - do , Miss Everdene - keep it ! " say the 
 erratic child of impulse . " the fact of your possessing 
 it make it worth ten time as much to I . a more 
 plebeian one will answer my purpose just as well , and 
 the pleasure of know whose heart my old one beat 
 against - well , I will not   speak of that . it be in far 
 worthy hand than ever it have be in before . " 
 " but indeed I can not   have it ! " she say , in a perfect 
 simmer of distress . " o , how can you do such a thing ; 
 that be if you really mean it ! give I your dead 
 father 's watch , and such a valuable one ! you should 
 not be so reckless , indeed , Sergeant Troy ! " 
 " I love my father : good ; but well , I love you 
 more . that be how I can do it . " say the sergeant , with 
 an intonation of such exquisite fidelity to nature that it . 
 be evidently not all act now . her beauty , which , 
 whilst it have be quiescent , he have praise in jest , 
 have in its animate phase move he to earn ; and 
 though his seriousness be less than she imagine , it 
 be probably more than he imagine himself . 
 Bathsheba be brim with agitated bewilderment , 
 and she say , in half - suspicious accent of feeling , " can 
 it be ! o , how can it be , that you care for I , and 
 so suddenly , ! you have see so little of I : I may 
 not be really so - so nice - look as I seem to you . 
 please , do take it ; o , do ! I can not and will not have 
 it . believe I , your generosity be too great . I have 
 never do you a single kindness , and why should you 
 be so kind to I ? " 
 a factitious reply have be again upon his lip , but 
 it be again suspend , and he look at she with an 
 arrest eye . the truth be , that as she now stand - 
 excited , wild , and honest as the day - her alluring 
 beauty bear out so fully the epithet he have bestow 
 upon it that he be quite startled at his temerity in 
 advance they as false . he say mechanically , " ah , 
 why ? " and continue to look at she . 
 " and my workfolk see I follow you about the 
 field , and be wonder . o , this be dreadful ! " she 
 go on , unconscious of the transmutation she be 
 effecting . 
 " I do not quite mean you to accept it at first , for it 
 as my one poor patent of nobility . " he break out , 
 bluntly ; " but , upon my soul , I wish you would now . 
 without any sham , come ! do not   deny I the 
 happiness of wear it for my sake ? but you be too 
 lovely even to care to be kind as other be . " 
 " no , no ; do not say so ! I have reason for reserve 
 which I can not explain . " 
 " bet it be , then , let it be . " he say , receive back 
 the watch at last ; " I must be leave you now . and 
 will you speak to I for these few week of my stay ? " 
 " indeed I will . yet , I do not   know if I will ! o , 
 why do you come and disturb I so ! " 
 " perhaps in set a gin , I have catch myself . 
 such thing have happen . well , will you let I 
 work in your field ? " he coax . 
 " yes , I suppose so ; if it be any pleasure to you . " 
 " Miss Everdene , I thank you . 
 " no , no . " 
 " good - bye ! " 
 the sergeant bring his hand to the cap on the 
 slope of his head , salute , and return to the distant 
 group of haymaker . 
 Bathsheba could not face the haymaker now . her 
 heart erratically flit hither and thither from per- 
 plexed excitement , hot , and almost tearful , she retreat 
 homeward , murmuring , O , what have I do ! what 
 do it mean ! I wish I know how much of it be 
 true ! 
 CHAPTER XXVII 
 hive the BEES 
 the Weatherbury bee be late in their swarm this 
 year . it be in the latter part of June , and the day after 
 the interview with Troy in the hayfield , that Bathsheba 
 be stand in her garden , watch a swarm in the 
 air and guess their probable settling place . not only 
 be they late this year , but unruly . sometimes through- 
 out a whole season all the swarm would alight on the 
 low attainable bough - such as part of a currant - bush 
 or espalier apple - tree ; next year they would , with just 
 the same unanimity , make straight off to the uppermost 
 member of some tall , gaunt costard , or quarrenden , 
 and there defy all invader who do not come arm 
 with ladder and stave to take they . 
 this be the case at present . Bathsheba 's eye , 
 shade by one hand , be follow the ascending 
 multitude against the unexplorable stretch of blue till 
 they ultimately halt by one of the unwieldy tree 
 speak of . a process somewhat analogous to that of 
 allege formation of the universe , time and time ago , 
 be observable . the bustling swarm have sweep the sky 
 in a scattered and uniform haze , which now thicken to 
 a nebulous centre : this glide on to a bough and grow 
 still denser , till it form a solid black spot upon the 
 light . 
 the man and woman be all busily engage in 
 save the hay - even Liddy have leave the house for the 
 purpose of lend a hand - Bathsheba resolve to hive 
 the bee herself , if possible . she have dress the hive 
 with herb and honey , fetch a ladder , brush , and 
 crook , make herself impregnable with armour of leather 
 glove , straw hat , and large gauze veil - once green but 
 now fade to snuff colour - and ascend a dozen rung 
 of the ladder . at once she hear , not ten yard off , 
 a voice that be begin to have a strange power in 
 agitate she . 
 " Miss Everdene , let I assist you ; you should not 
 attempt such a thing alone . " 
 Troy be just open the garden gate . 
 Bathsheba fling down the brush , crook , and empty 
 hive , pull the skirt of her dress tightly round her 
 ankle in a tremendous flurry , and as well as she could 
 slide down the ladder . by the time she reach the 
 bottom Troy be there also , and he stoop to pick 
 up the hive . 
 " how fortunate I be to have drop in at this 
 moment ! " exclaim the sergeant . 
 she find her voice in a minute . " what ! and will 
 you shake they in for I ? " she ask , in what , for a 
 defiant girl , be a falter way ; though , for a timid 
 girl , it would have seem a brave way enough . 
 " will I ! " say Troy . " why , of course I will . how 
 bloom you be to - day ! " Troy fling down his cane 
 and put his foot on the ladder to ascend . 
 " but you must have on the veil and glove , or you will 
 be sting fearfully ! " 
 " ah , yes . I must put on the veil and glove . will 
 you kindly show I how to fix they properly ? " 
 " and you must have the broad - brim hat , too , for 
 your cap have no brim to keep the veil off , and they would 
 reach your face . " 
 " the broad - brim hat , too , by all mean . " 
 so a whimsical fate order that her hat should be 
 take off - veil and all attach - and place upon his 
 head , Troy toss his own into a gooseberry bush . 
 then the veil have to be tie at its low edge round 
 his collar and the glove put on he . 
 he look such an extraordinary object in this guise 
 that , flurry as she be , she could not avoid laugh 
 outright . it be the removal of yet another stake from 
 the palisade of cold manner which have keep he off 
 Bathsheba look on from the ground whilst he be 
 busy sweep and shake the bee from the tree , 
 hold up the hive with the other hand for they to 
 fall into . she make use of an unobserved minute 
 whilst his attention be absorb in the operation to 
 arrange her plume a little . he come down hold 
 the hive at arm 's length , behind which trail a cloud 
 of bee . 
 " upon my life . " say Troy , through the veil , " hold 
 up this hive make one 's arm ache bad than a week 
 of sword - exercise . " when the manoeuvre be complete 
 he approach she . " would you be good enough to 
 untie I and let I out ? I be nearly stifle inside 
 this silk cage . " 
 to hide her embarrassment during the unwonted 
 process of untie the string about his neck , she say : - 
 " I have never see that you speak of . " 
 " what ? " 
 " the sword - exercise . " 
 " ah ! would you like to ? " say Troy . 
 Bathsheba hesitate . she have hear wondrous 
 report from time to time by dweller in Weatherbury , 
 who have by chance sojourn awhile in Casterbridge , 
 near the barrack , of this strange and glorious perform- 
 ance ,   tlie sword - exercise . man and boy who have 
 peep through chink or over wall into the barrack- 
 yard return with account of its be the most 
 flash affair conceivable ; accoutrement and weapon 
 glistening like star - here , there , around - yet all by rule 
 and compass . so she say mildly what she feel strongly . 
 " yes ; I should like to see it very much . " 
 " and so you shall ; you shall see I go through it . " 
 " no ! how ? " 
 " let I consider . " 
 " not with a walking - stick - I do not   care to see that . 
 lt must be a real sword . " 
 " yes , I know ; and I have no sword here ; but I 
 think I could get one by the evening . now , will you 
 do this ? " 
 " o no , indeed ! " say Bathsheba , blushing . " thank 
 you very much , but I could not   on any account . 
 " surely you might ? nobody would know . " 
 she shake her head , but with a weakened negation . 
 " if I be to . " she say , " I must bring Liddy too . might 
 I not ? " 
 Troy look far away . " I do not   see why you want 
 to bring she . " he say coldly . 
 an unconscious look of assent in Bathsheba 's eye 
 betray that something more than his coldness have 
 make she also feel that Liddy would be superfluous in 
 the suggested scene . she have feel it , even whilst make 
 the proposal . 
 " well , I will not   bring Liddy - and I will come . but 
 only for a very short time . " she add ; " a very short 
 time . " 
 " it will not take five minute . " say Troy . 
 CHAPTER XXVIII 
 the HOLLOW amid the FERNS 
 the hill opposite Bathsheba 's dwelling extend , a 
 mile off , into an uncultivated tract of land , dot at 
 this season with tall thicket of brake fern , plump and 
 diaphanous from recent rapid growth , and radiant in 
 hue of clear and untainted green . 
 at eight o'clock this midsummer evening , whilst the 
 bristling ball of gold in the west still sweep the tip of 
 the fern with its long , luxuriant ray , a soft brushing- 
 by of garment might have be hear among they , 
 and Bathsheba appear in their midst , their soft , 
 feathery arm caress she up to her shoulder . she 
 pause , turn , go back over the hill and half - way 
 to her own door , whence she cast a farewell glance upon 
 the spot she have just leave , have resolve not to remain 
 near the place after all . 
 she see a dim spot of artificial red moving round 
 the shoulder of the rise . it disappear on the other 
 side . 
 she wait one minute - two minute - thought of 
 Troy 's disappointment at her non - fulfilment of a promise 
 engagement , till she again run along the field , clamber 
 over the bank , and follow the original direction . she 
 be now literally tremble and pant at this her 
 temerity in such an errant undertaking ; her breath 
 come and go quickly , and her eye shine with an in- 
 frequent light . yet go she must . she reach the 
 verge of a pit in the middle of the fern . Troy stand 
 in the bottom , look up towards she . 
 " I hear you rustle through the fern before I see 
 you . " he say , come up and give she his hand to help 
 she down the slope . 
 the pit be a saucer - shape concave , naturally 
 form , with a top diameter of about thirty foot , and 
 shallow enough to allow the sunshine to reach their 
 head . stand in the centre , the sky overhead be 
 meet by a circular horizon of fern : this grow nearly to 
 the bottom of the slope and then abruptly cease . the 
 middle within the belt of verdure be floor with a 
 thick flossy carpet of moss and grass intermingle , so 
 yield that the foot be half - bury within it . 
 " now . " say Troy , produce the sword , which , as he 
 raise it into the sunlight , gleam a sort of greeting , 
 like a live thing , " first , we have four right and four 
 left cut ; four right and four left thrust . infantry cut 
 and guard be more interesting than ours , to my mind ; 
 but they be not so swashing . they have seven cut 
 and three thrust . so much as a preliminary . well , 
 next , our cut one be as if you be sow your corn - 
 so . " Bathsheba see a sort of rainbow , upside down in 
 the air , and Troy 's arm be still again . " cut two , as if 
 you be hedge - so . three , as if you be reap 
  - so . " Four , as if you be threshing - in that way . 
 " then the same on the left . the thrust be these : one , 
 two , three , four , right ; one , two , three , four , left . " he 
 repeat they . " have them again ? " he say . " one , 
 two - - " 
 she hurriedly interrupt : " I would rather not ; though 
 I do not   mind your two and four ; but your one and 
 three be terrible ! " 
 " very well . I will let you off the one and three . 
 next , cut , point and guard altogether . " Troy duly 
 exhibit they . " then there be pursue practice , in 
 this way . " he give the movement as before . " there , 
 those be the stereotyped form . the infantry have 
 two most diabolical upward cut , which we be too 
 humane to use . like this - three , four . " 
 " how murderous and bloodthirsty ! " 
 " they be rather deathy . now I will be more inter- 
 esting , and let you see some loose play - give all the 
 cut and point , infantry and cavalry , quick than 
 lightning , and as promiscuously - with just enough rule 
 to regulate instinct and yet not to fetter it . you be 
 my antagonist , with this difference from real warfare , 
 that I shall miss you every time by one hair 's breadth , 
 or perhaps two . mind you do not   flinch , whatever you 
 do . " 
 I will be sure not to ! " she say invincibly . 
 he point to about a yard in front of he . 
 Bathsheba 's adventurous spirit be begin to find 
 some grain of relish in these highly novel proceeding . 
 she take up her position as direct , face Troy . 
 " now just to learn whether you have pluck enough 
 to let I do what I wish , I will give you a preliminary 
 test . " 
 he flourish the sword by way of introduction 
 number two , and the next thing of which she be 
 conscious be that the point and blade of the sword 
 be dart with a gleam towards her left side , just 
 above her hip ; then of their reappearance on her right 
 side , emerge as it be from between her rib , have 
 apparently pass through her body . the third item 
 of consciousness be that of see the same sword , 
 perfectly clean and free from blood hold vertically in 
 Troy 's hand   in the position technically call " recover 
 sword " . all be as quick as electricity . 
 " oh ! " she cry out in affright , press her hand to 
 her side . " have you run I through ? - no , you have 
 not ! whatever have you do ! " 
 " I have not touch you . " say Troy , quietly . " it 
 be mere sleight of hand . the sword pass behind 
 you . now you be not afraid , be you ? because if 
 you be l can not   perform . I give my word that l will 
 not only not hurt you , but not once touch you . " 
 " I do not   think I be afraid . you be quite sure you 
 will not hurt I ? " 
 " quite sure . " 
 " be the sWord very sharp ? " 
 " o no - only stand as still as a statue . now ! " 
 in an instant the atmosphere be transform to 
 Bathsheba 's eye . beam of light catch from the low 
 sun 's ray , above , around , in front of she , well - nigh shut 
 out earth and heaven - all emit in the marvellous 
 evolution of Troy 's reflect blade , which seem 
 everywhere at once , and yet nowherre specially . these 
 circle gleam be accompany by a keen rush that 
 be almost a whistling - also spring from all side of 
 she at once . in short , she be enclose in a firmament 
 of light , and of sharp hiss , resemble a sky - full of 
 meteor close at hand . 
 never since the broadsword become the national 
 weapon have there be more dexterity show in its 
 management than by the hand of Sergeant Troy , and 
 never have he be in such splendid temper for the 
 performance as now in the evening sunshine among the 
 fern with Bathsheba . it may safely be assert with 
 respect to the closeness of his cut , that have it be 
 possible for the edge of the sword to leave in the air a 
 permanent substance wherever it fly past , the space 
 leave untouched would have be almost a mould of 
 Bathsheba 's figure . 
 behind the luminous stream of this aurora militaris , 
 she could see the hue of Troy 's sword arm , spread in a 
 scarlet haze over the space cover by its motion , like 
 a twanged harpstring , and behind all Troy himself , 
 mostly face she ; sometimes , to show the rear cut , 
 half turn away , his eye nevertheless always keenly 
 measure her breadth and outline , and his lip tightly 
 close in sustained effort . next , his movement lapse 
 slow , and she could see they individually . the 
 hiss of the sword have cease , and he stop 
 entirely . 
 " that outer loose lock of hair want tidy , he 
 say , before she have move or speak . " wait : I will do 
 it for you . " 
 an arc of silver shone on her right side : the sword 
 have descend . the lock drop to the ground . 
 " bravely bear ! " say Troy . " you do not   flinch a 
 shade 's thickness . wonderful in a woman ! " 
 " it be because I do not   expect it . o , you have 
 spoil my hair ! " 
 " only once more . " 
 " no - no ! I be afraid of you - indeed I be ! " she 
 cry . 
 " I will not   touch you at all - not even your hair . I 
 be only go to kill that caterpillar settle on you . 
 now : still ! " 
 it appear that a caterpillar have come from the 
 fern and choose the front of her bodice as his resting 
 place . she see the point glisten towards her bosom , 
 and seemingly enter it . Bathsheba close her eye in 
 the full persuasion that she be kill at last . how- 
 ever , feel just as usual , she open they again . 
 " there it be , look . " say the sargeant , hold his 
 sword before her eye . 
 the caterpillar be spit upon its point . 
 " why , it be magic ! " say Bathsheba , amazed . 
 " o no - dexterity . I merely give point to your 
 bosom where the caterpillar be , and instead of run 
 you through check the extension a thousandth of an 
 inch short of your surface . " 
 " but how could you chop off a curl of my hair with 
 a sword that have no edge ? " 
 " no edge ! this sword will shave like a razor . 
 look here . " 
 he touch the palm of his hand with the blade , 
 and then , lift it , show she a thin shaving of scarf- 
 skin dangle therefrom . 
 " but you say before begin that it be blunt and 
 could not   cut I ! " 
 " that be to get you to stand still , and so make sure 
 of your safety . the risk of injure you through your 
 moving be too great not to force I to tell you a 
 fib to escape it . " 
 she shudder . " I have be within an inch of my 
 life , and do not   know it ! " 
 " more precisely speak , you have be within half 
 an inch of be par alive two hundred and ninety - five 
 tinie . " 
 " cruel , cruel , ' tis of you ! " 
 " you have be perfectly safe , nevertheless . my 
 sword never err . " and Troy return the weapon to 
 the scabbard . 
 Bathsheba , overcome by a hundred tumultuous feel- 
 ing result from the scene , abstractedly sit down on 
 a tuft of heather . 
 " I must leave you now . " say Troy , softly . " and I will 
 venture to take and keep this in remembrance of you . " 
 she see he stoop to the grass , pick up the wind 
 lock which he have sever from her manifold tress , 
 twist it round his finger , unfasten a button in the breast 
 of his coat , and carefully put it inside . she feel power- 
 less to withstand or deny he . he be altogether too 
 much for she , and Bathsheba seem as one who , face 
 a revive wind , find it blow so strongly that it stop 
 the breath . 
 he draw near and say , " I must be leave you . " 
 he draw nearer still . a minute later and she see his 
 scarlet form disappear amid the ferny thicket , almost in 
 a flash , like a brand swiftly wave . 
 that minute 's interval have bring the blood beat 
 into her face , set she stinging as if aflame to the very 
 hollow of her foot , and enlarge emotion to a compass 
 which quite swamp thought . it have bring upon 
 she a stroke result , as do that of Moses in Horeh , in 
 a liquid stream - here a stream of tear . she feel like 
 one who have sin a great sin . 
 the circumstance have be the gentle dip of Troy 's 
 mouth downward upon her own . he have kiss she . 
 CHAPTER XXIX 
 PARTICULARS of a TWILIGHT WALK 
 we now see the element of folly distinctly mingle 
 with the many varying particular which make up the 
 character of Bathsheba Everdene . it be almost foreign 
 to her intrinsic nature . introduce as lymph on the 
 dart of Eros , it eventually permeate and colour 
 her whole constitution . Bathsheba , though she have too 
 much understanding to be entirely govern by her 
 womanliness , have too much womanliness to use she 
 understanding to the good advantage . perhaps in no 
 minor point do woman astonish her helpmate more 
 than in the strange power she possess of believe 
 cajolery that she know to be false - except , indeed , in 
 that of be utterly sceptical on stricture that she 
 know to be true . 
 Bathsheba love Troy in the way that only self - reliant 
 woman love when they abandon their self - reliance . 
 when a strong woman recklessly throw away her 
 strength she be bad than a weak woman who have never 
 have any strength to throw away . one source of her 
 inadequacy be the novelty of the occasion . she have 
 never have practice in make the good of such a 
 condition . weakness be doubly weak by be new . 
 Bathsheba be not conscious of guile in this matter . 
 though in one sense a woman of the world , it be , after 
 all , that world of daylight coterie and green carpet 
 wherein cattle form the pass crowd and wind the 
 busy hum ; where a quiet family of rabbit or hare live 
 on the other side of your party - wall , where your neigh- 
 bour be everybody in the tything , and where calculation 
 formulate self - indulgence of bad , nothing at all . have 
 her utmost thought in this direction be distinctly 
 word   and by herself they never be , they would 
 only have amount to such a matter as that she feel 
 her impulse to be pleasanter guide than her discretion . 
 her love be entire as a child 's , and though warm as 
 summer it be fresh as spring . her culpability lie in 
 she make no attempt to control feeling by subtle and 
 careful inquiry into conscience . she could show other 
 the steep and thorny way , but ' reck'd not her own rede , " 
 and Troy 's deformity lie deep down from a 
 woman 's vision , whilst his embellishment be upon 
 the very surface ; thus contrast with homely Oak , 
 whose defect be patent to the blindest , and whose 
 vertue be as metal in a mine . 
 the difference between love and respect be mark- 
 edly show in her conduct . Bathsheba have speak of 
 her interest in Boldwood with the great freedom to 
 Liddy , but she have only commune with her own heart 
 concern " Troy " . 
 all this infatuation Gabriel see , and be trouble 
 thereby from the time of his daily journey a - field to the 
 time of his return , and on to the small hour of many a 
 night . that he be not beloved have hitherto be his 
 great that Bathsheba be get into the toil 
 be now a sorrow great than the first , and one which 
 nearly obscure it . it be a result which parallel 
 the oft - quote observation of Hippocrates concern 
 physical pain . 
 that be a noble though perhaps an unpromising love 
 which not even the fear of breed aversion in the 
 bosom of the one beloved can deter from combat his 
 or her error . Oak determine to speak to his mistress . 
 he would base his appeal on what he consider her 
 unfair treatment of Farmer Boldwood , now absent from 
 home . 
 an opportunity occur one evening when she have 
 go for a short walk by a path through the neighbour- 
 ing cornfield . it be dusk when Oak , who have not 
 be far a - field that day , take the same path and meet 
 her return , quite pensively , as he think . 
 the wheat be now tall , and the path be narrow ; 
 thus the way be quite a sunken groove between the 
 embowe thicket on either side . two person could 
 not walk abreast without damage the crop , and Oak 
 stand aside to let she pass . 
 " oh , be it Gabriel ? " she say . " you be take a 
 walk too . good - night . " 
 " I think I would come to meet you , as it be rather 
 late , " say Oak , turn and follow at her heel when 
 she have brush somewhat quickly by he . 
 " thank you , indeed , but I be not very fearful . " 
 " o no ; but there be bad character about . " 
 " I never meet they . " 
 now Oak , with marvellous ingenuity , have be go 
 to introduce the gallant sergeant through the channel of 
 " bad character . " but all at once the scheme break 
 down , it suddenly occur to he that this be rather a 
 clumsy way , and too bareface to begin with . he try 
 another preamble . 
 " and as the man who would naturally come to meet 
 you be away from home , too - I mean Farmer Boldwood 
  - why , think I , I will go . " he say . 
 " ah , yes . " she walk on without turn her head , 
 and for many step nothing far be hear from she 
 quarter than the rustle of her dress against the heavy 
 corn - ear . then she resume rather tartly - 
 " I do not   quite understand what you mean by say 
 that Mr. Boldwood would naturally come to meet I . " 
 I mean on account of the wedding which they say 
 be likely to take place between you and he , miss . for- 
 give my speaking plainly . " 
 " they say what be not true . " she return quickly . 
 no marriage be likely to take place between we . " 
 Gabriel now put forth his unobscured opinion , for 
 the moment have come . " well , Miss Everdene . " he 
 say , " put aside what people say , I never in my life 
 see any courting if his be not a courting of you . " 
 Bathsheba would probably have terminate the con- 
 versation there and then by flatly forbid the subject , 
 have not her conscious weakness of position allure she 
 to palter and argue in endeavour to better it . 
 " since this subject have be mention . " she say 
 very emphatically , " I be glad of the opportunity of 
 clear up a mistake which be very common and very 
 provoking . I do not   definitely promise Mr. Boldwood 
 anything . I have never care for he . I respect he , 
 and he have urge I to marry he . but I have give 
 he no distinct answer . as soon as he return I shall 
 do so ; and the answer will be that I can not think of 
 marry he . " 
 " People be full of mistake , seemingly . " 
 " they be . " 
 the other day they say you be trifle with he , 
 and you almost prove that you be not ; lately they 
 have say that you be not , and you straightway begin 
 to show - - " 
 that I be , I suppose you mean . " 
 " well , I hope they speak the truth . " 
 they do , but wrongly apply . I do not   trifle with 
 he ; but then , I have nothing to do with he . " 
 Oak be unfortunately lead on to speak of Boldwood 's 
 rival in a wrong tone to she after all . " I wish you have 
 never meet that young Sergeant Troy , miss . " he sigh . 
 Bathsheba 's step become faintly spasmodic . " why ? " 
 she ask . 
 " he be not good enough for ' ee . " 
 " do any one tell you to speak to I like this ? " 
 " nobody at all . " 
 " then it appear to I that Sergeant Troy do not 
 concern we here . " she say , intractably . " yet I must say 
 that Sergeant Troy be an educate man , and quite worthy 
 of any woman . he be well bear . " 
 " his be high in learning and birth than the 
 ruck o ' soldier be anything but a proof of his worth . it 
 show be his course to be down'ard . " 
 " I can not see what this have to do with our conversa- 
 tion . Mr. Troy 's course be not by any mean downward ; 
 and his superiority be a proof of his worth ! " 
 " I believe he to have no conscience at all . and I 
 can not help beg you , miss , to have nothing to do 
 with he . listen to I this once - only this once ! 
 I do not   say he be such a bad man as I have fancy - I 
 pray to God he be not . but since we do not   exactly 
 know what he be , why not behave as if he might be bad , 
 simply for your own safety ? do not   trust he , mistress ; 
 I ask you not to trust he so . " 
 " why , pray ? " 
 " I like soldier , but this one I do not like . " he say , 
 sturdily . " his cleverness in his calling may have 
 tempt he astray , and what be mirth to the neighbour 
 be ruin to the woman . when he try to talk to ' ee again , 
 why not turn away with a short " good day , " and when 
 you see he come one way , turn the other . when 
 he say anything laughable , fail to see the point 
 and do not   smile , and speak of he before those who will 
 report your talk as " that fantastical man . " or " that 
 Sergeant What's - his - name . " " that man of a family 
 that have come to the dog . " do not   be unmannerly 
 towards en , but harmless - uncivil , and so get rid of the 
 man . " 
 no Christmas robin detain by a window - pane ever 
 pulse as do Bathsheba now . 
 I say - I say again - that it do not   become you to 
 talk about he . why he should be mention pass 
 I quite . she exclaim desperately . " I know this , 
 th - th - that he be a thoroughly conscientious man - blunt 
 sometimes even to rudeness - but always speak his 
 mind about you plain to your face ! " 
 " oh . " 
 " he be as good as anybody in this parish ! he be 
 very particular , too , about go to church - yes , he 
 be ! " 
 " I be afraid nobody see he there . I never 
 do certainly . " 
 " the reason of that be . " she say eagerly , " that he go 
 in privately by the old tower door , just when the service 
 commence , and sit at the back of the gallery . he 
 tell I so . " 
 this supreme instance of Troy 's goodness fall upon 
 Gabriel ear like the thirteenth stroke of crazy clock . 
 it be not only receive with utter incredulity as re- 
 garde itself , but throw a doubt on all the assurance 
 that have precede it . 
 Oak be grieve to find how entirely she trust he . 
 he brim with deep feeling as he reply in a steady 
 voice , the steadiness of which be spoil by the palpable- 
 ness of his great effort to keep it so : - 
 " you know , mistress , that I love you , and shall love 
 you always . I only mention this to bring to your mind 
 that at any rate I would wish to do you no harm : 
 beyond that I put it aside . I have lose in the race for 
 money and good thing , and I be not such a fool as to 
 pretend to ' ee now I be poor , and you have get alto- 
 gether above I . but Bathsheba , dear mistress , this 
 I beg you to consider - that , both to keep yourself well 
 honour among the workfolk , and in common generosity 
 to an honourable man who love you as well as I , you 
 particular of a TWILIGHT WALK 
 should be more discreet in your bearing towards this 
 soldier . " 
 " do not , do not , do not ! " she exclaim , in a choking 
 voice . 
 " be ye not more to I than my own affair , and 
 even life ! " he go on . " come , listen to I ! I be 
 six year old than you , and Mr. Boldwood be ten year 
 old than I , and consider - I do beg of ' ee to consider 
 before it be too late - how safe you would be in his 
 hand ! " 
 Oak 's allusion to his own love for her lessened , to 
 some extent , her anger at his interference ; but she 
 could not really forgive he for let his wish to marry 
 she be eclipse by his wish to do she good , any more 
 than for his slighting treatment of Troy . 
 " I wish you to go elsewhere . " she command , a 
 paleness of face invisible to the eye be suggest by 
 the trembling word . " do not remain on this farm any 
 long . I do not   want you - I beg you to go ! " 
 " that be nonsense . " say Oak , calmly . " this be the 
 second time you have pretend to dismiss I ; and 
 what be the use o ' it ? " 
 " Pretended ! you shall go , sir - your lecturing I 
 will not hear ! I be mistress here . " 
 " go , indeed - what folly will you say next ? treat 
 I like Dick , Tom and Harry when you know that a 
 short time ago my position be as good as your ! upon 
 my life , Bathsheba , it be too bareface . you know , too , 
 that I can not   go without put thing in such a strait as 
 you would not   get out of I can not   tell when . unless , indeed , 
 you will promise to have an understand man as bailiff , 
 or manager , or something . I will go at once if you will 
 promise that . " 
 " I shall have no bailiff ; I shall continue to be my 
 own manager . " she say decisively . 
 " very well , then ; you should be thankful to I for 
 biding . how would the farm go on with nobody to 
 mind it but a woman ? but mind this , I do not   wish 
 " ee to feel you owe I anything . not i. what I do , 
 I do . sometimes I say I should be as glad as a bird to 
 leave the place - for do not   suppose I be content to be a 
 nobody . I be make for well thing . however , I 
 do not   like to see your concern go to ruin , as they 
 must if you keep in this mind .... I hate take my 
 own measure so plain , but , upon my life , your provok- 
 ing way make a man say what he would not   dream of 
 at other time ! I own to be rather interfere . but 
 you know well enough how it be , and who she be that I 
 like too well , and feel too much like a fool about to be 
 civil to she ! " 
 it be more than probable that she privately and un- 
 consciously respect he a little for this grim fidelity , 
 which have be show in his tone even more than in 
 his word . at any rate she murmur something to the 
 effect that he might stay if he wish . she say more 
 distinctly , " will you leave I alone now ? I do not 
 order it as a mistress - I ask it as a woman , and I 
 expect you not to be so uncourteous as to refuse . " 
 " certainly I will , Miss Everdene . " say Gabriel , gently . 
 he wonder that the request should have come at this 
 moment , for the strife be over , and they be on a 
 most desolate hill , far from every human habitation , and 
 the hour be get late . he stand still and allow 
 she to get far ahead of he till he could only see she 
 form upon the sky . 
 a distressing explanation of this anxiety to be rid of 
 he at that point now ensue . a figure apparently rise 
 from the earth beside she . the shape beyond all doubt 
 be Troy 's . Oak would not be even a possible listener , 
 and at once turn back till a good two hundred yard 
 be between the lover and himself . 
 Gabriel go home by way of the churchyard . in 
 pass the tower he think of what she have say about 
 the sergeant 's virtuous habit of enter the church un- 
 PARTICULARS of a TWILIGHT WALK 
 perceive at the beginning of service . believe that 
 the little gallery door allude to be quite disuse , he 
 ascend the external flight of step at the top of which 
 it stand , and examine it . the pale lustre yet hang 
 in the north - western heaven be sufficient to show that 
 a sprig of ivy have grow from the wall across the door 
 to a length of more than a foot , delicately tie the 
 panel to the stone jamb . it be a decisive proof that 
 the door have not be open at least since Troy come 
 back to Weatherbury . 
 CHAPTER XXX 
 hot cheeks and TEARFUL eyes 
 HALF an hour later Bathsheba enter her own house . 
 there burn upon her face when she meet the light of 
 the candle the flush and excitement which be little 
 less than chronic with she now . the farewell word of 
 Troy , who have accompany she to the very door , still 
 linger in her ear . he have bid her adieu for two 
 day , which be so he state , to be spend at Bath in 
 visit some friend . he have also kiss she a second 
 time . 
 it be only fair to Bathsheba to explain here a little 
 fact which do not come to light till a long time after- 
 ward : that Troy 's presentation of himself so aptly at 
 the roadside this evening be not by any distinctly pre- 
 concert arrangement . he have hint - she have 
 forbid ; and it be only on the chance of his still 
 come that she have dismiss Oak , fear a meeting 
 between they just then . 
 she now sink down into a chair , wild and perturb 
 by all these new and fevering sequence . then she 
 jump up with a manner of decision , and fetch she 
 desk from a side table . 
 in three minute , without pause or modification , she 
 have write a letter to Boldwood , at his address beyond 
 Casterbridge , say mildly but firmly that she have well 
 consider the whole subject he have bring before she 
 and kindly give her time to decide upon ; that her 
 final decision be that she could not marry he . she 
 have express to Oak an intention to wait till Boldwood 
 come home before communicate to he her conclusive 
 reply . but Bathsheba find that she could not wait . 
 it be impossible to send this letter till the next day ; 
 yet to quell her uneasiness by get it out of her hand , 
 and so , as it be , set the act in motion at once , she 
 arise to take it to any one of the woman who might be 
 in the kitchen . 
 she pause in the passage . a dialogue be go 
 on in the kitchen , and Bathsheba and Troy be the 
 subject of it . 
 " if he marry she , she will gie up farm . " 
 " twill be a gallant life , but may bring some trouble 
 between the mirth - so say I. " 
 " well , I wish I have half such a husband . " 
 Bathsheba have too much sense to mind seriously 
 what her servitor say about she ; but too much womanly 
 redundance of speech to leave alone what be say till 
 it die the natural death of unminded thing . she 
 burst in upon they . 
 " who be you speak of ? " she ask . 
 there be a pause before anybody reply . at last 
 Liddy say frankly , " what be pass be a bit of a 
 word about yourself , miss . " 
 " I think so ! Maryann and Liddy and Temper- 
 ance - now I forbid you to suppose such thing . you 
 know I do not   care the least for Mr. Troy - not I. Every- 
 body know how much I hate he . - yes . " repeat the 
 froward young person , " hate he ! " 
 " we know you do , miss . " say Liddy ; " and so do we 
 all . " 
 " I hate he too . " say Maryann . 
 " Maryann - o you perjured woman ! how can you 
 speak that wicked story ! " say Bathsheba , excitedly . 
 " you admire he from your heart only this morning 
 in the very world , you do . yes , Maryann , you know it ! " 
 " yes , miss , but so do you . he be a wild scamp 
 now , and you be right to hate he . " 
 " he be not a wild scamp ! how dare you to my face ! 
 I have no right to hate he , nor you , nor anybody . 
 but I be a silly woman ! what be it to I what he be ? 
 you know it be nothing . I do not   care for he ; I do not 
 mean to defend his good name , not I. Mind this , if 
 any of you say a word against he you will be dismiss 
 instantly ! " 
 she fling down the letter and surge back into the 
 parlour , with a big heart and tearful eye , Liddy follow 
 she . 
 " o miss ! " say mild Liddy , look pitifully into 
 Bathsheba 's face . " I be sorry we mistook you so ! 
 do think you care for he ; but I see you do not   now . " 
 " shut the door , Liddy . " 
 Liddy close the door , and go on : " People always 
 say such foolery , miss . I will make answer hencefor'ard , 
 " of course a lady like Miss Everdene can not   love he ; " 
 I will say it out in plain black and white . " 
 Bathsheba burst out : " O Liddy , be you such a 
 simpleton ? can not   you read riddle ? can not   you see ? 
 be you a woman yourself ? " 
 Liddy 's clear eye round with wonderment . 
 " yes ; you must be a blind thing , Liddy ! " she say , 
 in reckless abandonment and grief . " o , I love he 
 to very distraction and misery and agony ! do not   be 
 frighten at I , though perhaps I be enough to frighten 
 any innocent woman . come close - close . " she put 
 her arm round Liddy 's neck . " I must let it out to 
 somebody ; it be wear I away ! do not   you yet know 
 enough of I to see through that miserable denial of 
 mine ? o God , what a lie it be ! Heaven and my 
 Love forgive I . and do not   you know that a woman 
 who love at all think nothing of perjury when it be 
 balance against her love ? there , go out of the room ; 
 I want to be quite alone . " 
 Liddy go towards the door . 
 " Liddy , come here . solemnly swear to I that he be 
 not a fast man ; that it be all lie they say about he ! " 
 " put , miss , how can I say he be not if - - " 
 " you graceless girl ! how can you have the cruel 
 heart to repeat what they say ? unfeele thing that 
 you be .... but I'LL see if you or anybody else in the 
 village , or town either , dare do such a thing ! " she 
 start off , pace from fireplace to door , and back 
 again . 
 " no , miss . I do not   - I know it be not true ! " say 
 Liddy , frighten at Bathsheba 's unwonted vehemence . 
 I suppose you only agree with I like that to please 
 I . but , Liddy , he CANNOT BE have , as be say . do you 
 hear ? " 
 " yes , miss , yes . " 
 " and you do not   believe he be ? " 
 " I do not   know what to say , miss . " say Liddy , be- 
 ginning to cry . " if I say no , you do not believe I ; 
 and if I say yes , you rage at I ! " 
 " say you do not   believe it - say you do not ! " 
 " I do not   believe he to be so have as they make out . " 
 " he be not have at all .... my poor life and heart , 
 how weak I be ! " she moan , in a relaxed , desultory 
 way , heedless of Liddy 's presence . " o , how I wish I 
 have never see he ! love be misery for woman 
 always . I shall never forgive God for make I a 
 woman , and dearly be I begin to pay for the honour 
 of own a pretty face . " she freshen and turn to 
 Liddy suddenly . " mind this , Lydia Smallbury , if you 
 repeat anywhere a single word of what l have say to 
 you inside this closed door , I will never trust you , or love 
 you , or have you with I a moment long - not a 
 moment ! " 
 " I do not   want to repeat anything . " say Liddy , with 
 womanly dignity of a diminutive order ; " but I do not 
 wish to stay with you . and , if you please , I will go at the 
 end of the harvest , or this week , or to - day .... I do not 
 see that I deserve to be put upon and storm at for 
 nothing ! " conclude the small woman , bigly . 
 " no , no , Liddy ; you must stay ! " say Bathsheba , 
 drop from haughtiness to entreaty with capricious 
 inconsequence . " you must not notice my be in a 
 taking just now . you be not as a servant - you be a 
 companion to I . dear , dear - I do not   know what I 
 be do since this miserable ache o ' ! my heart have 
 weight and wear upon I so ! what shall I come 
 to ! I suppose I shall get far and far into 
 trouble . I wonder sometimes if I be doom to die 
 in the Union . I be friendless enough , God know ! " 
 " I will not   notice anything , nor will I leave you ! " sob 
 Liddy , impulsively put up her lip to Bathsheba 's , 
 and kiss she . 
 then Bathsheba kiss Liddy , and all be smooth 
 again . 
 " I do not   often cry , do I , Lidd ? but you have make 
 tear come into my eye . " she say , a smile shin 
 through the moisture . " try to think he a good man , 
 will not   you , dear Liddy ? " 
 " I will , miss , indeed . " 
 " he be a sort of steady man in a wild way , you know . 
 way . I be afraid that be how I be . and promise I 
 to keep my secret - do , Liddy ! and do not let they 
 know that I have be cry about he , because it will 
 be dreadful for I , and no good to he , poor thing!"death 's head himself 
 shall not   wring it from I , mistress , 
 if I have   a mind to keep anything ; and I will always be your 
 friend . " reply Liddy , emphatically , at the same time 
 bring a few more tear into her own eye , not from 
 any particular necessity , but from an artistic sense of 
 make herself in keep with the remainder of the 
 picture , which seem to influence woman at such time . 
 " I think God like we to be good friend , do not   you ? " 
 " indeed I do . " 
 " and , dear miss , you will not harry I and storm at 
 I , will you ? because you seem to swell so tall as a 
 lion then , and it frighten I ! do you know , I fancy 
 you would be a match for any man when you be in one 
 O ' your taking . " 
 " never ! do you ? " say Bathsheba , slightly laugh , 
 though somewhat seriously alarm by this Amazonian 
 picture of herself . " I hope I be not a bold sort of 
 maid - mannish ? " she continue with some anxiety . 
 " o no , not mannish ; but so almighty womanish 
 that ' tis get on that way sometimes . ah ! miss . " she 
 say , after have draw her breath very sadly in and 
 send it very sadly out , " I wish I have half your failing 
 that way . ' tis a great protection to a poor maid in 
 these illegit'mate day ! " 
 CHAPTER XXXI 
 BLAME - FURY 
 the next evening Bathsheba , with the idea of get 
 out of the way of Mr. Boldwood in the event of his 
 return to answer her note in person , proceed to 
 fulfil an engagement make with Liddy some few hour 
 early . Bathsheba 's companion , as a gage of their 
 reconciliation , have be grant a week 's holiday to 
 visit her sister , who be married to a thrive hurdler 
 and cattle - crib - maker live in a delightful labyrinth of 
 hazel copse not far beyond Yalbury . the arrangement 
 be that Miss Everdene should honour they by come 
 there for a day or two to inspect some ingenious con- 
 trivance which this man of the wood have introduce 
 into his ware . 
 leave her instruction with Gabriel and Maryann , 
 that they be to see everything carefully lock up for 
 the night , she go out of the house just at the close of 
 a timely thunder - shower , which have refine the air , and 
 daintily bath the coat of the land , though all beneath 
 be dry as ever . freshness be exhale in an essence 
 from the varied contours of bank and hollow , as if the 
 earth breathe maiden breath ; and the pleased bird 
 be hymn to the scene . before she , among the 
 cloud , there be a contrast in the shape of lair of 
 fierce light which show themselves in the neighbour- 
 hood of a hide sun , linger on to the farth north- 
 west corner of the heaven that this midsummer season 
 allow . 
 she have walk nearly two mile of her journey , 
 watch how the day be retreat , and think how 
 the time of deed be quietly melt into the time of 
 thought , to give place in its turn to the time of prayer 
 and sleep , when she behold advance over Yalbury hill 
 the very man she seek so anxiously to elude . Boldwood 
 be step on , not with that quiet tread of reserved 
 strength which be his customary gait , in which he 
 always seem to be balance two thought . his 
 manner be stunned and sluggish now . 
 Boldwood have for the first time be awaken to 
 woman 's privilege in tergiversation even when it involve 
 another person 's possible blight . that Bathsheba be 
 a firm and positive girl , far less inconsequent than her 
 fellow , have be the very lung of his hope ; for he have 
 hold that these quality would lead she to adhere to a 
 straight course for consistency 's sake , and accept he , 
 though her fancy might not flood he with the iridescent 
 hue of uncritical love . but the argument now come 
 back as sorry gleam from a break mirror . the dis- 
 covery be no less a scourge than a surprise . 
 he come on look upon the ground , and do not 
 see Bathsheba till they be less than a stone 's throw 
 apart . he look up at the sound of her pit - pat , and 
 his change appearance sufficiently denote to her the 
 depth and strength of the feeling paralyze by her 
 letter . 
 " oh ; be it you , Mr. Boldwood ? " she falter , a guilty 
 warmth pulsing in her face . 
 those who have the power of reproach in silence 
 may find it a mean more effective than word . there 
 be accent in the eye which be not on the tongue , and 
 more tale come from pale lip than can enter an ear . 
 it be both the grandeur and the pain of the remoter 
 mood that they avoid the pathway of sound . bold- 
 wood 's look be unanswerable . 
 see she turn a little aside , he say , " what , be 
 you afraid of I ? " 
 why should you say that ? " say Bathsheba . 
 " I fancy you look so . " say he . " and it be most 
 strange , because of its contrast with my feeling for you . 
 she regain self - possession , fix her eye calmly , 
 and wait . 
 " you know what that feeling be . " continue Boldwood , 
 deliberately . " a thing strong as death . no dismissal 
 by a hasty letter affect that . " 
 " I wish you do not feel so strongly about I . " she 
 murmur . " it be generous of you , and more than I 
 deserve , but I must not hear it now . " 
 " hear it ? what do you think I have to say , then ? 
 I be not to marry you , and that be enough . your letter 
 be excellently plain . I want you to hear nothing - 
 not I. " 
 Bathsheba be unable to direct her will into any 
 definite groove for free herself from this fearfully 
 and be move on . Boldwood walk up to she heavily 
 and dully . 
 " Bathsheba - darling - be it final indeed ? " 
 " indeed it be . " 
 " O , Bathsheba - have pity upon I ! " Boldwood 
 burst out . " God 's sake , yes - I be come to that low , 
 low stage - to ask a woman for pity ! still , she be 
 you - she be you . " 
 Bathsheba command herself well . but she could 
 hardly get a clear voice for what come instinctively to 
 her lip : " there be little honour to the woman in that 
 speech . " it be only whisper , for something unutter- 
 ably mournful no less than distress in this spectacle 
 of a man show himself to be so entirely the vane of a 
 passion enervate the feminine instinct for punctilio . 
 " I be beyond myself about this , and be mad . " he 
 say . " I be no stoic at all to he supplicate here ; but 
 I do supplicate to you . I wish you know what be in 
 I of devotion to you ; but it be impossible , that . in 
 bare human mercy to a lonely man , do not   throw I off 
 now ! " 
 " I do not   throw you off - indeed , how can I ? I never 
 have you . " in her noon - clear sense that she have never 
 love he she forget for a moment her thoughtless angle 
 on that day in February . 
 " but there be a time when you turn to I , 
 before I think of you ! I do not   reproach you , for 
 even now I feel that the ignorant and cold darkness 
 that I should have live in if you have not attract I 
 by that letter - valentine you call it - would have be 
 bad than my knowledge of you , though it have bring 
 this misery . but , I say , there be a time when I know 
 nothing of you , and care nothing for you , and yet you 
 draw I on . and if you say you give I no en- 
 couragement , I can not but contradict you . " 
 " what you call encouragement be the childish 
 game of an idle minute . I have bitterly repent of it 
  - ay , bitterly , and in tear . can you still go on re- 
 mind I ? " 
 " I do not   accuse you of it - I deplore it . I take for 
 earnest what you insist be jest , and now this that I 
 pray to be jest you say be awful , wretched earnest . our 
 mood meet at wrong place . I wish your feeling be 
 more like mine , or my feeling more like your ! o , 
 could I but have foresee the torture that trifle trick 
 be go to lead I into , how I should have curse 
 you ; but only have be able to see it since , I can not 
 do that , for I love you too well ! but it be weak , idle 
 drivel to go on like this .... Bathsheba , you be 
 the first woman of any shade or nature that I have ever 
 look at to love , and it be the have be so near 
 claim you for my own that make this denial so hard 
 to bear . how nearly you promise I ! but I do not 
 speak now to move your heart , and make you grieve 
 because of my pain ; it be no use , that . I must bear it ; 
 my pain would get no less by pain you . " 
 " but I do pity you - deeply - o so deeply ! " she 
 earnestly say . 
 " do no such thing - do no such thing . your dear 
 love , Bathsheba , be such a vast thing beside your pity , 
 that the loss of your pity as well as your love be no great 
 addition to my sorrow , nor do the gain of your pity 
 make it sensibly less . o sweet - how dearly you 
 speak to I behind the spear - bed at the washing - pool , 
 and in the barn at the shearing , and that dearest last 
 time in the evening at your home ! where be your 
 pleasant word all go - your earnest hope to be able 
 to love I ? where be your firm conviction that you 
 would get to care for I very much ? really forget ? 
  - really ? " 
 she check emotion , look he quietly and clearly 
 in the face , and say in her low , firm voice , " Mr. Bold- 
 wood , I promise you nothing . would you have have 
 I a woman of clay when you pay I that furth , 
 high compliment a man can pay a woman - tell 
 she he love she ? I be bind to show some feeling , 
 if l would not be a graceless shrew . yet each of those 
 pleasure be just for the day - the day just for the 
 pleasure . how be I to know that what be a pastime 
 to all other man be death to you ? have reason , do , 
 and think more kindly of I ! " 
 " well , never mind argue - never mind . one 
 thing be sure : you be all but mine , and now you be 
 not nearly mine . everything be change , and that by 
 you alone , remember . you be nothing to I once , 
 and I be content ; you be now nothing to I again , 
 and how different the second nothing be from the first ! 
 would to God you have never take I up , since it be 
 only to throw I down ! " 
 Bathsheba , in spite of her mettle , begin to feel un- 
 mistakable sign that she be inherently the weak 
 vessel . she strove miserably against this feminity 
 which would insist upon supply unbidden emotion 
 in strong and strong current . she have try to 
 elude agitation by fix her mind on the tree , sky , any 
 trivial object before her eye , whilst his reproach fall , 
 but ingenuity could not save she now . 
 " I do not take you up - surely I do not ! " she 
 answer as heroically as she could . " but do not   be in 
 this mood with I . I can endure be tell I be in 
 the wrong , if you will only tell it I gently ! o sir , 
 will you not kindly forgive I , and look at it 
 cheerfully ? " 
 " cheerfully ! can a man fool to utter heart- 
 burn find a reason for be merry   if I have lose , 
 how can I be as if I have win ? Heavens you must be 
 heartless quite ! have I know what a fearfully bitter 
 sweet this be to be , how would I have avoid you , 
 and never see you , and be deaf of you . I tell you 
 all this , but what do you care ! you do not   care . " 
 she return silent and weak denial to his charge , 
 and sway her head desperately , as if to thrust away 
 the word as they come shower about her ear from 
 the lip of the trembling man in the climax of life , with 
 his bronzed roman face and fine frame . 
 " Dearest , dearest , I be waver even now between 
 the two opposite of recklessly renounce you , and 
 labour humbly for you again . forget that you have 
 say no , and let it be as it be ! Say , Bathsheba , that 
 you only write that refusal to I in fun - come , say it 
 to I ! " 
 " it would be untrue , and painful to both of we . you 
 overrate my capacity for love . I do not   possess half 
 the warmth of nature you believe I to have . an un- 
 protect childhood in a cold world have beat gentle- 
 ness out of I . " 
 he immediately say with more resentment : " that 
 may be true , somewhat ; but ah , Miss Everdene , it will not 
 do as a reason ! you be not the cold woman you 
 would have I believe . no , no ! it be not   because you 
 have no feeling in you that you do not   love I . you 
 naturally would have I think so - you would hide from 
 that you have a burn heart like mine . you have 
 love enough , but it be turn into a new channel . I 
 know where . " 
 the swift music of her heart become hubbub now , 
 and she throb to extremity . he be come to 
 Troy . he do then know what have occur ! and 
 the name fall from his lip the next moment . 
 " why do Troy not leave my treasure alone ? " he 
 ask , fiercely . " when I have no thought of injure 
 he , why do he force himself upon your notice ! 
 before he worry you your inclination be to have I ; 
 when next I should have come to you your answer 
 would have be yes . can you deny it - I ask , can 
 you deny it ? " 
 she delay the reply , but be to honest to with 
 hold it . " I can not . " she whisper . 
 " I know you can not . but he steal in in my absence 
 and rob I . why did't he win you away before , 
 when nobody would have be grieve ? - when nobody 
 would have be set tale - bearing . now the people 
 sneer at I - the very hill and sky seem to laugh at 
 I till I blush shamefuly for my folly . I have lose my 
 respect , my good name , my standing - lose it , never to 
 get it again . go and marry your man - go on ! " 
 " o sir - Mr. Boldwood ! " 
 " you may as well . I have no further claim upon you . 
 as for I , I have well go somewhere alone , and hide - 
 and pray . I love a woman once . I be now ashamed . 
 when I be dead they will say , miserable love - sick man 
 that he be . Heaven - heaven - if I have get jilt 
 secretly , and the dishonour not know , and my position 
 keep ! but no matter , it be go , and the woman not 
 gain . shame upon he - shame ! " 
 his unreasonable anger terrify she , and she glide 
 from he , without obviously move , as she say , " I be 
 only a girl - do not speak to I so ! " 
 " all the time you know - how very well you know - 
 that your new freak be my misery . dazzle by brass 
 and scarlet - O , Bathsheba - this be woman 's folly 
 indeed ! " 
 she fire up at once . " you be take too much 
 upon yourself ! " she say , vehemently . " everybody be 
 upon I - everybody . it be unmanly to attack a 
 woman so ! I have nobody in the world to fight my 
 battle for I ; but no mercy be show . yet if a 
 thousand of you sneer and say thing against I , I will 
 not be put down ! " 
 " you will chatter with he doubtless about I . say to 
 he , " Boldwood would have die for I . " yes , and 
 you have give way to he , know he to be not the 
 man for you . he have kiss you - claim you as his . 
 do you hear - he have kiss you . deny it ! " 
 the most tragic woman be cow by a tragic man , 
 and although Boldwood be , in vehemence and glow , 
 nearly her own self render into another sex , 
 Bathsheba 's cheek quiver . she gasp , " leave I , 
 sir - leave I ! I be nothing to you . let I go on ! " 
 " deny that he have kiss you . " 
 " I shall not . " 
 " ha - then he have ! " come hoarsely from the farmer . 
 " he have , " she say , slowly , and , in spite of her fear , 
 defiantly . " I be not ashamed to speak the truth . " 
 " then curse he ; and curse he ! " say Boldwood , 
 break into a whisper fury . " whilst I would have 
 give world to touch your hand , you have let a rake come 
 in without right or ceremony and - kiss you ! Heaven 's 
 mercy - kiss you ! ... ah , a time of his life shall come 
 when he will have to repent , and think wretchedly of 
 the pain he have cause another man ; and then may he 
 ache , and wish , and curse , and yearn - as I do now ! " 
 " do not , do not , o , do not   pray down evil upon he ! " 
 she implore in a miserable cry . " anything but that - 
 anything . o , be kind to he , sir , for I love he true . " 
 Boldwood 's idea have reach that point of fusion at 
 which outline and consistency entirely disappear . the 
 impending night appear to concentrate in his eye . 
 he do not hear she at all now . 
 " I will punish he - by my soul , that will I ! I will meet 
 he , soldier or no , and I will horsewhip the untimely 
 stripling for this reckless theft of my one delight . if he 
 be a hundred man I would horsewhip he - - " he 
 drop his voice suddenly and unnaturally . " bath- 
 sheba , sweet , lost coquette , pardon I ! I have   be 
 blame you , threaten you , behave like a churl to 
 you , when he be the great sinner . he steal your dear 
 heart away with his unfathomable lie ! ... lt be a 
 fortunate thing for he that he be go back to his 
 regiment - that he be away up the country , and not here ! 
 I hope he may not return here just yet . I pray God 
 he may not come into my sight , for I may be tempt 
 beyond myself . o , Bathsheba , keep he away - yes , 
 keep he away from I ! " 
 for a moment Boldwood stand so inertly after this 
 that his soul seem to have be entirely exhale with 
 the breath of his passionate word . he turn his face 
 away , and withdraw , and his form be soon cover over 
 by the twilight as his footstep mix in with the low 
 hiss of the leafy tree . 
 Bathsheba , who have be stand motionless as a 
 model all this latter time , fling her hand to her face , 
 and wildly attempt to ponder on the exhibition which 
 have just pass away . such astounding well of fevere 
 feeling in a still man like Mr. Boldwood be incompre- 
 hensible , dreadful . instead of be a man train to 
 repression he be - what she have see he . 
 the force of the farmer 's threat lay in their relation to a 
 circumstance know at present only to herself : her lover be 
 come back to Weatherby in the course of the very next 
 day or two . Troy have not return to his distant barrack as 
 Boldwood and other suppose , but have merely go to visit 
 some acquaintance in Bath , and have yet a week or more 
 remain to his furlough . 
 she feel wretchedly certain that if he revisit she just at 
 this nick of time , and come into contact with Boldwood , a 
 fierce quarrel would be the consequence . she pant with 
 solicitude when she think of possible injury to Troy . the 
 least spark would kindle the farmer 's swift feeling of rage 
 and jealousy ; he would lose his self - mastery as he have this 
 evening ; Troy 's blitheness might become aggressive ; it might 
 take the direction of derision , and Boldwood 's anger might 
 then take the direction of revenge . 
 with almost a morbid dread of be think a gushing 
 girl , this guileless woman too well conceal from the world 
 under a manner of carelessness the warm depth of her strong 
 emotion . but now there be no reserve . in fer 
 her distraction , instead of advance far she 
 walk up and down , beat 
 the air with her finger , press on her brow , and sob 
 brokenly to herself . then she sit down on a heap of stone by 
 the wayside to think . there she remain long . above the 
 dark margin of the earth appear foreshore and promontor- 
 ies of coppery cloud , bound a green and pellucid expanse 
 in the western sky . amaranthine gloss come over they then , 
 and the unreste world wheel her round to a contrast 
 prospect eastward , in the shape of indecisive and palpitating 
 star . she gaze upon their silent throe amid the shade of 
 space , but realise none at all . her troubled spirit be far 
 away with Troy . 
 CHAPTER XXXII 
 NIGHT - HORSES TRAMPING 
 the village of Weatherbury be quiet as the graveyard 
 in its midst , and the living be lie well nigh as still 
 as the dead . the church clock strike eleven . the 
 air be so empty of other sound that the whirr of the 
 clock - work immediately before the stroke be distinct , 
 and so be also the click of the same at their close . 
 the note fly forth with the usual blind obtuseness 
 of inanimate thing - flap and rebound among 
 wall , undulate against the scattered cloud , spread 
 through their interstice into unexplored mile of space . 
 Bathsheba 's crannied and mouldy hall be to - night 
 occupy only by Maryann , Liddy being , as be state , 
 with her sister , whom Bathsheba have set out to visit . 
 a few minute after eleven have strike , Maryann turn 
 in her bed with a sense of be disturb . she be 
 totally unconscious of the nature of the interruption to 
 her sleep . it lead to a dream , and the dream to an 
 awakening , with an uneasy sensation that something 
 have happen . she leave her bed and look out of 
 the window . the paddock abut on this end of the 
 building , and in the paddock she could just discern by 
 the uncertain gray a move figure approach the 
 horse that be feed there . the figure seize the 
 horse by the forelock , and lead it to the corner of the 
 field . here she could see some object which circum- 
 stance prove to be a vehicle for after a few minute 
 the horse down the road , mingle with the sound of 
 light wheel . 
 two variety only of humanity could have enter 
 the paddock with the ghostlike glide of that mysterious 
 figure . they be a woman and a gipsy man . a woman 
 be out of the question in such an occupation at this 
 hour , and the comer could be no less than a thief , who 
 might probably have know the weakness of the house- 
 hold on this particular night , and have choose it on 
 that account for his daring attempt . moreover , to 
 raise suspicion to conviction itself , there be gipsy in ! 
 Weatherbury Bottom . 
 Maryann , who have be afraid to shout in the robber 's 
 presence , have see he depart have no fear . she 
 hastily slip on her clothe , stump down the dis- 
 jointed staircase with its hundred creak , run to Coggan 's , 
 the near house , and raise an alarm . Coggan call 
 Gabriel , who now again lodge in his house as at first , 
 and together they go to the paddock . beyond all 
 doubt the horse be go . 
 " Hark ! " say Gabriel . 
 they listen . distinct upon the stagnant air come 
 the sound of a trotting horse pass up Longpuddle 
 Lane - just beyond the gipsy ' encampment in Weather- 
 bury Bottom . 
 " that be our Dainty - i'll swear to her step . " say Jan. 
 " mighty I ! will not   mis'ess storm and call us stupid 
 wen she come back ! " moan Maryann . " how I 
 wish it have happen when she be at home , and none 
 of we have be answerable ! " 
 " we must ride after . " say Gabriel , decisively . 
 be responsible to Miss Everdene for what we do . yes , 
 we will follow . " 
 " faith , I do not   see how . " say Coggan . " all our 
 horse be too heavy for that trick except little Poppet , 
 and what be she between two of us?-if we only have that 
 pair over the hedge we might do something . " 
 " which pair ? " 
 " Mr Boldwood 's Tidy and Moll . " 
 " then wait here till I come hither again . " say Gabriel . 
 he run down the hill towards Farmer Boldwood 's . 
 " Farmer Boldwood be not at home . " say Maryann . 
 " all the well . " say Coggan . " I know what he be 
 go for . " 
 Less than five minute bring up Oak again , run 
 at the same pace , with two halter dangle from his hand . 
 " where do you find them ? " say Coggan , turn 
 round and leap upon the hedge without wait for 
 an answer . 
 " under the eave . I know where they be keep , " 
 say Gabriel , follow he . " Coggan , you can ride 
 bare - back ? there be no time to look for saddle . " 
 " like a hero ! " say Jan. 
 " Maryann , you go to he d. " Gabriel shout to she 
 from the top of the hedge . 
 spring down into Boldwood 's pasture , each 
 pocket his halter to hide it from the horse , who , 
 see the man empty - handed , docilely allow them- 
 self to he seize by the mane , when the halter 
 be dexterously slip on . have neither bit nor 
 bridle , Oak and Coggan extemporize the former by 
 pass the rope in each case through the animal 's 
 mouth and loop it on the other side . Oak vault 
 astride , and Coggan clamber up by aid of the hank , 
 when they ascend to the gate and gallop off in the 
 direction take by Bathsheha 's horse and the robber . 
 whose vehicle the horse have be harness to be a 
 matter of some uncertainty . 
 Weatherbury Bottom be reach in three or four 
 minute . they scan the shady green patch by the 
 roadside . the gipsy be go . 
 " the villain ! " say Gabriel . " which way have they 
 go , I wonder ? " 
 " straight on , as sure as God make little apple , " 
 say Jan. 
 " very well ; we be well mount , and must over- 
 discover . the road - metal grow soft and more 
 rain have wet its surface to a somewhat plastic , but 
 not muddy state . they come to cross - road . coggan 
 suddenly pull up Moll and slip off . 
 " what be the matter ? " say Gabriel . 
 " we must try to track them , since we can not   hear them , " 
 say Jan , fumble in his pocket . he strike a light , 
 and hold the match to the ground . the rain have be 
 heavy here , and all foot and horse track make previous 
 to the storm have be abrade and blur by the drop , 
 and they be now so many little scoop of water , which 
 reflect the flame of the match like eye . one set of 
 track be fresh and have no water in they ; one pair of 
 rut be also empty , and not small canal , like the other . 
 the footprint form this recent impression be full 
 of information as to pace ; they be in equidistant pair , 
 three or four foot apart , the right and leave foot of each 
 pair be exactly opposite one another . 
 " straight on ! " Jan exclaim . " track like that 
 mean a stiff gallop . no wonder we do not   hear he . 
 and the horse be harness - look at the rut . ay , 
 " how do you know ? " 
 " Old Jimmy Harris only shoe she last week , and 
 I would swear to his make among ten thousand . " 
 " the rest of the gipsy must ha " go on early , 
 or some other way . " say Oak . " you see there be 
 no other track ? " 
 " true . " they ride along silently for a long weary 
 time . Coggan carry an old pinchbeck repeater which 
 he have inherit from some genius in his family ; and 
 it now strike one . he light another match , and ex- 
 amine the ground again . 
 " ' tis a canter now . " he say , throw away the light . 
 " a twisty , rickety pace for a gig . the fact be , they over- 
 drive she at start , we shall catch them yet . " 
 again they hasten on , and enter Blackmore 
 Vale . Coggan 's watch strike one . when they look 
 again the hoof - mark be so spaced as to form a sort 
 of zigzag if unite , like the lamp along a street . 
 " that be a trot , I know . " say Gabriel . 
 " only a trot now . " say Coggan , cheerfully . " we 
 shall overtake he in time . " 
 they push rapidly on for yet two or three mile . 
 " ah ! a moment . " say Jan. " let us see how she be 
 drive up this hill . " twill help we . " a light be 
 promptly strike upon his gaiter as before , and the ex- 
 amination make , 
 " Hurrah ! " say Coggan . " she walk up here - 
 and well she might . we shall get they in two mile , 
 for a crown . " 
 they ride three , and listen . no sound be to be 
 hear save a millpond trickle hoarsely through a 
 hatch , and suggest gloomy possibility of drown 
 by jump in . Gabriel dismount when they come 
 to a turning . the track be absolutely the only guide 
 as to the direction that they now have , and great caution 
 be necessary to avoid confuse they with some other 
 which have make their appearance lately . 
 " what do this mean ? - though I guess . " say 
 Gabriel , look up at Coggan as he move the match 
 over the ground about the turning . Coggan , who , no 
 less than the pant horse , have latterly show sign 
 of weariness , again scrutinize the mystic character . 
 this time only three be of the regular horseshoe 
 shape . every fourth be a dot . 
 he screw up his face and emit a long 
 " Whew - w - w ! " 
 " Lame . " say Oak . 
 " yes Dainty be lamed ; the near - foot - afore . " say 
 Coggan slowly star still at the footprint . 
 " we will push on . " say Gabriel , remount his humid 
 steed . 
 although the road along its great part have be as 
 good as any turnpike - road in the country , it be nomin- 
 ally only a byway . the last turning have bring they 
 into the high road lead to Bath . Coggan recollect 
 himself . 
 " we shall have he now ! " he exclaim . 
 " where ? " 
 " Sherton Turnpike . the keeper of that gate be the 
 sleepy man between here and London - Dan Randall . 
 that be his name - know en for year , when he be at 
 Casterbridge gate . between the lameness and the gate 
 ' tis a do job . " 
 ' Twas say until , against a shady background of foliage , 
 five white bar be visible , cross their route a little 
 way ahead . 
 " hush - we be almost close ! " say Gabriel . 
 " amble on upon the grass . " say Coggan . 
 the white bar be blot out in the midst by a 
 dark shape in front of they . the silence of this lonely 
 time be pierce by an exclamation from that quarter . 
 " hoy - a - hoy ! Gate ! " 
 it appear that there have be a previous call which 
 they have not notice , for on their close approach the 
 door of the turnpike - house open , and the keeper 
 come out half - dress , with a candle in his hand . the 
 ray illumine the whole group . 
 " keep the gate close ! " shout Gabriel . " he have 
 steal the horse ! " 
 who ? " say the turnpike - man . 
 Gabriel look at the driver of the gig , and see a 
 woman - Bathsheba , his mistress . 
 on hear his voice she have turn her face away 
 from the light . Coggan have , however , catch sight of 
 she in the meanwhile . 
 " why , ' tis mistress - i'll take my oath ! " he say , 
 amazed . 
 Bathsheba it certainly be , and she have by this time 
 do the trick she could do so well in crisis not of love , 
 namely , mask a surprise by coolness of manner . 
 " well , Gabriel . " she inquire quietly , " where be you 
 go ? " 
 " we think - - " begin Gabriel . 
 " Bath . " she say , take for her own 
 use the assurance that Gabriel lack . " an important 
 matter make it necessary for I to give up my visit to 
 liddy , and go off at once . what , then , be you 
 follow I ? " 
 " we think the horse be stole . " 
 " well - what a thing ! how very foolish of you not 
 to know that I have take the trap and horse . I could 
 neither wake Maryann nor get into the house , though 
 I hammer for ten minute against her window - sill . 
 fortunately , I could get the key of the coach - house , so 
 I trouble no one far . do not   you think it might 
 be I ? " 
 " why should we , miss ? " 
 " perhaps not why , those be never Farmer bold- 
 wood 's horse ! goodness mercy ! what have you be 
 do bring trouble upon I in this way ? what ! 
 must not   a lady move an inch from her door without be 
 dog like a thief ? " 
 " but how be we to know , if you leave no account of 
 your doing ? " expostulate Coggan , " and lady do not 
 drive at these hour , miss , as a jineral rule of society . " 
 " I do leave an account - and you would have see 
 it in the morning . I write in chalk on the coach - house 
 door that I have come back for the horse and gig , and 
 drive off ; that I could arouse nobody , and should 
 return soon . " 
 " but you will consider , ma'am , that we could not   see 
 that till it get daylight . " 
 " true . " she say , and though vex at first she have 
 too much sense to blame they long or seriously for a 
 devotion to she that be as valuable as it be rare . 
 she add with a very pretty grace , " well , I really thank 
 you heartily for take all this trouble ; but I wish you 
 have borrow anybody 's horse but Mr. Boldwood 's . " 
 " dainty be lame , miss . " say Coggan . " can ye go 
 on ? " 
 " lt be only a stone in her shoe . I get down and 
 pull it out a hundred yard back . I can manage 
 very well , thank you . I shall be in Bath by daylight . 
 will you now return , please ? " 
 she turn her head - the gateman 's candle 
 shimmer upon her quick , clear eye as she do so - 
 pass through the gate , and be soon wrap in the 
 embowering shade of mysterious summer bough . 
 Coggan and Gabriel put about their horse , and , fan 
 by the velvety air of this July night , retrace the road 
 by which they have come . 
 " a strange vagary , this of her , be not   it , Oak ? " say 
 Coggan , curiously . 
 " yes . " say Gabriel , shortly . 
 " she will not   be in Bath by no daylight ! " 
 " Coggan , suppose we keep this night 's work as quiet 
 as we can ? " 
 " I be of one and the same mind . " 
 " very well . we shall be home by three o'clock or 
 so , and can creep into the parish like lamb . " 
 Bathsheba 's perturb meditation by the roadside 
 have ultimately evolve a conclusion that there be only 
 two remedy for the present desperate state of affair . 
 the first be merely to keep Troy away from Weather- 
 bury till Boldwood 's indignation have cool ; the second 
 to listen to Oak 's entreaty , and Boldwood 's denuncia- 
 tion , and give up Troy altogether . 
 alas ! could she give up this new love - induce 
 he to renounce she by say she do not like he - 
 could no more speak to he , and beg he , for her good , 
 to end his furlough in Bath , and see she and weather- 
 bury no more ? 
 it be a picture full of misery , but for a while she 
 contemplate it firmly , allow herself , nevertheless , 
 as girl will , to dwell upon the happy life she would 
 have enjoy have Troy be Boldwood , and the path 
 of love the path of duty - inflict upon herself gratuit- 
 ous torture by imagine he the lover of another 
 woman after forget she ; for she have penetrate 
 Troy 's nature so far as to estimate his tendency pretty 
 accurately , hut unfortunately love he no less in 
 think that he might soon cease to love she - indeed , 
 considerably more . 
 she jump to her foot . she would see he at once . 
 yes , she would implore he by word of mouth to assist 
 she in this dilemma . a letter to keep he away could 
 not reach he in time , even if he should be dispose to 
 listen to it . 
 be Bathsheba altogether blind to the obvious fact 
 that the support of a lover 's arm be not of a kind good 
 calculate to assist a resolve to renounce he ? or be 
 she sophistically sensible , with a thrill of pleasure , that 
 by adopt this course for get rid of he she be 
 ensure a meeting with he , at any rate , once more ? 
 it be now dark , and the hour must have be nearly 
 ten . the only way to accomplish her purpose be to 
 give up her idea of visit Liddy at Yalbury , return to 
 Weatherbury Farm , put the horse into the gig , and drive 
 at once to bath . the scheme seem at first impossible : 
 the journey be a fearfully heavy one , even for a strong 
 horse , at her own estimate ; and she much underrate 
 the distance . it be most venturesome for a woman , 
 at night , and alone . 
 but could she go on to Liddy 's and leave thing to 
 take their course ? no , no ; anything but that . bath- 
 sheba be full of a stimulating turbulence , beside which 
 caution vainly pray for a hearing . she turn back 
 towards the village . 
 her walk be slow , for she wish not to enter 
 Weatherbury till the cottager be in bed , and , par- 
 ticularly , till Boldwood be secure . her plan be now 
 to drive to Bath during the night , see Sergeant Troy in 
 the morning before he set out to come to she , bid he 
 farewell , and dismiss he : then to rest the horse 
 thoroughly   herself to weep the while , she think , 
 start early the next morning on her return journey . 
 by this arrangement she could trot Dainty gently all 
 the day , reach Liddy at Yalbury in the evening , and 
 come home to Weatherbury with she whenever they 
 choose - so nobody would know she have be to bath 
 at all . 
 such be Bathsheba 's scheme . but in her topo- 
 graphical ignorance as a late comer to the place , she 
 misreckone the distance of her journey as not much 
 more than half what it really be . her idea , however , 
 she proceed to carry out , with what initial success we 
 have already see . 
 CHAPTER XXXIII 
 in the SUN - a harbinger 
 a week pass , and there be no tiding of bath- 
 sheba ; nor be there any explanation of her Gilpin 's 
 rig . 
 then a note come for Maryann , state that the 
 business which have call her mistress to Bath still 
 detain she there ; but that she hop to return 
 in the course of another week . 
 another week pass . the oat - harvest begin , and 
 all the man be a - field under a monochromatic Lammas 
 sky , amid the trembling air and short shadow of noon . 
 indoor nothing be to be hear save the droning of 
 blue - bottle fly ; out - of - door the whetting of scythe 
 and the hiss of tressy oat - ear rub together as their 
 perpendicular stalk of amber - yellow fall heavily to each 
 swath . every drop of moisture not in the man 's bottle 
 and flagon in the form of cider be rain as perspira- 
 tion from their forehead and cheek . Drought be 
 everywhere else . 
 they be about to withdraw for a while into the 
 charitable shade of a tree in the fence , when Coggan 
 see a figure in a blue coat and brass button run 
 to they across the field . 
 " I wonder who that be ? " he say . 
 " I hope nothing be wrong about mistress . " say 
 Maryann , who with some other woman be tie the 
 bundle   oat be always sheafe on this farm , " but 
 an unlucky token come to I indoor this morning . 
 l go to unlock the door and drop the key , and it 
 fall upon the stone floor and break into two piece . 
 break a key be a dreadful bodement . I wish mis'ess 
 be home . " 
 " ' Tis Cain Ball . " say Gabriel , pause from whet 
 his reaphook . 
 Oak be not bind by his agreement to assist in the 
 corn - field ; but the harvest month be an anxious time for 
 a farmer , and the corn be Bathsheba 's , so he lend a 
 hand . 
 " he be dress up in his good clothe . " say Matthew 
 Moon . " he hev be away from home for a few day , 
 since he be have that felon upon his finger ; for ' a said , 
 since I can not   work I will have a hollerday . " 
 " a good time for one - a excellent time . " say Joseph 
 Poorgrass , straighten his back ; for he , like some of 
 the other , have a way of rest a while from his labour 
 on such hot day for reason preternaturally small ; of 
 which Cain Pall 's advent on a week - day in his Sunday- 
 clothe be one of the first magnitude . " twas a bad leg 
 allow I to read the Pilgrim 's Progress , and Mark 
 Clark learn AliFours in a whitlow . " 
 " ay , and my father put his arm out of joint to have 
 time to go court . " say Jan Coggan , in an eclipse 
 tone , wipe his face with his shirt - sleeve and thrusting 
 back his hat upon the nape of his neck . 
 by this time Cainy be near the group of harvester , 
 and be perceive to be carry a large slice of bread 
 and ham in one hand , from which he take mouthful 
 as he run , the other be wrap in a bandage . 
 when he come close , his mouth assume the bell shape , 
 and he begin to cough violently . 
 " now , Cainy ! " say Gabriel , sternly . " how many 
 more time must I tell you to keep from run so fast 
 when you be eat ? you will choke yourself some day , 
 that be what you will do , Cain Ball . " 
 " hok - hok - hok ! " reply Cain . " a crumb of my 
 victual go the wrong way - hok - hok ! , that be what 
 ' tis , Mister Oak ! and I have   be visit to Bath 
 because I have a felon on my thumb ; yes , and l've 
 see - ahok - hok ! " 
 Directly Cain mention Bath , they all throw down 
 their hook and fork and draw round he . un- 
 fortunately the erratic crumb do not improve his 
 narrative power , and a supplementary hindrance be 
 that of a sneeze , jerk from his pocket his rather large 
 watch , which dangle in front of the young man 
 pendulum - wise . 
 " yes . " he continue , direct his thought to bath 
 and let his eye follow , " l've   seed the world at last 
  - yes - and I have   seed our mis'ess - ahok - hok - hok ! " 
 " bother the boy ! " say Gabriel . " something be 
 always go the wrong way down your throat , so that 
 you can not   tell what be necessary to be tell . " 
 " Ahok ! there ! please , Mister Oak , a gnat have 
 just fleed into my stomach and bring the cough on 
 again ! " 
 " yes , that be just it . your mouth be always open , you 
 young rascal ! " 
 " ' tis terrible bad to have a gnat fly down yer throat , 
 pore boy ! " say Matthew Moon . 
 " well , at Bath you see - - " prompt Gabriel . 
 " I see our mistress . " continue the junior shepherd , 
 " and a sojer , walk along . and bymeby they get 
 close and close , and then they go arm - in - crook , like 
 court complete - hok - hok ! like court complete - 
 hok ! - court complete - - " lose the thread of his 
 narrative at this point simultaneously with his loss of 
 breath , their informant look up and down the field 
 apparently for some clue to it . " well , I see our mis'ess 
 and a soldier - a - ha - a - wk ! " 
 " Damn the boy ! " say Gabriel . 
 " ' tis only my manner , Mister Oak , if ye'll excuse it , " 
 say Cain Ball , look reproachfully at Oak , with eye 
 drench in their own dew . 
 ! here be some cider for he - that will cure his throat , " 
 say Jan Coggan , lift a flagon of cider , pull out 
 the cork , and apply the hole to Cainy 's mouth ; 
 Joseph Poorgrass in the meantime beginning to think 
 apprehensively of the serious consequence that would 
 follow Cainy Ball 's strangulation in his cough , and the 
 history of his Bath adventure die with he . 
 " for my poor self , I always say " please God " afore 
 I do anything . " say Joseph , in an unboastful voice ; " and 
 so should you , Cain Ball . " ' tis a great safeguard , and 
 might perhaps save you from be choke to death 
 some day . " 
 Mr. Coggan pour the liquor with unstinted liber- 
 ality at the suffer Cain 's circular mouth ; half of it 
 run down the side of the flagon , and half of what 
 reach his mouth run down outside his throat , 
 and half of what run in go the wrong way , and be 
 cough and sneeze around the person of the gather 
 reaper in the form of a cider fog , which for a moment 
 hang in the sunny air like a small exhalation . 
 " there be a great clumsy sneeze ! why can not   ye have 
 well manner , you young dog ! " say Coggan , with- 
 draw the flagon . 
 " the cider go up my nose ! " cry Cainy , as soon 
 as he could speak ; " and now ' tis go down my neck , 
 and into my poor dumb felon , and over my shiny 
 button and all my good cloze ! " 
 " the poor lad 's cough be terrible unfortunate . " say 
 Matthew Moon . " and a great history on hand , too . 
 bump his back , shepherd . " 
 " ' tis my nater . " mourn Cain . " mother say I 
 always be so excitable when my feeling be work 
 up to a point ! " 
 " true , true . " say Joseph Poorgrass . " the Balls 
 be always a very excitable family . I know the 
 boy 's grandfather - a truly nervous and modest man , 
 even to genteel refinery . ' twas blush , blush with he , 
 almost as much as ' tis with I - not but that ' tis a 
 fault in I ! " 
 " not at all , Master Poorgrass . " say Coggan . " ' Tis 
 a very noble quality in ye . " 
 " heh - heh ! well , I wish to noise nothing abroad - 
 nothing at all . " murmur Poorgrass , diffidently . " but 
 we be bear to thing - that be true . yet I would rather 
 my trifle be hide ; though , perhaps , a high nater be a 
 little high , and at my birth all thing be possible to 
 my Maker , and he may have begrudge no gift .... 
 but under your bushel , Joseph ! under your bushel with 
 " ee ! a strange desire , neighbour , this desire to hide , 
 and no praise due . yet there be a Sermon on the 
 Mount with a calendar of the bless at the head , and 
 certain meek man may be name therein . " 
 " Cainy 's grandfather be a very clever man . " say 
 Matthew Moon . " invent a ' apple - tree out of his own 
 head , which be call by his name to this day - the early 
 Ball . you know them , Jan ? a Quarrenden graft on 
 a Tom Putt , and a rathe - ripe upon top o ' that again . 
 " ' tis trew ' a use to bide about in a public - house wi ' a 
 woman in a way he have no business to by right , but 
 there - ' a be a clever man in the sense of the term . " 
 " now then . " say Gabriel , impatiently , " what do you 
 see , Cain ? " 
 " I seed our mis'ess go into a sort of a park place , 
 where there 's seat , and shrub and flower , arm - in - crook 
 with a sojer . " continue Cainy , firmly , and with a dim 
 sense that his word be very effective as regard 
 Gabriel 's emotion . " and I think the sojer be 
 Sergeant Troy . and they sit there together for more 
 than half - an - hour , talk move thing , and she once 
 be cry a'most to death . and when they come out 
 her eye be shin and she be as white as a lily ; 
 and they look into one another 's face , as far - go 
 friendly as a man and woman can be . " 
 Gabriel 's feature seem to get thin . " well , 
 what do you see besides ? " 
 " oh , all sort . " 
 " White as a lily ? you be sure ' twa she ? 
 " yes . " 
 " well , what besides ? " 
 " great glass window to the shop , and great cloud 
 in the sky , full of rain , and old wooden tree in the 
 country round . " 
 " you stun - poll ! what will ye say next ? " say 
 Coggan . 
 " let en alone . " interpose Joseph Poorgrass . " the 
 boy 's meaning be that the sky and the earth in the 
 kingdom of Bath be not altogether different from our 
 here . ' tis for our good to gain knowledge of strange 
 city , and as such the boy 's word should be suffer , 
 so to speak it . " 
 " and the people of Bath . " continue Cain , " never 
 need to light their fire except as a luxury , for the 
 water spring up out of the earth ready boil for 
 use . " 
 " ' tis true as the light . " testify Matthew Moon . " I have 
 hear other navigator say the same thing . " 
 " they drink nothing else there . " say Cain , " and seem 
 to enjoy it , to see how they swaller it down . " 
 " well , it seem a barbarian practice enough to we , 
 but I daresay the native think nothing o ' it . " say 
 Matthew . 
 " and do not   victual spring up as well as drink ? " 
 ask Coggan , twirl his eye . 
 " no - I own to a blot there in Bath - a true blot . 
 God do not   provide them with victual as well as   - 
 and ' twas a drawback I could not   get over at all . " 
 " well , ' tis a curious place , to say the least . " observe 
 Moon ; " and it must be a curious people that live 
 therein . " 
 " Miss Everdene and the soldier be walk about 
 together , you say ? " say Gabriel , return to the 
 group . 
 " ay , and she wear a beautiful gold - colour silk 
 gown , trim with black lace , that would have stand 
 alone ' ithout leg inside if require . ' twas a very 
 winsome sight ; and her hair be brush splendid . 
 and when the sun shine upon the bright gown and his 
 red coat - my ! how handsome they look . you 
 could see them all the length of the street . " 
 " and what then ? " murmur Gabriel . 
 " and then I go into Griffin 's to hae my boot 
 hob , and then I go to Riggs 's batty - cake shop , 
 and ask them for a penneth of the cheap and nice 
 stale , that be all but blue - mouldy , but not quite . 
 and whilst I be chaw them down I walk on and 
 seed a clock with a face as big as a baking trendle - - " 
 " but that be nothing to do with mistress ! " 
 " I be come to that , if you will leave I alone , Mister 
 Oak ! " remonstrate Cainy . " if you excite I , 
 perhaps you will bring on my cough , and then I shall not   be 
 able to tell ye nothing . " 
 " yes - let he tell it his own way . " say Coggan . 
 Gabriel settle into a despairing attitude of patience , 
 and Cainy go on : - 
 " and there be great large house , and more 
 people all the week long than at Weatherbury club- 
 walk on White Tuesdays . and I go to grand 
 church and chapel . and how the parson would pray ! 
 yes ; he would kneel down and put up his hand 
 together , and make the holy gold ring on his finger 
 gleam and twinkle in yer eye , that he have earn 
 by pray so excellent well ! - ah yes , I wish I live 
 there . " 
 " our poor Parson thirdly can not   get no money to 
 buy such ring . " say Matthew Moon , thoughtfully . 
 " and as good a man as ever walk . I do not   believe 
 poor thirdly have a single one , even of humblest tin or 
 copper . such a great ornament as they would be to he on 
 a dull afternoon , when he be up in the pulpit light by 
 the wax candle ! but ' tis impossible , poor man . ah , 
 to think how unequal thing be . " 
 " perhaps he be make of different stuff than to wear 
 " em . " say Gabriel , grimly . " well , that be enough of this . 
 go on , Cainy - quick . " 
 " oh - and the new style of parson wear moustache 
 and long beard . " continue the illustrious traveller , 
 " and look like Moses and Aaron complete , and make 
 we foke in the congregation feel all over like the 
 child of Israel . " 
 " a very right feeling - very . " say Joseph Poorgrass . 
 " and there be two religion go on in the nation 
 now - High Church and High Chapel . and , think I , 
 I will play fair ; so I go to High Church in the morning , 
 and High Chapel in the afternoon . " 
 " a right and proper boy . " say Joseph Poorgrass . 
 " well , at High Church they pray singing , and worship 
 all the colour of the rainbow ; and at High Chapel they 
 pray preach , and worship drab and whitewash only . 
 and then - I do not   see no more of Miss Everdene at 
 all . " 
 " why do not   you say so afore , then ? " exclaim Oak , 
 with much disappointment . 
 " ah . " say Matthew Moon , ' she will wish her cake 
 dough if so be she be over intimate with that man . " 
 " she be not over intimate with he . " say Gabriel , 
 indignantly . 
 " she would know well . " say Coggan . " our 
 mis'ess have too much sense under they knot of black 
 hair to do such a mad thing . " 
 " you see , he be not a coarse , ignorant man , for he 
 be well bring up . " say Matthew , dubiously . " ' twa 
 only wildness that make he a soldier , and maid rather 
 like your man of sin . " 
 " now , Cain Ball . " say Gabriel restlessly , " can you 
 swear in the most awful form that the woman you see 
 be Miss Everdene ? " 
 " Cain Ball , you be no long a babe and suckling , " 
 say Joseph in the sepulchral tone the circumstance 
 demand , " and you know what take an oath be . 
 ' tis a horrible testament mind ye , which you say and 
 seal with your blood - stone , and the prophet Matthew 
 tell we that on whomsoever it shall fall it will grind 
 he to powder . now , before all the work - folk here 
 assemble , can you swear to your word as the shep- 
 herd ask ye ? " 
 " please no , Mister Oak ! " say Cainy , look from 
 one to the other with great uneasiness at the spiritual 
 magnitude of the position . " I do not   mind say ' tis 
 true , but I do not   like to say ' tis damn true , if that be 
 what you mane . " 
 " Cain , Cain , how can you ! " ask Joseph sternly . 
 " you be ask to swear in a holy manner , and you 
 swear like wicked Shimei , the son of Gera , who curse 
 as he come . young man , fie ! " 
 " no , I do not ! ' tis you want to squander a pore 
 boy 's soul , Joseph Poorgrass - that be what ' tis ! " say 
 Cain , begin to cry . " all I mane be that in common 
 truth ' twa Miss Everdene and Sergeant Troy , but in 
 the horrible so - help - I truth that ye want to make of 
 it perhaps ' twas somebody else ! " 
 " there be no getting at the right of it . " say Gabriel , 
 turn to his work . 
 " Cain Ball , you will come to a bit of bread ! " groan 
 Joseph Poorgrass . 
 then the reaper ' hook be flourish again , and 
 the old sound go on . Gabriel , without make any 
 pretence of be lively , do nothing to show that he 
 be particularly dull . however , Coggan know pretty 
 nearly how the land lay , and when they be in a nook 
 together he say - 
 " do not   take on about she , Gabriel . what difference 
 do it make whose sweetheart she be , since she can not   be 
 your ? " 
 " that be the very thing I say to myself . " say Gabriel . 
 CHAPTER XXXIV 
 HOME again - a trickster 
 that same evening at dusk Gabriel be lean over 
 Coggan 's garden - gate , take an up - and - down survey 
 before retire to rest . 
 a vehicle of some kind be softly creep along 
 the grassy margin of the lane . from it spread the 
 tone of two woman talk . the tone be natural 
 and not at all suppress . Oak instantly know the 
 voice to he those of Bathsheba and Liddy . 
 the carriage come opposite and pass by . it be 
 Miss Everdene 's gig , and Liddy and her mistress be 
 the only occupant of the seat . Liddy be ask 
 question about the city of Bath , and her companion 
 be answer they listlessly and unconcernedly . both 
 Bathsheba and the horse seem weary . 
 the exquisite relief of find that she be here 
 again , safe and sound , overpower all reflection , and 
 Oak could only luxuriate in the sense of it . all grave 
 report be forget . 
 he linger and linger on , till there be no 
 difference between the eastern and western expanse 
 of sky , and the timid hare begin to limp courageously 
 round the dim hillock . Gabriel might have be 
 there an additional half - hour when a dark form walk 
 slowly by . " good - night , Gabriel . " the passer say . 
 it be Boldwood . " good - night , sir . " say Gabriel . 
 Boldwood likewise vanish up the road , and Oak 
 shortly afterwards turn indoor to bed . 
 Farmer Boldwood go on towards Miss Everdene 's 
 house . he reach the front , and approach the 
 entrance , see a light in the parlour . the blind be 
 not draw down , and inside the room be Bathsheba , 
 look over some paper or letter . her back be 
 towards Boldwood . he go to the door , knock , 
 and wait with tense muscle and an ache brow . 
 Boldwood have not be outside his garden since 
 his meeting with Bathsheba in the road to Yalbury . 
 silent and alone , he have remain in moody medita- 
 tion on woman 's way , deeming as essential of the 
 whole sex the accident of the single one of their 
 number he have ever closely beheld . by degree a 
 more charitable temper have pervade he , and this 
 be the reason of his sally to - night . he have come to 
 apologize and beg forgiveness of Bathsheba with some- 
 thing like a sense of shame at his violence , have but 
 just now learn that she have return - only from a 
 visit to Liddy , as he suppose , the Bath escapade 
 be quite unknown to he . 
 he inquire for Miss Everdene . Liddy 's manner 
 be odd , but he do not notice it . she go in , leave 
 he stand there , and in her absence the blind of the 
 room contain Bathsheba be pull down . bold- 
 wood augur ill from that sign . Liddy come out . 
 " my mistress can not see you , sir . " she say . 
 the farmer instantly go out by the gate . he 
 as unforgiven - that be the issue of it all . he have 
 see she who be to he simultaneously a delight and 
 a torture , sit in the room he have share with she 
 as a peculiarly privileged guest only a little early in 
 he summer , and she have deny he an entrance 
 there now . 
 Boldwood do not hurry homeward . it be ten 
 o'clock at least , when , walk deliberately through the 
 low part of Weatherbury , he hear the carrier 's spring 
 van enter the village . the van run to and from a 
 town in a northern direction , and it be own and 
 drive by a Weatherbury man , at the door of whose 
 house it now pull up . the lamp fix to the head 
 of the hood illuminate a scarlet and gilded form , who 
 be the first to alight . 
 " ah ! " say Boldwood to himself , " come to see she 
 again . " 
 Troy enter the carrier 's house , which have be 
 the place of his lodge on his last visit to his native 
 place . Boldwood be move by a sudden determina- 
 tion . he hasten home . in ten minute he be 
 back again , and make as if he be go to call upon 
 Troy at the carrier 's . but as he approach , some 
 one open the door and come out . he hear this 
 person say " good - night " to the inmate , and the voice 
 be Troy 's . " this be strange , come so immediately 
 after his arrival . Boldwood , however , hasten up 
 to he . Troy have what appear to be a carpet - bag 
 in his hand - the same that he have bring with he . 
 it seem as if he be go to leave again this very 
 night . 
 Troy turn up the hill and quicken his pace . 
 Boldwood step forward . 
 " Sergeant Troy ? " 
 " yes - i'm Sergeant Troy . " 
 " just arrive from up the country , I think?"Just arrive from Bath . " 
 " I be William Boldwood . " 
 " indeed . " 
 the tone in which this word be utter be all 
 that have be want to bring Boldwood to the 
 point . 
 " I wish to speak a word with you . " he say . 
 " what about ? " 
 " about she who live just ahead there - and about 
 a woman you have wrong . " 
 " I wonder at your impertinence . " say Troy , move 
 on . 
 " now look here . " say Boldwood , stand in front 
 of he , " wonder or not , you be go to hold a conver- 
 sation with I . " 
 Troy hear the dull determination in Boldwood 's 
 voice , look at his stalwart frame , then at the thick 
 cudgel he carry in his hand . he remember it be 
 past ten o'clock . it seem worth while to be civil to 
 Boldwood . 
 " very well , I will listen with pleasure . " say Troy , 
 place his bag on the ground , " only speak low , for 
 somebody or other may overhear we in the farmhouse 
 there . " 
 " well then - I know a good deal concern your 
 Fanny Robin 's attachment to you . I may say , too , that 
 I believe I be the only person in the village , except 
 Gabriel Oak , who do know it . you ought to marry 
 she . " 
 " I suppose I ought . indeed , l wish to , but I 
 can not . " 
 " why ? " 
 Troy be about to utter something hastily ; he then 
 check himself and say , " I be too poor . " his voice 
 be change . previously it have have a devil - may - care 
 tone . it be the voice of a trickster now . 
 Boldwood 's present mood be not critical enough to 
 notice tone . he continue , " I may as well speak 
 plainly ; and understand , I do not   wish to enter into the 
 question of right or wrong , woman 's honour and shame , 
 or to express any opinion on your conduct . I intend a 
 business transaction with you . " 
 " I see . " say Troy . " suppose we sit down here . " 
 an old tree trunk lie under the hedge immediately 
 opposite , and they sit down . 
 the tone in which this word be utter be all 
 Troy hear the dull determination in Boldwood 's 
 voice , look at his stalwart frame , then at the thick 
 plainly ; and understand , I do not   wish to enter into the 
 " I be engage to be married to Miss Everdene , " 
 say Boldwood , " but you come and - - " 
 " not engage . " say Troy . 
 " as good as engage . " 
 " if I have not turn up she might have become en- 
 gag to you . " 
 " Hang might!"would , then . " 
 " if you have not come I should certainly - yes , 
 certainly - have be accept by this time . if you have 
 not see she you might have be marry to Fanny . 
 well , there be too much difference between Miss Ever- 
 dene 's station and your own for this flirtation with she 
 ever to benefit you by end in marriage . so all I ask 
 be , do not   molest she any more . Marry Fanny . 
 make it worth your while . " 
 " how will you ? " 
 " I will pay you well now , I will settle a sum of money 
 upon she , and I will see that you do not   suffer from poverty 
 in the future . I will put it clearly . Bathsheba be only 
 play with you : you be too poor for she as I say ; 
 so give up waste your time about a great match you will 
 never make for a moderate and rightful match you may 
 make to - morrow ; take up your carpet - bag , turn about , 
 leave Weatherbury now , this night , and you shall take 
 fifty pound with you . Fanny shall have fifty to enable 
 she to prepare for the wedding , when you have tell I 
 where she be live , and she shall have five hundred 
 pay down on her wedding - day . " 
 in make this statement Boldwood 's voice reveal 
 only too clearly a consciousness of the weakness of his 
 position , his aim , and his method . his manner have 
 lapse quite from that of the firm and dignified bold- 
 wood of former time ; and such a scheme as he have 
 now engage in he would have condemn as childishly 
 imbecile only a few month ago . we discern a grand 
 force in the lover which he lack whilst a free man ; but 
 there be a breadth of vision in the free man which in 
 the lover we vainly seek . where there be much bias 
 there must be some narrowness , and love , though add 
 emotion , be subtract capacity . Boldwood exemplify 
 this to an abnormal degree : he know nothing of Fanny 
 Robin 's circumstance or whereabout , he know nothing 
 of Troy 's possibility , yet that be what he say . 
 " I like Fanny well . " say Troy ; " and if , as you say , 
 Miss Everdene be out of my reach , why I have all to 
 gain by accept your money , and marry Fan . but 
 she be only a servant . " 
 " never mind - do you agree to my arrangement ? " 
 " I do . " 
 " ah ! " say Boldwood , in a more elastic voice . " o , 
 Troy , if you like she good , why then do you step in here 
 and injure my happiness ? " 
 " I love Fanny well now . " say Troy . " but 
 Bathsh - - Miss Everdene inflame I , and displace 
 Fanny for a time . it be over now . " 
 " why should it be over so soon ? and why then 
 do you come here again ? " 
 " there be weighty reason . fifty pound at once , 
 you say ! " 
 " I do . " say Boldwood , " and here they be - fifty 
 sovereign . " he hand Troy a small packet . 
 " you have everything ready - it seem that you 
 calculate on my accept they . " say the sergeant , 
 take the packet . 
 " I think you might accept they . " say Boldwood . 
 " you have   only my word that the programme shall be 
 adhere to , whilst I at any rate have fifty pound . " 
 " l have think of that , and l have consider that 
 if I can not   appeal to your honour I can trust to your - 
 well , shrewdness we will call it - not to lose five hundred 
 pound in prospect , and also make a bitter enemy of a 
 man who be willing to be an extremely useful friend . " 
 " stop , listen ! " say Troy in a whisper . 
 a light pit - pat be audible upon the road just above 
 they . 
 " by George - ' tis she . " he continue . " I must go 
 on and meet she . " 
 " she - who ? " 
 " Bathsheba . " 
 " Bathsheba - out alone at this time o ' night ! " say 
 Boldwood in amazement , and start up . " why must 
 you meet she ? " 
 " she be expect I to - night - and I must now 
 speak to she , and wish her good - bye , accord to your 
 wish . " 
 " I do not   see the necessity of speak . " 
 " it can do no harm - and she will be wander about 
 look for I if I do not . you shall hear all I say to she . 
 it will help you in your love - making when I be go . " 
 " your tone be mock . " 
 " o no . and remember this , if she do not know 
 what have become of I , she will think more about I 
 than if I tell she flatly I have come to give she up . " 
 " will you confine your word to that one point ? - 
 shall I hear every word you say ? " 
 " every word . now sit still there , and hold my " 
 carpet bag for I , and mark what you hear . " 
 the light footstep come close , halt occasionally , 
 as if the walker listen for a sound . Troy whistle a 
 double note in a soft , fluty tone . 
 " come to that , be it ! " murmur Boldwood , uneasily . 
 " you promise silence . " say Troy . 
 " I promise again . " 
 Troy step forward . 
 " Frank , dearest , be that you ? " the tone be 
 Bathsheba 's . 
 " o God ! " say Boldwood . 
 " yes . " say Troy to she . 
 " how late you be . " she continue , tenderly . " do 
 you come by the carrier ? I listen and hear his 
 wheel enter the village , but it be some time ago , 
 and I have almost give you up , Frank . " 
 " I be sure to come . " say Frank . " you know I 
 should , do you not ? " 
 " well , I think you would . " she say , playfully ; 
 " and , Frank , it be so lucky ! there be not a soul in my 
 house but I to - night . I have   pack they all off so 
 nobody on earth will know of your visit to your lady 's 
 bower . Liddy want to go to her grandfather 's to 
 tell he about her holiday , and I say she might stay 
 with they till to - morrow - when you will be go again . " 
 " Capital . " say Troy . " but , dear I , I. have well 
 go back for my bag , because my slipper and brush and 
 comb be in it ; you run home whilst I fetch it , and I will 
 promise to be in your parlour in ten minute . " 
 " yes . " she turn and trip up the hill again . 
 during the progress of this dialogue there be a 
 nervous twitching of Boldwood 's tightly close lip , and 
 his face become bath in a clammy dew . he now 
 start forward towards Troy . Troy turn to he and 
 take up the bag . 
 " shall I tell she I have come to give she up and 
 can not marry she ? " say the soldier , mockingly . 
 " no , no ; wait a minute . I want to say more to 
 you - more to you ! " say Boldwood , in a hoarse whisper . 
 " now . " say Troy , " you see my dilemma . perhaps 
 I be a bad man - the victim of my impulse - lead away 
 to do what I ought to leave undo . I can not , however , 
 marry they both . and I have two reason for- choose 
 Fanny . first , I like she good upon the whole , and 
 second , you make it worth my while . " 
 at the same instant Boldwood spring upon he , and 
 hold he by the neck . Troy feel Boldwood 's grasp slowly 
 tightening . the move be absolutely unexpected . 
 " a moment . " he gasp . " you be injure she you 
 love ! " 
 " well , what do you mean ? " say the farmer . 
 give I breath . " say Troy . 
 Boldwood loosen his hand , say , " by Heaven , 
 I have   a mind to kill you ! " 
 " and ruin she . " 
 " save she . " 
 " oh , how can she be save now , unless I marry she ? " 
 Boldwood groan . he reluctantly release the 
 soldier , and fling he back against the hedge . " Devil , 
 you torture I ! " say he . 
 Troy rebound like a ball , and be about to make 
 a dash at the farmer ; but he check himself , say 
 lightly - 
 " it be not worth while to measure my strength with 
 you . indeed it be a barbarous way of settle a quarrel . 
 I shall shortly leave the army because of the same 
 conviction . now after that revelation of how the land 
 lie with Bathsheba , ' twould be a mistake to kill I , 
 would it not ? " 
 " ' twould be a mistake to kill you . " repeat Boldwood , 
 mechanically , with a bow head . 
 " well kill yourself . " 
 " far well . " 
 " I be glad you see it . " 
 " Troy , make she your wife , and do not   act upon what 
 I arrange just now . the alternative be dreadful , but 
 take Bathsheba ; I give she up ! she must love you 
 indeed to sell soul and body to you so utterly as she 
 have do . wretched woman - delude woman - you 
 be , Bathsheba ! " 
 " but about Fanny ? " 
 " Bathsheba be a woman well to do . " continue bold- 
 wood , in nervous anxiety , and , Troy , she will make a 
 good wife ; and , indeed , she be worth your hastening 
 on your marriage with she ! " 
 " but she have a will - not to say a temper , and I shall 
 be a mere slave to she . I could do anything with poor 
 Fanny Robin . " 
 " Troy . " say Boldwood , imploringly , " I will do anything 
 for you , only do not   desert she ; pray do not   desert she , 
 Troy . " 
 " which , poor fanny ? " 
 " no ; Bathsheba Everdene . love her good ! love 
 her tenderly ! how shall I get you to see how advan- 
 tageous it will be to you to secure she at once ? " 
 " I do not   wish to secure she in any new way . " 
 Boldwood 's arm move spasmodically towards Troy 's 
 person again . he repress the instinct , and his form 
 droop as with pain . 
 Troy go on - 
 " I shall soon purchase my discharge , and then - - " 
 " but I wish you to hasten on this marriage ! it will 
 be well for you both . you love each other , and you 
 must let I help you to do it . " 
 " how ? " 
 " why , by settle the five hundred on Bathsheba 
 instead of Fanny , to enable you to marry at once . 
 no ; she would not   have it of I . I will pay it down to 
 you on the wedding - day . " 
 Troy pause in secret amazement at Boldwood 's 
 wild infatuation . he carelessly say , " and be I to 
 have anything now ? " 
 " yes , if you wish to . but I have not much additional 
 money with I . I do not expect this ; but all I have 
 be your . " 
 Boldwood , more like a somnambulist than a wakeful 
 man , pull out the large canvas bag he carry by way 
 of a purse , and search it . 
 " I have twenty - one pound more with I . " he say . 
 " two note and a sovereign . but before I leave you 
 I must have a paper sign - - " 
 " pay I the money , and we will go straight to her 
 parlour , and make any arrangement you please to secure 
 my compliance with your wish . but she must know 
 nothing of this cash business . " 
 " nothing , nothing . " say Boldwood , hastily . " here 
 be the sum , and if you will come to my house we will write 
 out the agreement for the remainder , and the term 
 also . " 
 " first we will call upon she . " 
 " but why ? come with I to - night , and go with 
 I to - morrow to the surrogate 's . " 
 " but she must be consult ; at any rate inform . " 
 " very well ; go on . " 
 they go up the hill to Bathsheba 's house . when 
 they stand at the entrance , Troy say , " wait here a 
 moment . " open the door , he glide inside , leave 
 the door ajar . 
 Boldwood wait . in two minute a light appear 
 in the passage . Boldwood then see that the chain 
 have be fasten across the door . Troy appear 
 inside , carry a bedroom candlestick . 
 " what , do you think I should break in ? " say 
 Boldwood , contemptuously . 
 " oh , no , it be merely my humour to secure thing . 
 will you read this a moment ? I will hold the light . " 
 Troy hand a fold newspaper through the slit 
 between door and doorpost , and put the candle close . 
 " that be the paragraph . " he say , place his finger on 
 a line . 
 Boldwood look and read - 
 " MARRIAGES . 
 " on the 17th inst . , at St. Ambrose 's Church , Bath , 
 by the Rev. G. Mincing , B.A. , Francis Troy , only son 
 of the late Edward Troy , Esq . , H.D. , of Weatherbury , 
 and sergeant with Dragoon Guards , to Bathsheba , only 
 survive daughter of the late Mr , John Everdene , of 
 Casterbridge . " 
 " this may be call Fort meeting Feeble , hey , 
 Boldwood ? " say Troy . a low gurgle of derisive 
 laughter follow the word . 
 the paper fall from Boldwood 's hand . Troy 
 continue - 
 " fifty pound to marry Fanny , good . twenty - 
 one pound not to marry Fanny , but Bathsheba . good . 
 Finale : already Bathsheba 's husband . now , Boldwood , 
 yours be the ridiculous fate which always attend inter- 
 ference between a man and his wife . and another 
 word . bad as I be , I be not such a villain as to 
 make the marriage or misery of any woman a matter 
 of huckster and sale . Fanny have long ago leave I . 
 do not   know where she be . I have search everywhere . 
 another word yet . you say you love Bathsheba ; yet 
 on the mere apparent evidence you instantly believe 
 in her dishonour . a fig for such love ! now that I have 
 teach you a lesson , take your money back again . " 
 " I will not ; I will not ! " say Boldwood , in a hiss . 
 " anyhow I will not   have it . " say Troy , contemptuously . 
 he wrap the packet of gold in the note , and throw 
 the whole into the road . 
 Boldwood shake his clench fist at he . " you 
 juggler of Satan ! you black hound ! but I will punish 
 you yet ; mark I , I will punish you yet ! " 
 another peal of laughter . Troy then close the 
 door , and lock himself in . 
 throughout the whole of that night Boldwood 's dark 
 down of Weatherbury like an unhappy Shade in the 
 Mournful Fields by Acheron . 
 CHAPTER XXXV 
 AT an UPPER WINDOW 
 it be very early the next morning - a time of sun and 
 dew . the confused beginning of many bird ' song 
 spread into the healthy air , and the wan blue of the 
 heaven be here and there coat with thin webs of 
 incorporeal cloud which be of no effect in obscure 
 day . all the light in the scene be yellow as to 
 colour , and all the shadow be attenuate as to form . 
 the creep plant about the old manor - house be 
 bow with row of heavy water drop , which have upon 
 object behind they the effect of minute lens of high 
 magnifying power . 
 just before the clock strike five Gabriel Oak and 
 Coggan pass the village cross , and go on together 
 to the field . they be yet barely in view of their 
 mistress 's house , when Oak fancy he see the opening 
 of a casement in one of the upper window . the two 
 man be at this moment partially screen by an elder 
 bush , now begin to be enrich with black bunch 
 of fruit , and they pause before emerge from its 
 shade . 
 a handsome man lean idly from the lattice . he 
 look east and then west , in the manner of one who 
 make a first morning survey . the man be Sergeant 
 Troy . his red jacket be loosely throw on , but not 
 button , and he have altogether the relaxed bearing of 
 a soldier take his ease . 
 Coggan speak first , look quietly at the window . 
 " she have marry he ! " he say . 
 Gabriel have previously behold the sight , and he now 
 stand with his back turn , make no reply . 
 " I fancy we should know something to - day . " con- 
 tinue Coggan . " I hear wheel pass my door just 
 after dark - you be out somewhere . "He glance 
 round upon Gabriel . " good heaven above we , Oak , 
 how white your face be ; you look like a corpse ! " 
 " do I ? " say Oak , with a faint smile . 
 " lean on the gate : I will wait a bit . " 
 " all right , all right . " 
 they stand by the gate awhile , Gabriel listlessly 
 star at the ground . his mind speed into the future , 
 and see there enact in year of leisure the scene o 
 repentance that would ensue from this work of haste 
 that they be married he have instantly decide . why 
 have it be so mysteriously manage ? it have become 
 know that she have have a fearful journey to Bath , owe 
 to her miscalculating the distance : that the horse have 
 break down , and that she have be more than two 
 day get there . it be not Bathsheba 's way to do 
 thing furtively . with all her fault , she be candour 
 itself . could she have be entrap ? the union 
 be not only an unutterable grief to he : it amaze 
 he , notwithstanding that he have pass the precede 
 week in a suspicion that such might be the issue of 
 Troy 's meeting she away from home . her quiet return 
 with liddy have to some extent disperse the dread . 
 just as that imperceptible motion which appear like 
 stillness be infinitely divide in its property from stili 
 ness itself , so have his hope undistinguishable from 
 despair differ from despair indeed . 
 in a few minute they move on again towards the 
 house . the sergeant still look from the window . 
 " Morning , comrade ! " he shout , in a cheery voice , 
 when they come up . 
 Coggan reply to the greeting . " Bain't   ye go to 
 answer the man ? " he then say to Gabriel . " I would say 
 good morning - you need not   spend a hapenny of meaning 
 upon it , and yet keep the man civil . " 
 Gabriel soon decide too that , since the deed be 
 do , to put the good face upon the matter would be the 
 great kindness to she he love . 
 " good morning , Sergeant Troy . " he return , in a 
 ghastly voice . 
 " a ramble , gloomy house this . " say Troy , smile . 
 " why - they may not be marry ! " suggest Coggan . 
 " perhaps she be not there . " 
 Gabriel shake his head . the soldier turn a little 
 towards the east , and the sun kindle his scarlet coat 
 to an orange glow . 
 " but it be a nice old house . " respond Gabriel . 
 " yes - I suppose so ; but I feel like new wine in an 
 old bottle here . my notion be that sash - window should 
 be put throughout , and these old wainscote wall 
 brighten up a bit ; or the oak clear quite away , and 
 the wall paper . " 
 " it would be a pity , I think . " 
 well , no . a philosopher once say in my hearing 
 that the old builder , who work when art be a living 
 thing , have no respect for the work of builder who go 
 before they , but pull down and alter as they 
 think fit ; and why should not   we?"'creation and 
 preservation do not   do well together . " say he , " and a 
 million of antiquarian can not   invent a style . " my mind 
 exactly . I be for make this place more modern , that 
 we may be cheerful whilst we can . " 
 the military man turn and survey the interior 
 of the room , to assist his idea of improvement in this 
 direction . Gabriel and Coggan begin to move on . 
 " oh , Coggan . " say Troy , as if inspire by a recollec- 
 tion " do you know if insanity have ever appear in Mr. 
 Boldwood 's family ? " 
 Jan reflect for a moment . 
 " I once hear that an uncle of his be queer in his 
 head , but I do not   know the right o't . " he say . 
 " it be of no importance . " say Troy , lightly . " well , 
 I shall be down in the field with you some time this 
 week ; but I have a few matter to attend to first . so 
 good - day to you . we shall , of course , keep on just as 
 friendly term as usual . I be not a proud man : nobody 
 be ever able to say that of Sergeant Troy . however , 
 what be must be , and here be half - a - crown to drink my 
 health , man . " 
 Troy throw the coin dexterously across the front plot 
 and over the fence towards Gabriel , who shun it in 
 its fall , his face turn to an angry red . coggan 
 twirl his eye , edge forward , and catch the money 
 in its ricochet upon the road . 
 " very well - you keep it , Coggan . " say Gabriel with 
 disdain and almost fiercely . " as for I , I will do with- 
 out gift from he ! " 
 " do not   show it too much . " say Coggan , musingly . 
 " for if he be married to she , mark my word , he will buy 
 his discharge and be our master here . therefore ' tis 
 well to say ` Friend ' outwardly , though you say 
 ` Troublehouse ' within . " 
 " well - perhaps it be good to be silent ; but I can not 
 go far than that . I can not   flatter , and if my place 
 here be only to be keep by smooth he down , my 
 place must be lose . " 
 a horseman , whom they have for some time see in 
 the distance , now appear close beside they . 
 " there be Mr. Boldwood . " say Oak . " I wonder what 
 Troy mean by his question . " 
 Coggan and Oak nod respectfully to the farmer , 
 just check their pace to discover if they be want , 
 and find they be not stand back to let he pass on . 
 the only sign of the terrible sorrow Boldwood have 
 be combat through the night , and be combat 
 now , be the want of colour in his well - define face , 
 the enlarged appearance of the vein in his forehead 
 and temple , and the sharp line about his mouth . 
 the horse bear he away , and the very step of the 
 animal seem significant of dogged despair . Gabriel , for 
 a minute , rise above his own grief in notice Boldwood 's . 
 he see the square figure sit erect upon the horse , 
 the head turn to neither side , the elbow steady by 
 the hip , the brim of the hat level and undisturbed in 
 its onward glide , until the keen edge of Boldwood 's 
 shape sink by degree over the hill . to one who know 
 the man and his story there be something more striking 
 in this immobility than in a collapse . the clash of 
 discord between mood and matter here be force 
 painfully home to the heart ; and , as in laughter there be 
 more dreadful phase than in tear , so be there in the 
 steadiness of this agonized man an expression deep 
 than a cry . 
 CHAPTER xxxvi 
 wealth in JEOPARDY - THE revel 
 one night , at the end of August , when Bathsheba 's 
 experience as a married woman be still new , and 
 when the weather be yet dry and sultry , a man stand 
 motionless in the stockyard of Weatherbury Upper 
 Farm , look at the moon and sky . 
 the night have a sinister aspect . a heated breeze 
 from the south slowly fan the summit of lofty 
 object , and in the sky dash of buoyant cloud be 
 sail in a course at right angle to that of another 
 stratum , neither of they in the direction of the breeze 
 below . the moon , as see through these film , have 
 a lurid metallic look . the field be sallow with the 
 impure light , and all be ting in monochrome , as 
 if behold through stain glass . the same evening 
 the sheep have trail homeward head to tail , the 
 behaviour of the rook have be confuse , and the 
 horse have move with timidity and caution . 
 thunder be imminent , and , take some secondary 
 appearance into consideration , it be likely to be 
 follow by one of the lengthen rain which mark 
 the close of dry weather for the season . before twelve 
 hour have pass a harvest atmosphere would be a 
 bygone thing . 
 Oak gaze with misgive at eight naked and un- 
 protect rick , massive and heavy with the rich 
 produce of one - half the farm for that year . he go 
 on to the barn . 
 this be the night which have be select by 
 Sergeant Troy - rule now in the room of his wife - 
 for give the harvest supper and dance . as Oak 
 approach the building the sound of violin and a 
 tambourine , and the regular jigging of many foot , grow 
 more distinct . he come close to the large door , one 
 of which stand slightly ajar , and look in . 
 the central space , together with the recess at one 
 end , be empty of all incumbrance , and this area , 
 cover about two - third of the whole , be appropriate 
 for the gathering , the remain end , which be pile 
 to the ceiling with oat , be screen off with sail- 
 cloth . tuft and garland of green foliage decorate 
 the wall , beam , and extemporize chandelier , and 
 immediately opposite to Oak a rostrum have be 
 erect , bear a table and chair . here sit three 
 fiddler , and beside they stand a frantic man with his 
 hair on end , perspiration stream down his cheek , 
 and a tambourine quiver in his hand . 
 the dance end , and on the black oak floor in the 
 midst a new row of couple form for another . 
 " now , ma'am , and no offence I hope , I ask what 
 dance you would like next ? " say the first violin . 
 " really , it make no difference . " say the clear voice 
 of Bathsheba , who stand at the inner end of the build- 
 ing , observe the scene from behind a table cover 
 with cup and viand . Troy be loll beside she . 
 " then . " say the fiddler , " I will venture to name that 
 the right and proper thing be " the soldier 's Joy " - 
 there be a gallant soldier marry into the farm - 
 hey , my sonny , and gentleman all ? " 
 " it shall be " the soldier 's Joy , " exclaim a 
 chorus . 
 " thank for the compliment . " say the sergeant 
 gaily , take Bathsheba by the hand and lead she 
 to the top of the dance . " for though I have pur- 
 chase my discharge from her Most gracious Majesty 's 
 regiment of cavalry the 11th Dragoon Guards , to attend 
 to the new duty await I here , I shall continue a 
 soldier in spirit and feeling as long as I live . " 
 so the dance begin . as to the merit of " the 
 soldier 's Joy . " there can not be , and never be , two 
 opinion . it have be observe in the musical circle 
 of Weatherbury and its vicinity that this melody , at 
 the end of three - quarter of an hour of thunderous 
 footing , still possess more stimulative property for 
 the heel and toe than the majority of other dance at 
 their first opening . " the soldier 's Joy " have , too , an 
 additional charm , in be so admirably adapt to 
 the tambourine aforesaid - no mean instrument in the 
 hand of a performer who understand the proper 
 convulsion , spasm , St. vitus 's dance , and fearful 
 frenzy necessary when exhibit its tone in their 
 high perfection . 
 the immortal tune end , a fine dd roll forth 
 from the bass - viol with the sonorousness of a cannonade , 
 and Gabriel delay his entry no long . he avoid 
 Bathsheba , and get as near as possible to the platform , 
 where Sergeant Troy be now seat , drink brandy- 
 and - water , though the other drink without exception 
 cider and ale . Gabriel could not easily thrust himself 
 within speak distance of the sergeant , and he send 
 a message , ask he to come down for a moment . 
 " the sergeant say he could not attend . 
 " will you tell he , then . " say Gabriel , " that I only 
 step ath'art to say that a heavy rain be sure to fall 
 soon , and that something should be do to protect 
 the rick ? " 
 " M. Troy say it will not rain . " return the 
 messenger , " and he can not stop to talk to you about 
 such fidget . " 
 in Juxtaposition with Troy , Oak have a melancholy 
 tendency to look like a candle beside gas , and ill at 
 ease , he go out again , think he would go home ; 
 for , under the circumstance , he have no heart for the 
 scene in the barn . at the door he pause for a 
 moment : Troy be speak . 
 " friend , it be not only the harvest home that we 
 be celebrate to - night ; but this be also a Wedding 
 Feast . a short time ago I have the happiness to lead 
 to the altar this lady , your mistress , and not until now 
 have we be able to give any public flourish to the 
 event in Weatherbury . that it may be thoroughly 
 well do , and that every man may go happy to bed , 
 I have order to be bring here some bottle of 
 brandy and kettle of hot water . a treble - strong 
 goblet will he hand round to each guest . " 
 Bathsheba put her hand upon his arm , and , with 
 upturned pale face , say imploringly , " no - do not   give 
 it to they - pray do not , Frank ! it will only do they 
 harm : they have have enough of everything . " 
 " true - we do not   wish for no more , thank ye . " say 
 one or two . 
 " Pooh ! " say the sergeant contemptuously , and 
 raise his voice as if light up by a new idea . 
 " friend . " he say , " we will send the woman - folk home ! 
 ' tis time they be in bed . then we cockbird will 
 have a jolly carouse to ourselves ! if any of the man 
 show the white feather , let they look elsewhere for a 
 winter 's work . " 
 Bathsheba indignantly leave the barn , follow by 
 all the woman and child . the musician , not 
 look upon themselves as " company . " slip quietly 
 away to their spring waggon and put in the horse . 
 thus Troy and the man on the farm be leave sole 
 occupant of the place . Oak , not to appear unneces- 
 sarily disagreeable , stay a little while ; then he , too , 
 arise and quietly take his departure , follow by a 
 friendly oath from the sergeant for not stay to a 
 second round of grog . 
 Gabriel proceed towards his home . in approach- 
 e the door , his toe kick something which feel and 
 sound soft , leathery , and distend , like a boxing- 
 glove . it be a large toad humbly travel across 
 the path . Oak take it up , think it might be well 
 to kill the creature to save it from pain ; but find 
 it uninjured , he place it again among the grass . he 
 know what this direct message from the Great Mother 
 mean . and soon come another . 
 when he strike a light indoor there appear upon 
 the table a thin glistening streak , as if a brush of varnish 
 have be lightly drag across it . Oak 's eye follow 
 the serpentine sheen to the other side , where it lead up 
 to a huge brown garden - slug , which have come indoor 
 to - night for reason of its own . it be Nature 's second 
 way of hint to he that he be to prepare for foul 
 weather . 
 Oak sit down meditate for nearly an hour . 
 during this time two black spider , of the kind common 
 in thatched house , promenade the ceiling , ultimately 
 drop to the floor . this remind he that if there 
 be one class of manifestation on this matter that he 
 thoroughly understand , it be the instinct of sheep . 
 he leave the room , run across two or three field towards 
 the flock , get upon a hedge , and look over among 
 they . 
 they be crowd close together on the other side 
 around some furze bush , and the first peculiarity ob- 
 servable be that , on the sudden appearance of Oak 's 
 head over the fence , they do not stir or run away . 
 they have now a terror of something great than their 
 terror of man . but this be not the most noteworthy 
 feature : they be all group in such a way that their 
 tail , without a single exception , be towards that half 
 of the horizon from which the storm threaten . there 
 be an inner circle closely huddle , and outside these 
 they radiate wider apart , the pattern form by the 
 flock as a whole not be unlike a vandyke lace 
 collar , to which the clump of furze - bush stand in the 
 position of a wearer 's neck . 
 opinion . he know now that he be right , and that 
 Troy be wrong . every voice in nature be unanimous 
 in bespeaking change . but two distinct translation 
 attach to these dumb expression . apparently there 
 be to be a thunder - storm , and afterwards a cold con- 
 tinuous rain . the creep thing seem to know all 
 about the later rain , hut little of the interpolate 
 thunder - storm ; whilst the sheep know all about the 
 thunder - storm and nothing of the later rain . 
 this complication of weather be uncommon , 
 be all the more to be fear . Oak return to the 
 stack - yard . all be silent here , and the conical tip of 
 the rick jut darkly into the sky . there be five 
 wheat - rick in this yard , and three stack of barley . 
 the wheat when thresh would average about thirty 
 quarter to each stack ; the barley , at least forty . their 
 value to Bathsheba , and indeed to anybody , Oak 
 mentally estimate by the follow simple calcula- 
 tion : - 
 5 x 30    150 quarter   500 L. 
 3 x 40 120 quarter   250 L. 
 Total . . 750 L. 
 seven hundred and fifty pound in the divinest form 
 that money can wear - that of necessary food for man 
 and beast : should the risk be run of deteriorate this 
 bulk of corn to less than half its value , because of the 
 instability of a woman?"never , if I can prevent it ! " 
 say Gabriel . 
 such be the argument that Oak set outwardly before 
 he . but man , even to himself , be a palimps , have 
 an ostensible writing , and another beneath the line . 
 it be possible that there be this golden legend under 
 the utilitarian one : " I will help to my last effort the 
 woman I have love so dearly . " 
 he go back to the barn to endeavour to obtain 
 assistance for cover the rick that very night . all 
 be silent within , and he would have pass on in the 
 belief that the party have break up , have not a dim 
 light , yellow as saffron by contrast with the greenish 
 whiteness outside , stream through a knot - hole in the 
 fold door . 
 Gabriel look in . an unusual picture meet his eye . 
 the candle suspend among the evergreen have 
 burn down to their socket , and in some case the 
 leaf tie about they be scorch . many of the 
 light have quite go out , other smoke and stank , 
 grease drop from they upon the floor . here , 
 under the table , and lean against form and chair 
 in every conceivable attitude except the perpendicular , ! " 
 be the wretched person of all the work - folk , the hair 
 of their head at such low level be suggestive of 
 mop and broom . in the midst of these shone red 
 and distinct the figure of Sergeant Troy , lean back 
 in a chair . Coggan be on his back , with his mouth 
 open , huzze forth snore , as be several other ; the 
 united breathing of the horizonal assemblage form 
 a subdue roar like London from a distance . Joseph 
 Poorgrass be curl round in the fashion of a hedge- 
 hog , apparently in attempt to present the least possible 
 portion of his surface to the air ; and behind he be 
 dimly visible an unimportant remnant of William Small- 
 bury . the glass and cup still stand upon the table , 
 a water - jug be overturn , from which a small rill , 
 after trace its course with marvellous precision down 
 the centre of the long table , fall into the neck of the 
 unconscious Mark Clark , in a steady , monotonous drip , 
 like the dripping of a stalactite in a cave . 
 Gabriel glance hopelessly at the group , which , with 
 one or two exception , compose all the able - body 
 man upon the farm . he see at once that if the rick 
 be to be save that night , or even the next morning , 
 he must save they with his own hand . 
 a faint " ting - ting " resound from under Coggan 's 
 waistcoat . it be Coggan 's watch strike the hour of 
 two . 
 Oak go to the recumbent form of Matthew Moon , 
 who usually undertake the rough thatching of the home- 
 stead , and shake he . the shaking be without effect . 
 Gabriel shout in his ear , " where be your thatching- 
 beetle and rick - stick and spar ? " 
 " under the staddle . " say Moon , mechanically , with 
 the unconscious promptness of a medium . 
 Gabriel let go his head , and it drop upon the 
 floor like a bowl . he then go to Susan Tall 's 
 husband . 
 " where be the key of the granary ? " 
 no answer . the question be repeat , with the 
 same result . to be shout to at night be evidently 
 less of a novelty to Susan Tall 's husband than to 
 Matthew Moon . Oak fling down Tall 's head into the 
 corner again and turn away . 
 to be just , the man be not greatly to blame for 
 this painful and demoralize termination to the 
 evening 's entertainment . Sergeant Troy have so strenu- 
 ously insist , glass in hand , that drinking should be 
 the bond of their union , that those who wish to refuse 
 hardly like to be so unmannerly under the circum- 
 stance . have from their youth up be entirely un- 
 accustom to any liquor strong than cider or mild 
 ale , it be no wonder that they have succumb , one 
 and all , with extraordinary uniformity , after the lapse of 
 about an hour . 
 Gabriel be greatly depressed . this debauch bode 
 ill for that wilful and fascinating mistress whom the 
 faithful man even now feel within he as the embodi- 
 ment of all that be sweet and bright and hopeless . 
 he put out the expire light , that the barn might 
 not be endanger , close the door upon the man in 
 their deep and oblivious sleep , and go again into the 
 lone night . a hot breeze , as if breathe from the 
 part lip of some dragon about to swallow the globe , 
 fan he from the south , while directly opposite in 
 the north rise a grim misshapen body of cloud , in the 
 very tooth of the wind . so unnaturally do it rise that 
 one could fancy it to be lift by machinery from below . 
 meanwhile the faint cloudlet have fly back into the 
 south - east corner of the sky , as if in terror of the large 
 cloud , like a young brood gaze in upon by some 
 monster . 
 go on to the village , Oak fling a small stone 
 against the window of Laban Tall 's bedroom , expect 
 Susan to open it ; but nobody stir . he go round 
 to the back door , which have be leave unfastened for 
 Laban 's entry , and pass in to the foot of the stair- 
 case . 
 " Mrs. Tall , I have   come for the key of the granary , 
 to get at the rick - cloth . " say Oak , in a stentorian 
 voice . 
 " be that you ? " say Mrs. Susan Tall , half awake . 
 " yes . " say Gabriel . 
 " come along to bed , do , you drawlatche rogue - 
 keep a body awake like this . " 
 " it be not   Laban - ' tis Gabriel Oak . I want the key 
 of the granary . " 
 " Gabriel . what in the name of fortune do you 
 pretend to be Laban for ? " 
 " I do not . I think you mean - - " 
 " yes you do ! what do you want here ? " 
 " the key of the granary . " 
 " take it then . ' tis on the nail . People come 
 disturb woman at this time of night ought - - " 
 Gabriel take the key , without wait to hear the 
 conclusion of the tirade . ten minute later his lonely 
 figure might have be see drag four large water- 
 proof covering across the yard , and soon two of these 
 heap of treasure in grain be cover snug - two cloth 
 to each . two hundred pound be secure . three 
 wheat - stack remain open , and there be no more 
 cloth . Oak look under the staddle and find a 
 fork . he mount the third pile of wealth and begin 
 operate , adopt the plan of slop the upper 
 sheave one over the other ; and , in addition , fill 
 the interstice with the material of some untied sheaf . 
 so far all be well . by this hurried contrivance 
 Bathsheba 's property in wheat be safe for at any rate 
 a week or two , provide always that there be not 
 much wind . 
 Next come the barley . this it be only possible to 
 protect by systematic thatching . time go on , and 
 the moon vanish not to reappear . it be the 
 farewell of the ambassador previous to war . the 
 night have a haggard look , like a sick thing ; and there 
 come finally an utter expiration of air from the whole 
 heaven in the form of a slow breeze , which might have 
 be liken to a death . and now nothing be hear 
 in the yard but the dull thud of the beetle which drive 
 in the spar , and the rustle of thatch in the interval . 
 CHAPTER XXXVII 
 the storm - the two together 
 a light flap over the scene , as if reflect from 
 phosphorescent wing cross the sky , and a rumble 
 fill the air . it be the first move of the approach 
 storm . 
 the second peal be noisy , with comparatively little 
 visible lightning . Gabriel see a candle shin in bath- 
 sheba 's bedroom , and soon a shadow sweep to and fro 
 upon the blind . 
 then there come a third flash . manoeuvre of a 
 most extraordinary kind be go on in the vast 
 firmamental hollow overhead . the lightning now be 
 the colour of silver , and gleam in the heaven like a 
 mail army . rumble become rattle . Gabriel from 
 his elevated position could see over the landscape at 
 least half - a - dozen mile in front . every hedge , bush , 
 and tree be distinct as in a line engraving . in a 
 paddock in the same direction be a herd of heifer , 
 and the form of these be visible at this moment in 
 the act of gallop about in the wildest and maddest 
 confusion , fling their heel and tail high into the air , 
 their head to earth . a poplar in the immediate fore- 
 ground be like an ink stroke on burnish tin . then 
 the picture vanish , leave the darkness so intense 
 that Gabriel work entirely by feel with his hand . 
 he have stick his rick - rod , or poniard , as it be 
 indifferently call - a long iron lance , polish by 
 handling - into the stack , use to support the sheaf 
 instead of the support call a groom use on house , 
 a blue light appear in the zenith , and in some in- 
 describable manner flicker down near the top of the 
 rod . it be the fourth of the large flash . a moment 
 later and there be a smack - smart , clear , and short , 
 Gabriel feel his position to be anything but a safe one , 
 and he resolve to descend . 
 not a drop of rain have fall as yet . he wipe his 
 weary brow , and look again at the black form of 
 the unprotected stack . be his life so valuable to 
 he after all ? what be his prospect that he 
 should be so chary of run risk , when important 
 and urgent labour could not be carry on without 
 such risk ? he resolve to stick to the stack . how- 
 ever , he take a precaution . under the staddle be 
 a long tether chain , use to prevent the escape of 
 errant horse . this he carry up the ladder , and 
 stick his rod through the clog at one end , allow 
 the other end of the chain to trail upon the ground 
 the spike attach to it he drive in . under the 
 shadow of this extemporize lightning - conductor he 
 feel himself comparatively safe . 
 before Oak have lay his hand upon his tool again 
 out leapt the fifth flash , with the spring of a serpent 
 and the shout of a fiend . it be green as an 
 emerald , and the reverberation be stunning . what 
 be this the light reveal to he ? in the open 
 ground before he , as he look over the ridge of 
 the rick , be a dark and apparently female form . 
 could it be that of the only venturesome woman in 
 the parish - Bathsheba ? the form move on a step : 
 then he could see no more . 
 " be that you , ma'am ? " say Gabriel to the darkness . 
 " who be there ? " say the voice of Bathsheba , 
 " Gabriel . I be on the rick , thatch . " 
 " O , Gabriel ! - and be you ? I have come about 
 they . the weather awake I , and I think of the 
 corn . I be so distressed about it - can we save it any- 
 how ? I can not find my husband . be he with you ? " 
 he be not here . " 
 " do you know where he be ? " 
 " asleep in the barn . " 
 " he promise that the stack should be see to , 
 and now they be all neglect ! can I do anything 
 to help ? Liddy be afraid to come out . fancy finding 
 you here at such an hour ! surely I can do something ? " 
 " you can bring up some reed - sheaf to I , one by 
 one , ma'am ; if you be not afraid to come up the ladder 
 in the dark . " say Gabriel . " every moment be precious 
 now , and that would save a good deal of time . it be 
 not very dark when the lightning have be go a bit . " 
 " I will do anything ! " she say , resolutely . she instantly 
 take a sheaf upon her shoulder , clamber up close to 
 his heel , place it behind the rod , and descend for 
 another . at her third ascent the rick suddenly brighten 
 with the brazen glare of shin majolica - every knot 
 in every straw be visible . on the slope in front of he 
 appear two human shape , black as jet . the rick 
 lose its sheen - the shape vanish . Gabriel turn his 
 head . it have be the sixth flash which have come from 
 the east behind he , and the two dark form on the 
 slope have be the shadow of himself and Bathsheba . 
 then come the peal . it hardly be credible that 
 such a heavenly light could be the parent of such a 
 diabolical sound . 
 " how terrible ! " she exclaim , and clutch he by 
 the sleeve . Gabriel turn , and steady she on her 
 aerial perch by hold her arm . at the same moment , 
 while he be still reverse in his attitude , there be 
 more light , and he see , as it be , a copy of the tall 
 poplar tree on the hill draw in black on the wall of 
 the barn . it be the shadow of that tree , throw across 
 by a secondary flash in the west . 
 the next flare come . Bathsheba be on the ground 
 now , shoulder another sheaf , and she bear its dazzle 
 without flinching - thunder and ali - and again ascend 
 with the load . there be then a silence everywhere 
 for four or five minute , and the crunch of the spar , 
 as Gabriel hastily drive they in , could again be distinctly 
 hear . he think the crisis of the storm have pass . 
 but there come a burst of light . 
 " hold on ! " say Gabriel , take the sheaf from her 
 shoulder , and grasp her arm again . 
 Heaven open then , indeed . the flash be almost 
 too novel for its inexpressibly dangerous nature to be 
 at once realize , and they could only comprehend the 
 magnificence of its beauty . it spring from east , west , 
 north , south , and be a perfect dance of death . the 
 form of skeleton appear in the air , shape with 
 blue fire for bone - dancing , leaping , stride , racing 
 around , and mingle altogether in unparalleled con- 
 fusion . with these be intertwine undulate snake of 
 green , and behind these be a broad mass of less light . 
 simultaneously come from every part of the tumble 
 sky what may be call a shout ; since , though no shout 
 ever come near it , it be more of the nature of a shout 
 than of anything else earthly . in the meantime one of 
 the grisly form have alight upon the point of Gabriel 's 
 rod , to run invisibly down it , down the chain , and into 
 the earth . Gabriel be almost blinded , and he could 
 feel Bathsheba 's warm arm tremble in his hand - a 
 sensation novel and thrill enough ; but love , life , 
 everything human , seem small and trifle in such 
 close juxtaposition with an infuriated universe . 
 Oak have hardly time to gather up these impression 
 into a thought , and to see how strangely the red feather 
 of her hat shone in this light , when the tall tree on the 
 hill before mention seem on fire to a white heat , 
 and a new one among these terrible voice mingle with 
 the last crash of those precede . it be a stupefy 
 blast , harsh and pitiless , and it fall upon their ear in a 
 dead , flat blow , without that reverberation which lend 
 the tone of a drum to more distant thunder . by the 
 lustre reflect from every part of the earth and from the 
 wide domical scoop above it , he see that the tree be 
 slice down the whole length of its tall , straight stem , a 
 huge riband of bark be apparently fling off . the 
 other portion remain erect , and reveal the bared 
 surface as a strip of white down the front . the 
 lightning have strike the tree . a sulphurous smell 
 fill the air ; then all be silent , and black as a cave 
 in Hinnom . 
 " we have a narrow escape ! " say Gabriel , hurriedly . 
 " you have well go down . " 
 Bathsheba say nothing ; but he could distinctly hear 
 her rhythmical pant , and the recurrent rustle of the 
 sheaf beside she in response to her frightened pulsation . 
 she descend the ladder , and , on second thought , he 
 follow she . the darkness be now impenetrable by 
 the sharp vision . they both stand still at the 
 bottom , side by side . Bathsheba appear to think 
 only of the weather - Oak think only of she just then . 
 at last he say - 
 " the storm seem to have pass now , at any 
 rate . " 
 " I think so too . " say Bathsheba . " though there 
 be multitude of gleams , look ! " 
 the sky be now fill with an incessant light , 
 frequent repetition melt into complete continuity , as 
 an unbroken sound result from the successive stroke 
 on a gong . 
 " nothing serious . " say he . " I can not understand 
 no rain fall . but Heaven be praise , it be all the 
 well for we . I be now go up again . " 
 " Gabriel , you be kind than I deserve ! I will stay 
 and help you yet . o , why be not some of the other 
 here ! " 
 " they would have be here if they could . " say Oak , 
 in a hesitating way . 
 " o , I know it all - all . " she say , add slowly : 
 " they be all asleep in the barn , in a drunken sleep , and 
 my husband among they . that be it , be it not ? do not 
 think I be a timid woman and can not   endure thing . " 
 " I be not certain . " say Gabriel . " I will go and see , " 
 he cross to the barn , leave she there alone . he 
 look through the chink of the door . all be in 
 total darkness , as he have leave it , and there still arise , as 
 at the former time , the steady buzz of many snore . 
 he feel a zephyr curl about his cheek , and turn . 
 it be Bathsheba 's breath - she have follow he , and 
 be look into the same chink . 
 he endeavour to put off the immediate and pain- 
 ful subject of their thought by remark gently , " if 
 you will come back again , miss - ma'am , and hand up a 
 few more ; it would save much time . " 
 then Oak go back again , ascend to the top , 
 step off the ladder for great expedition , and go 
 on thatch . she follow , but without a sheaf 
 " Gabriel . " she say , in a strange and impressive voice . 
 Oak look up at she . she have not speak since 
 he leave the barn . the soft and continual shimmer of 
 the die lightning show a marble face high against 
 the black sky of the opposite quarter . Bathsheba be 
 sit almost on the apex of the stack , her foot gather 
 up beneath she , and rest on the top round of the 
 ladder . 
 " yes , mistress . " he say . 
 " I suppose you think that when I gallop away 
 to Bath that night it be on purpose to be marry ? " 
 " I do at last - not at first . " he answer , somewhat 
 surprised at the abruptness with which this new subject 
 be broach . 
 " and other think so , too ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " and you blame I for it ? " 
 " well - a little . " 
 " I think so . now , I care a little for your good 
 opinion , and I want to explain something - I have 
 long to do it ever since I return , and you look so 
 gravely at I . for if I be to die - and I may die 
 soon - it would be dreadful that you should always think 
 mistakenly of I . now , listen . " 
 Gabriel cease his rustling . 
 " I go to Bath that night in the full intention of 
 break off my engagement to Mr. Troy . it be owe 
 to circumstance which occur after I get there that 
  - that we be marry . now , do you see the matter 
 in a new light ? " 
 " I do - somewhat . " 
 " I must , I suppose , say more , now that I have 
 begin . and perhaps it be no harm , for you be certainly 
 under no delusion that I ever love you , or that I can 
 have any object in speak , more than that object I 
 have mention . well , I be alone in a strange city , 
 and the horse be lame . and at last I do not   know 
 what to do . I see , when it be too late , that scandal 
 might seize hold of I for meet he alone in that 
 way . but I be come away , when he suddenly say 
 he have that day see a woman more beautiful than I , 
 and that his constancy could not be count on unless 
 I at once become his .... and I be grieve and 
 trouble - - " she clear her voice , and wait a 
 moment , as if to gather breath . " and then , between 
 jealousy and distraction , I marry he ! " she whisper 
 with desperate impetuosity . 
 Gabriel make no reply . 
 " he be not to blame , for it be perfectly true about 
  - about his see somebody else . " she quickly add . 
 " and now I do not   wish for a single remark from you 
 upon the subject - indeed , I forbid it . I only want 
 you to know that misunderstood bit of my history before 
 a time come when you could never know it . - you want 
 some more sheaf ? " 
 she go down the ladder , and the work proceed . 
 Gabriel soon perceive a languor in the movement of 
 his mistress up and down , and he say to she , gently as 
 a mother - 
 " I think you have well go indoor now , you be 
 tired . I can finish the rest alone . if the wind do 
 not change the rain be likely to keep off . " 
 " if I be useless I will go . " say Bathsheba , in a 
 flagging cadence . " but o , if your life should be lose ! " 
 " you be not useless ; but I would rather not tire 
 you long . you have do well . " 
 " and you well ! " she say , gratefully . ! thank you 
 for your devotion , a thousand time , Gabriel ! Good- 
 night - I know you be do your very good for I . " 
 she diminish in the gloom , and vanish , and he 
 hear the latch of the gate fall as she pass through . 
 he work in a reverie now , muse upon her story , and 
 upon the contradictoriness of that feminine heart which 
 have cause she to speak more warmly to he to - night 
 than she ever have do whilst unmarried and free to 
 speak as warmly as she choose . 
 he be disturb in his meditation by a grating 
 noise from the coach - house . it be the vane on the 
 roof turn round , and this change in the wind be the 
 signal for a disastrous rain . 
 CHAPTER XXXVIII 
 RAIN - one SOLITARY MEETS ANOTHER 
 it be now five o'clock , and the dawn be promise 
 to break in hue of drab and ash . 
 the air change its temperature and stir itself 
 more vigorously . cool breeze course in transparent 
 eddy round Oak 's face . the wind shift yet a point 
 or two and blow strong . in ten minute every wind 
 of heaven seem to be roam at large . some of the 
 thatch on the wheat - stack be now whirl fantas- 
 tically aloft , and have to be replace and weight with 
 some rail that lie near at hand . this do , Oak slave 
 away again at the barley . a huge drop of rain smote 
 his face , the wind snarl round every corner , the tree 
 rock to the basis of their trunk , and the twig clash 
 in strife . drive in spar at any point and on any 
 system , inch by inch he cover more and more safely 
 from ruin this distracting impersonation of seven hundred 
 pound . " the rain come on in earnest , and Oak soon feel 
 the water to be track cold and clammy route down 
 his back . ultimately he be reduce well - nigh to a 
 homogeneous sop , and the dye of his clothe trickle 
 down and stand in a pool at the foot of the ladder . 
 the rain stretch obliquely through the dull atmo- 
 sphere in liquid spine , unbroken in continuity between 
 their beginning in the cloud and their point in he . 
 Oak suddenly remember that eight month before 
 this time he have be fight against fire in the same 
 spot as desperately as he be fight against water 
 now - and for a futile love of the same woman . as for 
 she - - but Oak be generous and true , and dis- 
 miss his reflection . 
 it be about seven o'clock in the dark leaden 
 morning when Gabriel come down from the last stack , 
 and thankfully exclaim , " it be do ! " he be 
 drench , weary , and sad , and yet not so sad as drench 
 and weary , for he be cheer by a sense of success in 
 a good cause . 
 Faint sound come from the barn , and he look 
 that way . figure step singly and in pair through 
 the door - all walk awkwardly , and abash , save 
 the foremost , who wear a red jacket , and advance 
 with his hand in his pocket , whistle . the other 
 shamble after with a conscience - stricken air : the whole 
 procession be not unlike Flaxman 's group of the suitor 
 tottering on towards the infernal region under the 
 conduct of Mercury . the gnarl shape pass into 
 the village , Troy , their leader , enter the farmhouse . 
 not a single one of they have turn his face to the 
 rick , or apparently bestow one thought upon their 
 condition . 
 soon Oak too go homeward , by a different route 
 from theirs . in front of he against the wet glaze 
 surface of the lane he see a person walk yet more 
 slowly than himself under an umbrella . the man 
 turn and plainly start ; he be Boldwood . 
 " how be you this morning , sir ? " say Oak . 
 " yes , it be a wet day . - oh , I be well , very well , I 
 thank you ; quite well . " 
 " I be glad to hear it , sir . " 
 Boldwood seem to awake to the present by degree . 
 " you look tired and ill , Oak . " he say then , desultorily 
 regard his companion . 
 " I be tired . you look strangely alter , sir . " 
 " I ? not a bit of it : I be well enough . what put 
 that into your head ? " 
 " I think you do not   look quite so topping as you 
 use to , that be all . " 
 " indeed , then you be mistaken . " say Boldwood , 
 shortly . " nothing hurt I . my constitution be an 
 iron one . " 
 " I have   be work hard to get our rick cover , 
 and be barely in time . never have such a struggle in 
 my life .... your of course be safe , sir . " 
 " o yes . " Boldwood add , after an interval of 
 silence : " what do you ask , Oak ? " 
 " your rick be all cover before this time ? " 
 " no . " 
 " at any rate , the large one upon the stone staddle ? " 
 " they be not . " 
 " they under the hedge ? " 
 " no . I forget to tell the thatcher to set about it . " 
 " nor the little one by the stile?"nor the little one by the stile . I 
 overlook the 
 rick this year . " 
 " then not a tenth of your corn will come to measure , 
 sir . " 
 " possibly not . 
 " overlooked they . " repeat Gabriel slowly to him- 
 self . it be difficult to describe the intensely dramatic 
 effect that announcement have upon Oak at such a 
 moment . all the night he have be feel that the 
 neglect he be labour to repair be abnormal and 
 isolate - the only instance of the kind within the circuit 
 of the county . yet at this very time , within the same 
 parish , a great waste have be go on , uncomplained 
 of and disregard . a few month early Boldwood 's 
 forget his husbandry would have be as preposter- 
 ous an idea as a sailor forget he be in a ship . Oak 
 be just think that whatever he himself might have 
 suffer from Bathsheba 's marriage , here be a man 
 who have suffer more , when Boldwood speak in a 
 change voice - that of one who yearn to make a 
 confidence and relieve his heart by an outpouring . 
 " Oak , you know as well as I that thing have go 
 wrong with I lately . I may as well own it . I be 
 go to get a little settle in life ; but in some way my 
 plan have come to nothing . " 
 " I think my mistress would have marry you , " 
 say Gabriel , not know enough of the full depth of 
 Boldwood 's love to keep silence on the farmer 's account , 
 and determine not to evade discipline by do so on 
 his own . " however , it be so sometimes , and nothing 
 happen that we expect . " he add , with the repose of 
 a man whom misfortune have inure rather than sub- 
 due . 
 " I daresay I be a joke about the parish . " say bold- 
 wood , as if the subject come irresistibly to his tongue , 
 and with a miserable lightness mean to express his 
 indifference . 
 " o no - I do not   think that . " 
  - but the real truth of the matter be that there be 
 not , as some fancy , any jilting on - her part . no 
 engagement ever exist between I and Miss Ever- 
 dene . People say so , but it be untrue : she never 
 promise I ! " Boldwood stand still now and turn 
 his wild face to Oak . " O , Gabriel . " he continue , " I 
 be weak and foolish , and I do not   know what , and I 
 can not   fend off my miserable grief ! ... I have some faint 
 belief in the mercy of God till I lose that woman . yes , 
 he prepare a gourd to shade I , and like the prophet 
 I thank he and be glad . but the next day he 
 prepare a worm to smite the gourd and wither it ; and 
 I feel it be well to die than to live ! " 
 a silence follow . Boldwood arouse himself from 
 the momentary mood of confidence into which he have 
 drift , and walk on again , resume his usual reserve , 
 " no , Gabriel . " he resume , with a carelessness which 
 be like the smile on the countenance of a skull : " it 
 be make more of by other people than ever it be by 
 we . I do feel a little regret occasionally , but no woman 
 ever have power over I for any length of time . well , 
 good morning ; I can trust you not to mention to other 
 what have pass between we two here . " 
 CHAPTER XXXIX 
 come HOME - a CRY 
 on the turnpike road , between Casterbridge and 
 Weatherbury , and about three mile from the former 
 which pervade the highway of this undulating part of 
 South Wessex . I return from market it be usual 
 for the farmer and other gig - gentry to alight at the 
 bottom and walk up . 
 one Saturday evening in the month of October 
 Bathsheba 's vehicle be duly creep up this incline . 
 she be sit listlessly in the second seat of the gig , 
 whilst walk beside she in farmer 's marketing suit 
 of unusually fashionable cut be an erect , well - make 
 young man . though on foot , he hold the rein and 
 whip , and occasionally aim light cut at the horse 's 
 ear with the end of the lash , as a recreation . this 
 man be her husband , formerly Sergeant Troy , who , 
 have buy his discharge with Bathsheba 's money , 
 be gradually transform himself into a farmer of a 
 spirited and very modern school . People of unalter- 
 able idea still insist upon call he " Sergeant " 
 hen they meet he , which be in some degree owe 
 to his have still retain the well - shape moustache 
 of his military day , and the soldierly bear insepar- 
 able from his form and training . 
 " yes , if it have not   be for that wretched rain I 
 should have clear two hundred as easy as look , 
 my love . " he be say . " do not   you see , it alter 
 all the chance ? to speak like a book I once read , 
 wet weather be the narrative , and fine day be the 
 episode , of our country 's history ; now , be not   that 
 true ? " 
 " but the time of year be come for changeable weather . " 
 " well , yes . the fact be , these autumn race be the 
 ruin of everybody . never do I see such a day as ' twas ! 
 ' tis a wild open place , just out of Budmouth , and a 
 drab sea roll in towards we like liquid misery . wind 
 and rain - good Lord ! Dark ? why , ' twa as black 
 as my hat before the last race be run . ' twas five 
 o'clock , and you could not   see the horse till they be 
 almost in , leave alone colour . the ground be as 
 heavy as lead , and all judgment from a fellow 's experi- 
 ence go for nothing . horse , rider , people , be 
 all blow about like ship at sea . three booth be 
 blow over , and the wretched folk inside crawl out 
 upon their hand and knee ; and in the next field 
 be as many as a dozen hat at one time . aye , 
 Pimpernel regularly stick fast , when about sixty yard 
 off , and when I see policy step on , it do knock 
 my heart against the lining of my rib , I assure you , 
 my love ! " 
 " and you mean , Frank . " say Bathsheba , sadly - 
 her voice be painfully lower from the fulness and 
 vivacity of the previous summer - " that you have lose 
 more than a hundred pound in a month by this 
 dreadful horse - racing ? o , Frank , it be cruel ; it be 
 foolish of you to take away my money so . we shall 
 have to leave the farm ; that will be the end of it ! " 
 " Humbug about cruel . now , there ' tis again - 
 turn on the waterworks ; that be just like you . " 
 " but you will promise I not to go to Budmouth 
 second meeting , will not   you ? " she implore . Bathsheba 
 be at the full depth for tear , but she maintain a 
 dry eye . 
 " I do not   see why I should ; in fact , if it turn out to 
 be a fine day , I be think of take you . " 
 " never , never ! I will go a hundred mile the other 
 way first . I hate the sound of the very word ! " 
 " but the question of go to see the race or stay 
 at home have very little to do with the matter . bet be 
 all book safely enough before the race begin , you 
 may depend . whether it be a bad race for I or a 
 good one , will have very little to do with our go 
 there next Monday . " 
 " but you do not   mean to say that you have risk 
 anything on this one too ! " she exclaim , with an 
 agonize look . 
 " there now , do not   you be a little fool . wait till you 
 be tell . why , Bathsheba , you have lose all the pluck 
 and sauciness you formerly have , and upon my life if I 
 have know what a chicken - hearte creature you be 
 under all your boldness , I would never have - I know what . " 
 a flash of indignation might have be see in 
 Bathsheba 's dark eye as she look resolutely ahead 
 after this reply . they move on without further 
 speech , some early - wither leaf from the tree which 
 hood the road at this spot occasionally spin 
 downward across their path to the earth . 
 a woman appear on the brow of the hill . the 
 ridge be in a cutting , so that she be very near the 
 husband and wife before she become visible . Troy have 
 turn towards the gig to remount , and whilst put 
 his foot on the step - the woman pass behind he . 
 though the overshadow tree and the approach 
 of eventide envelop they in gloom , Bathsheba could 
 see plainly enough to discern the extreme poverty of 
 the woman 's garb , and the sadness of her face . 
 " please , sir , do you know at what time Casterbridge 
 Union - house close at night ? " 
 the woman say these word to Troy over his 
 shoulder . 
 Troy start visibly at the sound of the voice ; yet 
 he seem to recover presence of mind sufficient to 
 prevent himself from give way to his impulse to 
 suddenly turn and face she . he say , slowly - 
 " I do not   know . " 
 the woman , on hear he speak , quickly look 
 up , examine the side of his face , and recognize the 
 soldier under the yeoman 's garb . her face be draw 
 into an expression which have gladness and agony both 
 among its element . she utter an hysterical cry , 
 and fall down . 
 " o , poor thing ! " exclaim Bathsheba , instantly 
 prepare to alight . 
 " stay where you be , and attend to the horse ! " 
 say Troy , peremptorily throw she the rein and 
 the whip . " walk the horse to the top : I will see to 
 the woman . " 
 " but I - " 
 " do you hear ? Clk - Poppet ! " 
 the horse , gig , and Bathsheba move on . 
 " how on earth do you come here ? I think 
 you be mile away , or dead ! why do not   you 
 write to I ? " say Troy to the woman , in a strangely 
 gentle , yet hurry voice , as he lift she up . 
 " I fear to . " 
 " have you any money ? " 
 " none . " 
 " Good Heaven - I wish I have more to give you ! 
 here 's - wretched - the mere trifle . it be every 
 farthing I have leave . I have none but what my wife 
 give I , you know , and I can not   ask she now . " 
 he woman make no answer . 
 " I have only another moment . " continue Troy ; 
 " and now listen . where be you go to - night ? 
 Casterbridge Union ? " 
 " yes ; I think to go there . " 
 " you shall not   go there ; yet , wait . yes , perhaps for 
 to - night ; I can do nothing well - bad luck ! sleep 
 there to - night , and stay there to - morrow . Monday be 
 the first free day I have ; and on Monday morning , 
 at ten exactly , meet I on Grey 's Bridge just out of the 
 town . I will bring all the money I can muster . you 
 shall not   want - i'll see that , Fanny ; then I will get you a 
 lodge somewhere . good - bye till then . I be a brute 
  - but good - bye ! " 
 after advance the distance which complete the 
 ascent of the hill , Bathsheba turn her head . the 
 woman be upon her foot , and Bathsheba see she 
 withdraw from Troy , and go feebly down the 
 hill by the third milestone from Casterbridge . Troy 
 then come on towards his wife , step into the gig , 
 take the rein from her hand , and without make any 
 observation whip the horse into a trot . he be 
 rather agitated . 
 " do you know who that woman be ? " say Bath- 
 sheba , look searchingly into his face . 
 " I do . " he say , look boldly back into her . 
 " I think you do . " say she , with angry hauteur , 
 and still regard he . " who be she ? " 
 he suddenly seem to think that frankness would 
 benefit neither of the woman . 
 " nothing to either of we . " he say . " I know she 
 by sight . " 
 " what be her name ? " 
 " how should I know her name ? " 
 " I think you do . " 
 " think if you will , and be - - " the sentence be 
 complete by a smart cut of the whip round Poppet 's 
 flank , which cause the animal to start forward at a 
 wild pace . no more be say . 
 CHAPTER XL 
 ON CASTERBRIDGE HIGHWAY 
 for a considerable time the woman walk on . her 
 step become feebler , and she strain her eye to look 
 afar upon the naked road , now indistinct amid the 
 penumbrae of night . at length her onward walk 
 dwindle to the mere totter , and she open a gate 
 within which be a haystack . underneath this she sit 
 down and presently sleep . 
 when the woman awake it be to find herself in the 
 depth of a moonless and starless night . a heavy un- 
 break crust of cloud stretch across the sky , shut 
 out every speck of heaven ; and a distant halo which 
 hang over the town of Casterbridge be visible against 
 the black concave , the luminosity appear the 
 bright by its great contrast with the circumscribing 
 darkness . towards this weak , soft glow the woman 
 turn her eye . 
 " if I could only get there ! " she say . " meet he 
 the day after to - morrow : God help I ! perhaps I 
 shall be in my grave before then . " 
 a manor - house clock from the far depth of shadow 
 strike the hour , one , in a small , attenuate tone . after 
 midnight the voice of a clock seem to lose in breadth 
 as much as in length , and to diminish its sonorousness 
 to a thin falsetto . 
 afterwards a light - two light - arise from the re- 
 mote shade , and grow large . a carriage roll along 
 the toad , and pass the gate . it probably contain 
 some late diner - out . the beam from one lamp shine 
 for a moment upon the crouch woman , and throw 
 her face into vivid relieff . the face be young in the 
 groundwork , old in the finish ; the general contour 
 be flexuous and childlike , but the fine lineament 
 have begin to be sharp and thin . 
 the pedestrian stand up , apparently with revive 
 determination , and look around . the road appear 
 to be familiar to she , and she carefully scan the fence 
 as she slowly walk along . presently there become 
 visible a dim white shape ; it be another milestone . 
 she draw her finger across its face to feel the mark . 
 " two more ! " she say . 
 she leant against the stone as a means of rest for a 
 short interval , then bestir herself , and again pursue 
 her way . for a slight distance she bear up bravely , 
 afterwards flag as before . this be beside a lone 
 copsewood , wherein heap of white chip strew upon 
 the leafy ground show that woodman have be 
 faggot and make hurdle during the day . now 
 there be not a rustle , not a breeze , not the faint 
 clash of twig to keep her company . the woman 
 look over the gate , open it , and go in . close 
 to the entrance stand a row of faggot , bind and un- 
 bind , together with stake of all size . 
 for a few second the wayfarer stand with that tense 
 stillness which signify itself to be not the end but 
 merely the suspension , of a previous motion . her 
 attitude be that of a person who listen , either to the 
 external world of sound , or to the imagined discourse of 
 thought . a close criticism might have detect sign 
 prove that she be intent on the latter alternative . 
 moreover , as be show by what follow , she be 
 oddly exercise the faculty of invention upon the spe- 
 ciality of the clever Jacquet Droz , the designer of auto- 
 matic substitute for human limb . 
 by the aid of the Casterbridge aurora , and by feel 
 with her hand , the woman select two stick from the 
 heap . these stick be nearly straight to the height 
 of three or four foot , where each branch into a fork 
 like the letter Y. she sit down , snap off the small 
 upper twig , and carry the remainder with she into 
 the road . she place one of these fork under each 
 arm as a crutch , test they , timidly throw her whole 
 weight upon they - so little that it be - and swung 
 herself forward . the girl have make for herself a 
 material aid . 
 the crutch answer well . the pat of her foot , 
 and the tap of her stick upon the highway , be all the 
 sound that come from the traveller now . she have 
 pass the last milestone by a good long distance , and 
 begin to look wistfully towards the bank as if calculate 
 upon another milestone soon . the crutch , though 
 so very useful , have their limit of power . mechanism 
 only transfer labour , be powerless to supersede it , 
 and the original amount of exertion be not clear 
 away ; it be throw into the body and arm . she be 
 exhaust , and each swing forward become fainter . at 
 last she sway sideways , and fall . 
 here she lay , a shapeless heap , for ten minute and 
 more . the morning wind begin to boom dully over 
 the flat , and to move afresh dead leaf which have 
 lain still since yesterday . the woman desperately 
 turn round upon her knee , and next rise to her 
 foot . steady herself by the help of one crutch , she 
 essay a step , then another , then a third , use the 
 crutch now as walk - stick only . thus she pro- 
 gresse till descend Mellstock Hill another milestone 
 appear , and soon the beginning of an iron - rail fence 
 come into view . she stagger across to the first post , 
 clung to it , and look around . 
 the Casterbridge light be now individually visible , 
 it be get towards morning , and vehicle might be 
 hop for , if not expect soon . she listen . there 
 be not a sound of life save that acme and sublimation 
 of all dismal sound , the hark of a fox , its three hollow 
 note be render at interval of a minute with the 
 precision of a funeral bell . 
 " Less than a mile ! " the woman murmur . " no ; 
 more . " she add , after a pause . " the mile be to the 
 county hall , and my resting - place be on the other side 
 Casterbridge . a little over a mile , and there I be ! " 
 after an interval she again speak . " five or six step to 
 a yard - six perhaps . I have to go seventeen hundred 
 yard . a hundred time six , six hundred . seventeen 
 time that . o pity I , Lord ! " 
 hold to the rail , she advance , thrust one 
 hand forward upon the rail , then the other , then lean 
 over it whilst she drag her foot on beneath . 
 this woman be not give to soliloquy ; but ex- 
 tremity of feel lessen the individuality of the weak , 
 as it increase that of the strong . she say again in the 
 same tone , " I will believe that the end lie five post for- 
 ward , and no far , and so get strength to pass they . " 
 this be a practical application of the principle that 
 a half - feigned and fictitious faith be well than no faith 
 at all . 
 she pass five post and hold on to the fifth . 
 " I will pass five more by believe my long - for spot 
 be at the next fifth . I can do it . " 
 she pass five more . 
 " it lie only five far . " 
 she pass five more . 
 " but it be five far . " 
 she pass they . 
 " that stone bridge be the end of my journey . " she 
 say , when the bridge over the Froom be in view . 
 she crawl to the bridge . during the effort each 
 breath of the woman go into the air as if never to 
 return again . 
 " now for the truth of the matter . " she say , sit 
 down . " the truth be , that I have less than half a mile . " 
 self - beguilement with what she have know all the time 
 to be false have give her strength to come over half 
 a mile that she would have be powerless to face in 
 the lump . the artifice show that the woman , by 
 some mysterious intuition , have grasp the paradoxical 
 truth that blindness may operate more vigorously than 
 prescience , and the short - sighted effect more than the 
 far - seeing ; that limitation , and not comprehensiveness , 
 be need for strike a blow . 
 the half - mile stand now before the sick and weary 
 woman like a stolid Juggernaut . it be an impassive 
 king of her world . the road here run across durnover 
 Moor , open to the road on either side . she survey 
 the wide space , the light , herself , sigh , and lie down 
 against a guard - stone of the bridge . 
 never be ingenuity exercise so sorely as the 
 traveller here exercise her . every conceivable aid , 
 method , stratagem , mechanism , by which these last 
 desperate eight hundred yard could be overpasse by a 
 human being unperceive , be revolve in her busy 
 brain , and dismiss as impracticable . she think of 
 stick , wheel , crawl - she even think of roll . 
 but the exertion demand by either of these latter two 
 be great than to walk erect . the faculty of con- 
 trivance be wear out , Hopelessness have come at 
 last . 
 " no far ! " she whisper , and close her eye . 
 from the stripe of shadow on the opposite side of 
 the bridge a portion of shade seem to detach itself 
 and move into isolation upon the pale white of the road . 
 it glide noiselessly towards the recumbent woman . 
 she become conscious of something touch she 
 hand ; it be softness and it be warmth . she 
 open her eye 's , and the substance touch her face . 
 a dog be lick her cheek . 
 he be huge , heavy , and quiet creature , stand 
 darkly against the low horizon , and at least two foot 
 high than the present position of her eye . whether 
 Newfoundland , mastiff , bloodhound , or what not , it be 
 impossible to say . he seem to be of too strange and 
 mysterious a nature to belong to any variety among those 
 of popular nomenclature . be thus assignable to no 
 breed , he be the ideal embodiment of canine greatness 
  - a generalization from what be common to all . night , 
 in its sad , solemn , and benevolent aspect , apart from its 
 stealthy and cruel side , be personify in this form 
 darkness endow the small and ordinary one among 
 mankind with poetical power , and even the suffering 
 woman throw her idea into figure . 
 in her reclining position she look up to he just 
 as in early time she have , when stand , look up 
 to a man . the animal , who be as homeless as she , 
 respectfully withdraw a step or two when the woman 
 move , and , see that she do not repulse he , he 
 lick her hand again . 
 a thought move within she like lightning . " perhaps 
 I can make use of he - I might do it then ! " 
 she point in the direction of Casterbridge , and 
 the dog seem to misunderstand : he trot on . then , 
 find she could not follow , he come back and whine . 
 the ultimate and sad singularity of woman 's effort 
 and invention be reach when , with a quickened breath- 
 ing , she rise to a stoop posture , and , rest her two 
 little arm upon the shoulder of the dog , leant firmly 
 thereon , and murmur stimulate word . whilst she 
 sorrow in her heart she cheer with her voice , and 
 what be strange than that the strong should need 
 encouragement from the weak be that cheerfulness 
 should be so well stimulate by such utter dejection . 
 her friend move forward slowly , and she with small 
 mincing step move forward beside he , half her 
 weight be throw upon the animal . sometimes 
 she sink as she have sink from walk erect , from 
 the crutch , from the rail . the dog , who now 
 thoroughly understand her desire and her incapacity , 
 be frantic in his distress on these occasion ; he would 
 tug at her dress and run forward . she always call 
 he back , and it be now to be observe that the 
 woman listen for human sound only to avoid they . 
 it be evident that she have an object in keep she 
 presence on the road and her forlorn state unknown . 
 their progress be necessarily very slow . they 
 reach the bottom of the town , and the Casterbridge 
 lamp lie before they like fall Pleiads as they turn 
 to the left into the dense shade of a deserted avenue of 
 chestnut , and so skirt the borough . thus the town 
 be pass , and the goal be reach . 
 on this much - desire spot outside the town rise a 
 picturesque building . originally it have be a mere 
 case to hold people . the shell have be so thin , so 
 devoid of excrescence , and so closely draw over the 
 accommodation grant , that the grim character of 
 what be beneath show through it , as the shape of 
 a body be visible under a winding - sheet . 
 then Nature , as if offended , lend a hand . mass 
 of ivy grow up , completely cover the wall , till the 
 place look like an abbey ; and it be discover that 
 the view from the front , over the Casterbridge chimney , 
 be one of the most magnificent in the county . a 
 neighbouring earl once say that he would give up a 
 year 's rental to have at his own door the view enjoy 
 by the inmate from theirs - and very probably the 
 inmate would have give up the view for his year 's 
 rental . 
 this stone edifice consist of a central mass and 
 two wing , whereon stand as sentinel a few slim 
 chimney , now gurgle sorrowfully to the slow wind . 
 in the wall be a gate , and by the gate a bellpull 
 form of a hang wire . the woman raise herself 
 as high as possible upon her knee , and could just 
 reach the handle . she move it and fall forwards in 
 a bow attitude , her face upon her bosom . 
 it be get on towards six o'clock , and sound of 
 movement be to be hear inside the building which 
 be the haven of rest to this wearied soul . a little door 
 by the large one be open , and a man appear inside . 
 he discern the pant heap of clothe , go back 
 for a light , and come again . he enter a second 
 time , and return with two woman . 
 these lift the prostrate figure and assist she in 
 through the doorway . the man then close the door . 
 how do she get here ? " say one of the woman . 
 " the Lord know . " say the other . 
 there be a dog outside , " murmur the overcome 
 traveller . " where be he go ? he help I . " 
 I stone he away . " say the man . 
 the little procession then move forward - the man 
 in front bear the light , the two bony woman next , 
 support between they the small and supple one . 
 thus they enter the house and disappear . 
 CHAPTER XLI 
 SUSPICION - FANNY be send for 
 BATHSHEBA say very little to her husband all that 
 evening of their return from market , and he be not 
 dispose to say much to she . he exhibit the un- 
 pleasant combination of a restless condition with a 
 silent tongue . the next day , which be Sunday , pass 
 nearly in the same manner as regard their taciturnity , 
 Bathsheba go to church both morning and afternoon . 
 this be the day before the Budmouth race . in the 
 evening Troy say , suddenly - 
 " Bathsheba , could you let I have twenty pound ? " 
 her countenance instantly sink . " twenty pound ? 
 she say . 
 " the fact be , I want it badly . " the anxiety upon 
 Troy 's face be unusual and very marked . lt be a 
 culmination of the mood he have be in all the day . 
 " ah ! for those race to - morrow . " 
 Troy for the moment make no reply . her mistake 
 have its advantage to a man who shrink from have 
 his mind inspect as he do now . " well , suppose I 
 do want it for race ? " he say , at last . 
 " O , Frank ! " Bathsheba reply , and there be such 
 a volume of entreaty in the word . " only such a few 
 week ago you say that I be far sweet than all your 
 other pleasure put together , and that you would give 
 they all up for I ; and now , will not   you give up this 
 one , which be more a worry than a pleasure ? do , 
 Frank . come , let I fascinate you by all I can do 
  - by pretty word and pretty look , and everything I 
 can think of - to stay at home . say yes to your wife - 
 say yes ! " 
 the tender and soft phase of Bathsheba 's 
 nature be prominent now - advanced impulsively for 
 his acceptance , without any of the disguise and defence 
 which the wariness of her character when she be cool 
 too frequently throw over they . few man could have 
 resist the arch yet dignified entreaty of the beautiful 
 face , throw a little back and sideway in the well 
 know attitude that express more than the word it 
 accompany , and which seem to have be design 
 for these special occasion . have the woman not be 
 his wife , Troy would have succumb instantly ; as it 
 be , he think he would not deceive she long . 
 " the money be not want for race debt at all , " 
 he say . 
 " what be it for ? " she ask . " you worry I a great 
 deal by these mysterious responsibility , Frank . " 
 Troy hesitate . he do not now love she enough 
 to allow himself to be carry too far by her way . yet 
 it be necessary to be civil . " you wrong I by such 
 a suspicious manner , he say . " such strait - waistcoating 
 as you treat I to be not become in you at so early a 
 date . " 
 " I think that I have a right to grumble a little if I 
 pay . " she say , with feature between a smile and a 
 pout . 
 exactly ; and , the former be do , suppose we 
 proceed to the latter . Bathsheba , fun be all very well , 
 but do not   go too far , or you may have cause to regret 
 something . " 
 she redden . " I do that already . " she say , quickly 
 " what do you regret ? " 
 SUSPICION 
 " that my romance have come to an end . " 
 " all romance end at marriage . " 
 " I wish you would not   talk like that . you grieve I 
 to my soul by be smart at my expense . " 
 " you be dull enough at mine . I believe you hate 
 I . " 
 " not you - only your fault . I do hate they . " 
 " ' twould be much more become if you set your- 
 self to cure they . come , let us strike a balance with 
 the twenty pound , and be friend . " 
 she give a sigh of resignation . " I have about that 
 sum here for household expense . if you must have it , 
 take it . " 
 " very good . thank you . I expect I shall have 
 go away before you be in to breakfast to - morrow . " 
 " and must you go ? ah ! there be a time , Frank , 
 when it would have take a good many promise to 
 other people to drag you away from I . you use to 
 call I darling , then . but it do not   matter to you how 
 my day be pass now . " 
 " I must go , in spite of sentiment . " Troy , as he 
 speak , look at his watch , and , apparently actuate by 
 NON LUCENDO principle , open the case at the back , 
 reveal , snugly stow within it , a small coil of hair . 
 Bathsheba 's eye have be accidentally lift at that 
 moment , and she see the action and see the hair . she 
 flush in pain and surprise , and some word escape 
 she before she have think whether or not it be wise 
 to utter they . " a woman 's curl of hair ! " she say . 
 " o , Frank , whose be that ? " 
 Troy have instantly close his watch . he carelessly 
 reply , as one who cloak some feeling that the sight 
 have stir . " why , your , of course . whose should it 
 be ? I have quite forget that I have it . " 
 " what a dreadful fib , Frank ! " 
 " I tell you I have forget it ! " he say , loudly . 
 " I do not   mean that - it be yellow hair . " 
 " nonsense . " 
 " that be insult I . I know it be yellow . now 
 whose be it ? I want to know . " 
 " very well I will tell you , so make no more ado . it 
 be the hair of a young woman I be go to marry 
 before I know you . " 
 " you ought to tell I her name , then . " 
 " I can not do that . " 
 " be she married yet ? " 
 " no . " 
 " be she alive ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " be she pretty ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " it be wonderful how she can be , poor thing , under 
 such an awful affliction ! " 
 " affliction - what affliction ? " he inquire , quickly . 
 " have hair of that dreadful colour . " 
 " oh - ho - I like that ! " say Troy , recover him- 
 self . " why , her hair have be admire by everybody 
 who have see she since she have wear it loose , which have 
 not be long . it be beautiful hair . People use to 
 turn their head to look at it , poor girl ! " 
 " Pooh ! that be nothing - that be nothing ! " she ex- 
 claim , in incipient accent of pique . " if I care for 
 your love as much as I use to I could say people have 
 turn to look at mine . " 
 " Bathsheba , do not   be so fitful and jealous . you 
 know what married life would be like , and should not 
 have enter it if you fear these contingency . " 
 Troy have by this time drive she to bitterness : her 
 heart be big in her throat , and the duct to her eye 
 be painfully full . ashamed as she be to show 
 emotion , at last she burst out : - 
 " this be all I get for love you so well ! ah ! when 
 I marry you your life be dearer to I than my own . 
 I would have die for you - how truly I can say that I 
 would have die for you ! and now you sneer at my 
 foolishness in marry you . o ! be it kind to I to 
 throw my mistake in my face ? whatever opinion you 
 may have of my wisdom , you should not tell I of it so 
 mercilessly , now that I be in your power . " 
 " I can not   help how thing fall out . " say Troy ; " upon 
 my heart , woman will be the death of I ! " 
 " well you should not   keep people 's hair . you will 
 burn it , will not   you , Frank ? " 
 Frank go on as if he have not hear she . " there 
 be consideration even before my consideration for you ; 
 reparation to be make - tie you know nothing of if 
 you repent of marrying , so do I. " 
 tremble now , she put her hand upon his arm , 
 say , in mingled tone of wretchedness and coax , 
 " I only repent it if you do not   love I well than any 
 woman in the world ! I do not   otherwise , Frank . you 
 do not   repent because you already love somebody well 
 than you love I , do you ? " 
 " I do not   know . why do you say that ? " 
 " you will not   burn that curl . you like the woman 
 who own that pretty hair - yes ; it be pretty - more 
 beautiful than my miserable black mane ! well , it be 
 no use ; I can not   help be ugly . you must like she 
 well , if you will ! " 
 " until to - day , when I take it from a drawer , I have 
 never look upon that bit of hair for several month - 
 that I be ready to swear . " 
 " but just now you say " tie ; " and then - that 
 woman we meet ? " 
 " ' twas the meeting with she that remind I of 
 the hair . " 
 " be it her , then ? " 
 " yes . there , now that you have worm it out of 
 I , I hope you be content . " 
 " and what be the tie ? " 
 " oh ! that mean nothing - a mere jest . " 
 " a mere jest ! " she say , in mournful astonishment . 
 " can you jest when I be so wretchedly in earnest ? 
 tell I the truth , Frank . I be not a fool , you know , 
 although I be a woman , and have my woman 's moment . 
 come ! treat I fairly . " she say , look honestly and 
 fearlessly into his face . " I do not   want much ; bare 
 justice - that be all ! ah ! once I feel I could be content 
 with nothing less than the high homage from the 
 husband I should choose . now , anything short of 
 cruelty will content I . yes ! the independent and 
 spirited Bathsheba be come to this ! " 
 " for Heaven 's sake do not   be so desperate!"troy 
 say , snappishly , rise as he do so , and leave the 
 room . 
 directly he have go , Bathsheba burst into great 
 sobs - dry - eyed sob , which cut as they come , without 
 any softening by tear . but she determine to repress 
 all evidence of feeling . she be conquer ; but she 
 would never own it as long as she live . her pride 
 be indeed bring low by despair discovery of her 
 spoliation by marriage with a less pure nature than her 
 own . she chafe to and fro in rebelliousness , like a 
 cage leopard ; her whole soul be in arm , and the 
 blood fire her face . until she have meet Troy , bath- 
 sheba have be proud of her position as a woman ; it 
 have be a glory to she to know that her lip have be 
 touch by no man 's on earth - that her waist have 
 never be encircle by a lover 's arm . she hat 
 herself now . in those early day she have always 
 nourish a secret contempt for girl who be the 
 slave of the first goodlooke young fellow who should 
 choose to salute they . she have never take kindly to 
 the idea of marriage in the abstract as do the majority 
 of woman she see about she . in the turmoil of her 
 anxiety for her lover she have agree to marry he ; but 
 the perception that have accompany her happy hour 
 on this account be rather that of self - sacrifice than of 
 promotion and honour . although she scarcely know 
 the divinity 's name , Diana be the goddess whom 
 Bathsheba instinctively adore . that she have never , 
 by look , word , or sign , encourage a man to approach 
 she - that she have feel herself sufficient to herself , and 
 have in the independence of her girlish heart fancy 
 there be a certain degradation in renounce the 
 simplicity of a maiden existence to become the humbler 
 half of an indifferent matrimonial whole - be fact 
 now bitterly remember . o , if she have never 
 stoop to folly of this kind , respectable as it be , and 
 could only stand again , as she have stand on the hill at 
 Norcombe , and dare Troy or any other man to pollute 
 a hair of her head by his interference ! 
 the next morning she rise early than usual , and 
 have the horse saddle for her ride round the farm in 
 the customary way . when she come in at half - past 
 eight - their usual hour for breakfasting - she be in- 
 form that her husband have rise , take his breakfast , 
 and drive off to Casterbridge with the gig and Poppet . 
 after breakfast she be cool and collect - quite 
 herself in fact - and she ramble to the gate , intend 
 to walk to another quarter of the farm , which she still 
 personally superintend as well as her duty in the 
 house would permit , continually , however , find her- 
 self precede in forethought by Gabriel Oak , for whom 
 she begin to entertain the genuine friendship of a sister . 
 of course , she sometimes think of he in the light of 
 an old lover , and have momentary imagining of what 
 life with he as a husband would have be like ; also 
 of life with Boldwood under the same condition . but 
 Bathsheba , though she could feel , be not much give 
 to futile dreaming , and her musing under this head 
 be short and entirely confine to the time when 
 Troy 's neglect be more than ordinarily evident . 
 she see come up the road a man like Mr. Boldwood . 
 it be Mr. Boldwood . Bathsheba blush painfully , 
 and watch . the farmer stop when still a long 
 way off , and hold up his hand to Gabriel Oak , who be 
 in a footpath across the field . the two man then 
 approach each other and seem to engage in 
 earnest conversation . 
 thus they continue for a long time . Joseph poor- 
 grass now pass near they , wheel a barrow of apple 
 up the hill to Bathsheba 's residence . Boldwood and 
 Gabriel call to he , speak to he for a few minute , 
 and then all three part , Joseph immediately come 
 up the hill with his barrow . 
 Bathsheba , who have see this pantomime with some 
 surprise , experience great relief when Boldwood turn 
 back again . " well , what be the message , Joseph ? " she 
 say . 
 he set down his barrow , and , put upon himself 
 the refined aspect that a conversation with a lady re- 
 quire , speak to Bathsheba over the gate . 
 " you will never see Fanny Robin no more - use nor 
 principal - ma'am . " 
 " why ? " 
 " because she be dead in the Union . " 
 " fanny dead - never ! " 
 " yes , ma'am . " 
 " what do she die from ? " 
 " I do not   know for certain ; but I should be incline 
 to think it be from general weakness of constitution . 
 she be such a limber maid that ' a could stand no 
 hardship , even when I know she , and ' a go like a 
 candle - snoff , so ' tis say . she be take bad in the 
 morning , and , be quite feeble and wear out , she 
 die in the evening . she belong by law to our parish ; 
 and Mr. Boldwood be go to send a waggon at three 
 this afternoon to fetch her home here and bury she . " 
 " indeed I shall not let Mr. Boldwood do any such 
 thing - I shall do it ! Fanny be my uncle 's servant , 
 and , although I only know she for a couple of day , 
 FANNY be send for 
 she belong to I . how very , very sad this be ! - 
 the idea of Fanny be in a workhouse . " Bathsheba 
 have begin to know what suffering be , and she speak 
 with real feeling .... " send across to Mr. Boldwood 's , 
 and say that Mrs. Troy will take upon herself the duty 
 of fetch an old servant of the family .... we 
 ought not to put she in a waggon ; we will get a hearse . " 
 " there will hardly be time , ma'am , will there ? " 
 " perhaps not . " she say , musingly . " when do you 
 say we must be at the door - three o'clock ? " 
 " three o'clock this afternoon , ma'am , so to speak it . " 
 " very well - you go with it . a pretty waggon be 
 well than an ugly hearse , after all . Joseph , have the 
 new spring waggon with the blue body and red wheel , 
 and wash it very clean . and , Joseph - - " 
 " yes , ma'am . " 
 " carry with you some evergreen and flower to put 
 upon her coffin - indeed , gather a great many , and 
 completely bury she in they . get some bough of 
 laurustinus , and variegate box , and yew , and boy'siove ; 
 ay , and some hunch of chrysanthemum . and let old 
 Pleasant draw she , because she know he so well . "I will , ma'am . I ought 
 to have say that the 
 Union , in the form of four labour man , will meet I 
 when I get to our churchyard gate , and take she and 
 bury she accord to the rite of the Board of Guardians , 
 as by law ordain . " 
 " dear I - Casterbridge Union - and be Fanny come 
 to this ? " say Bathsheba , musing . " I wish I have know 
 of it soon . I think she be far away . how long 
 have she live there ? " 
 " On'y be there a day or two . " 
 " oh ! - then she have not be stay there as a 
 regular inmate ? " 
 " no . she first go to live in a garrison - town t'other 
 side o ' wessex , and since then she be be pick up a 
 live at seampstere in Melchester for several month , 
 at the house of a very respectable widow - woman who 
 take in work of that sort . she only get handy the 
 Union - house on Sunday morning ' a b'lieve , and ' tis sup- 
 pose here and there that she have traipse every step 
 of the way from Melchester . why she leave her place , 
 I can not   say , for I do not   know ; and as to a lie , why , I 
 would not   tell it . that be the short of the story , ma'am . " 
 " ah - h ! " 
 no gem ever flash from a rosy ray to a white one 
 more rapidly than change the young wife 's counten- 
 ance whilst this word come from she in a long - draw 
 breath . " do she walk along our turnpike - road ? " she 
 say , in a suddenly restless and eager voice . 
 " I believe she do .... Ma'am , shall I call Liddy ? 
 you bain't   well , ma'am , surely ? you look like a lily - 
 so pale and fainty ! " 
 " no ; do not   call she ; it be nothing . when do she 
 pass Weatherbury ? " 
 " last Saturday night . " 
 " that will do , Joseph ; now you may go . " 
 certainly , ma'am . " 
 " Joseph , come hither a moment . what be the 
 colour of Fanny Robin 's hair ? " 
 " really , mistress , now that ' tis put to I so judge- 
 and - jury like , I can not   call to mind , if ye'll believe I ! " 
 " never mind ; go on and do what I tell you . stop 
  - well no , go on . " 
 she turn herself away from he , that he might no 
 long notice the mood which have set its sign so visibly 
 upon she , and go indoor with a distressing sense of 
 faintness and a beat brow . about an hour after , she 
 hear the noise of the waggon and go out , still with a 
 painful consciousness of her bewilder and troubled 
 look . Joseph , dress in his good suit of clothe , be 
 put in the horse to start . the shrub and flower 
 be all pile in the waggon , as she have direct 
 Bathsheba hardly see they now . 
 " whose sweetheart do you say , Joseph ? " 
 " I do not   know , ma'am . " 
 " be you quite sure ? " 
 " yes , ma'am , quite sure . "sure of what ? " 
 " I be sure that all I know be that she arrive in the 
 morning and die in the evening without further parley . 
 what Oak and Mr. Boldwood tell I be only these 
 few word . ` little Fanny Robin be dead , Joseph , ' 
 Gabriel say , look in my face in his steady old way . 
 I be very sorry , and I say , ` ah ! - and how do she 
 come to die ? ' ` well , she be dead in Casterhridge 
 Union , ' he say , ` and perhaps ' tisn't   much matter 
 about how she come to die . she reach the Union 
 early Sunday morning , and die in the afternoon - that be 
 clear enough . ' then I ask what she have be do 
 lately , and Mr. Boldwood turn round to I then , and 
 leave off spit a thistle with the end of his stick . he 
 tell I about she have live by seampstere in 
 Melchester , as I mention to you , and that she walk 
 therefrom at the end of last week , pass near here 
 Saturday night in the dusk . they then say I have 
 well just name a hint of her death to you , and away 
 they go . her death might have be bring on by 
 biding in the night wind , you know , ma'am ; for people 
 use to say she would go off in a decline : she use to cough 
 a good deal in winter time . however , ' tisn't   much 
 odd to we about that now , for ' tis all over . " 
 " have you hear a different story at all ? ' she 
 look at he so intently that Joseph 's eye quail . 
 " not a word , mistress , I assure ' ee ! " he say . 
 " hardly anybody in the parish know the news yet . " 
 " I wonder why Gabriel do not   bring the message to 
 I himself . he mostly make a point of see I 
 upon the most trifling errand . " these word be 
 merely murmur , and she be look upon the ground . 
 " perhaps he be busy , ma'am . " Joseph suggest . 
 " and sometimes he seem to suffer from thing upon 
 his mind , connect with the time when he be well 
 off than ' a be now . ' a be rather a curious item , but a 
 very understand shepherd , and learn in book . " 
 " do anything seem upon his mind whilst he be 
 speak to you about this ? " 
 " I can not but say that there do , ma'am . he be 
 terrible down , and so be Farmer Boldwood . " 
 " thank you , Joseph . that will do . go on now , 
 or you will be late . " 
 Bathsheba , still unhappy , go indoor again . in 
 the course of the afternoon she say to Liddy , who have 
 be inform of the occurrence , " what be the colour 
 of poor Fanny Robin 's hair ? do you know ? I can not 
 recollect - I only see she for a day or two . " 
 " it be light , ma'am ; but she wear it rather short , 
 and pack away under her cap , so that you would 
 hardly notice it . but I have see she let it down when 
 she be go to bed , and it look beautiful then . 
 real golden hair . " 
 " her young man be a soldier , be he not ? " 
 " yes . in the same regiment as Mr. Troy . he say 
 he know he very well . "what , Mr. Troy say so ? how come he to say 
 that ? " 
 " one day I just name it to he , and ask he if 
 he know Fanny 's young man . he say , " o yes , he 
 know the young man as well as he know himself , and 
 that there be not   a man in the regiment he like 
 well . " 
 " ah ! say that , do he ? " 
 " yes ; and he say there be a strong likeness be- 
 tween himself and the other young man , so that some- 
 time people mistook they - - " 
 " Liddy , for Heaven 's sake stop your talking ! " say 
 Bathsheba , with the nervous petulance that come from 
 worry perception . 
 CHAPTER XLII 
 JOSEPH and his BURDEN 
 a WALL bound the site of Casterbridge Union- 
 house , except along a portion of the end . here a high 
 gable stand prominent , and it be cover like the front 
 with a mat of ivy . in this gable be no window , 
 chimney , ornament , or protuberance of any kind . the 
 single feature appertain to it , beyond the expanse of 
 dark green leaf , be a small door . 
 the situation of the door be peculiar . the sill 
 be three or four foot above the ground , and for a 
 moment one be at a loss for an explanation of this 
 exceptional altitude , till rut immediately beneath sug- 
 geste that the door be use solely for the passage of 
 article and person to and from the level of a vehicle 
 stand on the outside . upon the whole , the door 
 seem to advertise itself as a species of Traitor 's Gate 
 translate to another sphere . that entry and exit 
 hereby be only at rare interval become apparent on 
 note that tuft of grass be allow to flourish undis- 
 turbe in the chink of the sill . 
 as the clock over the south - street Alms - house point 
 to five minute to three , a blue spring waggon , pick 
 out with red , and contain bough and flower , pass 
 the end of the street , and up towards this side of the 
 building . whilst the chime be yet stammer out 
 a shattered form of " malbrook . " Joseph Poorgrass rang 
 the bell , and receive direction to back his waggon 
 against the high door under the gable . the door then 
 open , and a plain elm coffin be slowly thrust forth , 
 and lay by two man in fustian along the middle of the 
 vehicle . 
 one of the man then step up beside it , take from 
 his pocket a lump of chalk , and write upon the cover 
 the name and a few other word in a large scrawling 
 hand .   we believe that they do these thing more 
 tenderly now , and provide a plate .   he cover the 
 whole with a black cloth , threadbare , but decent , the 
 tailboard of the waggon be return to its place , one 
 of the man hand a certificate of registry to Poorgrass , 
 and both enter the door , close it behind they . 
 their connection with she , short as it have be , be 
 over for ever . 
 Joseph then place the flower as enjoin , and the 
 evergreen around the flower , till it be difficult to 
 divine what the waggon contain ; he smack his 
 whip , and the rather pleasing funeral car creep down 
 the hill , and along the road to Weatherbury . 
 the afternoon draw on apace , and , look to the 
 right towards the sea as he walk beside the horse , poor- 
 grass see strange cloud and scroll of mist roll over 
 the long ridge which girt the landscape in that quarter . 
 they come in yet great volume , and indolently creep 
 across the intervening valley , and around the wither 
 papery flag of the moor and river brink . then their 
 dank spongy form close in upon the sky . it be 
 a sudden overgrowth of atmospheric fungus which have 
 their root in the neighbouring sea , and by the time 
 that horse , man , and corpse enter Yalbury Great 
 Wood , these silent working of an invisible hand have 
 reach they , and they be completely envelop , 
 this be the first arrival of the autumn fog , and the 
 first fog of the series . 
 the air be as an eye suddenly strike blind . the 
 waggon and its load roll no long on the horizontal 
 division between clearness and opacity , but be 
 imbed in an elastic body of a monotonous pallor 
 throughout . there be no perceptible motion in the 
 air , not a visible drop of water fall upon a leaf of the 
 beech , birch , and fir compose the wood on either 
 side . the tree stand in an attitude of intentness , as if 
 they wait longingly for a wind to come and rock 
 they . a startling quiet overhung all surround thing 
  - so completely , that the crunching of the waggon- 
 wheel be as a great noise , and small rustle , which 
 have never obtain a hearing except by night , be dis- 
 tinctly individualized . 
 Joseph Poorgrass look round upon his sad burden 
 as it loom faintly through the flower laurustinus , 
 then at the unfathomable gloom amid the high tree on 
 each hand , indistinct , shadowless , and spectrelike in 
 their monochrome of grey . he feel anything but cheer- 
 ful , and wish he have the company even of a child or 
 dog . stop the home , he listen . not a footstep 
 or wheel be audible anywhere around , and the dead 
 silence be break only by a heavy particle fall from 
 a tree through the evergreen and alight with a smart 
 rap upon the coffin of poor Fanny . the fog have by 
 this time saturate the tree , and this be the first 
 dropping of water from the overbrimme leaf . the 
 hollow echo of its fall remind the waggoner painfully 
 of the grim Leveller . then hard by come down another 
 drop , then two or three . presently there be a continual 
 tapping of these heavy drop upon the dead leaf , the 
 road , and the traveller . the nearer bough be bead 
 with the mist to the greyness of aged man , and the rusty- 
 red leaf of the beech be hang with similar drop , 
 like diamond on auburn hair . 
 at the roadside hamlet call Roy - Town , just beyond 
 this wood , be the old inn Buck 's Head . it be about 
 a mile and a half from Weatherbury , and in the meridian 
 time of stage - coach travelling have be the place 
 where many coach change and keep their relay 
 of horse . all the old stabling be now pull down , 
 and little remain besides the habitable inn itself , 
 which , stand a little way back from the road , sig- 
 nifie its existence to people far up and down the 
 highway by a sign hang from the horizontal bough 
 of an elm on the opposite side of the way . 
 traveller - for the variety tourist have hardly 
 develop into a distinct specie at this date - some- 
 time say in pass , when they cast their eye up to 
 the sign - bear tree , that artist be fond of repre- 
 sente the signboard hang thus , but that they 
 themselves have never before notice so perfect an 
 instance in actual working order . it be near this tree 
 that the waggon be stand into which Gabriel Oak 
 creep on his first journey to Weatherbury ; but , owe 
 to the darkness , the sign and the inn have be un- 
 observe . 
 the manner of the inn be of the old - establish 
 type . indeed , in the mind of its frequenter they 
 exist as unalterable formulae : E.G. - 
 Rap with the bottom of your pint for more liquor . 
 for tobacco , shout . 
 in call for the girl in waiting , say , " Maid ! " 
 ditto for the landlady , " Old Soul ! " etc . , etc . 
 it be a relief to Joseph 's heart when the friendly 
 signboard come in view , and , stop his horse 
 immediately beneath it , he proceed to fulfil an 
 intention make a long time before . his spirit be 
 ooze out of he quite . he turn the horse 's head 
 to the green bank , and enter the hostel for a mug 
 of ale . 
 go down into the kitchen of the inn , the floor 
 of which be a step below the passage , which in its 
 turn be a step below the road outside , what should 
 Joseph see to gladden his eye but two copper - colour 
 disc , in the form of the countenance of Mr. Jan 
 Coggan and Mr. Mark Clark . these owner of the 
 two most appreciative throat in the neighbourhood , 
 within the pale of respectability , be now sit face 
 to face over a threelegge circular table , have an 
 iron rim to keep cup and pot from be accidentally 
 elbow off ; they might have be say to resemble 
 the set sun and the full moon shin VIS - a - vis 
 across the globe . 
 " why , ' tis neighbour Poorgrass ! " say Mark Clark . 
 " I be sure your face do not   praise your mistress 's table , 
 Joseph . " 
 " I have   have a very pale companion for the last four 
 mile . " say Joseph , indulge in a shudder tone 
 down by resignation . " and to speak the truth , ' twa 
 begin to tell upon I . I assure ye , I ha'n't   seed 
 the colour of victual or drink since breakfast time 
 this morning , and that be no more than a dew - bit 
 afield . " 
 " then drink , Joseph , and do not   restrain yourself ! " 
 say Coggan , hand he a hoop mug three- 
 quarter full . 
 Joseph drink for a moderately long time , then for 
 a long time , say , as he lower the jug , " ' tis 
 pretty drinking - very pretty drinking , and be more 
 than cheerful on my melancholy errand , so to speak it . " 
 " true , drink be a pleasant delight . " say Jan , as one 
 who repeat a truism so familiar to his brain that he 
 hardly notice its passage over his tongue ; and , 
 lift the cup , Coggan tilt his head gradually 
 backwards , with closed eye , that his expectant soul 
 might not be divert for one instant from its bliss 
 by irrelevant surrounding . 
 " well , I must be on again . " say Poorgrass . " not 
 but that I should like another nip with ye ; but the 
 parish might lose confidence in I if I be seed 
 here . " 
 " where be ye trading o't to to - day , then , Joseph ? " 
 " back to Weatherbury . I have   get poor little Fanny 
 Robin in my waggon outside , and I must be at the 
 churchyard gate at a quarter to five with she . " 
 " ay - i've   hear of it . and so she be nail up in 
 parish board after all , and nobody to pay the bell 
 shilling and the grave half - crown . " 
 " the parish pay the grave half - crown , but not the 
 bell shilling , because the bell 's a luxery : but ' a can 
 hardly do without the grave , poor body . however , I 
 expect our mistress will pay all . " 
 " a pretty maid as ever I see ! but what be yer hurry , 
 Joseph ? the pore woman 's dead , and you can not   bring 
 she to life , and you may as well sit down comfortable , 
 and finish another with we . " 
 " I do not   mind take just the least thimbleful ye 
 can dream of more with ye , sonny . but only a few 
 minute , because ' tis as ' tis . " 
 " of course , you will have another drop . a man 's 
 twice the man afterwards . you feel so warm and 
 glorious , and you whop and slap at your work without 
 any trouble , and everything go on like stick a- 
 breaking . too much liquor be bad , and lead we to 
 that horn man in the smoky house ; but after all , 
 many people have not   the gift of enjoy a wet , and 
 since we be highly favour with a power that way , 
 we should make the most o't . "true . " say Mark Clark . " ' tis a talent the 
 Lord 
 have mercifully bestow upon we , and we ought not 
 to neglect it . but , what with the parson and clerk 
 and schoolpeople and serious tea - party , the merry 
 old way of good life have go to the dog - upon 
 my carcase , they have ! " 
 " well , really , I must be onward again now . " say 
 Joseph . 
 " now , now , Joseph ; nonsense ! the poor woman 
 be dead , be not   she , and what be your hurry ? " 
 " well , I hope Providence will not   be in a way with 
 I for my doing . " say Joseph , again sit down . 
 " I have   be trouble with weak moment lately , ' tis 
 true . I have   be drinky once this month already , and 
 I do not go to church a - Sunday , and I drop a 
 curse or two yesterday ; so I do not   want to go too far 
 for my safety . your next world be your next world , 
 and not to be squander offhand . " 
 " I believe ye to be a chapelmember , Joseph . that 
 I do . " 
 " oh , no , no ! I do not   go so far as that . " 
 " for my part . " say Coggan , " I be staunch Church 
 of England . " 
 " ay , and faith , so be I. " say Mark Clark . 
 " I will not   say much for myself ; I do not   wish to , " 
 Coggan continue , with that tendency to talk on 
 principle which be characteristic of the barley - corn . 
 " but I have   never change a single doctrine : I have   stick 
 like a plaster to the old faith I be bear in . yes ; 
 there be this to be say for the Church , a man can 
 belong to the church and bide in his cheerful old 
 inn , and never trouble or worry his mind about 
 doctrine at all . but to be a meetinger , you must 
 go to chapel in all wind and weather , and make 
 yerself as frantic as a skit . not but that chapel 
 member be clever chap enough in their way . they 
 can lift up beautiful prayer out of their own head , all 
 about their family and shipwreck in the newspaper . " 
 " they can - they can . " say Mark Clark , with cor- 
 roborative feeling ; " but we Churchmen , you see , must 
 have it all print aforehand , or , dang it all , we should 
 no more know what to say to a great gaffer like the 
 Lord than babe unborn , " 
 " Chapelfolk be more hand - in - glove with they above 
 than we . " say Joseph , thoughtfully . 
 " yes . " say Coggan . " we know very well that if 
 anybody do go to heaven , they will . they have   work 
 hard for it , and they deserve to have it , such as ' tis . 
 I bain't   such a fool as to pretend that we who stick 
 to the Church have the same chance as they , because 
 we know we have not . but I hate a feller who will 
 change his old ancient doctrine for the sake of get 
 to heaven . I would as soon turn king's - evidence for the 
 few pound you get . why , neighbour , when every 
 one of my tatie be frost , our Parson thirdly 
 be the man who give I a sack for seed , though 
 he hardly have one for his own use , and no money to 
 buy them . if it have not   be for he , I should not   hae 
 have a tatie to put in my garden . D'ye think I would 
 turn after that ? no , I will stick to my side ; and if we 
 be in the wrong , so be it : I will fall with the fall ! " 
 " well say - very well say . " observe Joseph . - 
 " however , folk , I must be move now : upon my life 
 I must . pa'son thirdly will be wait at the church 
 gate , and there be the woman a - biding outside in the 
 waggon . " 
 " Joseph Poorgrass , do not   be so miserable ! pa'son 
 thirdly will not   mind . he be a generous man ; he be find 
 I in tract for year , and I have   consume a good many 
 in the course of a long and shady life ; but he be never 
 be the man to cry out at the expense . sit down . " 
 the long Joseph Poorgrass remain , the less his 
 spirit be trouble by the duty which devolve upon 
 he this afternoon . the minute glide by uncounted , 
 until the evening shade begin perceptibly to deepen , 
 and the eye of the three be but sparkle point 
 on the surface of darkness . Coggan 's repeater strike 
 six from his pocket in the usual still small tone . 
 at that moment hasty step be hear in the entry , 
 and the door open to admit the figure of Gabriel Oak , 
 follow by the maid of the inn bear a candle . he 
 star sternly at the one lengthy and two round face 
 of the sitter , which confront he with the expression 
 of a fiddle and a couple of warming - pan . Joseph poor- 
 grass blink , and shrink several inch into the back- 
 ground . 
 " upon my soul , I be ashamed of you ; ' tis disgraceful , 
 Joseph , disgraceful ! " say Gabriel , indignantly . " Coggan , 
 you call yourself a man , and do not   know well than this . " 
 Coggan look up indefinitely at Oak , one or other 
 of his eye occasionally open and closing of its own 
 accord , as if it be not a member , but a dozy individual 
 with a distinct personality . 
 " do not   take on so , shepherd ! " say Mark Clark , 
 look reproachfully at the candle , which appear 
 to possess special feature of interest for his eye . 
 " nobody can hurt a dead woman . " at length say 
 Coggan , with the precision of a machine . " all that 
 could be do for she be do - she be beyond we : and 
 why should a man put himself in a tearing hurry for 
 lifeless clay that can neither feel nor see , and do not 
 know what you do with she at all ? if she have be 
 alive , I would have be the first to help she . if she 
 now want victual and drink , I would pay for it , money 
 down . but she be dead , and no speed of our will 
 bring she to life . the woman 's past we - time spend 
 upon she be throw away : why should we hurry to 
 do what be not require ? drink , shepherd , and be 
 friend , for to - morrow we may be like she . " 
 " we may . " add Mark Clark , emphatically , at once 
 drink himself , to run no further risk of lose his 
 chance by the event allude to , Jan meanwhile merge 
 his additional thought of to - morrow in a song : - 
 to - mor - row , to - mor - row ! 
 and while peace and plen - ty I find at my board , 
 with a heart free from sick - ness and sor - row , 
 with my friend will I share what to - day may af - ford , 
 and let they spread the ta - ble to - mor - row . 
 to - mor - row ' , to - mor - 
 " do hold thy horning , Jan ! " say Oak ; and turn 
 upon Poorgrass , " as for you , Joseph , who do your wicked 
 deed in such confoundedly holy way , you be as drunk 
 as you can stand . " 
 " no , Shepherd Oak , no ! listen to reason , shepherd . 
 all that be the matter with I be the affliction call a 
 multiplying eye , and that be how it be I look double to 
 you - I mean , you look double to I . " 
 a multiplying eye be a very bad thing . " say Mark 
 Clark . 
 " it always come on when I have be in a public - 
 house a little time . " say Joseph Poorgrass , meekly . 
 " yes ; I see two of every sort , as if I be some holy 
 man live in the time of King Noah and enter 
 into the ark .... Y - y - y - yes . " he add , become much 
 affect by the picture of himself as a person throw 
 away , and shed tear ; " I feel too good for England : 
 I ought to have live in Genesis by right , like the other 
 man of sacrifice , and then I should not   have b - b - be 
 call a d - d - drunkard in such a way ! " 
 " I wish you would show yourself a man of spirit , and not 
 sit whine there ! " 
 " show myself a man of spirit ? ... ah , well ! let 
 I take the name of drunkard humbly - iet I be a 
 man of contrite knee - iet it be ! l know that I always 
 do say " please God " afore I do anything , from my 
 get up to my go down of the same , and I be 
 willing to take as much disgrace as there be in that 
 holy act . hah , yes ! ... but not a man of spirit ? 
 have I ever allow the toe of pride to be lift 
 against my hinder part without groan manfully that 
 I question the right to do so ? I inquire that query 
 boldly ? " 
 " we can not   say that you have , Hero Poorgrass , " 
 admit Jan. 
 " never have I allow such treatment to pass un- 
 question ! yet the shepherd say in the face of that 
 rich testimony that I be not a man of spirit ! well , 
 let it pass by , and death be a kind friend ! " 
 Gabriel , see that neither of the three be in a fit 
 state to Cake charge of the waggon for the remainder of 
 the journey , make no reply , but , close the door again 
 upon they , go across to where the vehicle stand , now 
 get indistinct in the fog and gloom of this mildewy 
 time . he pull the horse 's head from the large patch 
 of turf it have eat bare , readjust the bough over 
 the coffin , and drive along through the unwholesome 
 night . 
 it have gradually become rumour in the village 
 that the body to be bring and bury that day be 
 all that be leave of the unfortunate Fanny Robin who 
 have follow the Eleventh from Casterbridge through 
 Melchester and onwards . but , thank to Boldwood 's 
 reticence and Oak 's generosity , the lover she have follow 
 have never be individualized as Troy . Gabriel hop 
 that the whole truth of the matter might not be publish 
 till at any rate the girl have be in her grave for a few 
 day , when the interpose barrier of earth and time , 
 and a sense that the event have be somewhat shut 
 into oblivion , would deaden the sting that revelation and 
 invidious remark would have for Bathsheba just now . 
 by the time that Gabriel reach the old manor- 
 house , her residence , which lie in his way to the church , 
 it be quite dark . a man come from the gate and say 
 through the fog , which hang between they like blow 
 flour - 
 " be that Poorgrass with the corpse ? " 
 Gabriel recognize the voice as that of the parson . 
 " the corpse be here , sir . " say Gabriel . 
 " I have just be to inquire of Mrs. Troy if she could 
 tell I the reason of the delay . I be afraid it be too 
 late now for the funeral to be perform with proper 
 decency . have you the registrar 's certificate ? " 
 " no . " say Gabriel . " I expect Poorgrass have that ; 
 and he be at the Buck 's Head . I forget to ask he 
 for it . " 
 " then that settle the matter . we will put off the 
 funeral till to - morrow morning . the body may be 
 bring on to the church , or it may be leave here at 
 the farm and fetch by the bearer in the morning . 
 they wait more than an hour , and have now go 
 home . " 
 Gabriel have his reason for think the latter a 
 most objectionable plan , notwithstanding that Fanny 
 have be an inmate of the farm - house for several year 
 in the lifetime of Bathsheba 's uncle . vision of several 
 unhappy contingency which might arise from this delay 
 flit before he . but his will be not law , and he 
 go indoor to inquire of his mistress what be she 
 wish on the subject . he find she in an unusual 
 mood : her eye as she look up to he be suspicious 
 and perplex as with some antecedent thought . Troy 
 have not yet return . at first Bathsheba assent with 
 a mien of indifference to his proposition that they should 
 go on to the church at once with their burden ; but 
 immediately afterwards , follow Gabriel to the gate , 
 she swerve to the extreme of solicitousness on Fanny 's 
 account , and desire that the girl might be bring into 
 the house . Oak argue upon the convenience of leave 
 she in the waggon , just as she lie now , with her flower 
 and green leaf about she , merely wheel the vehicle 
 into the coach - house till the morning , but to no purpose , 
 " it be unkind and unchristian . " she say , " to leave the 
 poor thing in a coach - house all night . " 
 very well , then . " say the parson . " and I will 
 arrange that the funeral shall take place early to- 
 morrow . perhaps Mrs. Troy be right in feeling that we 
 can not treat a dead fellow - creature too thoughtfully 
 we must remember that though she may have err 
 grievously in leave her home , she be still our sister : 
 and it be to be believe that God 's uncovenante 
 mercy be extend towards she , and that she be a 
 member of the flock of Christ . " 
 the parson 's word spread into the heavy air with a 
 sad yet unperturbed cadence , and Gabriel shed an 
 honest tear . Bathsheba seem unmoved . Mr. 
 thirdly then leave they , and Gabriel light a lantern . 
 fetch three other man to assist he , they bear the 
 unconscious truant indoor , place the coffin on two 
 bench in the middle of a little sitting - room next the 
 hall , as Bathsheba direct . 
 every one except Gabriel Oak then leave the room . 
 he still indecisively linger beside the body . he be 
 deeply troubled at the wretchedly ironical aspect that 
 circumstance be put on with regard to Troy 's 
 wife , and at his own powerlessness to counteract they , 
  n spite of his careful manoeuvre all this day , the very 
 bad event that could in any way have happen in 
 connection with the burial have happen now . Oak 
 imagine a terrible discovery result from this after- 
 noon 's work that might cast over Bathsheba 's life a shade 
 which the interposition of many lapsing year might but 
 indifferently lighten , and which nothing at all might 
 altogether remove . 
 suddenly , as in a last attempt to save Bathsheba 
 from , at any rate , immediate anguish , he look again , 
 as he have look before , at the chalk writing upon the 
 coffinlid . the scrawl be this simple one , " Fanny 
 Robin and child . " Gabriel take his handkerchief and 
 carefully rub out the two latter word , leave visible 
 the inscription " Fanny Robin " only . he then leave the 
 room , and go out quietly by the front door . 
 CHAPTER XLIII 
 FANNY 's REVENGE 
 " do you want I any long ma'am ? " inquire Liddy , 
 at a late hour the same evening , stand by the door 
 with a chamber candlestick in her hand and address 
 Bathsheba , who sit cheerless and alone in the large 
 parlour beside the first fire of the season . 
 " no more to - night , Liddy . " 
 " I will sit up for master if you like , ma'am . I be not 
 at all afraid of Fanny , if I may sit in my own room and 
 have a candle . she be such a childlike , nesh young 
 thing that her spirit could not   appear to anybody if it 
 try , I be quite sure . " 
 " o no , no ! you go to bed . I will sit up for he 
 myself till twelve o'clock , and if he have not arrive by 
 that time , I shall give he up and go to bed too . " 
 it be half - past ten now . " 
 " oh ! be it ? " 
 why do not   you sit upstairs , ma'am ? " 
 " why do not   I ? " say Bathsheba , desultorily . " it 
 be not   worth while - there be a fire here , Liddy . " she 
 suddenly exclaim in an impulsive and excited whisper , 
 have you hear anything strange say of Fanny ? " 
 the word have no soon escape she than an expres- 
 sion of unutterable regret cross her face , and she 
 burst into tear . 
 " no - not a word ! " say Liddy , look at the 
 weep woman with astonishment . " what be it make 
 you cry so , ma'am ; have anything hurt you ? " she come 
 to Bathsheba 's side with a face full of sympathy . 
 " no , Liddy - I do not   want you any more . I can 
 hardly say why I have take to cry lately : I never 
 use to cry . good - night . " 
 Liddy then leave the parlour and close the door . 
 Bathsheba be lonely and miserable now ; not lone- 
 lier actually than she have be before her marriage ; 
 but her loneliness then be to that of the present time 
 as the solitude of a mountain be to the solitude of a 
 cave . and within the last day or two have come these 
 disquieting thought about her husband 's past . her 
 wayward sentiment that evening concern Fanny 's 
 temporary resting - place have be the result of a strange 
 complication of impulse in Bathsheba 's bosom . per- 
 hap it would be more accurately describe as a 
 determine rebellion against her prejudice , a revulsion 
 from a low instinct of uncharitableness , which would 
 have withhold all sympathy from the dead woman , be- 
 cause in life she have precede Bathsheba in the atten- 
 tion of a man whom Bathsheba have by no mean 
 cease from love , though her love be sick to death 
 just now with the gravity of a further misgiving . 
 in five or ten minute there be another tap at the 
 door . Liddy reappear , and come in a little way 
 stand hesitate , until at length she said,!maryann have 
 just hear something very strange , but I know it be not 
 true . and we shall be sure to know the right of it in 
 a day or two . " 
 " what be it ? " 
 " oh , nothing connect with you or we , ma'am . it 
 be about Fanny . that same thing you have hear . " 
 " I have hear nothing . " 
 " I mean that a wicked story be get to Weatherbury 
 within this last hour - that - - " Liddy come close to 
 her mistress and whisper the remainder of the sentence 
 slowly into her ear , incline her head as she speak in 
 the direction of the room where Fanny lie . 
 Bathsheba tremble from head to foot . 
 " I do not   believe it ! " she say , excitedly . " and 
 there be only one name write on the coffin - cover . " 
 " nor I , ma'am . and a good many other do not ; 
 for we should surely have be tell more about it if it 
 have be true - do not   you think so , ma'am ? " 
 " we might or we might not . " 
 Bathsheba turn and look into the fire , that 
 Liddy might not see her face . find that her mistress 
 be go to say no more , Liddy glide out , close the 
 door softly , and go to bed . 
 Bathsheba 's face , as she continue look into the 
 fire that evening , might have excite solicitousness on 
 her account even among those who love she least . 
 the sadness of Fanny Robin 's fate do not make bath- 
 sheba 's glorious , although she be the Esther to this 
 poor vashti , and their fate might be suppose to stand 
 in some respect as contrast to each other . when 
 Liddy come into the room a second time the beautiful 
 eye which meet hers have wear a listless , weary look- 
 when she go out after tell the story they have ex- 
 press wretchedness in full activity . her simple 
 country nature , feed on old - fashioned principle , be 
 trouble by that which would have trouble a woman 
 of the world very little , both Fanny and her child , if she 
 have one , be dead . 
 Bathsheba have ground for conjecture a connection 
 between her own history and the dimly suspect 
 tragedy of Fanny 's end which Oak and Boldwood never 
 for a moment credit she with possessing . the 
 meeting with the lonely woman on the previous Saturday 
 night have be unwitnessed and unspoken of . Oak 
 may have have the good of intention in withhold for 
 as many day as possible the detail of what have 
 happen to Fanny ; but have he know that Bathsheba 's 
 perception have already be exercise in the matter , 
 he would have do nothing to lengthen the minute of 
 suspense she be now undergo , when the certainty 
 which must terminate it would be the bad fact suspect 
 after all . 
 she suddenly feel a longing desire to speak to some 
 one strong than herself , and so get strength to sustain 
 her surmise position with dignity and her lurking 
 doubt with stoicism . where could she find such a 
 friend ? nowhere in the house . she be by far the 
 coolest of the woman under her roof . patience and 
 suspension of judgement for a few hour be what she 
 want to learn , and there be nobody to teach she . 
 might she but go to Gabriel Oak ! - but that could not 
 be . what a way Oak have , she think , of endure 
 thing . Boldwood , who seem so much deep and 
 high and strong in feeling than Gabriel , have not 
 yet learn , any more than she herself , the simple 
 lesson which Oak show a mastery of by every turn 
 and look he give - that among the multitude of interest 
 by which he be surround , those which affect his 
 personal wellbeing be not the most absorbing and 
 important in his eye . Oak meditatively look upon 
 the horizon of circumstance without any special regard 
 to his own standpoint in the midst . that be how 
 she would wish to be . but then Oak be not rack 
 by incertitude upon the inmost matter of his bosom , as 
 she be at this moment . Oak know all about Fanny 
 that he wish to know - she feel convinced of that . 
 if she be to go to he now at once and say no more 
 than these few words,!what be the truth of the story ? " 
 he would feel bind in honour to tell she . it would 
 be an inexpressible relief . no further speech would 
 need to be utter . he know she so well that no 
 eccentricity of behaviour in she would alarm he . 
 she fling a cloak round she , go to the door and 
 open it . every blade , every twig be still . the air 
 be yet thick with moisture , though somewhat less dense 
 than during the afternoon , and a steady smack of drop 
 upon the fall leaf under the bough be almost 
 musical in its soothe regularity . lt seem well to 
 be out of the house than within it , and Bathsheba close 
 the door , and walk slowly down the lane till she come 
 opposite to Gabriel 's cottage , where he now live alone , 
 have leave Coggan 's house through be pinch for 
 room . there be a light in one window only ' , and that 
 be downstairs . the shutter be not closed , nor be 
 any blind or curtain draw over the window , neither 
 robbery nor observation be a contingency which could 
 do much injury to the occupant of the domicile . yes , 
 it be Gabriel himself who be sit up : he be read , 
 from her stand - place in the road she could see he 
 plainly , sit quite still , his light curly head upon his 
 hand , and only occasionally look up to snuff the 
 candle which stand beside he . at length he look 
 at the clock , seem surprised at the lateness of the 
 hour , close his book , and arise . he be go to bed , 
 she know , and if she tap it must be do at once . 
 Alas for her resolve ! she feel she could not do it , 
 not for world now could she give a hint about her 
 misery to he , much less ask he plainly for information 
 on the cause of Fanny 's death . she must suspect , and 
 guess , and chafe , and bear it all alone . 
 like a homeless wanderer she linger by the bank , 
 as if lull and fascinate by the atmosphere of content 
 which seem to spread from that little dwelling , and 
 be so sadly lack in her own . Gabriel appear in 
 an upper room , place his light in the window - bench , 
 and then - kneel down to pray . the contrast of the 
 picture with her rebellious and agitated existence at this 
 same time be too much for she to bear to look upon 
 long . it be not for she to make a truce with 
 trouble by any such mean . she must tread her giddy 
 distracting measure to its last note , as she have begin it . 
 with a swollen heart she go again up the lane , and 
 enter her own door . 
 more fevere now by a reaction from the first feeling 
 which Oak 's example have raise in she , she pause in 
 the hall , look at the door of the room wherein Fanny 
 lay . she lock her finger , throw back her head , and 
 strain her hot hand rigidly across her forehead , say , 
 with a hysterical sob , " would to God you would speak 
 and tell I your secret , Fanny ! . , . o , I hope , hope 
 it be not true that there be two of you ! ... if I could 
 only look in upon you for one little minute , I should 
 know all ! " 
 a few moment pass , and she add , slowly , " and 
 I will " 
 Bathsheba in after time could never gauge the mood 
 which carry she through the action follow this 
 murmur resolution on this memorable evening of her 
 life . she go to the lumber - closet for a screw - driver . 
 at the end of a short though undefined time she find 
 herself in the small room , quiver with emotion , a mist 
 before her eye , and an excruciating pulsation in her 
 brain , stand beside the uncovered coffin of the girl 
 whose conjecture end have so entirely engross she , and 
 say to herself in a husky voice as she gaze within - 
 " it be good to know the bad , and I know it now ! " 
 she be conscious of have bring about this 
 situation by a series of action do as by one in an 
 extravagant dream ; of follow that idea as to method , 
 which have burst upon she in the hall with glare 
 obviousness , by glide to the top of the stair , assure 
 herself by listen to the heavy breathing of her maid 
 that they be asleep , glide down again , turn the 
 handle of the door within which the young girl lay , and 
 deliberately set herself to do what , if she have antici- 
 pat any such undertaking at night and alone , would 
 have horrify she , but which , when do , be not so 
 dreadful as be the conclusive proof of her husband 's 
 conduct which come with know beyond doubt the 
 last chapter of Fanny 's story . 
 Bathsheba 's head sink upon her bosom , and the 
 breath which have be bat in suspense , curiosity , and 
 interest , be exhale now in the form of a whispered 
 wail : " oh - h - h ! " she say , and the silent room add 
 length to her moan . 
 her tear fall fast beside the unconscious pair in the 
 coffin : tear of a complicated origin , of a nature inde- 
 scribable , almost indefinable except as other than those 
 of simple sorrow . assuredly their wonte fire must 
 have live in Fanny 's ash when event be so shaped 
 as to chariot her hither in this natural , unobtrusive , yet 
 effectual manner . the one feat alone - that of die - 
 by which a mean condition could be resolve into a 
 grand one , Fanny have achieve . and to that have 
 destiny subjoin this rencounter to - night , which have , 
 in Bathsheba 's wild imagining , turn her companion 's 
 failure to success , her humiliation to triumph , her luck- 
 lessness to ascendency ; et have throw over herself a 
 garish light of mockery , and set upon all thing about 
 she an ironical smile . 
 Fanny 's face be frame in by that yellow hair of 
 her ; and there be no long much room for doubt as 
 to the origin of the curl own by Troy . in bath- 
 sheba 's heated fancy the innocent white countenance 
 express a dim triumphant consciousness of the pain 
 she be retaliate for her pain with all the merciless 
 rigour of the Mosaic law : " burn for burning ; wound 
 for wound : strife for strife . 
 Bathsheba indulge in contemplation of escape from 
 her position by immediate death , which think she , 
 though it be an inconvenient and awful way , have limit 
 to its inconvenience and awfulness that could not be 
 overpasse ; whilst the shame of life be measureless . 
 yet even this scheme of extinction by death be out 
 tamely copy her rival 's method without the reason 
 which have glorify it in her rival 's case . she glide 
 rapidly up and down the room , as be mostly her habit 
 hen excite , her hand hang clasp in front of she , 
 as she think and in part express in broken word : 
 O , I hate she , yet I do not   mean that I hate she , for 
 it be grievous and wicked ; and yet I hate she a little ! 
 yes , my flesh insist upon hat she , whether my spirit 
 be willing or no ! ... if she have only live , I could 
 ave be angry and cruel towards she with some justifi- 
 cation ; but to be vindictive towards a poor dead woman 
 recoil upon myself . o God , have mercy , ! I be 
 miserable at all this ! " 
 Bathsheba become at this moment so terrified at her 
 own state of mind that she look around for some sort 
 of refuge from herself . the vision of Oak kneeling 
 down that night recur to she , and with the imitative 
 instinct which animate woman she seize upon the idea , 
 resolve to kneel , and , if possible , pray . Gabriel have 
 pray ; so would she . 
 she kneel beside the coffin , cover her face with her 
 hand , and for a time the room be silent as a tomb . 
 whether from a purely mechanical , or from any other 
 cause , when Bathsheba arise it be with a quiet spirit , 
 and a regret for the antagonistic instinct which have 
 seize upon she just before . 
 in her desire to make atonement she take flower 
 from a vase by the window , and begin lay they 
 around the dead girl 's head . Bathsheba know no other 
 way of show kindness to person depart than by 
 give they flower . she know not how long she 
 remain engage thus . she forget time , life , where 
 she be , what she be do . a slamming together of 
 the coach - house door in the yard bring she to her- 
 self again . an instant after , the front door open and 
 close , step cross the hall , and her husband appear 
 at the entrance to the room , look in upon she . 
 he behold it all by degree , star in stupefaction at 
 the scene , as if he think it an illusion raise by some 
 fiendish 
 incantation . Bathsheba , pallid as a corpse on 
 end , gaze back at he in the same wild way . 
 so little be instinctive guess the fruit of a legitimate 
 induction , that at this moment , as he stand with the 
 door in his hand , Troy never once think of Fanny in 
 connection with what he see . his first confuse idea 
 be that somebody in the house have die . 
 " well - what ? " say Troy , blankly . 
 " I must go ! I must go ! " say Bathsheba , to herself 
 more than to he . she come with a dilated eye towards 
 the door , to push past he . 
 " what be the matter , in God 's name ? who be dead ? " 
 say Troy . 
 " I can not say ; let I go out . I want air ! " she 
 continue . 
 " but no ; stay , I insist ! " he seize her hand , and 
 then volition seem to leave she , and she go off into 
 a state of passivity . he , still hold she , come up the 
 room , and thus , hand in hand , Troy and Bathsheba 
 approach the coffin 's side . 
 the candle be stand on a bureau close by they , 
 and the light slant down , distinctly enkindle the 
 cold feature of both mother and babe . Troy look 
 in , drop his wife 's hand , knowledge of it all come 
 over he in a lurid sheen , and he stand still . 
 so still he remain that he could be imagine to 
 have leave in he no motive power whatever . the 
 clash of feeling in all direction confound one 
 another , produce a neutrality , and there be motion in 
 none . 
 " do you know she ? " say Bathsheba , in a small 
 enclose echo , as from the interior of a cell . 
 " I do . " say Troy . 
 " be it she ? " 
 " it be . " 
 he have originally stand perfectly erect . and now , 
 in the wellnigh congeal immobility of his frame 
 could be discern an incipient movement , as in the 
 dark night may be discern light after a while . 
 he be gradually sink forwards . the line of his 
 feature soften , and dismay modulate to illimitable 
 sadness . Bathsheba be regard he from the other 
 side , still with part lip and distracted eye . capacity 
 for intense feeling be proportionate to the general 
 intensity of the nature , and perhaps in all Fanny 's 
 suffering , much great relatively to her strength , there 
 never be a time she suffer in an absolute sense 
 what Bathsheba suffer now . 
 what Troy do be to sink upon his knee with 
 an indefinable union of remorse and reverence upon 
 his face , and , bend over Fanny Robin , gently kiss 
 she , as one would kiss an infant asleep to avoid 
 awakening it . 
 at the sight and sound of that , to she , unendurable 
 act , Bathsheba spring towards he . all the strong 
 feeling which have be scatter over her existence 
 since she know what feeling be , seem gather 
 together into one pulsation now . the revulsion from 
 her indignant mood a little early , when she have 
 meditate upon compromise honour , forestalment , 
 eclipse in maternity by another , be violent and entire . 
 all that be forget in the simple and still strong 
 attachment of wife to husband . she have sigh for 
 her self - completeness then , and now she cry aloud 
 against the severance of the union she have deplore . 
 she fling her arm round Troy 's neck , exclaim wildly 
 from the deep deep of her heart - 
 " do not   - do not   kiss they ! o , Frank , I can not bear 
 it - I can not ! I love you well than she do : kiss I 
 too , Frank - kiss I ! you will , Frank , kiss I too ! " 
 there be something so abnormal and startling in 
 the childlike pain and simplicity of this appeal from a 
 woman of Bathsheba 's calibre and independence , that 
 Troy , loosen she tightly clasp arm from his neck , 
 look at she in bewilderment . it be such and unex- 
 pecte revelation of all woman be alike at heart , even 
 those so different in their accessory as Fanny and this 
 one beside he , that Troy could hardly seem to believe 
 she to be his proud wife Bathsheba . Fanny 's own 
 spirit seem to be animate her frame . but this be 
 the mood of a few instant only . when the momentary 
 " I will not kiss you ! " he say push she away . 
 have the wife now but go no far . yet , 
 perhaps . under the harrowing circumstance , to speak 
 out be the one wrong act which can be well under- 
 stand , if not forgive in she , than the right and politic 
 one , her rival be now but a corpse . all the feeling 
 she have be betray into show she draw back to 
 herself again by a strenuous effort of self - command . 
 " what have you to say as your reason ? " she ask 
 her bitter voice be strangely low - quite that of 
 another woman now . 
 " I have to say that I have be a bad , black - hearte 
 man . " he answer . 
 less than she . " 
 " ah ! do not   taunt I , madam . this woman be more 
 to I , dead as she be , than ever you be , or be , or can 
 be . if Satan have not tempt I with that face of 
 your , and those cursed coquetry , I should have 
 he turn to Fanny then . " but never mind , darling , 
 wife ! " 
 at these word there arise from Bathsheba 's lip a 
 long , low cry of measureless despair and indignation , 
 such a wail of anguish as have never before be hear 
 within those old - inhabit wall . it be the product 
 of her union with Troy . 
 " if she be - that , - what - be I ? " she add , as a 
 continuation of the same cry , and sob pitifully : 
 and the rarity with she of such abandonment only make 
 the condition more dire . 
 " you be nothing to I - nothing . " say Troy , 
 heartlessly . " a ceremony before a priest do not   make 
 a marriage . I be not morally your . " 
 a vehement impulse to flee from he , to run from 
 this place , hide , and escape his word at any price , not 
 stop short of death itself , master Bathsheba now . 
 she wait not an instant , but turn to the door and 
 run out . 
 CHAPTER XLIV 
 under a tree - REACTION 
 BATHSHEBA go along the dark road , neither know- 
 ing nor care about the direction or issue of her flight . 
 the first time that she definitely notice her position 
 be when she reach a gate lead into a thicket over- 
 hang by some large oak and beech tree . on look 
 into the place , it occur to she that she have see it 
 by daylight on some previous occasion , and that what 
 appear like an impassable thicket be in reality a 
 brake of fern now wither fast . she could think of 
 nothing well to do with her palpitate self than to go 
 in here and hide ; and enter , she light on a spot 
 shelter from the damp fog by a reclining trunk , where 
 she sink down upon a tangled couch of frond and 
 stem . she mechanically pull some armful round 
 she to keep off the breeze , and close her eye . 
 whether she sleep or not that night Bathsheba be 
 not clearly aware . but it be with a freshen exist- 
 ence and a cool brain that , a long time afterwards , she 
 become conscious of some interesting proceeding which 
 be go on in the tree above her head and around . 
 a coarse - throate chatter be the first sound . 
 it be a sparrow just wake . 
 next : " chee - weeze - weeze - weeze ! " from another 
 retreat . 
 it be a finch . 
 Third : " tink - tink - tink - tink - a - chink ! " from the hedge , 
 it be a robin . 
 " chuck - chuck - chuck ! " overhead . 
 a squirrel . 
 then , from the road , " with my ra - ta - ta , and my 
 rum - tum - tum ! " 
 it be a ploughboy . presently he come opposite , 
 and she believe from his voice that he be one of 
 the boy on her own farm . he be follow by a 
 shambling tramp of heavy foot , and look through 
 the fern Bathsheba could just discern in the wan light 
 of daybreak a team of her own horse . they stop 
 to drink at a pond on the other side of the way ' . she 
 watch they flounce into the pool , drinking , toss 
 up their head , drink again , the water dribble 
 from their lip in silver thread . there be another 
 flounce , and they come out of the pond , and turn 
 back again towards the farm . 
 she look far around . day be just dawn , 
 and beside its cool air and colour her heated action 
 and resolve of the night stand out in lurid contrast . 
 she perceive that in her lap , and cling to her 
 hair , be red and yellow leaf which have come 
 down from the tree and settle silently upon she 
 during her partial sleep . Bathsheba shake her dress to 
 get rid of they , when multitude of the same family lie 
 round about she rise and flutter away in the breeze 
 thus create , like ghost from an enchanter flee . " 
 there be an opening towards the east , and the 
 glow from the as yet unrisen sun attract her eye 
 thither . from her foot , and between the beautiful 
 yellowing fern with their feathery arm , the ground 
 slop downwards to a hollow , in which be a specie 
 of swamp , dot with fungus . a morning mist hung 
 over it now - a fulsome yet magnificent silvery veil , 
 full of light from the sun , yet semi - opaque - the hedge 
 behind it be in some measure hide by its hazy 
 luminousness . up the side of this depression grow 
 sheaf of the common rush , and here and there a 
 peculiar specie of flag , the blade of which glisten 
 in the emerge sun , like scythe . but the general 
 aspect of the swamp be malignant . from its moist 
 and poisonous coat seem to be exhale the essence 
 of evil thing in the earth , and in the water under 
 the earth . the fungus grow in all manner of position 
 from rot leaf and tree stump , some exhibit 
 to her listless gaze their clammy top , other their 
 oozing gill . some be mark with great splotch , 
 red as arterial blood , other be saffron yellow , and 
 other tall and attenuate , with stem like macaroni . 
 some be leathery and of rich brown . the 
 hollow seem a nursery of pestilence small and 
 great , in the immediate neighbourhood of comfort 
 and health , and Bathsheba arise with a tremor at the 
 thought of have pass the night on the brink of 
 so dismal a place . 
 " there be now other footstep to be hear along 
 the road . Bathsheba 's nerve be still unstrung : 
 she crouch down out of sight again , and the pedes- 
 trian come into view . he be a schoolboy , with a 
 bag sling over his shoulder contain his dinner , 
 and a hook in his hand . he pause by the gate , 
 and , without look up , continue murmur word 
 in tone quite loud enough to reach her ear . 
 " o Lord , o Lord , o Lord , o Lord , o Lord " : - 
 that I know out o ' book . " give we , give we , give we , 
 give we , give we " : - that I know . " grace that , grace that , 
 grace that , grace that " : - that I know . " other word 
 follow to the same effect . the boy be of the 
 dunce class apparently ; the book be a psalter , and 
 this be his way of learn the collect . in the bad 
 attack of trouble there appear to be always a super- 
 ficial film of consciousness which be leave disengage 
 and open to the notice of trifle , and Bathsheba be 
 faintly amuse at the boy 's method , till he too pass on . 
 by this time stupor have give place to anxiety , and 
 anxiety begin to make room for hunger and thirst . 
 a form now appear upon the rise on the other side 
 of the swamp , half - hide by the mist , and come 
 towards Bathsheba . the woman - for it be a woman 
  - approach with her face askance , as if look 
 earnestly on all side of she . when she get a little 
 further round to the left , and draw nearer , Bathsheba 
 could see the newcomer 's profile against the sunny 
 sky ' , and know the wavy sweep from forehead to chin , 
 with neither angle nor decisive line anywhere about 
 it , to be the familiar contour of Liddy Smallbury . 
 Bathsheba 's heart bound with gratitude in the 
 thought that she be not altogether desert , and she 
 jump up . " O , Liddy ! " she say , or attempt to say ; 
 but the word have only be frame by her lip ; there 
 come no sound . she have lose her voice by exposure 
 to the clogged atmosphere all these hour of night . 
 " O , ma'am ! I be so glad I have find you . " say 
 the girl , as soon as she see Bathsheba . 
 " you can not   come across . " Bathsheba say in a whisper , 
 which she vainly endeavour to make loud enough to 
 reach Liddy 's ear . Liddy , not know this , step 
 down upon the swamp , say , as she do so , " it will 
 bear I up , I think . " 
 Bathsheba never forget that transient little picture 
 of Liddy cross the swamp to she there in the 
 morning light . iridescent bubble of dank subter- 
 ranean breath rise from the sweating sod beside the 
 wait maid 's foot as she trod , hiss as they burst 
 and expand away to join the vapoury firmament above . 
 Liddy do not sink , as Bathsheba have anticipate . 
 she land safely on the other side , and look up 
 at the beautiful though pale and weary face of her 
 young mistress . 
 " poor thing ! " say Liddy , with tear in her eye , 
 do hearten yourself up a little , ma'am . however 
 do - - " 
 " I can not   speak above a whisper - my voice be go 
 for the present . " say Bathsheba , hurriedly . " I suppose 
 the damp air from that hollow have take it away 
 Liddy , do not   question I , mind . who send you - 
 anybody ? " 
 " nobody . I think , when I find you be not 
 at home , that something cruel have happen . I fancy 
 I hear his voice late last night ; and so , know 
 something be wrong - - " 
 " be he at home ? " 
 " no ; he leave just before I come out . " 
 " be Fanny take away ? " 
 " not yet . she will soon be - at nine o'clock . " 
 " we will not   go home at present , then . suppose we 
 walk about in this wood ? " 
 Liddy , without exactly understand everything , or 
 anything , in this episode , assent , and they walk 
 together far among the tree . 
 " but you have well come in , ma'am , and have 
 something to eat . you will die of a chill ! " 
 " I shall not come indoor yet - perhaps never . " 
 " shall I get you something to eat , and something 
 else to put over your head besides that little shawl ? " 
 " if you will , Liddy . " 
 Liddy vanish , and at the end of twenty minute 
 return with a cloak , hat , some slice of bread and 
 butter , a tea - cup , and some hot tea in a little china jug 
 " be Fanny go ? " say Bathsheba . 
 " no . " say her companion , pour out the tea . 
 Bathsheba wrap herself up and eat and drank 
 sparingly . her voice be then a little clear , and 
 trifle colour return to her face . " now we will walk 
 about again . " she say . 
 they wander about the wood for nearly two 
 hour , Bathsheba reply in monosyllable to Liddy 's 
 prattle , for her mind run on one subject , and one only . 
 she interrupt with - 
 " l wonder if Fanny be go by this time ? " 
 " I will go and see . " 
 she come back with the information that the 
 man be just take away the corpse ; that Bathsheba 
 have be inquire for ; that she have reply to the 
 effect that her mistress be unwell and could not be 
 see . 
 " then they think I be in my bedroom ? " 
 " yes . " Liddy then venture to add : " you say 
 when I first find you that you might never go home 
 again - you do not   mean it , ma'am ? " 
 " no ; I have   alter my mind . it be only woman with 
 no pride in they who run away from their husband . 
 there be one position bad than that of be find 
 dead in your husband 's house from his ill usage , and 
 that be , to be find alive through have go away to 
 the house of somebody else . I have   think of it all this 
 morning , and I have   choose my course . a runaway wife 
 be an encumbrance to everybody , a burden to herself and 
 a byword - all of which make up a heap of misery 
 great than any that come by stay at home - 
 though this may include the trifle item of insult , 
 beating , and starvation . Liddy , if ever you marry - 
 God forbid that you ever should ! - you will find yourself 
 in a fearful situation ; but mind this , do not   you flinch . 
 stand your ground , and be cut to piece . that be 
 what I be go to do . " 
 " o , mistress , do not   talk so ! " say liddy,-take she 
 hand ; " but I know you have too much sense to bide 
 away . may I ask what dreadful thing it be that have 
 happen between you and he ? " 
 " you may ask ; but I may not tell . " 
 in about ten minute they return to the house by 
 a circuitous route , enter at the rear . Bathsheba 
 glide up the back stair to a disused attic , and her 
 companion follow . 
 " Liddy . " she say , with a light heart , for youth and 
 hope have begin to reassert themselves ; " you be to be 
 my confidante for the present - somebody must be - and 
 I choose you . well , I shall take up my abode here for 
 a while . will you get a fire light , put down a piece 
 of carpet , and help I to make the place comfortable . 
 afterwards , I want you and Maryann to bring up that 
 little stump bedstead in the small room , and the be 
 belong to it , and a table , and some other thing . 
 what shall I do to pass the heavy time away ? " 
 " hem handkerchief be a very good thing . " say 
 Liddy . 
 " o no , no ! I hate needlework - I always do . " 
 " knit ? " 
 " and that , too . " 
 " you might finish your sampler . only the carna- 
 tion and peacock want fill in ; and then it could 
 be frame and glaze , and hang beside your aunt " 
 ma'am . " 
 " sampler be out of date - horribly countrifie . no 
 Liddy , I will read . bring up some book - not new one . 
 I have not   heart to read anything new . " 
 " some of your uncle 's old one , ma'am ? " 
 " yes . some of those we stow away in box . " a 
 faint gleam of humour pass over her face as she say : 
 " bring Beaumont and Fletcher 's Maid 's Tragedy , and 
 the Mourning Bride , and let I see - night Thoughts , 
 and the Vanity of Human Wishes . " 
 " and that story of the black man , who murder his 
 wife Desdemona ? it be a nice dismal one that would 
 suit you excellent just now . " 
 " now , Liddy , you have   be look into my book 
 without tell I ; and I say you be not to ! how 
 do you know it would suit I ? it would not   suit I a 
 all . " 
 " but if the other do - - " 
 " no , they do not ; and I will not   read dismal book . 
 why should I read dismal book , indeed ? bring I 
 love in a Village , and Maid of the Mill , and Doctor 
 Syntax , and some volume of the Spectator . " 
 all that day Bathsheba and Liddy live in the attic 
 in a state of barricade ; a precaution which prove to be 
 needless as against Troy , for he do not appear in the 
 neighbourhood or trouble they at all . Bathsheba sit 
 at the window till sunset , sometimes attempt to read , 
 at other time watch every movement outside without 
 much purpose , and listen without much interest to 
 every sound . 
 the sun go down almost blood - red that night , and 
 a livid cloud receive its ray in the east . up against 
 this dark background the west front of the church 
 tower - the only part of the edifice visible from the 
 farm - house windows - rise distinct and lustrous , the 
 vane upon the summit bristling with ray . Hereabouts , 
 at six o'clock , the young man of the village gather , 
 as be their custom , for a game of Prisoners ' base . the 
 spot have be consecrate to this ancient diversion from 
 time immemorial , the old stock conveniently form 
 a base face the boundary of the churchyard , in front 
 of which the ground be tread hard and bare as a 
 pavement by the player . she could see the brown 
 and black head of the young lad dart about right 
 and leave , their white shirt - sleeve gleam in the sun ; 
 whilst occasionally a shout and a peal of hearty laughter 
 vary the stillness of the evening air . they continue 
 play for a quarter of an hour or so , when the game 
 conclude abruptly , and the player leapt over the wall 
 and vanish round to the other side behind a yew - tree , 
 which be also half behind a beech , now spread in 
 one mass of golden foliage , on which the branch 
 trace black line . 
 " why do the base - player finish their game so 
 suddenly ? " Bathsheba inquire , the next time that 
 Liddy enter the room . 
 " I think ' twa because two man come just then from 
 Casterbridge and begin put up grand carve 
 tombstone . " say Liddy . " the lad go to see whose 
 it be . " 
 " do you know ? " Bathsheba ask . 
 " I do not . " say Liddy . 
 CHAPTER XLV 
 TROY 's romanticism 
 when Troy 's wife have leave the house at the previous 
 midnight his first act be to cover the dead from sight . 
 this do he ascend the stair , and throw himself 
 down upon the bed dress as he be , he wait miser- 
 ably for the morning . 
 Fate have deal grimly with he through the last four- 
 and - twenty hour . his day have be spend in a way 
 which vary very materially from his intention regard- 
 e it . there be always an inertia to be overcome in 
 strike out a new line of conduct - not more in our- 
 self , it seem , than in circumscribe event , which 
 appear as if league together to allow no novelty in 
 the way of amelioration . 
 twenty pound have be secure from Bathsheba , 
 he have manage to add to the sum every farthe he 
 could muster on his own account , which have be seven 
 pound ten . with this money , twenty - seven pound ten 
 in all , he have hastily drive from the gate that morning 
 to keep his appointment with Fanny Robin . 
 on reach Casterbridge he leave the horse and trap 
 at an inn , and at five minute before ten come back to 
 the bridge at the low end of the town , and sit himself 
 upon the parapet . the clock strike the hour , and no 
 Fanny appear . in fact , at that moment she be be 
 rob in her grave - clothe by two attendant at the 
 Union poorhouse - the first and last tiring - woman the 
 gentle creature have ever be honour with . the 
 quarter go , the half hour . a rush of recollection 
 come upon Troy as he wait : this be the second 
 time she have break a serious engagement with he 
 in anger he vow it should be the last , and at eleven 
 o'clock , when he have linger and watch the stone 
 of the bridge till he know every lichen upon their face 
 and hear the chink of the ripple underneath till they 
 oppress he , he jump from his seat , go to the inn 
 for his gig , and in a bitter mood of indifference con- 
 cerne the past , and recklessness about the future , 
 drive on to Budmouth race . 
 he reach the race - course at two o'clock , and re- 
 maine either there or in the town till nine , but 
 Fanny 's image , as it have appear to he in the sombre 
 shadow of that Saturday evening , return to his mind , 
 back up by Bathsheba 's reproach . he vow he 
 would not bet , and he keep his vow , for on leave the 
 town at nine o'clock in the evening he have diminish 
 his cash only to the extent of a few shilling . 
 he trot slowly homeward , and it be now that 
 be strike for the first time with a thought that Fanny 
 have be really prevent by illness from keep she 
 promise . this time she could have make no mistake 
 he regret that he have not remain in Casterbridge 
 and make inquiry . reach home he quietly un- 
 harness the horse and come indoor , as we have see , 
 to the fearful shock that await he . 
 as soon as it grow light enough to distinguish object , 
 Troy arise from the coverlet of the bed , and in a mood 
 of absolute indifference to Bathsheba 's whereabouts , a 
 almost oblivious of her existence , he stalk downstairs 
 and leave the house by the back door . his walk be 
 towards the churchyard , enter which he search 
 around till he find a newly dig unoccupied grave - 
 the grave dig the day before for Fanny . the position 
 of this have be mark , he hasten on to Caster- 
 bridge , only pausing 
 whereon he have last see Fanny alive . 
 reach the town , Troy descend into a side 
 street and enter a pair of gate surmount by a board 
 bear the word , " Lester , stone and marble mason . " 
 Within be lie about stone of all size and design , 
 inscribe as be sacred to the memory of unnamed 
 person who have not yet die . 
 Troy be so unlike himself now in look , word , and 
 deed , that the want of likeness be perceptible even to 
 his own consciousness . his method of engage himself 
 in this business of purchase a tomb be that of an 
 absolutely unpractised man . he could not bring him- 
 self to consider , calculate , or economize . he waywardly 
 wish for something , and he set about obtain it like 
 a child in a nursery . ' I want a good tomb . " he say to 
 the man who stand in a little office within the yard . 
 " I want as good a one as you can give I for twenty- 
 seven pound , " 
 it be all the money he possess . 
 " that sum to include everything ? " 
 " everything . cut the name , carriage to weather- 
 bury , and erection . and I want it now at once . " 
 " we could not get anything special work this 
 week . 
 " if you would like one of these in stock it could be 
 get ready immediately . " 
 " very well . " say Troy , impatiently . " let us see what 
 you have . " 
 " the good I have in stock be this one , " say the stone- 
 cutter , go into a shed . " here be a marble headstone 
 beautifully crockete , with medallion beneath of typical 
 subject ; here be the footstone after the same pattern , 
 and here be the coping to enclose the- grave . the 
 slab be the good of their kind , and I can warrant they 
 " well , I could add the name , and put it up at 
 visitor who wear not a shred of mourning . Troy then 
 settle the account and go away . in the afternoon 
 almost do . he wait in the yard till the tomb be 
 way to Weatherbury , give direction to the two man 
 the grave of the person name in the inscription . 
 bridge . he carry rather a heavy basket upon his 
 occasionally at bridge and gate , whereon he deposit 
 return in the darkness , the man and the waggon 
 the work be do , and , on be assure that it be , 
 Troy enter Weatherbury churchyard about ten 
 have mark the vacant grave early in the morning . it 
 extent from the view of passer along the road - a spot 
 and bush of alder , but now it be clear and make 
 the ground elsewhere . 
 here now stand the tomb as the man have state , snow- 
 white and shapely in the gloom , consist of head and 
 foot - stone , and enclose border of marble - work unite 
 they . in the midst be mould , suitable for plant . 
 Troy deposit his basket beside the tomb , and 
 vanish for a few minute . when he return he 
 carry a spade and a lantern , the light of which he 
 direct for a few moment upon the marble , whilst he 
 read the inscription . he hang his lantern on the low 
 bough of the yew - tree , and take from his basket flower- 
 root of several variety . there be bundle of snow- 
 drop , hyacinth and crocus bulb , violet and double 
 daisy , which be to bloom in early spring , and of 
 carnation , pink , picotee , lily of the valley , forget - me- 
 not , summer' - farewell , meadow - saffron and other , for 
 the later season of the year . 
 Troy lay these out upon the grass , and with an im- 
 passive face set to work to plant they . the snowdrop 
 be arrange in a line on the outside of the coping , 
 the remainder within the enclosure of the grave . the 
 crocus and hyacinth be to grow in row ; some of 
 the summer flower he place over her head and foot , 
 the lily and forget - I - not over her heart . the 
 remainder be disperse in the space between these . 
 Troy , in his prostration at this time , have no percep- 
 tion that in the futility of these romantic doing , dictate 
 by a remorseful reaction from previous indifference , there 
 be any element of absurdity . derive his idiosyn- 
 crasie from both side of the Channel , he show at 
 such juncture as the present the inelasticity of the 
 Englishman , together with that blindness to the line 
 where sentiment verge on mawkishness , characteristic 
 of the French . 
 lt be a cloudy , muggy , and very dark night , and 
 the ray from Troy 's lantern spread into the two old 
 yew with a strange illuminate power , flickering , as it 
 seem , up to the black ceiling of cloud above . he 
 feel a large drop of rain upon the back of his hand , and 
 presently one come and enter one of the hole of the 
 lantern , whereupon the candle sputter and go out- 
 Troy be weary and it be now not far from midnight , 
 and the rain threaten to increase , he resolve to leave 
 the finish touch of his labour until the day should 
 break . he grope along the wall and over the graf 
 in the dark till he find himself round at the north side . 
 here he enter the porch , and , recline upon the 
 bench within , fall asleep . 
 CHAPTER XLVI 
 THE GURGOYLE : its doing 
 the tower of Weatherbury Church be a square 
 erection of fourteenth - century date , have two stone 
 gurgoyle on each of the four face of its parapet . of 
 these eight carve protuberance only two at this time 
 continue to serve the purpose of their erection - that 
 of spout the water from the lead roof within . one 
 mouth in each front have be close by bygone church- 
 warden as superfluous , and two other be break 
 away and choke - a matter not of much consequence 
 to the wellbeing of the tower , for the two mouth which 
 still remain open and active be gap enough to do 
 all the work . 
 it have be sometimes argue that there be no truer 
 criterion of the vitality of any give art - period than the 
 power of the master - spirit of that time in grotesque ; 
 and certainly in the instance of Gothic art there be no 
 dispute the proposition . weatherbury tower be a 
 somewhat early instance of the use of an ornamental 
 parapet in parish as distinct from cathedral church , 
 and the gurgoyle , which be the necessary correlative 
 of a parapet , be exceptionally prominent - of the 
 bold cut that the hand could shape , and of the most 
 original design that a human brain could conceive . 
 there be , so to speak , that symmetry in their distortion 
 which be less the characteristic of british than of 
 continental grotesque of the period . all the eight 
 be different from each other . a beholder be con- 
 vince that nothing on earth could be more hideous 
 than those he see on the north side until he go 
 round to the south . of the two on this latter face , only 
 that at the south - eastern corner concern the story . it 
 be too human to be call like a dragon , too impish 
 to be like a man , too animal to be like a fiend , and not 
 enough like a bird to be call a griffin . this horrible 
 stone entity be fashion as if cover with a wrinkle 
 hide ; it have short , erect ear , eye start from their 
 socket , and its finger and hand be seize the 
 corner of its mouth , which they thus seem to pull 
 open to give free passage to the water it vomit . the 
 low row of tooth be quite wash away , though the 
 upper still remain . here and thus , jut a couple 
 of foot from the wall against which its foot rest as a 
 support , the creature have for four hundred year 
 laugh at the surround landscape , voicelessly in 
 dry weather , and in wet with a gurgle and snort 
 sound . 
 Troy sleep on in the porch , and the rain increase 
 outside . presently the gurgoyle spat . in due time a 
 small stream begin to trickle through the seventy foot 
 of aerial space between its mouth and the ground , which 
 the water - drop smote like duckshot in their accelerate 
 velocity . the stream thicken in substance , and in- 
 crease in power , gradually spout far and yet 
 far from the side of the tower . when the rain fall 
 in a steady and ceaseless torrent the stream dash 
 downward in volume . 
 we follow its course to the ground at this point of 
 time . the end of the liquid parabola have come forward 
 from the wall , have advance over the plinth moulding , 
 over a heap of stone , over the marble border , into the 
 midst of Fanny Robin 's grave . 
 the force of the stream have , until very lately , be 
 receive upon some loose stone spread thereabout , 
 which have act as a shield to the soil under the onset . 
 these during the summer have be clear from the 
 ground , and there be now nothing to resist the down- 
 fall but the bare earth . for several year the stream 
 have not spout so far from the tower as it be do 
 on this night , and such a contingency have be over- 
 look . sometimes this obscure corner receive no 
 inhabitant for the space of two or three year , and 
 then it be usually but a pauper , a poacher , or other 
 sinner of undignified sin . 
 the persistent torrent from the gurgoyle 's jaw 
 direct all its vengeance into the grave . the rich 
 tawny mould be stir into motion , and boil like 
 chocolate . the water accumulate and wash deep 
 down , and the roar of the pool thus form spread into 
 the night as the head and chief among other noise of 
 the kind create by the deluging rain . the flower so 
 carefully plant by Fanny 's repentant lover begin to 
 move and writhe in their bed . the winter - violet 
 turn slowly upside down , and become a mere mat of 
 mud . soon the snowdrop and other bulb dance in 
 the boiling mass like ingredient in a cauldron . plant 
 of the tufte specie be loosen , rise to the surface , 
 and float of . 
 Troy do not awake from his comfortless sleep till it 
 be broad day . not have be in bed for two night 
 his shoulder feel stiff his foot tender , and his head 
 heavy . he remember his position , arise , shiver , 
 take the spade , and again go out . 
 the rain have quite cease , and the sun be shin 
 through the green , brown , and yellow leaf , now 
 sparkle and varnish by the raindrop to the bright- 
 ness of similar effect in the landscape of Ruysdael and 
 Hobbema , and full of all those infinite beauty that 
 arise from the union of water and colour with high 
 light . the air be render so transparent by the 
 heavy fall of rain that the autumn hue of the middle 
 distance be as rich as those near at hand , and the 
 remote field intercept by the angle of the tower ap- 
 peared in the same plane as the tower itself . 
 he enter the gravel path which would take he 
 behind the tower . the path , instead of be stony as 
 it have be the night before , be brown over with a 
 thin coating of mud . at one place in the path he see 
 a tuft of stringy root wash white and clean as a 
 bundle of tendon . he pick it up - surely it could 
 not be one of the primrose he have plant ? he see 
 a bulb , another , and another as he advance . beyond 
 doubt they be the crocus . with a face of perplexed 
 dismay Troy turn the corner and then behold the 
 wreck the stream have make . 
 the pool upon the grave have soak away into the 
 ground , and in its place be a hollow . the disturbed 
 earth be wash over the grass and pathway in the 
 guise of the brown mud he have already see , and it 
 spot the marble tombstone with the same stain . 
 nearly all the flower be wash clean out of the 
 ground , and they lay , root upwards , on the spot whither 
 they have be splash by the stream . 
 Troy 's brow become heavily contract . he set his 
 tooth closely , and his compress lip move as those of 
 one in great pain . this singular accident , by a strange 
 confluence of emotion in he , be feel as the sharp 
 sting of all . Troy 's face be very expressive , and any 
 observer who have see he now would hardly have 
 believe he to be a man who have laugh , and sung , 
 and pour love - trifle into a woman 's ear . to curse 
 his miserable lot be at first his impulse , but even that 
 low stage of rebellion need an activity whose 
 absence be necessarily antecedent to the existence of the 
 morbid misery which wring he . the sight , come 
 as it do , superimpose upon the other dark scenery of 
 the previous day , form a sort of climax to the whole 
 panorama , and it be more than he could endure . 
 Sanguine by nature , Troy have a power of elude 
 grief by simply adjourn it . he could put off the 
 consideration of any particular spectre till the matter 
 have become old and soften by time . the planting 
 of flower on Fanny 's grave have be perhaps but a 
 specie of elusion of the primary grief , and now it be 
 as if his intention have be know and circumvent . 
 almost for the first time in his life , Troy , as he stand 
 by this dismantled grave , wish himself another man . 
 lt be seldom that a person with much animal spirit do 
 not feel that the fact of his life be his own be the one 
 qualification which single it out as a more hopeful life 
 than that of other who may actually resemble he in 
 every particular . Troy have feel , in his transient way , 
 hundred of time , that he could not envy other people 
 their condition , because the possession of that condition 
 would have necessitate a different personality , when he 
 desire no other than his own . he have not mind 
 the peculiarity of his birth , the vicissitude of his life , 
 the meteorlike uncertainty of all that relate to he , 
 because these appertain to the hero of his story , 
 without whom there would have be no story at all for 
 he ; and it seem to be only in the nature of thing 
 that matter would right themselves at some proper date 
 and wind up well . this very morning the illusion 
 complete its disappearance , and , as it be , all of a 
 sudden , Troy hat himself . the suddenness be 
 probably more apparent than real . a coral reef which 
 just come short of the ocean surface be no more to the 
 horizon than if it have never be begin , and the mere 
 finishing stroke be what often appear to create an event 
 which have long be potentially an accomplished thing . 
 he stand and mediate - a miserable man . whither 
 should he go ? " he that be accurse , let he be accurse 
 still . " be the pitiless anathema write in this spoliate 
 effort of his new - bear solicitousness . a man who have 
 spend his primal strength in journeying in one direction 
 have not much spirit leave for reverse his course . Troy 
 have , since yesterday , faintly reverse his ; but the merest 
 opposition have dishearten he . to turn about would 
 have be hard enough under the great providential 
 encouragement ; but to find that Providence , far from 
 help he into a new course , or show any wish 
 that he might adopt one , actually jeer his first trembling 
 and critical attempt in that kind , be more than nature 
 could bear . 
 he slowly withdraw from the grave . he do not 
 attempt to fill up the hole , replace the flower , or do 
 anything at all . he simply throw up his card and 
 forswore his game for that time and always . go out 
 of the churchyard silently and unobserved - none of the 
 villager have yet rise - he pass down some field 
 at the back , and emerge just as secretly upon the high 
 road . shortly afterwards he have go from the village . 
 meanwhile , Bathsheba remain a voluntary prisoner 
 in the attic . the door be keep lock , except during 
 the entry and exit of Liddy , for whom a bed have 
 be arrange in a small adjoining room . the light 
 of Troy 's lantern in the churchyard be notice about 
 ten o'clock by the maid - servant , who casually glance 
 from the window in that direction whilst take she 
 supper , and she call Bathsheba 's attention to it . 
 they look curiously at the phenomenon for a time , 
 until Liddy be send to bed . 
 bathsheba do not sleep very heavily that night . 
 when her attendant be unconscious and softly breath- 
 ing in the next room , the mistress of the house be 
 still look out of the window at the faint gleam 
 spread from among the tree - not in a steady shine , 
 but blink like a revolving coastlight , though this 
 appearance fail to suggest to she that a person be 
 pass and repasse in front of it . Bathsheba sit 
 here till it begin to rain , and the light vanish , when 
 she withdraw to lie restlessly in her bed and re - enact 
 in a worn mind the lurid scene of yesternight . 
 almost before the first faint sign of dawn appear 
 she arise again , and open the window to obtain a full 
 breathing of the new morning air , the pane be now 
 wet with trembling tear leave by the night rain , each 
 one round with a pale lustre catch from primrose- 
 hue slash through a cloud low down in the awaken- 
 ing sky . from the tree come the sound of steady 
 dripping upon the drift leaf under they , and from 
 the direction of the church she could hear another noise 
  - peculiar , and not intermittent like the rest , the purl 
 of water fall into a pool . 
 Liddy knock at eight o'clock , and Bathsheba un- 
 lock the door . 
 " what a heavy rain we have   have in the night , ma'am ! " 
 say Liddy , when her inquiry about breakfast have be 
 make . 
 " yes , very heavy . " 
 " do you hear the strange noise from the church 
 yard ? " 
 " I hear one strange noise . I have   be think it 
 must have be the water from the tower spout . " 
 " well , that be what the shepherd be say , ma'am . 
 he be now go on to see . " 
 " oh ! Gabriel have be here this morning ! " 
 " only just look in in pass - quite in his old way , 
 which I think he have leave off lately . but the tower 
 spout use to spatter on the stone , and we be puzzle , 
 for this be like the boiling of a pot . " 
 not be able to read , think , or work , Bathsheba ask 
 Liddy to stay and breakfast with she . the tongue of the 
 more childish woman still run upon recent event . " be 
 you go across to the church , ma'am ? " she ask . 
 " not that I know of . " say Bathsheba . 
 " I think you might like to go and see where they 
 have put Fanny . the tree hide the place from your 
 window . " 
 Bathsheba have all sort of dread about meet she 
 husband . " have Mr. Troy be in to - night ? " she say 
 " no , ma'am ; I think he be go to Budmouth . 
 Budmouth ! the sound of the word carry with 
 it a much diminished perspective of he and his deed ; 
 there be thirteen mile interval betwixt they now . 
 she hat question Liddy about her husband 's 
 movement , and indeed have hitherto sedulously avoid 
 do so ; but now all the house know that there have 
 be some dreadful disagreement between they , and 
 it be futile to attempt disguise . Bathsheba have 
 reach a stage at which people cease to have any 
 appreciative regard for public opinion . 
 " what make you think he have go there ? " she say . 
 " Laban Tall see he on the Budmouth road this 
 morning before breakfast . " 
 Bathsheba be momentarily relieve of that wayward 
 heaviness of the past twenty - four hour which have 
 quench the vitality of youth in she without sub- 
 stitute the philosophy of mature year , and the 
 resolve to go out and walk a little way . so when 
 breakfast be over , she put on her bonnet , and take 
 a direction towards the church . it be nine o'clock , 
 and the man have return to work again from their 
 first meal , she be not likely to meet many of they in 
 the road . know that Fanny have be lay in the 
 reprobate ' quarter of the graveyard , call in the parish 
 " behind church . " which be invisible from the road , it 
 be impossible to resist the impulse to enter and look 
 upon a spot which , from nameless feeling , she at the 
 same time dread to see . she have be unable to 
 overcome an impression that some connection exist 
 between her rival and the light through the tree . 
 Bathsheba skirt the buttress , and behold the hole 
 and the tomb , its delicately veined surface splash and 
 stain just as Troy have see it and leave it two hour 
 early . on the other side of the scene stand Gabriel . 
 his eye , too , be fix on the tomb , and her arrival 
 have be noiseless , she have not as yet attract his 
 attention . Bathsheba do not at once perceive that the 
 grand tomb and the disturbed grave be Fanny 's , and 
 she look on both side and around for some humbler 
 mound , earth up and clodde in the usual way . then 
 her eye follow Oak 's , and she read the word with 
 which the inscription open : - 
 " erect by Francis Troy in Beloved Memory of 
 Fanny Robin . " 
 Oak see she , and his first act be to gaze inquiringly 
 and learn how she receive this knowledge of the 
 authorship of the work , which to himself have cause 
 considerable astonishment . but such discovery do 
 not much affect she now . emotional convulsion seem 
 to have become the commonplace of her history , and 
 she bid he good morning , and ask he to fill in 
 the hole with the spade which be stand by . Whilst 
 Oak be do as she desire , Bathsheba collect the 
 flower , and begin plant they with that sympathetic 
 manipulation of root and leaf which be so conspicuous 
 in a woman 's gardening , and which flower seem to 
 understand and thrive upon . she request Oak to 
 get the churchwarden to turn the leadwork at the 
 mouth of the gurgoyle that hang gap down upon 
 they , that by this mean the stream might be direct 
 sideways , and a repetition of the accident prevent . 
 finally , with the superfluous magnanimity of a woman 
 whose narrow instinct have bring down bitterness 
 upon she instead of love , she wipe the mud spot from 
 the tomb as if she rather like its word than otherwise , 
 CHAPTER XLVII 
 ADVENTURES by THE SHORE 
 TROY wander along towards the south . a composite 
 feeling , make up of disgust with the , to he , humdrum 
 tediousness of a farmer 's life , gloomily image of she who 
 lie in the churchyard , remorse , and a general averseness 
 to his wife 's society , impel he to seek a home in any 
 place on earth save Weatherbury . the sad accessory 
 of Fanny 's end confront he as vivid picture which 
 threaten to be indelible , and make life in Bathsheba 's 
 house intolerable . at three in the afternoon he find 
 himself at the foot of a slope more than a mile in length , 
 which run to the ridge of a range of hill lie parallel 
 with the shore , and form a monotonous barrier between 
 the basin of cultivate country inland and the wilder 
 scenery of the coast . up the hill stretch a road 
 nearly straight and perfectly white , the two side 
 approach each other in a gradual taper till they 
 meet the sky at the top about two mile off . Through- 
 out the length of this narrow and irksome incline plane 
 not a sign of life be visible on this garish afternoon 
 Troy toil up the road with a languor and depression 
 great than any he have experience for many a day 
 and year before . the air be warm and muggy , and 
 the top seem to recede as he approach . 
 at last he reach the summit , and a wide and 
 novel prospect burst upon he with an effect almost like 
 that of the Pacific upon Balboa 's gaze . the broad 
 steely sea , mark only by faint line , which have a 
 semblance of be etch thereon to a degree not deep 
 enough to disturb its general evenness , stretch the 
 whole width of his front and round to the right , where , 
 near the town and port of Budmouth , the sun bristle 
 down upon it , and banish all colour , to substitute in 
 its place a clear oily polish . nothing move in sky , 
 land , or sea , except a frill of milkwhite foam along the 
 nearer angle of the shore , shred of which lick the 
 contiguous stone like tongue . 
 he descend and come to a small basin of sea 
 enclose by the cliff . Troy 's nature freshen within 
 he ; he think he would rest and bathe here before 
 go far . he undress and plunge in . inside 
 the cove the water be unintereste to a swimmer , 
 be smooth as a pond , and to get a little of the ocean 
 swell , Troy presently swam between the two project 
 spur of rock which form the pillar of Hercules to 
 this miniature Mediterranean . unfortunately for Troy 
 a current unknown to he exist outside , which , un- 
 important to craft of any burden , be awkward for a 
 swimmer who might be take in it unawares . Troy 
 find himself carry to the left and then round in a 
 swoop out to sea . 
 he now recollect the place and its sinister 
 character . many bather have there pray for a dry 
 death from time to time , and , like Gonzalo also , have 
 be unanswere ; and Troy begin to deem it possible 
 that he might be add to their number . not a boat 
 of any kind be at present within sight , but far in the 
 distance Budmouth lie upon the sea , as it be quietly 
 regard his effort , and beside the town the harbour 
 show its position by a dim meshwork of rope and 
 spar . after wellnigh exhaust himself in attempt 
 to get back to the mouth of the cove , in his weakness 
 swim several inch deep than be his will not , 
 keep up his breathing entirely by his nostril , turn 
 upon his back a dozen time over , swim EN papillon 
 and so on , Troy resolve as a last resource to tread 
 water at a slight incline , and so endeavour to reach the 
 shore at any point , merely give himself a gentle 
 impetus inward whilst carry on in the general direc- 
 tion of the tide . this , necessarily a slow process , he 
 find to be not altogether so difficult , and though there 
 be no choice of a landing - place - the object on shore 
 pass by he in a sad and slow procession - he per- 
 ceptibly approach the extremity of a spit of land yet 
 far to the right , now well define against the sunny 
 portion of the horizon . while the swimmer 's eye 's be 
 fix upon the spit as his only mean of salvation on 
 this side of the Unknown , a move object break the 
 outline of the extremity , and immediately a ship 's boat 
 appear man with several sailor lad , her bow 
 towards the sea . 
 all Troy 's vigour spasmodically revive to prolong 
 the struggle yet a little far . swim with his 
 right arm , he hold up his left to hail they , splash 
 upon the wave , and shout with all his might . from 
 the position of the set sun his white form be 
 distinctly visible upon the now deep - hue bosom of the 
 sea to the east of the boat , and the man see he at 
 once . back their oar and put the boat about , 
 they pull towards he with a will , and in five or six 
 minute from the time of his first halloo , two of the 
 sailor haul he in over the stern . 
 they form part of a brig 's crew , and have come 
 ashore for sand . lend he what little clothing they 
 could spare among they as a slight protection against 
 late they make again towards the roadstead where their 
 and now night droop slowly upon the wide watery 
 level in front ; and at no great distance from they , 
 where the shoreline curve round , and form a long 
 riband of shade upon the horizon , a series of point of 
 yellow light begin to start into existence , denote the 
 spot to be the site of Budmouth , where the lamp be 
 be light along the parade . the cluck of their 
 oar be the only sound of any distinctness upon the 
 sea , and as they labour amid the thickening shade 
 the lamplight grow large , each appear to send a 
 flaming sword deep down into the wave before it , until 
 there arise , among other dim shape of the kind , the 
 form of the vessel for which they be bind . 
 CHAPTER XLVIII 
 DOUBTS ARISE - DOUBTS linger 
 BATHSHEBA undergo the enlargement of her 
 Husband 's absence from hour to day with a slight 
 feeling of surprise , and a slight feeling of relief ; yet 
 neither sensation rise at any time far above the level 
 commonly designate as indifference . she belong to 
 he : the certainty of that position be so well define , 
 and the reasonable probability of its issue so bound 
 that she could not speculate on contingency . take 
 no further interest in herself as a splendid woman , she 
 acquire the indifferent feeling of an outsider in contem- 
 plat her probable fate as a singular wretch ; for bath- 
 sheba draw herself and her future in colour that no 
 reality could exceed for darkness . her original vigorous 
 pride of youth have sicken , and with it have decline 
 all her anxiety about come year , since anxiety 
 recognize a well and a bad alternative , and Bath- 
 sheba have make up her mind that alternative on any 
 noteworthy scale have cease for she . soon , or later - 
 and that not very late - her husband would be home 
 again . and then the day of their tenancy of the 
 Upper Farm would be number . there have origin- 
 ally be show by the agent to the estate some distrust 
 of Bathsheba 's tenure as James Everdene 's successor , 
 on the score of her sex , and her youth , and her beauty ; 
 but the peculiar nature of her uncle 's will , his own 
 frequent testimony before his death to her cleverness 
 in such a pursuit , and her vigorous marshalling of the 
 numerous flock and herd which come suddenly into 
 her hand before negotiation be conclude , have win 
 confidence in her power , and no further objection have 
 be raise . she have latterly be in great doubt as 
 to what the legal effect of her marriage would be upon 
 her position ; but no notice have be take as yet of 
 her change of name , and only one point be clear - that 
 in the event of her own or her husband 's inability to 
 meet the agent at the forthcoming January rent - day , 
 very little consideration would be show , and , for that 
 matter , very little would be deserve . once out of the 
 farm , the approach of poverty would be sure . 
 hence Bathsheba live in a perception that her 
 purpose be break of . she be not a woman who 
 could hope on without good material for the process , 
 differ thus from the less far - sighted and energetic , 
 though more petted one of the sex , with whom hope 
 go on as a sort of clockwork which the mere food 
 and shelter be sufficient to wind up ; and perceive 
 clearly that her mistake have be a fatal one , she 
 accept her position , and wait coldly for the end . 
 the first Saturday after Troy 's departure she go 
 to Casterbridge alone , a journey she have not before 
 take since her marriage . on this Saturday Bathsheba 
 be pass slowly on foot through the crowd of rural 
 business - man gather as usual in front of the market- 
 house , who be as usual gaze upon by the burgher 
 with feeling that those healthy life be dearly pay 
 for by exclusion from possible aldermanship , when a 
 man , who have apparently be follow she , say some 
 word to another on her left hand . Bathsheba 's ear 
 be keen as those of any wild animal , and she dis- 
 tinctly hear what the speaker say , though her back 
 be towards he 
 " I be look for Mrs. Troy . be that she there ? " 
 " yes ; that be the young lady , I believe . " say the 
 the person address . 
 " I have some awkward news to break to she . her 
 husband be drown . " 
 as if endow with the spirit of prophecy , Bathsheba 
 gasp out , " no , it be not true ; it can not be true ! " 
 then she say and hear no more . the ice of self- 
 command which have latterly gather over she be 
 break , and the current burst forth again , and over 
 whelm she . a darkness come into her eye , and she 
 fall . 
 but not to the ground . a gloomy man , who have 
 be observe she from under the portico of the old 
 corn - exchange when she pass through the group 
 without , step quickly to her side at the moment of 
 her exclamation , and catch she in his arm as she sink 
 down . 
 " what be it ? " say Boldwood , look up at the 
 bringer of the big news , as he support she . 
 " her husband be drown this week while bath 
 in Lulwind Cove . a coastguardsman find his clothe , 
 and bring they into Budmouth yesterday . " 
 thereupon a strange fire light up Boldwood 's eye , 
 and his face flush with the suppress excitement of 
 an unutterable thought . everybody 's glance be now 
 centre upon he and the unconscious Bathsheba . he 
 lift she bodily off the ground , and smooth down 
 the fold of her dress as a child might have take a 
 storm - beat bird and arrange its ruffled plume , and 
 bear she along the pavement to the King 's Arms Inn . 
 here he pass with she under the archway into a 
 private room ; and by the time he have deposit - so 
 lothly - the precious burden upon a sofa , Bathsheba have 
 open her eye . remember all that have occur , 
 she murmur , " I want to go home ! " 
 Boldwood leave the room . he stand for a moment in 
 the passage to recover his sens . the experience have 
 be too much for his consciousness to keep up with , 
 and now that he have grasp it it have go again . for 
 those few heavenly , golden moment she have be in his 
 arm . what do it matter about she not know it ? she 
 have be close to his breast ; he have be close to her . 
 he start onward again , and send a woman to 
 she , go out to ascertain all the fact of the case . 
 these appear to be limit to what he have already 
 hear . he then order her horse to be put into the 
 gig , and when all be ready return to inform she . 
 he find that , though still pale and unwell , she have in 
 the meantime send for the Budmouth man who bring 
 the tiding , and learn from he all there be to know . 
 be hardly in a condition to drive home as she 
 have drive to town , Boldwood , with every delicacy of 
 manner and feeling , offer to get she a driver , or to 
 give she a seat in his phaeton , which be more com- 
 fortable than her own conveyance . these proposal 
 Bathsheba gently decline , and the farmer at once de- 
 part . 
 about half - an - hour later she invigorate herself by 
 an effort , and take her seat and the rein as usual - in 
 external appearance much as if nothing have happen . 
 she go out of the town by a tortuous back street , and 
 drive slowly along , unconscious of the road and the 
 scene . the first shade of evening be show them- 
 self when Bathsheba reach home , where , silently 
 alight and leave the horse in the hand of the boy , 
 she proceed at once upstairs . Liddy meet she on the 
 landing . the news have precede Bathsheba to weather- 
 bury by half - an - hour , and Liddy look inquiringly into 
 her mistress 's face . Bathsheba have nothing to say . 
 she enter her bedroom and sit by the window , and 
 thought and thought till night envelop she , and the 
 extreme line only of her shape be visible . somebody 
 come to the door , knock , and open it . 
 " well , what be it , Liddy ? " she say . 
 " I be think there must be something get for you 
 to wear . " say Liddy , with hesitation . 
 " what do you mean ? " 
 " mourning . " 
 " no , no , no . " say Bathsheba , hurriedly . 
 " but I suppose there must be something do for 
 poor - - " 
 " not at present , I think . it be not necessary . " 
 " why not , ma'am ? " 
 " because he be still alive . " 
 " how do you know that ? " say Liddy , amazed . 
 " I do not   know it . but would not   it have be different , 
 or should not   I have hear more , or would not   they have 
 find he , Liddy ? - or - I do not   know how it be , but 
 death would have be different from how this be . I be 
 perfectly convinced that he be still alive ! " 
 Bathsheba remain firm in this opinion till Monday , 
 when two circumstance conjoin to shake it . the 
 first be a short paragraph in the local newspaper , which , 
 beyond make by a methodizing pen formidable pre- 
 sumptive evidence of Troy 's death by drown , con- 
 taine the important testimony of a young Mr. Barker , 
 M.D. , of Budmouth , who speak to be an eyewitness 
 of the accident , in a letter to the editor . in this he 
 state that he be pass over the cliff on the remoter 
 side of the cove just as the sun be set . at that 
 time he see a bather carry along in the current outside 
 the mouth of the cove , and guess in an instant that 
 there be but a poor chance for he unless he should 
 be possess of unusual muscular power . he drift 
 behind a projection of the coast , and Mr. Barker follow 
 along the shore in the same direction . but by the time 
 that he could reach an elevation sufficiently great to 
 command a view of the sea beyond , dusk have set in , and 
 nothing far be to be see . 
 the other circumstance be the arrival of his clothe , 
 when it become necessary for she to examine and identify 
 they - though this have virtually be do long before 
 by those who inspect the letter in his pocket . it 
 be so evident to she in the midst of her agitation that 
 Troy have undress in the full conviction of dress 
 again almost immediately , that the notion that anything 
 but death could have prevent he be a perverse one 
 to entertain . 
 then Bathsheba say to herself that other be 
 assure in their opinion ; strange that she should not 
 be . a strange reflection occur to she , cause she 
 face to flush . suppose that Troy have follow Fanny 
 into another world . have he do this intentionally , yet 
 contrive to make his death appear like an accident ? 
 nevertheless , this thought of how the apparent might 
 differ from the real - make vivid by her bygone jealousy 
 of Fanny , and the remorse he have show that night 
  - do not blind she to the perception of a likeli 
 difference , less tragic , but to herself far more disastrous . 
 when alone late that evening beside a small fire , and 
 much calm down , Bathsheba take Troy 's watch into 
 her hand , which have be restore to she with the rest 
 of the article belong to he . she open the case 
 as he have open it before she a week ago . there be 
 the little coil of pale hair which have be as the fuze to 
 this great explosion . 
 " he be hers and she be his ; they should be go 
 together . " she say . " I be nothing to either of they , 
 and why should I keep her hair ? " she take it in her 
 hand , and hold it over the fire . " no - i'll not burn it 
 -i'll keep it in memory of she , poor thing ! " she add , 
 snatch back her hand . 
 CHAPTER XLIX 
 OAK 's ADVANCEMENT - a great HOPE 
 the later autumn and the winter draw on apace , 
 and the leaf lie thick upon the turf of the glade 
 and the moss of the wood . Bathsheba , have 
 previously be live in a state of suspend feeling 
 which be not suspense , now live in a mood of 
 quietude which be not precisely peacefulness . while 
 she have know he to be alive she could have think 
 of his death with equanimity ; but now that it might be 
 she have lose he , she regret that he be not her 
 still . she keep the farm go , rake in her profit 
 without care keenly about they , and expend 
 money on venture because she have do so in bygone 
 day , which , though not long go by , seem infinitely 
 remove from her present . she look back upon that 
 past over a great gulf , as if she be now a dead person , 
 have the faculty of meditation still leave in she , by 
 mean of which , like the mouldering gentlefolk of the 
 poet 's story , she could sit and ponder what a gift life 
 use to be . 
 however , one excellent result of her general apathy 
 be the long - delay installation of Oak as bailiff ; but 
 he have virtually exercise that function for a long 
 time already , the change , beyond the substantial in- 
 crease of wage it bring , be little more than a 
 nominal one address to the outside world . 
 Boldwood live seclude and inactive . much of 
 his wheat and all his barley of that season have be 
 spoilt by the rain . it sprout , grow into intricate 
 mat , and be ultimately throw to the pig in armful . 
 the strange neglect which have produce this ruin 
 and waste become the subject of whisper talk among 
 all the people round ; and it be elicit from one of 
 Boldwood 's man that forgetfulness have nothing to do 
 with it , for he have be remind of the danger to 
 his corn as many time and as persistently as inferior 
 dare to do . the sight of the pig turn in disgust 
 from the rotten ear seem to arouse Boldwood , and 
 he one evening send for Oak . whether it be sug- 
 geste by Bathsheba 's recent act of promotion or not , 
 the farmer propose at the interview that Gabriel 
 should undertake the superintendence of the Lower 
 Farm as well as of Bathsheba 's , because of the necessity 
 Boldwood feel for such aid , and the impossibility of 
 discover a more trustworthy man . Gabriel 's malig- 
 nant star be assuredly set fast . 
 Bathsheba , when she learn of this proposal - for 
 Oak be oblige to consult she - at first languidly 
 object . she consider that the two farm together 
 be too extensive for the observation of one man . 
 Boldwood , who be apparently determine by personal 
 rather than commercial reason , suggest that Oak 
 should be furnish with a horse for his sole use , 
 when the plan would present no difficulty , the two 
 farm lie side by side . Boldwood do not directly 
 communicate with she during these negotiation , only 
 speak to Oak , who be the go - between throughout . 
 all be harmoniously arrange at last , and we now 
 see Oak mount on a strong cob , and daily trot 
 the length breadth of about two thousand acre 
 in a cheerful spirit of surveillance , as if the crop 
 belong to he - the actual mistress of the one - half 
 and the master of the other , sit in their respective 
 home in gloomy and sad seclusion . 
 out of this there arise , during the spring succeeding , 
 a talk in the parish that Gabriel Oak be feather his 
 nest fast . 
 " whatever d'ye think . " say Susan Tall , " Gable Oak 
 be come it quite the dand . he now wear shin 
 boot with hardly a hob in them , two or three time 
 a - week , and a tall hat a - Sundays , and ' a hardly know 
 the name of smockfrock . when I see people strut 
 enough to he cut up into bantam cock , I stand 
 dormant with wonder , and say no more ! " 
 it be eventually know that Gabriel , though pay 
 a fix wage by Bathsheba independent of the fluctua- 
 tion of agricultural profit , have make an engagement 
 with Boldwood by which Oak be to receive a share 
 of the receipt - a small share certainly , yet it be 
 money of a high quality than mere wage , and 
 capable of expansion in a way that wage be not . 
 some be begin to consider Oak a " near " man , 
 for though his condition have thus far improve , he 
 live in no well style than before , occupy the 
 same cottage , par his own potato , mend his 
 stocking , and sometimes even make his bed with 
 his own hand . but as Oak be not only provokingly 
 indifferent to public opinion , but a man who clung 
 persistently to old habit and usage , simply because 
 they be old , there be room for doubt as to his 
 motif . 
 a great hope have latterly germinate in Boldwood , 
 whose unreasone devotion to Bathsheba could only 
 be characterize as a fond madness which neither 
 time nor circumstance , evil nor good report , could 
 weaken or destroy . this fevere hope have grow up 
 again like a grain of mustard - seed during the quiet 
 which follow the hasty conjecture that Troy be 
 drown . he nourish it fearfully , and almost 
 shun the contemplation of it in earnest , lest fact 
 should reveal the wildness of the dream . Bathsheba 
 have at last be persuade to wear mourning , her 
 appearance as she enter the church in that guise 
 be in itself a weekly addition to his faith that a 
 time be come - very far off perhaps , yet surely 
 near - when his wait on event should have 
 its reward . how long he might have to wait he have 
 not yet closely consider . what he would try to 
 recognize be that the severe schooling she have be 
 subject to have make Bathsheba much more con- 
 siderate than she have formerly be of the feeling of 
 other , and he trust that , should she be willing at 
 any time in the future to marry any man at all , that 
 man would be himself . there be a substratum of 
 good feeling in she : her self - reproach for the injury 
 she have thoughtlessly do he might be depend 
 upon now to a much great extent than before her 
 infatuation and disappointment . it would be possible 
 to approach she by the channel of her good nature , 
 and to suggest a friendly businesslike compact between 
 they for fulfilment at some future day , keep the 
 passionate side of his desire entirely out of her sight . 
 such be Boldwood 's hope . 
 to the eye of the middle - aged , Bathsheba be 
 perhaps additionally charming just now . her exuber- 
 ance of spirit be prune down ; the original phantom 
 of delight have show herself to be not too bright for 
 human nature 's daily food , and she have be able to 
 enter this second poetical phase without lose much 
 of the first in the process . 
 Bathsheba 's return from a two month ' visit to her 
 old aunt at Norcombe afford the impassioned and 
 yearn farmer a pretext for inquire directly after 
 she - now possibly in the ninth month of her 
 widowhood - and endeavour to get a notion of her 
 middle of the haymaking , and Boldwood contrive to 
 " I be glad to see you out of door , Lydia . " he say 
 she simper , and wonder in her heart why he 
 " I hope Mrs. Troy be quite well after her long 
 the coldest - hearted neighbour could scarcely say less 
 " she be quite well , sir . 
 " yes , cheerful . 
 " Fearful , do you say ? " 
 " o no . I merely say she be cheerful . " 
 " tell you all her affair ? " 
 " no , sir . 
 " some of they ? " 
 " yes , sir . 
 " Mrs Troy put much confidence in you , Lydia , 
 and very wisely , perhaps . " 
 " she do , sir . I have   be with she all through her 
 trouble , and be with she at the time of Mr. Troy 's 
 going and all . and if she be to marry again I 
 expect I should bide with she . " 
 " she promise that you shall - quite natural . " say 
 the strategic lover , throb throughout he at the 
 presumption which Liddy 's word appear to warrant 
  - that his darling have think of re - marriage . 
 " no - she do not   promise it exactly . I merely 
 judge on my own account . 
 " yes , yes , I understand . when she allude to the 
 possibility of marry again , you conclude - - " 
 " she never do allude to it , sir . " say Liddy , think 
 how very stupid Mr. Boldwood be get . 
 " of course not . " he return hastily , his hope fall 
 again . " you need not   take quite such long reach with 
 your rake , Lydia - short and quick one be good . well , 
 perhaps , as she be absolute mistress again now , it be wise 
 of she to resolve never to give up her freedom . " 
 " my mistress do certainly once say , though not 
 seriously , that she suppose she might marry again at 
 the end of seven year from last year , if she care to 
 risk Mr. Troy 's come back and claim she . " 
 " ah , six year from the present time . say that she 
 might . she might marry at once in every reasonable 
 person 's opinion , whatever the lawyer may say to the 
 contrary . " 
 " have you be to ask they ? " say Liddy , innocently . 
 " not I. " say Boldwood , grow red . " Liddy , you 
 need not   stay here a minute later than you wish , so Mr , 
 Oak say . I be now go on a little far . good " 
 afternoon . " 
 he go away vex with himself , and ashamed of 
 have for this one time in his life do anything which 
 could be call underhand . poor Boldwood have no 
 more skill in finesse than a battering - ram , and he be 
 uneasy with a sense of have make himself to appear 
 stupid and , what be bad , mean . but he have , after 
 all , light upon one fact by way of repayment . it be 
 a singularly fresh and fascinating fact , and though not 
 without its sadness it be pertinent and real . in little 
 more than six year from this time Bathsheba might 
 certainly marry he . there be something definite in 
 that hope , for admit that there might have be no 
 deep thought in her word to Liddy about marriage , 
 they show at least her creed on the matter . 
 this pleasant notion be now continually in his mind . 
 six year be a long time , but how much short than 
 never , the idea he have for so long be oblige to 
 endure ! Jacob have serve twice seven year for 
 Rachel : what be six for such a woman as this ? he 
 try to like the notion of wait for she well than 
 that of win she at once . Boldwood feel his love 
 to be so deep and strong and eternal , that it be pos- 
 sible she have never yet know its full volume , and this 
 patience in delay would afford he an opportunity of 
 give sweet proof on the point . he would annihilate 
 the six year of his life as if they be minute - so little 
 do he value his time on earth beside her love . he 
 would let she see , all those six year of intangible ether- 
 eal courtship , how little care he have for anything but as 
 it bear upon the consummation . 
 meanwhile the early and the late summer bring 
 round the week in which Greenhill Fair be hold . 
 this fair be frequently attend by the folk of Weather- 
 bury . 
 CHAPTER L 
 the sheep FAIR - TROY touch his WIFE 's HAND 
 GREENHILL be the Nijni Novgorod of South 
 Wessex ; and the busy , merriest , noisy day of the 
 whole statute number be the day of the sheep fair . 
 this yearly gathering be upon the summit of a hill 
 which retain in good preservation the remain of an 
 ancient earthwork , consist of a huge rampart and 
 entrenchment of an oval form encircle the top of 
 the hill , though somewhat break down here and there . 
 to each of the two chief opening on opposite side a 
 wind road ascend , and the level green space of 
 ten or fifteen acre enclose by the bank be the 
 site of the fair . a few permanent erection dot the 
 spot , but the majority of visitor patronize canvas alone 
 for rest and feed under during the time of their 
 sojourn here . 
 shepherd who attend with their flock from long 
 distance start from home two or three day , or even 
 a week , before the fair , drive their charge a few mile 
 each day - not more than ten or twelve - and rest 
 they at night in hire field by the wayside at pre- 
 viously choose point , where they feed , have fast since 
 morning . the shepherd of each flock march behind , 
 a bundle contain his kit for the week strap upon 
 his shoulder , and in his hand his crook , which he use 
 as the staff of his pilgrimage . several of the sheep 
 would get wear and lame , and occasionally a lambing 
 occur on the road . to meet these contingency , 
 there be frequently provide , to accompany the flock 
 from the remoter point , a pony and waggon into which 
 the weakly one be take for the remainder of the 
 journey . 
 the Weatherbury Farms , however , be no such 
 long distance from the hill , and those arrangement 
 be not necessary in their case . but the large united 
 flock of Bathsheba and Farmer Boldwood form a 
 valuable and impose multitude which demand much 
 attention , and on this account Gabriel , in addition to 
 Boldwood 's shepherd and Cain Ball , accompany they 
 along the way , through the decayed old town of Kings- 
 bere , and upward to the plateau , - old George the dog 
 of course behind they . 
 when the autumn sun slant over Greenhill this 
 morning and light the dewy flat upon its crest , nebu- 
 lous cloud of dust be to be see float between 
 the pair of hedge which streak the wide prospect 
 around in all direction . these gradually converge 
 upon the base of the hill , and the flock become 
 individually visible , climb the serpentine way which 
 lead to the top . thus , in a slow procession , they enter 
 the opening to which the road tend , multitude after 
 multitude , horn and hornless - blue flock and red 
 flock , buff flock and brown flock , even green and 
 salmon - tint flock , accord to the fancy of the 
 colourist and custom of the farm . man be shout , 
 dog be bark , with great animation , but the 
 throng traveller in so long a journey have grow 
 nearly indifferent to such terror , though they still 
 bleat piteously at the unwontedness of their experi- 
 ence , a tall shepherd rise here and there in the midst 
 of they , like a gigantic idol amid a crowd of prostrate 
 devotee . 
 the great mass of sheep in the fair consisted of 
 South Downs and the old Wessex horn breed , to 
 the latter class Bathsheba 's and Farmer Boldwood 's 
 mainly belong . these file in about nine o'clock , 
 their vermiculate horn lop gracefully on each side 
 of their cheek in geometrically perfect spiral , a small 
 pink and white ear nestle under each horn . before 
 and behind come other variety , perfect leopard as to 
 the full rich substance of their coat , and only lack the 
 spot . there be also a few of the Oxfordshire breed , 
 whose wool be begin to curl like a child 's flaxen 
 hair , though surpass in this respect by the effeminate 
 Leicesters , which be in turn less curly than the cots- 
 wold . but the most picturesque by far be a small 
 flock of Exmoors , which chance to be there this year . 
 their pied face and leg , dark and heavy horn , tress 
 of wool hang round their swarthy forehead , quite 
 relieve the monotony of the flock in that quarter . 
 all these bleat , panting , and weary thousand have 
 enter and be pen before the morning have far 
 advanced , the dog belong to each flock be tie to 
 the corner of the pen contain it . alley for pedes- 
 trian intersect the pen , which soon become crowd 
 with buyer and seller from far and near . 
 in another part of the hill an altogether different 
 scene begin to force itself upon the eye towards mid- 
 day . a circular tent , of exceptional newness and size , 
 be in course of erection here . as the day draw on , 
 the flock begin to change hand , lighten the shep- 
 herd 's responsibility ; and they turn their attention 
 to this tent and inquire of a man at work there , whose 
 soul seem concentrate on tie a bother knot in 
 no time , what be go on . 
 " the Royal Hippodrome Performance of Turpin 's 
 Ride to York and the death of Black Bess . " reply the 
 man promptly , without turn his eye or leave off 
 try . 
 as soon as the tent be complete the band strike 
 up highly stimulating harmony , and the announce- 
 ment be publicly make , Black Bess stand in a con- 
 spicuous position on the outside , as a live proof , if 
 proof be want , of the truth of the oracular utterance 
 from the stage over which the people be to enter . 
 these be so convinced by such genuine appeal to 
 heart and understanding both that they soon begin to 
 crowd in abundantly , among the foremost be visible 
 Jan Coggan and Joseph Poorgrass , who be holiday 
 keep here to - day , 
 " ' that be the great ruffen push I ! " scream a 
 woman in front of Jan over her shoulder at he when 
 the rush be at its fiercest . 
 " how can I help push ye when the folk behind 
 push I ? " say Coggan , in a deprecate tone , turn 
 without turn his body , which be jam as in a vice . 
 there be a silence ; then the drum and trumpet 
 again send forth their echo note . the crowd be 
 again ecstasie , and give another lurch in which Coggan 
 and Poorgrass be again thrust by those behind upon 
 the woman in front . 
 " o that helpless feymel should be at the mercy of 
 she sway like a reed shake by the wind . 
 now . " say Coggan , appeal in an earnest voice 
 to the public at large as it stand cluster about his 
 shoulder - blade . " do ye ever hear such onreasonable 
 woman as that ? upon my carcase , neighbour , if I 
 could only get out of this cheesewring , the damn woman 
 might eat the show for I ! " 
 " do not   ye lose yer temper , Jan ! " implore Joseph 
 Poorgrass , in a whisper . " they might get their man to 
 murder we , for I think by the shine of their eye that 
 they be a sinful form of womankind . " 
 Jan hold his tongue , as if he have no objection to be 
 pacify to please a friend , and they gradually reach 
 the foot of the ladder , Poorgrass be flatten like a 
 jumping - jack , and the sixpence , for admission , which he 
 have get ready half - an - hour early , have become so 
 reeking hot in the tight squeeze of his excited hand that 
 the woman in spangle , brazen ring set with glass 
 diamond , and with chalk face and shoulder , who 
 take the money of he , hastily drop it again from 
 a fear that some trick have be play to burn she 
 finger . so they all enter , and the cloth of the 
 tent , to the eye of an observer on the outside , become 
 bulge into innumerable pimple such as we observe on 
 a sack of potato , cause by the various human head , 
 back , and elbow at high pressure within . 
 at the rear of the large tent there be two small 
 dressing - tent . one of these , allot to the male per- 
 former , be partition into half by a cloth ; and in 
 one of the division there be sit on the grass , pull 
 ing on a pair of jack - boot , a young man whom we 
 instantly recognise as Sergeant Troy . 
 Troy 's appearance in this position may be briefly 
 account for . the brig aboard which he be take in 
 Budmouth Roads be about to start on a voyage , though 
 somewhat short of hand . Troy read the article and 
 join , but before they sail a boat be despatch 
 across the bay to Lulwind cove ; as he have half expect , 
 his clothe be go . he ultimately work his passage 
 to the United States , where he make a precarious living 
 in various town as Professor of Gymnastics , Sword 
 Exercise , Fencing , and Pugilism . a few month be 
 sufficient to give he a distaste for this kind of life . 
 there be a certain animal form of refinement in his 
 nature ; and however pleasant a strange condition might 
 be whilst privation be easily ward off , it be dis- 
 advantageously coarse when money be short . there 
 be ever present , too , the idea that he could claim a 
 home and its comfort do he but choose to return to 
 England and Weatherbury Farm . whether Bathsheba 
 think he dead be a frequent subject of curious 
 conjecture . to England he do return at last ; but the 
 but the fact of draw nearer to Weatherbury abstract its 
 fascination , and his intention to enter his old groove at 
 the place become modify . it be with gloom he con- 
 sidere on land at Liverpool that if he be to go home 
 his reception would be of a kind very unpleasant to con- 
 template ; for what Troy have in the way of emotion be 
 an occasional fitful sentiment which sometimes cause 
 he as much inconvenience as emotion of a strong and 
 healthy kind . Bathsheba be not a woman to be make 
 a fool of , or a woman to suffer in silence ; and how 
 could he endure existence with a spirited wife to whom 
 at first enter he would be beholden for food and 
 lodge ? moreover , it be not at all unlikely that his 
 wife would fail at her farming , if she have not already 
 do so ; and he would then become liable for her 
 maintenance : and what a life such a future of poverty 
 with she would be , the spectre of Fanny constantly be- 
 tween they , harrow his temper and embitter her 
 word ! thus , for reason touch on distaste , regret , 
 and shame commingle , he put off his return from day 
 to day , and would have decide to put it off altogether 
 if he could have find anywhere else the ready - make 
 establishment which exist for he there . 
 at this time - the July precede the September in 
 which we find at Greenhill Fair - he fall in with a 
 travel circus which be perform in the outskirt of 
 a northern town . Troy introduce himself to the 
 manager by tame a restive horse of the troupe , hit 
 a suspend apple with pistol - bullet fire from the 
 animal 's back when in full gallop , and other feat . for 
 his merit in these - all more or less base upon his ex- 
 perience as a dragoon - guardsman - Troy be take into 
 the company , and the play of Turpin be prepare with 
 a view to his personation of the chief character . Troy 
 be not greatly elated by the appreciative spirit in which 
 he be undoubtedly treat , but he think the engage- 
 ment might afford he a few week for consideration . 
 it be thus carelessly , and without have form any 
 definite plan for the future , that Troy find himself 
 at Greenhill Fair with the rest of the company on this 
 day . 
 and now the mild autumn sun get low , and in 
 front of the pavilion the following incident have take 
 place . Bathsheba - who be drive to the fair that day 
 by her odd man Poorgrass - have , like every one else , 
 read or hear the announcement that Mr. Francis , the 
 Great Cosmopolitan Equestrian and Roughrider , would 
 enact the part of turpin , and she be not yet too old 
 and careworn to be without a little curiosity to see he . 
 this particular show be by far the large and grand 
 in the fair , a horde of little show group themselves 
 under its shade like chicken around a hen . the crowd 
 have pass in , and Boldwood , who have be watch 
 all the day for an opportunity of speak to she , see 
 her comparatively isolate , come up to her side . 
 " I hope the sheep have do well to - day , Mrs. Troy ? " 
 he say , nervously . 
 " o yes , thank you . " say Bathsheba , colour spring 
 up in the centre of her cheek . " I be fortunate 
 enough to sell they all just as we get upon the hill , so 
 we have not   to pen at all . " 
 " and now you be entirely at leisure ? " 
 " yes , except that I have to see one more dealer in 
 two hour ' time : otherwise I should be go home . 
 he be look at this large tent and the announcement . 
 have you ever see the play of " turpin 's Ride to 
 York ? " turpin be a real man , be he not ? " 
 " o yes , perfectly true - all of it . indeed , I think 
 I have   hear Jan Coggan say that a relation of his knew 
 Tom King , Turpin 's friend , quite well . " 
 " coggan be rather give to strange story connect 
 with his relation , we must remember . I hope they 
 can all be believe . " 
 " yes , yes ; we know Coggan . but turpin be true 
 enough . you have never see it play , I suppose ? " 
 " never . I be not allow to go into these place 
 when I be young . Hark ! what be that prance ? 
 how they shout ! " 
 " Black Bess just start off , I suppose . be I right 
 in suppose you would like to see the performance , 
 Mrs. Troy ? please excuse my mistake , if it be one ; 
 but if you would like to , I will get a seat for you with 
 pleasure . " perceive that she hesitate , he add , " I 
 myself shall not stay to see it : I have   see it before . " 
 now Bathsheba do care a little to see the show , and 
 have only withhold her foot from the ladder because she 
 fear to go in alone . she have be hop that Oak 
 might appear , whose assistance in such case be always 
 accept as an inalienable right , but Oak be nowhere 
 to be see ; and hence it be that she say , " then if 
 you will just look in first , to see if there 's room , I think 
 I will go in for a minute or two . " 
 and so a short time after this Bathsheba appear 
 in the tent with Boldwood at her elbow , who , take 
 her to a " reserved " seat , again withdraw . 
 this feature consist of one raise bench in very 
 conspicuous part of the circle , cover with red cloth , 
 and floor with a piece of carpet , and Bathsheba 
 immediately find , to her confusion , that she be the 
 single reserved individual in the tent , the rest of the 
 crowded spectator , one and all , stand on their leg 
 on the border of the arena , where they get twice as 
 good a view of the performance for half the money . 
 hence as many eye be turn upon she , enthrone 
 alone in this place of honour , against a scarlet back- 
 ground , as upon the pony and clown who be 
 engage in preliminary exploit in the centre , turpin 
 not have yet appear . once there , Bathsheba be 
 force to make the good of it and remain : she sit 
 down , spread her skirt with some dignity over the 
 unoccupied space on each side of she , and give a 
 new and feminine aspect to the pavilion . in a few 
 minute she notice the fat red nape of Coggan 's neck 
 among those stand just below she , and Joseph Poor- 
 grass 's saintly profile a little far on . 
 the interior be shadowy with a peculiar shade . 
 the strange luminous semi - opacity of fine autumn 
 afternoon and eve intensify into Rembrandt effect 
 the few yellow sunbeam which come through hole 
 and division in the canvas , and spirt like jet of 
 gold - dust across the dusky blue atmosphere of haze 
 pervade the tent , until they alight on inner surface 
 of cloth opposite , and shine like little lamp suspend 
 there . 
 Troy , on peep from his dressing - tent through a 
 slit for a reconnoitre before enter , see his unconscious 
 wife on high before he as describe , sit as queen 
 of the tournament . he start back in utter confusion , 
 for although his disguise effectually conceal his person- 
 ality , he instantly feel that she would be sure to recognize 
 his voice . he have several time during the day think 
 of the possibility of some Weatherbury person or other 
 appear and recognize he ; but he have take the 
 risk carelessly . if they see I , let they , he have say . 
 but here be Bathsheba in her own person ; and the 
 reality of the scene be so much intenser than any of 
 his prefiguring that he feel he have not half enough 
 consider the point . 
 she look so charming and fair that his cool mood 
 about Weatherbury people be change . he have not 
 expect she to exercise this power over he in the 
 twinkling of an eye . should he go on , and care nothing ? 
 he could not bring himself to do that . beyond a politic 
 wish to remain unknown , there suddenly arise in he 
 now a sense of shame at the possibility that his 
 attractive young wife , who already despise he , should 
 despise he more by discover he in so mean a 
 condition after so long a time . he actually blush 
 at the thought , and be vex beyond measure that 
 his sentiment of dislike towards Weatherbury should 
 have lead he to dally about the country in this way . 
 but Troy be never more clever than when absolutely 
 at his wit 's end . he hastily thrust aside the curtain 
 divide his own little dress space from that of the 
 manager and proprietor , who now appear as the 
 individual call Tom King as far down as his waist , and 
 as the aforesaid respectable manager thence to his toe . 
 " here be the devil to pay ! " say Troy . 
 " how be that ? " 
 " why , there be a blackguard creditor in the tent I do not 
 want to see , who will discover I and nab I as sure as 
 Satan if I open my mouth . what be to be do ? " 
 you must appear now , I think . " 
 " I can not . " 
 but the play must proceed . " 
 " do you give out that Turpin have get a bad cold , 
 and can not   speak his part , but that he will perform it just 
 the same without speak . " 
 the proprietor shake his head . 
 " anyhow , play or no play , I will not   open my mouth , 
 say Troy , firmly . 
 " very well , then let I see . I tell you how we will 
 manage . " say the other , who perhaps feel it would be 
 extremely awkward to offend his lead man just at 
 this time . " I will not   tell them anything about your 
 keeping silence ; go on with the piece and say nothing , 
 do what you can by a judicious wink now and then , 
 and a few indomitable nod in the heroic place , you 
 know . they will never find out that the speech be 
 omit . " 
 this seem feasible enough , for Turpin 's speech 
 be not many or long , the fascination of the piece 
 lie entirely in the action ; and accordingly the play 
 begin , and at the appoint time Black Bess leap 
 into the grassy circle amid the plaudit of the spectator . 
 at the turnpike scene , where Bess and Turpin be hotly 
 pursue at midnight by the officer , and half - awake 
 gatekeeper in his tasselled nightcap deny that any 
 horseman have pass , Coggan utter a broad - cheste 
 " well do ! " which could be hear all over the fair 
 above the bleating , and Poorgrass smile delightedly 
 with a nice sense of dramatic contrast between our 
 hero , who coolly leap the gate , and halt justice in 
 the form of his enemy , who must need pull up 
 cumbersomely and wait to be let through . at the 
 death of Tom King , he could not refrain from seize 
 Coggan by the hand , and whispering , with tear in his 
 eye , " of course he be not really shoot , Jan - only 
 seemingly ! " and when the last sad scene come on , 
 and the body of the gallant and faithful Bess have to 
 be carry out on a shutter by twelve volunteer from 
 among the spectator , nothing could restrain Poorgrass 
 from lend a hand , exclaim , as he ask Jan to 
 join he , " twill be something to tell of at Warren 's in 
 future year , Jan , and hand down to our child . " for 
 many a year in Weatherbury , Joseph tell , with the air 
 of a man who have have experience in his time , that he 
 touch with his own hand the hoof of Bess as she lie 
 upon the board upon his shoulder . if , as some thinker 
 hold , immortality consist in be enshrine in other " 
 memory , then do Black Bess become immortal that 
 day if she never have do so before . 
 meanwhile Troy have add a few touch to his 
 ordinary make - up for the character , the more effectually 
 to disguise himself , and though he have feel faint qualm 
 on first enter , the metamorphosis effect by judici- 
 ously " line " his face with a wire render he safe from 
 the eye of Bathsheba and her man . nevertheless , he 
 be relieve when it be get through . 
 there a second performance in the evening , and 
 the tent be light up . Troy have take his part very 
 quietly this time , venture to introduce a few speech 
 on occasion ; and be just conclude it when , whilst 
 stand at the edge of the circle contiguous to the first 
 row of spectator , he observe within a yard of he the 
 eye of a man dart keenly into his side feature . Troy 
 hastily shift his position , after have recognize in 
 swear enemy , who still hang about the outskirt of 
 at first Troy resolve to take no notice and abide 
 by circumstance . that he have be recognize by 
 this man be highly probable ; yet there be room for 
 a doubt . then the great objection he have feel to 
 allow news of his proximity to precede he to 
 Weatherbury in the event of his return , base on a 
 feeling that knowledge of his present occupation would 
 discredit he still far in his wife 's eye , return 
 in full force . moreover , should he resolve not to 
 return at all , a tale of his be alive and be in 
 the neighbourhood would be awkward ; and he be 
 anxious to acquire a knowledge of his wife 's temporal 
 affair before decide which to do . 
 in this dilemma Troy at once go out to recon- 
 noitre . it occur to he that to find Pennyways , and 
 make a friend of he if possible , would be a very wise 
 act . he have put on a thick beard borrow from the 
 establishment , and this he wander about the fair- 
 field . it be now almost dark , and respectable people 
 be get their cart and gig ready to go home 
 the large refreshment booth in the fair be provide 
 by an innkeeper from a neighbouring town . this be 
 consider an unexceptionable place for obtain the 
 necessary food and rest : Host Trencher   as he be 
 jauntily call by the local newspaper   be a sub- 
 stantial man of high repute for cater through all the 
 county round . the tent be divide into first and 
 second - class compartment , and at the end of the first- 
 class division be a yet further enclosure for the most 
 exclusive , fence of from the body of the tent by a 
 luncheon - bar , behind which the host himself stand 
 bustle about in white apron and shirt - sleeve , and look- 
 ing as if he have never live anywhere but under canvas 
 all his life . in these penetralia be chair and a table , 
 which , on candle be light , make quite a cozy and 
 luxurious show , with an urn , plat tea and coffee pot , 
 china teacups , and plum cake . 
 Troy stand at the entrance to the booth , where a 
 gipsy - woman be fry pancake over a little fire of 
 stick and sell they at a penny a - piece , and look 
 over the head of the people within . he could see 
 nothing of Pennyways , but he soon discern Bathsheba 
 through an opening into the reserve space at the 
 further end . Troy thereupon retreat , go round the 
 tent into the darkness , and listen . he could hear 
 Bathsheba 's voice immediately inside the canvas ; she 
 be converse with a man . a warmth overspread his 
 face : surely she be not so unprincipled as to flirt in 
 a fair ! he wonder if , then , she reckon upon his 
 death as an absolute certainty . to get at the root of 
 the matter , Troy take a penknife from his pocket and 
 softly make two little cut crosswise in the cloth , which , 
 by fold back the corner leave a hole the size of a 
 wafer . close to this he place his face , withdraw 
 it again in a movement of surprise ; for his eye have 
 be within twelve inch of the top of Bathsheba 's 
 head . lt be too near to be convenient . he make 
 another hole a little to one side and low down , in a 
 shade place beside her chair , from which it be easy 
 and safe to survey she by look horizontally ' . 
 Troy take in the scene completely now . she be 
 lean back , sip a cup of tea that she hold in her 
 hand , and the owner of the male voice be Boldwood , 
 who have apparently just bring the cup to she , 
 Bathsheba , be in a negligent mood , leant so idly 
 against the canvas that it be press to the shape of 
 her shoulder , and she be , in fact , as good as in Troy 's 
 arm ; and he be oblige to keep his breast carefully 
 backward that she might not feel its warmth through the 
 cloth as he gaze in . 
 Troy find unexpected chord of feel to be stir 
 again within he as they have be stir early in the 
 day . she be handsome as ever , and she be his . it 
 be some minute before he could counteract his sudden 
 wish to go in , and claim she . then he think how 
 the proud girl who have always look down upon he 
 even whilst it be to love he , would hate he on dis- 
 cover he to be a stroll player . be he to make 
 himself know , that chapter of his life must at all risk 
 be keep for ever from she and from the Weatherbury 
 people , or his name would be a byword throughout the 
 parish . he would be nickname " turpin " as long as 
 he live . assuredly before he could claim she these few 
 past month of his existence must be entirely blot out . 
 " shall I get you another cup before you start , 
 ma'am ? " say Farmer Boldwood . 
 I thank you , " say Bathsheba . " but I must be go 
 at once . it be great neglect in that man to keep I 
 wait here till so late . I should have go two hour 
 ago , if it have not be for he . I have no idea of 
 come in here ; but there be nothing so refreshing as a 
 cup of tea , though I should never have get one if you 
 have not   help I . " 
 Troy scrutinize her cheek as light by the candle , 
 and watch each vary shade thereon , and the 
 white shell - like sinuosity of her little ear . she take 
 out her purse and be insist to Boldwood on pay 
 for her tea for herself , when at this moment pennyway 
 enter the tent . Troy tremble : here be his scheme 
 for respectability endanger at once . he be about 
 to leave his hole of espial , attempt to follow Pennyways , 
 and find out if the ex - bailiff have recognize he , when 
 he be arrest by the conversation , and find he be 
 too late . 
 " excuse I , ma'am . " say Pennyways ; " I have   some 
 private information for your ear alone . " 
 I can not hear it now . " she say , coldly . that 
 Bathsheba could not endure this man be evident ; in 
 fact , he be continually come to she with some tale 
 or other , by which he might creep into favour at the 
 expense of person malign . 
 " I will write it down . " say Pennyways , confidently . he 
 stoop over the table , pull a leaf from a warped 
 pocket - book , and write upon the paper , in a round 
 hand - 
 " your husband be here . I have   see he . who be the fool 
 now ? " 
 this he fold small , and hand towards she . 
 Bathsheba would not read it ; she would not even put 
 out her hand to take it . pennyway , then , with a laugh 
 of derision , toss it into her lap , and , turn away , 
 leave she . 
 from the word and action of Pennyways , Troy , 
 though he have not be able to see what the ex - bailiff 
 write , have not a moment 's doubt that the note refer 
 to he . nothing that he could think of could be do 
 to check the exposure . " curse my luck ! " he whisper , 
 and add imprecation which rustle in the gloom like 
 a pestilent wind . meanwhile Boldwood say , take up 
 the note from her lap - 
 " do not   you wish to read it , Mrs. Troy ? if not , 
 I will destroy it . " 
 " oh , well . " say Bathsheba , carelessly , " perhaps it be 
 unjust not to read it ; but I can guess what it be about . 
 he want I to recommend he , or it be to tell I of 
 some little scandal or another connect with my work- 
 people . he be always do that . " 
 Bathsheba hold the note in her right hand . bold- 
 wood hand towards she a plate of cut bread - and- 
 butter ; when , in order to take a slice , she put the note 
 into her left hand , where she be still hold the purse , 
 and then allow her hand to drop beside her close to 
 the canvas . the moment have come for save his game , 
 and Troy impulsively feel that he would play the card , 
 for yet another time he look at the fair hand , and 
 see the pink finger - tip , and the blue vein of the 
 wrist , encircle by a bracelet of coral chipping which 
 she wear : how familiar it all be to he ! then , with 
 the lightning action in which he be such an adept , he 
 noiselessly slip his hand under the bottom of the 
 tent - cloth , which be far from be pin tightly down , 
 lift it a little way , keep his eye to the hole , 
 snatch the note from her finger , drop the canvas , 
 and run away in the gloom towards the bank and ditch , 
 smile at the scream of astonishment which burst from 
 she . Troy then slide down on the outside of the rampart , 
 hastened round in the bottom of the entrenchment to 
 a distance of a hundred yard , ascend again , and 
 cross boldly in a slow walk towards the front entrance 
 of the tent . his object be now to get to Pennyways , 
 and prevent a repetition of the announcement until 
 such time as he should choose . 
 Troy reach the tent door , and stand among the 
 group there gather , look anxiously for Pennyways , 
 evidently not wish to make himself prominent by 
 inquire for he . one or two man be speak of 
 a daring attempt that have just be make to rob a 
 young lady by lift the canvas of the tent beside she . 
 it be suppose that the rogue have imagine a slip of 
 paper which she hold in her hand to he a bank note , 
 for he have seize it , and make off with it , leave she 
 purse behind . his chagrin and disappointment at dis- 
 cover its worthlessness would be a good joke , it be 
 say . however , the occurrence seem to have become 
 know to few , for it have not interrupt a fiddler , who 
 have lately begin play by the door of the tent , nor 
 the four bow old man with grim countenance and 
 walking - stick in hand , who be dance " Major 
 Malley 's reel " to the tune . behind these stand 
 Pennyways . Troy glide up to he , beckon , and 
 whisper a few word ; and with a mutual glance of 
 concurrence the two man go into the night together . 
 CHAPTER LI 
 BATHSHEBA talk with her outrider 
 the arrangement for get back again to weather- 
 bury have be that Oak should take the place of poor- 
 grass in Bathsheba 's conveyance and drive her home , 
 it be discover late in the afternoon that Joseph 
 be suffer from his old complaint , a multiplying eye , 
 and be , therefore , hardly trustworthy as coachman and 
 protector to a woman . but Oak have find himself so 
 occupy , and be full of so many care relative to 
 those portion of Boldwood 's flock that be not 
 dispose of , that Bathsheba , without tell Oak or 
 anybody , resolve to drive home herself , as she have 
 many time do from Casterbridge Market , and trust 
 to her good angel for perform the journey un- 
 molest . but have fall in with Farmer Boldwood 
 accidentally   on her part at least   at the refreshment- 
 tent , she find it impossible to refuse his offer to ride 
 on horseback beside she as escort . it have grow 
 twilight before she be aware , but Boldwood assure 
 she that there be no cause for uneasiness , as the 
 moon would be up in half - an - hour . 
 immediately after the incident in the tent , she have 
 rise to go - now absolutely alarmed and really grateful 
 for her old lover 's protection - though regret Gabriel 's 
 absence , whose company she would have much prefer , 
 as be more proper as well as more pleasant , since he 
 be her own manage - man and servant . this , how- 
 ever , could not be help ; she would not , on any 
 consideration , treat Boldwood harshly , have once 
 already illuse he , and the moon have rise , and 
 the gig be ready , she drive across the hilltop in 
 the wending way 's which lead downwards - to oblivious 
 obscurity , as it seem , for the moon and the hill it 
 flood with light be in appearance on a level , the 
 rest of the world lie as a vast shady concave between 
 they . Boldwood mount his horse , and follow in 
 close attendance behind . thus they descend into 
 the lowland , and the sound of those leave on the 
 hill come like voice from the sky , and the light be 
 as those of a camp in heaven . they soon pass the 
 merry straggler in the immediate vicinity of the hill , 
 traverse Kingsbere , and get upon the high road . 
 the keen instinct of Bathsheba have perceive that 
 the farmer 's staunch devotion to herself be still un- 
 diminish , and she sympathize deeply . the sight 
 have quite depress she this evening ; have remind 
 she of her folly ; she wish anew , as she have wish 
 many month ago , for some mean of make repara- 
 tion for her fault . hence her pity for the man who 
 so persistently love on to his own injury and per- 
 manent gloom have betray Bathsheba into an injudi- 
 cious considerateness of manner , which appear 
 almost like tenderness , and give new vigour to the 
 exquisite dream of a Jacob 's seven year service in 
 poor Boldwood 's mind . 
 he soon find an excuse for advance from his 
 position in the rear , and ride close by her side . they 
 have go two or three mile in the moonlight , speak 
 desultorily across the wheel of her gig concern the 
 fair , farming , Oak 's usefulness to they both , and other 
 indifferent subject , when Boldwood say suddenly 
 and simply - 
 " Mrs. Troy , you will marry again some day ? " 
 this point - blank query unmistakably confuse she , 
 it be not till a minute or more have elapse that 
 she say , " I have not seriously think of any such 
 subject . " 
 " I quite understand that . yet your late husband 
 have be dead nearly one year , and - " 
 " you forget that his death be never absolutely 
 prove , and may not have take place ; so that I may 
 not be really a widow . " she say , catch at the straw of 
 escape that the fact afford 
 " not absolutely prove , perhaps , but it be prove 
 circumstantially . a man see he drown , too . no 
 reasonable person have any doubt of his death ; nor 
 have you , ma'am , I should imagine . 
 " o yes I have , or I should have act differently , " 
 she say , gently . " from the first , I have have a strange 
 uaccountable feeling that he could not have perish , 
 but I have be able to explain that in several way 
 since . even be I half persuade that I shall see 
 he no more , I be far from thinking of marriage with 
 another . I should be very contemptible to indulge in 
 such a thought . " 
 they be silent now awhile , and have strike into 
 an unfrequented track across a common , the creak of 
 Boldwood 's saddle and gig spring be all the 
 sound to be hear . Boldwood end the pause . 
 " do you remember when I carry you faint in 
 my arm into the King 's arm , in Casterbridge ? every 
 dog have his day : that be mine . " 
 " I know - I know it all . " she say , hurriedly . 
 " I , for one , shall never cease regret that event 
 so fall out as to deny you to I . " 
 " I , too , be very sorry . " she say , and then check 
 herself . " I mean , you know , I be sorry you think 
 i - " 
 " I have always this dreary pleasure in think over 
 those past time with you - that I be something to 
 you before he be anything , and that you belong 
 almost to I . but , of course , that be nothing . you 
 never like I . " 
 " I do ; and respect you , too . "Do you now ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " which ? " 
 " how do you mean which ? " 
 " do you like I , or do you respect I ? " 
 " I do not   know - at least , I can not tell you . it be 
 difficult for a woman to define her feeling in language 
 which be chiefly make by man to express theirs . my 
 treatment of you be thoughtless , inexcusable , wicked ! 
 I shall eternally regret it . if there have be anything 
 I could have do to make amend I would most 
 gladly have do it - there be nothing on earth I so 
 long to do as to repair the error . but that be not 
 possible . " 
 " do not   blame yourself - you be not so far in the 
 wrong as you suppose . Bathsheba , suppose you have 
 real complete proof that you be what , in fact , you be 
  - a widow - would you repair the old wrong to I by 
 marry I ? " 
 " I can not say . I should not   yet , at any rate . " 
 " but you might at some future time of your life ? " 
 " o yes , I might at some time . " 
 " well , then , do you know that without further proof 
 of any kind you may marry again in about six year 
 from the present - subject to nobody 's objection or 
 blame ? " 
 " o yes . " she say , quickly . " I know all that . but 
 do not   talk of it - seven or six year - where may we all 
 be by that time ? " 
 " they will soon glide by , and it will seem an 
 astonishingly short time to look back upon when they 
 be past - much less than to look forward to now . " 
 " yes , yes ; I have find that in my own experience . " 
 " now listen once more . " Boldwood plead . " if I 
 wait that time , will you marry I ? you own that you 
 owe I amend - let that be your way of make they . " 
 " but , Mr. Boldwood - six year - " 
 " do you want to be the wife of any other man ? " 
 " no indeed ! I mean , that I do not   like to talk 
 about this matter now . perhaps it be not proper , and 
 I ought not to allow it . let we drop it . my husband 
 may be live , as I say . " 
 " of course , I will drop the subject if you wish . but 
 propriety have nothing to do with reason . I be a 
 middle - aged man , willing to protect you for the 
 remainder of our life . on your side , at least , there 
 be no passion or blamable haste - on mine , perhaps , 
 there be . but I can not   help see that if you choose 
 from a feeling of pity , and , as you say , a wish to make 
 amend , to make a bargain with I for a far - ahead 
 time - an agreement which will set all thing right 
 and make I happy , late though it may be - there be 
 no fault to be find with you as a woman . had not 
 I the first place beside you ? have not   you be 
 almost mine once already ? surely you can say to 
 I as much as this , you will have I back again 
 should circumstance permit ? now , pray speak ! O 
 Bathsheba , promise - it be only a little promise - that 
 if you marry again , you will marry I ! " 
 his tone be so excited that she almost fear he 
 at this moment , even whilst she sympathize . it be 
 a simple physical fear - the weak of the strong ; there 
 no emotional aversion or inner repugnance . she 
 say , with some distress in her voice , for she remember 
 vividly his outburst on the Yalbury Road , and shrank 
 from a repetition of his anger : - 
 " I will never marry another man whilst you wish I 
 to be your wife , whatever come - but to say more - you 
 have take I so by surprise - " 
 " but let it stand in these simple word - that in six 
 year ' time you will be my wife ? unexpected accident 
 we will not mention , because those , of course , must be 
 give way to . now , this time I know you will keep 
 your word . " 
 " that be why I hesitate to give it . " 
 " but do give it ! remember the past , and be kind . " 
 she breathe ; and then say mournfully : " o what 
 shall I do ? I do not   love you , and I much fear that I 
 never shall love you as much as a woman ought to love 
 a husband . if you , sir , know that , and I can yet give 
 you happiness by a mere promise to marry at the end of 
 six year , if my husband should not come back , it be a 
 great honour to I . and if you value such an act of 
 friendship from a woman who do not   esteem her- 
 self as she do , and have little love leave , why it 
 will - " 
 " promise ! " 
 " - consider , if I can not promise soon . " 
 " but soon be perhaps never ? " 
 " o no , it be not ! I mean soon . Christmas , we will 
 say . " 
 " Christmas ! " he say nothing further till he 
 add : " well , I will say no more to you about it till that 
 time . " 
 Bathsheba be in a very peculiar state of mind , 
 which show how entirely the soul be the slave of the 
 body , the ethereal spirit dependent for its quality upon 
 the tangible flesh and blood . it be hardly too much to 
 say that she feel coerce by a force strong than her 
 own will , not only into the act of promise upon this 
 singularly remote and vague matter , but into the emo- 
 tion of fancy that she ought to promise . when the 
 week intervene between the night of this conversa- 
 tion and Christmas day begin perceptibly to diminish , 
 her anxiety and perplexity increase . 
 one day she be lead by an accident into an oddly 
 confidential dialogue with Gabriel about her difficulty 
 it afford she a little relief - of a dull and cheerless 
 kind . they be auditing account , and something 
 occur in the course of their labour which lead Oak 
 to say , speak of Boldwood , " he will never forget you , 
 ma'am , never . " 
 then out come her trouble before she be aware ; 
 and she tell he how she have again get into the toil ; 
 what Boldwood have ask she , and how he be ex- 
 pecte her assent . " the most mournful reason of all 
 for my agree to it . " she say sadly , " and the true 
 reason why I think to do so for good or for evil , be this 
  - it be a thing I have not breathe to a live soul as 
 yet - I believe that if I do not   give my word , he will go out 
 of his mind . " 
 " really , do ye ? " say Gabriel , gravely . 
 " I believe this . " she continue , with reckless frank- 
 ness ; " and Heaven know I say it in a spirit the very 
 reverse of vain , for I be grieve and trouble to my 
 soul about it - I believe I hold that man 's future in my 
 hand . his career depend entirely upon my treatment 
 of he . o Gabriel , I tremble at my responsibility , for 
 it be terrible ! " 
 " well , I think this much , ma'am , as I tell you year 
 ago . " say Oak , " that his life be a total blank whenever 
 he be not   hop for ' ee ; but I can not   suppose - I hope 
 that nothing so dreadful hang on to it as you fancy . 
 his natural manner have always be dark and strange , 
 you know . but since the case be so sad and oddlike , 
 why do not   ye give the conditional promise ? I think I 
 would . " 
 " but be it right ? some rash act of my past life 
 have teach I that a watch woman must have very 
 much circumspection to retain only a very little credit , 
 and I do want and long to be discreet in this ! and 
 six year - why we may all be in our graf by that 
 BATHSHEBA talk with OAK 
 time , even if Mr. Troy do not come back again , which 
 he may not impossibly do ! such thought give a sort 
 of absurdity to the scheme . now , be not   it preposterous , 
 Gabriel ? however he come to dream of it , I can not think . 
 but be it wrong ? you know - you be old than i. " 
 " eight year old , ma'am . " 
 " yes , eight year - and be it wrong ? " 
 " perhaps it would be an uncommon agreement for a 
 man and woman to make : I do not   see anything really 
 wrong about it . " say Oak , slowly . " in fact the very 
 thing that make it doubtful if you ought to marry en 
 under any condition , that is , your not care about he 
  - for I may suppose - - " 
 " yes , you may suppose that love be want . " she 
 say shortly . " love be an utterly bygone , sorry , worn- 
 out , miserable thing with I - for he or any one else . " 
 " well , your want of love seem to I the one thing 
 that take away harm from such an agreement with he . 
 if wild heat have to do wi ' it , make ye long to over- 
 come the awkwardness about your husband 's vanishing , 
 it mid be wrong ; but a cold - hearted agreement to oblige 
 a man seem different , somehow . the real sin , ma'am 
 in my mind , lie in thinking of ever wed wi ' a man 
 you do not   love honest and true . " 
 " that I be willing to pay the penalty of . " say Bath- 
 sheba , firmly . " you know , Gabriel , this be what I can- 
 not get off my conscience - that I once seriously injure 
 he in sheer idleness . if I have never play a trick 
 upon he , he would never have want to marry I . 
 o if I could only pay some heavy damage in money 
 to he for the harm I do , and so get the sin off my 
 soul that way ! .. well , there be the debt , which can 
 only be discharge in one way , and I believe I be 
 bind to do it if it honestly lie in my power , without 
 any consideration of my own future at all . when a 
 rake gamble away his expectation , the fact that it be 
 an inconvenient debt do not   make he the less liable . 
 I have   be a rake , and the single point I ask you be , con- 
 sidering that my own scruple , and the fact that in the 
 eye of the law my husband be only miss , will keep 
 any man from marry I until seven year have 
 pass - be I free to entertain such an idea , even 
 though ' tis a sort of penance - for it will be that ? I 
 hate the act of marriage under such circumstance , and 
 the class of woman I should seem to belong to by do 
 it ! " 
 " it seem to I that all depend upon whe'r you 
 think , as everybody else do , that your husband be 
 dead . " 
 " I shall get to , I suppose , because I can not help 
 feel what would have bring he back long before 
 this time if he have live . " 
 " well , then , in religious sense you will be as free 
 to think o ' marry again as any real widow of one 
 year 's standing . but why do not   ye ask Mr. Thirdly 's 
 advice on how to treat Mr. Boldwood ? " 
 " no . when I want a broad - minded opinion for 
 general enlightenment , distinct from special advice , I 
 never go to a man who deal in the subject pro- 
 fessionally . so I like the parson 's opinion on law , the 
 lawyer be on doctoring , the doctor 's on business , and my 
 business - man 's - that be , yours - on moral . " 
 " and on love - - " 
 " my own . " 
 " I be afraid there be a hitch in that argument . " say 
 Oak , with a grave smile . 
 she do not reply at once , and then say , " good 
 evening Mr. Oak . " go away . 
 she have speak frankly , and neither ask nor ex- 
 pecte any reply from Gabriel more satisfactory than 
 that she have obtain . yet in the centremost part of 
 her complicated heart there exist at this minute a 
 little pang of disappointment , for a reason she would 
 not allow herself to recognize . Oak have not once 
 wish she free that he might marry she himself - have 
 not once say , " I could wait for you as well as he . " 
 that be the insect sting . not that she would have 
 listen to any such hypothesis . o no - for be not 
 she say all the time that such thought of the future 
 be improper , and be not   Gabriel far too poor a man 
 to speak sentiment to she ? yet he might have just 
 hint about that old love of his , and ask , in a playful 
 off - hand way , if he might speak of it . it would have 
 seem pretty and sweet , if no more ; and then she 
 would have show how kind and inoffensive a woman 's 
 " no " can sometimes be . but to give such cool advice 
  - the very advice she have ask for - it ruffle our 
 heroine all the afternoon . 
 CHAPTER LII 
 CONVERGING course 
 I 
 CHRISTMAS - EVE come , and a party that Boldwood 
 be to give in the evening be the great subject of talk 
 in Weatherbury . it be not that the rarity of Christmas 
 party in the parish make this one a wonder , but that 
 Boldwood should be the giver . the announcement 
 have have an abnormal and incongruous sound , as if one 
 should hear of croquet - playing in a cathedral aisle , or 
 that some much - respect judge be go upon the 
 stage . that the party be intend to be a truly jovial 
 one there be no room for doubt . a large bough of 
 mistletoe have be bring from the wood that day , and 
 suspend in the hall of the bachelor 's home . Holly 
 and ivy have follow in armful . from six that morning 
 till past noon the huge wood fire in the kitchen roar 
 and sparkle at its high , the kettle , the saucepan , and 
 the threelegge pot appear in the midst of the flame 
 like Shadrach , Meshach , and Abednego ; moreover , 
 roast and basting operation be continually 
 carry on in front of the genial blaze . 
 as it grow later the fire be make up in the large 
 long hall into which the staircase descend , and all 
 encumbrance be clear out for dancing . the log 
 which be to form the back - brand of the evening fire 
 be the uncleft trunk of a tree , so unwieldy that it could 
 be neither bring nor roll to its place ; and accord- 
 ingly two man be to be observe dragging and heave 
 it in by chain and lever as the hour of assembly draw 
 near . 
 II 
 in spite of all this , the spirit of revelry be want 
 in the atmosphere of the house . such a thing have 
 never be attempt before by its owner , and it be 
 now do as by a wrench . intend gaiety would 
 insist upon appear like solemn grandeur , the organ- 
 ization of the whole effort be carry out coldly , by 
 hireling , and a shadow seem to move about the 
 room , say that the proceeding be unnatural to 
 the place and the lone man who live therein , and hence 
 not good . 
 Bathsheba be at this time in her room , dress for 
 the event . she have call for candle , and Liddy 
 enter and place one on each side of her mistress 's 
 glass . 
 " do not   go away , Liddy . " say Bathsheba , almost 
 timidly . " I be foolishly agitated - I can not tell why . 
 I wish I have not be oblige to go to this dance ; but 
 there be no escaping now . I have not speak to Mr. 
 Boldwood since the autumn , when I promise to see 
 he at Christmas on business , but I have no idea there 
 be to be anything of this kind . " 
 " but I would go now . " say Liddy , who be go 
 with she ; for Boldwood have be indiscriminate in his 
 invitation . 
 " yes , I shall make my appearance , of course . " say 
 Bathsheba . " but I be the CAUSE of the party , and that 
 upset I ! - do not   tell , Liddy . " 
 " o no , ma'am , you the cause of it , ma'am ? " 
 " yes . I be the reason of the party - i. if it have 
 not be for I , there would never have be one . I 
 can not   explain any more - there be no more to be explain . 
 I wish I have never see Weatherbury . " 
 " that be wicked of you - to wish to be bad off than 
 you be . " 
 " no , Liddy . I have never be free from trouble 
 since I have live here , and this party be likely to bring 
 I more . now , fetch my black silk dress , and see how 
 it sit upon I . " 
 " but you will leave off that , surely , ma'am ? you 
 have be a widowlady fourteen month , and ought to 
 brighten up a little on such a night as this . " 
 " be it necessary ? no ; I will appear as usual , for if 
 I be to wear any light dress people would say thing 
 about I , and I should seem to he rejoice when I be 
 solemn all the time . the party do not   suit I a bit ; 
 but never mind , stay and help to finish I off . " 
 III 
 Boldwood be dress also at this hour . a tailor 
 from Casterbridge be with he , assist he in the 
 operation of try on a new coat that have just be 
 bring home . 
 never have Boldwood be so fastidious , unreasonable 
 about the fit , and generally difficult to please . the 
 tailor walk round and round he , tug at the waist , 
 pull the sleeve , press out the collar , and for the 
 first time in his experience Boldwood be not bored- 
 Times have be when the farmer have exclaim against 
 all such nicety as childish , but now no philosophic or 
 hasty rebuke whatever be provoke by this man for 
 attach as much importance to a crease in the coat 
 as to an earthquake in South America . Boldwood at 
 last express himself nearly satisfied , and pay the bill , 
 the tailor pass out of the door just as Oak come in 
 to report progress for the day . 
 " oh , Oak . " say Boldwood . " I shall of course see 
 you here to - night . make yourself merry . I be deter- 
 mine that neither expense nor trouble shall be spar . " 
 " I will try to be here , sir , though perhaps it may not 
 be very early . " say Gabriel , quietly . " I be glad indeed 
 to see such a change in ' ee from what it use to be . " 
 " yes - I must own it - I be bright to - night : cheerful 
 and more than cheerful - so much so that I be almost 
 sad again with the sense that all of it be pass away . 
 and sometimes , when I be excessively hopeful and 
 blithe , a trouble be loom in the distance : so that I 
 often get to look upon gloom in I with content , and 
 to fear a happy mood . still this may be absurd - I feel 
 that it be absurd . perhaps my day be dawn at last . " 
 " I hope it ' ill be a long and a fair one . " 
 " thank you - thank you . yet perhaps my cheerful 
 mess rest on a slender hope . and yet I trust my hope . 
 it be faith , not hope . I think this time I reckon with 
 my host . - Oak , my hand be a little shaky , or some- 
 thing ; I can not   tie this neckerchief properly . perhaps 
 you will tie it for I . the fact be , I have not be well 
 lately , you know . " 
 " I be sorry to hear that , sir . " 
 " oh , it be nothing . I want it do as well as you can , 
 please . be there any late knot in fashion , Oak ? " 
 " I do not   know , sir . " say Oak . his tone have sink to 
 sadness . 
 Boldwood approach Gabriel , and as Oak tie the 
 neckerchief the farmer go on feverishly - 
 " do a woman keep her promise , Gabriel ? " 
 " if it be not inconvenient to she she may . " 
 " - or rather an imply promise . " 
 " I will not   answer for her implying . " say Oak , with 
 faint bitterness . " that be a word as full o ' hole as a 
 sieve with they . " 
 Oak , do not   talk like that . you have get quite 
 cynical lately - how be it ? we seem to have shift our 
 position : I have become the young and hopeful man , 
 and you the old and unbelieve one . however , do 
 a woman keep a promise , not to marry , but to enter on 
 an engagement to marry at some time ? now you 
 know woman well than I - tell I . " 
 " I be afeard you honour my understanding too much . 
 however , she may keep such a promise , if it be make 
 with an honest meaning to repair a wrong . " 
 " it have not go far yet , but I think it will soon - 
 yes , I know it will . " he say , in an impulsive whisper . 
 " I have press she upon the subject , and she incline 
 to be kind to I , and to think of I as a husband at 
 a long future time , and that be enough for I . how 
 can I expect more ? she have a notion that a woman 
 should not marry within seven year of her husband 's 
 disappearance - that her own self should not , I mean - 
 because his body be not find . it may be merely 
 this legal reason which influence she , or it may be a 
 religious one , but she be reluctant to talk on the point- 
 yet she have promise - imply - that she will ratify an 
 engagement to - night . " 
 " seven year . " murmur Oak . 
 " no , no - it be no such thing ! " he say , with im- 
 patience . five year , nine month , and a few day . 
 fifteen month nearly have pass since he vanish , 
 and be there anything so wonderful in an engagement of 
 little more than five year ? " 
 " it seem long in a forward view . do not   build too 
 much upon such promise , sir . remember , you have 
 once be'n deceive . her meaning may be good ; but 
 there - she be young yet . " 
 " deceive ? never ! " say Boldwood , vehemently . 
 " she never promise I at that first time , and hence 
 she do not break her promise ! if she promise I , 
 she will marry I , Bathsheba be a woman to her word . " 
 IV 
 Troy be sit in a corner of the White Hart 
 tavern at Casterbridge , smoking and drink a steaming 
 mixture from a glass . a knock be give at the door , 
 and Pennyways enter . 
 " well , have you see he ? " Troy inquire , point 
 to a chair . 
 " Boldwood ? " 
 " No - Lawyer Long . " 
 " he wadn ' at home . I go there first , too . " 
 " that be a nuisance . " 
 " ' tis rather , I suppose . " 
 " yet I do not   see that , because a man appear to be 
 drown and be not , he should be liable for anything . 
 I shall not   ask any lawyer - not I. " 
 " but that be not it , exactly . if a man change his 
 name and so forth , and take step to deceive the world 
 and his own wife , he be a cheat , and that in the eye of 
 the law be ayless a rogue , and that be ayless a lammocken 
 vagabond ; and that be a punishable situation . " 
 " ha - ha ! well do , Pennyways . " Troy have laugh , 
 but it be with some anxiety that he say , " now , what 
 I want to know be this , do you think there be really 
 anything go on between she and Boldwood ? upon 
 my soul , I should never have believe it ! how she . 
 must detest I ! have you find out whether she 
 have encourage he ? " 
 " I haen't   be able to learn . there be a deal of 
 feel on his side seemingly , but I do not   answer for 
 she . I do not   know a word about any such thing till 
 yesterday , and all I hear then be that she be gwine 
 to the party at his house to - night . this be the first 
 time she have ever go there , they say . and they say 
 that she've   not so much as speak to he since they be 
 at Greenhill Fair : but what can folk believe o't ? how- 
 ever , she be not fond of he - quite offish and quite care 
 less , I know . " 
 " I be not so sure of that .... she be a handsome 
 woman , Pennyways , be she not ? own that you never 
 see a fine or more splendid creature in your life . 
 upon my honour , when I set eye upon she that day 
 I wonder what I could have be make of to be able 
 to leave she by herself so long . and then I be 
 hamper with that bothering show , which I be free of 
 at last , thank the star . " he smoke on awhile , and 
 then add , " how do she look when you pass by 
 yesterday ? " 
 " oh , she take no great heed of I , ye may well 
 fancy ; but she look well enough , far be I know . just 
 flash her haughty eye upon my poor scram body , and 
 then let they go past I to what be yond , much as if 
 I would be no more than a leafless tree . she have just get 
 off her mare to look at the last wring - down of cider for 
 the year ; she have be rid , and so her colour be 
 up and her breath rather quick , so that her bosom 
 plimme and feli - plimme and feli - every time plain 
 to my eye . ay , and there be the feller round she 
 wringing down the cheese and bustle about and 
 say , ware o ' the pommy , ma'am : ' twill spoil yer 
 gown . " never mind I , " say she . then Gabe 
 bring she some of the new cider , and she must 
 need go drink it through a strawmote , and not in 
 a nateral way at all . " Liddy , " say she , " bring indoor 
 a few gallon , and I will make some cider - wine . " Sergeant , 
 I be no more to she than a morsel of scroffin the fuel 
 house ! " 
 " I must go and find she out at once - o yes , I see 
 that - I must go . Oak be head man still , be not   he ? " 
 " yes , ' a b'lieve . and at Little Weatherbury Farm 
 too . he manage everything . " 
 " twill puzzle he to manage she , or any other man 
 of his compass ! " 
 " I do not   know about that . she can not   do without 
 he , and know it well he be pretty independent . 
 and she've   a few soft corner to her mind , though 
 I have   never be able to get into one , the devil 's in't ! " 
 " ah baily she be a notch above you , and you must 
 own it : a high class of animal - a fine tissue . how- 
 ever , stick to I , and neither this haughty goddess , 
 dash piece of womanhood , Juno - wife of mine   Juno 
 be a goddess , you know , nor anybody else shall hurt 
 you . but all this want look into , I perceive . 
 what with one thing and another , I see that my work 
 be well cut out for I . " 
 V 
 " how do I look to - night , Liddy ? " say Bathsheba , 
 give a final adjustment to her dress before leave the 
 glass . 
 " I never see you look so well before . yes - i'll tell 
 you when you look like it - that night , a year and a 
 half ago , when you come in so wildlike , and scold we 
 for make remark about you and Mr. Troy . " 
 " everybody will think that I be set myself to 
 captivate Mr. Boldwood , I suppose . " she murmur . 
 " at least they will say so . can not   my hair be brush 
 down a little flatter ? I dread go - yet I dread the 
 risk of wound he by stay away . "Anyhow , ma'am , you can not   well be 
 dress plainer 
 than you be , unless you go in sackcloth at once . ' Tis 
 your excitement be what make you look so noticeable 
 to - night . " 
 " I do not   know what be the matter , I feel wretched at 
 one time , and buoyant at another . I wish I could have 
 continue quite alone as I have be for the last year 
 or so , with no hope and no fear , and no pleasure and 
 no grief . 
 " now just suppose Mr. Boldwood should ask you 
  - only just suppose it - to run away with he , what 
 would you do , ma'am ? " 
 " Liddy - none of that . " say Bathsheba , gravely . 
 " Mind , I will not   hear joke on any such matter . do 
 you hear ? " 
 " I beg pardon , ma'am . but know what rum 
 thing we woman be , I just say - however , I will not 
 speak of it again . " 
 " no marrying for I yet for many a year ; if ever , 
 " twill be for reason very , very different from those you 
 think , or other will believe ! now get my cloak , for it 
 be time to go . " 
 VI 
 " Oak , say Boldwood , " before you go I want to 
 mention what have be pass in my mind lately - 
 that little arrangement we make about your share in the 
 farm I mean . that share be small , too small , consider- 
 ing how little I attend to business now , and how much 
 time and think you give to it . well , since the world 
 be brighten for I , I want to show my sense of it 
 by increase your proportion in the partnership . I will 
 make a memorandum of the arrangement which strike 
 I as likely to be convenient , for I have not   time to talk 
 about it now ; and then we will discuss it at our leisure . 
 my intention be ultimately to retire from the manage- 
 ment altogether , and until you can take all the expendi- 
 ture upon your shoulder , I will be a sleeping partner in 
 the stock . then , if I marry she - and I hope - I feel I 
 shall , why - - " 
 " pray do not   speak of it , sir . " say Oak , hastily . " we 
 do not   know what may happen . so many upset may 
 befall ' ee . there be many a slip , as they say - and I 
 would advise you - I know you will pardon I this once - 
 not to be TOO sure . " 
 " I know , I know . but the feeling I have about in- 
 crease your share be on account of what I know of you 
 Oak , I have learn a little about your secret : your 
 interest in she be more than that of bailiff for an em- 
 ployer . but you have behave like a man , and I , as a 
 sort of successful rival - successful partly through your 
 goodness of heart - should like definitely to show my 
 sense of your friendship under what must have be a 
 great pain to you . " 
 " o that be not necessary , thank ' ee . " say Oak , 
 hurriedly . " I must get use to such as that ; other 
 man have , and so shall I. " 
 Oak then leave he . he be uneasy on Boldwood 's 
 account , for he see anew that this constant passion 
 of the farmer make he not the man he once have 
 be . 
 as Boldwood continue awhile in his room alone - 
 ready and dress to receive his company - the mood of 
 anxiety about his appearance seem to pass away , and 
 to be succeed by a deep solemnity . he look out 
 of the window , and regard the dim outline of the tree 
 upon the sky , and the twilight deepen to darkness . 
 then he go to a locked closet , and take from 
 a locked drawer therein a small circular case the size of 
 a pillbox , and be about to put it into his pocket . but 
 he linger to open the cover and take a momentary 
 glance inside . it contain a woman 's finger - ring , set 
 all the way round with small diamond , and from its 
 appearance have evidently be recently purchase . 
 Boldwood 's eye dwelt upon its many sparkle a long 
 time , though that its material aspect concern he 
 little be plain from his manner and mien , which be 
 those of a mind follow out the presume thread of 
 that jewel 's future history . 
 the noise of wheel at the front of the house become 
 audible . Boldwood close the box , stow it away 
 carefully in his pocket , and go out upon the landing . 
 the old man who be his indoor factotum come at the 
 same moment to the foot of the stair . 
 " they be come , sir - lot of them - a - foot and a- 
 drive ! " 
 " I be come down this moment . those wheel I 
 hear - be it Mrs. Troy ? " 
 " no , sir - ' tis not she yet . " 
 a reserved and sombre expression have return to 
 Boldwood 's face again , but it poorly cloak his feel- 
 ing when he pronounce Bathsheba 's name ; and his 
 feverish anxiety continue to show its existence by a 
 gallop motion of his finger upon the side of his thigh 
 as he go down the stair . 
 VII 
 " how do this cover I ? " say Troy to Pennyways , 
 " nobody would recognize I now , I be sure . " 
 he be button on a heavy grey overcoat of 
 Noachian cut , with cape and high collar , the latter be 
 erect and rigid , like a girdle wall , and nearly reach 
 to the verge of travel cap which be pull down 
 over his ear . 
 pennyway snuff the candle , and then look up 
 and deliberately inspect Troy 
 " you have   make up your mind to go then ? " he 
 say . 
 " make up my mind ? yes ; of course I have . " 
 " why not write to she ? ' tis a very queer corner 
 that you have get into , sergeant . you see all these thing 
 will come to light if you go back , and they will not   sound 
 well at all . faith , if I be you I would even bide as you be 
  - a single man of the name of Francis . a good wife be 
 good , but the good wife be not so good as no wife at all . 
 now that be my outspoke mind , and I have   be call a 
 long - head feller here and there . " 
 " all nonsense ! " say Troy , angrily . " there she be 
 with plenty of money , and a house and farm , and 
 horse , and comfort , and here be I live from hand to 
 mouth - a needy adventurer . besides , it be no use 
 talk now ; it be too late , and I be glad of it ; I have   be 
 see and recognize here this very afternoon . I should 
 have go back to she the day after the fair , if it have not 
 be for you talk about the law , and rubbish about 
 get a separation ; and I do not   put it off any long . 
 what the deuce put it into my head to run away at all , 
 I can not   think ! humbug sentiment - that be what it 
 be . but what man on earth be to know that his wife 
 would be in such a hurry to get rid of his name ! " 
 " I should have know it . she be bad enough for 
 anything . " 
 " pennyway , mind who you be talk to . " 
 " well , sergeant , all I say be this , that if I be you I would 
 go abroad again where I come from - ' tisn't   too late to do 
 it now . I would not   stir up the business and get a bad 
 name for the sake of live with she - for all that about 
 your play - act be sure to come out , you know , although 
 you think otherwise . my eye and limb , there will be a 
 racket if you go back just now - in the middle of bold- 
 wood 's christmasing ! " 
 " H'm , yes . I expect I shall not be a very welcome 
 guest if he have she there . " say the sergeant , with a slight 
 laugh . " a sort of alonzo the Brave ; and when I go in 
 the guest will sit in silence and fear , and all laughter 
 and pleasure will be hush , and the light in the 
 chamber burn blue , and the worms - Ugh , horrible ! - 
 Ring for some more brandy , Pennyways , I feel an 
 awful shudder just then ! well , what be there besides ? 
 a stick - I must have a walking - stick . " 
 pennyway now feel himself to be in something of a 
 difficulty , for should Bathsheba and Troy become recon- 
 cile it would be necessary to regain her good opinion 
 if he would secure the patronage of her husband . I 
 sometimes think she like you yet , and be a good woman 
 at bottom . " he say , as a saving sentence . " but there be 
 no telling to a certainty from a body 's outside . well , 
 you will do as you like about go , of course , sergeant , 
 and as for I , I will do as you tell I . " 
 " now , let I see what the time be . " say Troy , after 
 empty his glass in one draught as he stand . ' half- 
 past six o'clock . I shall not hurry along the road , and 
 shall be there then before nine . " 
 CHAPTER LIII 
 CONCURRITUR - HORAE MOMENTO 
 outside the front of Boldwood 's house a group of 
 man stand in the dark , with their face towards the door , 
 which occasionally open and close for the passage of 
 some guest or servant , when a golden rod of light would 
 stripe the ground for the moment and vanish again , 
 leave nothing outside but the glowworm shine of the 
 pale lamp amid the evergreen over the door . 
 " he be see in Casterbridge this afternoon - so the 
 boy say . " one of they remark in a whisper . " and l 
 for one believe it . his body be never find , you know . " 
 " ' tis a strange story . " say the next . " you may 
 depend upon't   that she know nothing about it . " 
 " not a word . " 
 " perhaps he do not   mean that she shall . " say another 
 man . 
 " if he be alive and here in the neighbourhood , he 
 mean mischief . " say the first . " poor young thing : 
 I do pity she , if ' tis true . he will drag she to the dog . " 
 " o no ; he will settle down quiet enough . " say one 
 dispose to take a more hopeful view of the case . 
 " what a fool she must have be ever to have have 
 anything to do with the man ! she be so self - willed and 
 independent too , that one be more minded to say it 
 serve she right than pity she . " 
 " no , no . I do not   hold with ' ee there . she be no 
 otherwise than a girl mind , and how could she tell what 
 the man be make of ? if ' tis really true , ' tis too hard 
 a punishment , and more than she ought to hae . - Hullo , 
 who be that ? " this be to some footstep that be 
 hear approach . 
 " William Smallbury . " say a dim figure in the shade , 
 come up and join they . " Dark as a hedge , to- 
 night , be not   it ? I all but miss the plank over the river 
 ath'art there in the bottom - never do such a thing 
 before in my life . be ye any of Boldwood 's workfolk ? " 
 he peer into their face . 
 " yes - all o ' we . we meet here a few minute ago . " 
 " oh , I hear now - that be Sam Samway : think I 
 know the voice , too . go in ? " 
 " presently . but I say , William . " Samway whisper , 
 " have ye hear this strange tale ? " 
 " what - that about Sergeant Troy be see , d'ye 
 mean , soul ? " say smallbury , also lower his voice . 
 " ay : in Casterbridge . " 
 " yes , I have . Laban Tall name a hint of it to I 
 but now - but I do not   think it . Hark , here Laban 
 come himself , ' a b'lieve . " a footstep draw near . 
 " Laban ? " 
 " yes , ' tis I. " say Tall . 
 " have ye hear any more about that ? " 
 " no . " say Tall , join the group . " and I be in- 
 cline to think we would well keep quiet . if so be ' tis not 
 true , ' twill flurry she , and do she much harm to repeat 
 it ; and if so be ' tis true , ' twill do no good to forestall 
 her time o ' trouble . God send that it mid be a lie , for 
 though Henery Fray and some of them do speak against 
 she , she be never be anything but fair to I . she be 
 hot and hasty , but she be a brave girl who will never tell a 
 lie however much the truth may harm she , and I have   no 
 cause to wish her evil . " 
 " she never do tell woman 's little lie , that be true ; and 
 ' tis a thing that can be say of very few . ay , all the 
 harm she think she say to yer face : there be nothing 
 underhand wi ' she . " 
 they stand silent then , every man busy with his 
 own thought , during which interval sound of merri- 
 ment could be hear within . then the front door again 
 open , the ray stream out , the wellknown form of 
 Boldwood be see in the rectangular area of light , the 
 door close , and Boldwood walk slowly down the path . 
 " ' Tis master . " one of the man whisper , as he near 
 they . " we would well stand quiet - he will go in again 
 directly . he would think it unseemly o ' we to be 
 loitering here . 
 Boldwood come on , and pass by the man without 
 see they , they be under the bush on the grass . 
 he pause , leant over the gate , and breathe a long 
 breath . they hear low word come from he . 
 " I hope to God she will come , or this night will be 
 nothing but misery to I ! o my darling , my darling , 
 why do you keep I in suspense like this ? " 
 he say this to himself , and they all distinctly hear 
 it . Boldwood remain silent after that , and the noise 
 from indoor be again just audible , until , a few minute 
 later , light wheel could be distinguish come down 
 the hill . they draw near , and cease at the gate . 
 Boldwood hasten back to the door , and open it ; 
 and the light shone upon Bathsheba come up the 
 path . 
 Boldwood compress his emotion to mere welcome : 
 the man mark her light laugh and apology as she meet 
 he : he take she into the house ; and the door close 
 again . 
 " gracious heaven , I do not   know it be like that with 
 he ! " say one of the man . " I think that fancy of 
 his be over long ago . 
 " you do not   know much of master , if you think 
 that . " say Samway . 
 " I would not   he should know we hear what ' a say 
 for the world . " remark a third . 
 " I wish we have tell of the report at once . " the first 
 uneasily continue . " More harm may come of this than 
 we know of . poor Mr. Boldwood , it will , be hard upon 
 en . I wish Troy be in - - well , God forgive I 
 for such a wish ! a scoundrel to play a poor wife such 
 trick . nothing have prosper in Weatherbury since he 
 come here . and now I have   no heart to go in . let us 
 look into Warren 's for a few minute first , shall we , 
 neighbour ? " 
 Samway , Tall , and Smallbury agree to go to Warren 's , 
 and go out at the gate , the remain one enter 
 the house . the three soon draw near the malt - house , 
 approach it from the adjoining orchard , and not by 
 way of the street . the pane of glass be illuminate 
 as usual . smallbury be a little in advance of the rest 
 when , pausing , he turn suddenly to his companion 
 and say , " Hist ! see there . " 
 the light from the pane be now perceive to be 
 shin not upon the ivied wall as usual , but upon some 
 object close to the glass . it be a human face . 
 " let us come close . " whisper Samway ; and they 
 approach on tiptoe . there be no disbelieve the 
 report any long . Troy 's face be almost close to the 
 pane , and he be look in . not only be he look in , 
 but he appear to have be arrest by a conversation 
 which be in progress in the malt - house , the voice of 
 the interlocutor be those of Oak and the maltster . 
 " the spree be all in her honour , be not   it - hey ? " say 
 the old man . " although he make believe ' tis only 
 keep up o ' Christmas ? " 
 " I can not say . " reply Oak . 
 " o ' tis true enough , faith . I can not understand 
 Farmer Boldwood be such a fool at his time of life 
 as to ho and hanker after thik woman in the way ' a do , 
 and she not care a bit about en . " 
 the man , after recognize Troy 's feature , withdraw 
 across the orchard as quietly as they have come . the 
 air be big with Bathsheba 's fortune to - night : every 
 word everywhere concern she . when they be quite 
 out of earshot all by one instinct pause . 
 " it give I quite a turn - his face . " say Tall , 
 breathing . 
 " and so it do I . " say Samway . " what be to be 
 do ? " 
 " I do not   see that ' tis any business of our . " smallbury 
 murmur dubiously . 
 " but it be ! ' tis a thing which be everybody 's business , 
 say Samway . " we know very well that master 's on a 
 wrong tack , and that she be quite in the dark , and we 
 should let them know at once . Laban , you know she 
 well - you would well go and ask to speak to she . " 
 " I bain't   fit for any such thing . " say Laban , nervously . 
 " I should think William ought to do it if anybody . he be 
 old . " 
 " I shall have nothing to do with it . " say Smallbury . 
 " ' tis a ticklish business altogether . why , he will go on 
 to she himself in a few minute , ye'll see . " 
 " we do not   know that he will . come , Laban . " 
 " very well , if I must I must , I suppose . " tall reluct- 
 antly answer . " what must I say ? " 
 " just ask to see master . " 
 " o no ; I shall not   speak to Mr. Boldwood . if I tell 
 anybody , ' twill be mistress . " 
 " very well . " say Samway . 
 Laban then go to the door . when he open it 
 the hum of bustle roll out as a wave upon a still 
 strand - the assemblage be immediately inside the 
 hall - and be deaden to a murmur as he close it 
 again . each man wait intently , and look around at 
 the dark tree top gently rock against the sky and 
 occasionally shiver in a slight wind , as if he take 
 interest in the scene , which neither do . one of they 
 begin walk up and down , and then come to where 
 he start from and stop again , with a sense that 
 walking be thing not worth do now . 
 " I should think Laban must have see mistress by 
 this time . " say Smallbury , break the silence . " per- 
 hap she will not   come and speak to he . " 
 the door open . Tall appear , and join they 
 " well ? " say both . 
 " I do not   like to ask for she after all . " Laban falter 
 out . " they be all in such a stir , try to put a little 
 spirit into the party . somehow the fun seem to hang 
 fire , though everything be there that a heart can desire , 
 and I could not   for my soul interfere and throw damp 
 upon it - if ' twa to save my life , I could not ! " 
 " I suppose we have well all go in together . " say 
 Samway , gloomily . " perhaps I may have a chance of 
 say a word to master . " 
 so the man enter the hall , which be the room 
 select and arrange for the gathering because of its 
 size . the young man and maid be at last just 
 begin to dance . Bathsheba have be perplex 
 how to act , for she be not much more than a slim 
 young maid herself , and the weight of stateliness sit 
 heavy upon she . sometimes she think she ought 
 not to have come under any circumstance ; then she 
 consider what cold unkindness that would have be , 
 and finally resolve upon the middle course of stay 
 for about an hour only , and glide off unobserved , 
 have from the first make up her mind that she could 
 on no account dance , sing , or take any active part in 
 the proceeding . 
 her allotted hour have be pass in chat 
 and look on , Bathsheba tell Liddy not to hurry her- 
 self , and go to the small parlour to prepare for 
 departure , which , like the hall , be decorate with holly 
 and ivy , and well light up . 
 nobody be in the room , but she have hardly 
 be there a moment when the master of the house 
 enter . 
 " Mrs. Troy - you be not go ? " he say . " we have 
 hardly begin ! " 
 " if you will excuse I , I should like to go now . " she 
 manner be restive , for she remember her promise , 
 and imagine what he be about to say . " but as it be 
 not late . " she add , " I can walk home , and leave my 
 man and Liddy to come when they choose . " 
 " I have   be try to get an opportunity of speak 
 to you . " say Boldwood . " you know perhaps what I 
 long to say ? " 
 Bathsheba silently look on the floor . 
 " you do give it ? " he say , eagerly . 
 " what ? " she whisper . 
 " now , that be evasion ! why , the promise . I do not 
 want to intrude upon you at all , or to let it become 
 know to anybody . but do give your word ! a 
 mere business compact , you know , between two people 
 who be beyond the influence of passion . " Boldwood 
 know how false this picture be as regard himself ; 
 but he have prove that it be the only tone in which 
 she would allow he to approach she . " a promise to 
 marry I at the end of five year and three - quarter . 
 you owe it to I ! " 
 " I feel that I do . " say Bathsheba ; " that be , if you 
 demand it . but I be a change woman - an unhappy 
 woman - and not - not - - " 
 " you be still a very beautiful woman , say Boldwood . 
 Honesty and pure conviction suggest the remark , 
 unaccompanie by any perception that it might have 
 be adopt by blunt flattery to soothe and win she . 
 however , it have not much effect now , for for she say , 
 in a passionless murmur which be in itself a proof of 
 her word : " I have no feeling in the matter at all . 
 and I do not   at all know what be right to do in my 
 diddicult position , and I have nobody to advise I . but 
 I give my promise , if I must . I give it as the rendering of 
 a debt , conditionally , of course , on my be a widow . " 
 " you will marry I between five and six year hence ? " 
 " do not   press I too hard . I will marry nobody 
 else . " 
 " but surely you will name the time , or there be nothing 
 in the promise at all ? " 
 O , I do not   know , pray let I go ! " she say , her 
 bosom beginning to rise . " I be afraid what to do ! 
 want to be just to you , and to be that seem to be wrong- 
 ing myself , and perhaps it be break the commandment . 
 there be considerable doubt of his death , and then it 
 be dreadful ; let I ask a solicitor , Mr. Boldwood , if I 
 ought or no ! " 
 " say the word , dear one , and the subject shall be 
 dismiss ; a blissful love intimacy of six year , and 
 then marriage - o Bathsheba , say they ! " he beg in 
 a husky voice , unable to sustain the form of mere 
 friendship any long . " promise yourself to I ; I 
 deserve it , indeed I do , for I have love you more than 
 anybody in the world ! and if I say hasty word and 
 show uncalled - for heat of manner towards you , believe 
 I , dear , I do not mean to distress you ; I be in 
 agony , Bathsheba , and I do not know what I say . 
 you would not   let a dog suffer what I have suffer , 
 could you but know it ! sometimes I shrink from your 
 know what I have feel for you , and sometimes I be 
 distressed that all of it you never will know . be 
 gracious , and give up a little to I , when I would give 
 up my life for you ! " 
 the trimming of her dress , as they quiver against 
 the light , show how agitated she be , and at last she 
 burst out cry . ' and you will not - press I - about 
 anything more - if I say in five or six year ? " she 
 sob , when she have power to frame the word . 
 " yes , then I will leave it to time . " 
 " very well . if he do not return , I will marry you 
 in six year from this day , if we both live . " she say 
 solemnly . 
 " and you will take this as a token from I . " 
 Boldwood have come close to her side , and now he 
 clasp one of her hand in both his own , and lift it 
 to his breast . 
 " what be it ? oh I can not wear a ring ! " she ex- 
 claim , on see what he hold ; " besides , I would not 
 have a soul know that it be an engagement ! perhaps it 
 be improper ? besides , we be not engage in the usual 
 sense , be we ? do not   insist , Mr. Boldwood - do not ! " 
 in her trouble at not be able to get her hand away 
 from he at once , she stamp passionately on the floor 
 with one foot , and tear crowd to her eye again . 
 " it mean simply a pledge - no sentiment - the seal 
 of a practical compact . " he say more quietly , but still 
 retain her hand in his firm grasp . " come , now ! " 
 and Boldwood slip the ring on her finger . 
 " I can not wear it . " she say , weep as if her heart 
 would break . " you frighten I , almost . so wild a 
 scheme ! please let I go home ! " 
 " only to - night : wear it just to - night , to please I ! " 
 Bathsheba sit down in a chair , and bury her face 
 in her handkerchief , though Boldwood keep her hand 
 yet . at length she say , in a sort of hopeless whisper - 
 " very well , then , I will to - night , if you wish it so 
 earnestly . now loosen my hand ; I will , indeed I will 
 wear it to - night . " 
 " and it shall be the beginning of a pleasant secret 
 courtship of six year , with a wedding at the end ? " 
 " it must be , I suppose , since you will have it so ! " 
 she say , fairly beat into non - resistance . 
 Boldwood press her hand , and allow it to drop 
 in her lap . " I be happy now . " he say . " God bless 
 you ! " 
 he leave the room , and when he think she might 
 be sufficiently compose send one of the maid to she 
 Bathsheba cloak the effect of the late scene as she 
 good could , follow the girl , and in a few moment 
 come downstairs with her hat and cloak on , ready to go . 
 to get to the door it be necessary to pass through the 
 hall , and before do so she pause on the bottom of 
 the staircase which descend into one corner , to take 
 a last look at the gathering . 
 there be no music or dance in progress just now . 
 at the low end , which have be arrange for the work- 
 folk specially , a group converse in whisper , and with 
 cloud look . Boldwood be stand by the fireplace , 
 and he , too , though so absorb in vision arise from 
 her promise that he scarcely see anything , seem at 
 that moment to have observe their peculiar manner , 
 and their look askance . 
 " what be it you be in doubt about , man ? " he say . 
 one of they turn and reply uneasily : " it be 
 something Laban hear of , that be all , sir . " 
 " News ? anybody marry or engage , bear or 
 dead ? " inquire the farmer , gaily . " tell it to we , Tall . 
 one would think from your look and mysterious way 
 that it be something very dreadful indeed . " 
 " o no , sir , nobody be dead . " say Tall . 
 " I wish somebody be . " say Samway , in a whisper . 
 " what do you say , Samway ? " ask Boldwood , some- 
 what sharply . " if you have anything to say , speak out ; 
 if not , get up another dance . " 
 " Mrs. Troy have come downstairs . " say Samway to 
 Tall . " if you want to tell she , you have well do it now . " 
 " do you know what they mean ? " the farmer ask 
 Bathsheba , across the room . 
 " I do not   in the least , " say Bathsheba . 
 there be a smart rapping at the door . one of 
 the man open it instantly , and go outside . 
 " Mrs. Troy be want . " he say , on return . 
 " quite ready . " say Bathsheba . " though I do not 
 tell they to send . " 
 " it be a stranger , ma'am . " say the man by the door . 
 " a stranger ? " she say . 
 " ask he to come in . " say Boldwood . 
 the message be give , and Troy , wrap up to 
 his eye as we have see he , stand in the doorway . 
 there be an unearthly silence , all look towards 
 the newcomer . those who have just learn that he 
 be in the neighbourhood recognize he instantly ; 
 those who do not be perplexed . nobody note 
 Bathsheba . she be lean on the stair . her brow 
 have heavily contract ; her whole face be pallid , her 
 lip apart , her eye rigidly star at their visitor . 
 Boldwood be among those who do not notice that 
 he be Troy . " come in , come in ! " he repeat , 
 cheerfully , " and drain a Christmas beaker with we , 
 strange ! " 
 Troy next advanced into the middle of the room , 
 take off his cap , turn down his coat - collar , and look 
 Boldwood in the face . even then Boldwood do not 
 recognize that the impersonator of Heaven 's persistent 
 irony towards he , who have once before break in 
 upon his bliss , scourge he , and snatch his delight 
 away , have come to do these thing a second time . 
 Troy begin to laugh a mechanical laugh : Boldwood 
 recognize he now . 
 Troy turn to Bathsheba . the poor girl 's wretched- 
 ness at this time be beyond all fancy or narration . 
 she have sink down on the low stair ; and there 
 she sit , her mouth blue and dry , and her dark eye 
 fix vacantly upon he , as if she wonder whether it 
 be not all a terrible illusion . 
 then Troy speak . " Bathsheba , I come here for 
 you ! " 
 she make no reply . 
 " come home with I : come ! 
 Bathsheba move her foot a little , but do not rise . 
 Troy go across to she . 
 " Come , madam , do you hear what I say ? " he say , 
 peremptorily . 
 a strange voice come from the fireplace - a voice 
 sound far off and confine , as if from a dungeon . 
 hardly a soul in the assembly recognize the thin tone 
 to be those of Boldwood . sudden dispaire have trans- 
 form he . 
 " Bathsheba , go with your husband ! " 
 nevertheless , she do not move . the truth be 
 that Bathsheba be beyond the pale of activity - and 
 yet not in a swoon . she be in a state of mental GUTTA 
 SERENA ; her mind be for the minute totally deprive of 
 light at the same time no obscuration be apparent 
 from without . 
 Troy stretch out his hand to pull she she towards he , 
 when she quickly shrink back . this visible dread of 
 he seem to irritate Troy , and he seize her arm and 
 pull it sharply . whether his grasp pinch she , or 
 whether his mere touch be the 'cause , be never know , 
 but at the moment of his seizure she writhe , and give 
 a quick , low scream . 
 the scream have be hear but a few second when 
 it be follow by sudden deafening report that 
 echo through the room and stupefy they all . the 
 oak partition shake with the concussion , and the place 
 be fill with grey smoke . 
 in bewilderment they turn their eye to Boldwood . 
 at his back , as stand before the fireplace , be a gun- 
 rack , as be usual in farmhouse , construct to hold two 
 gun . when Bathsheba have cry out in her husband 's 
 grasp , Boldwood 's face of gnashing despair have change . 
 the vein have swell , and a frenzied look have gleam 
 in his eye . he have turn quickly , take one of the 
 gun , cock it , and at once discharge it at Troy . 
 Troy fall . the distance apart of the two man be 
 so small that the charge of shot do not spread in the 
 least , but pass like a bullet into his body . he utter 
 a long guttural sigh - there be a contraction - an exten- 
 sion - then his muscle relax , and he lie still . 
 Boldwood be see through the smoke to be now 
 again engage with the gun . it be double - barrel , 
 and he have , meanwhile , in some way fasten his hand- 
 kerchief to the trigger , and with his foot on the other 
 end be in the act of turn the second barrel upon 
 himself . samway his man be the first to see this , and 
 in the midst of the general horror dart up to he . 
 Boldwood have already twitch the handkerchief , and 
 the gun explode a second time , send its content , 
 by a timely blow from Samway , into the beam which 
 cross the ceiling . 
 " well , it make no difference ! " Boldwood gasp . 
 " there be another way for I to die . " 
 then he break from Samway , cross the room to 
 Bathsheba , and kiss her hand . he put on his hat , 
 open the door , and go into the darkness , nobody 
 thinking of prevent he . 
 CHAPTER LIV 
 after the shock 
 BOLDWOOD pass into the high road and turn 
 in the direction of Casterbridge . here he walk at 
 an even , steady pace over Yalbury Hill , along the dead 
 level beyond , mount Mellstock Hill , and between 
 eleven and twelve o'clock cross the Moor into the town . 
 the street be nearly desert now , and the wave 
 lamp - flame only light up row of grey shop - shutter , 
 and strip of white paving upon which his step echo 
 as his pass along . he turn to the right , and halt 
 before an archway of heavy stonework , which be close 
 by an iron stud pair of door . this be the entrance 
 to the gaol , and over it a lamp be fix , the light en- 
 able the wretched traveller to find a bellpull . 
 the small wicket at last open , and a porter 
 appear . Boldwood step forward , and say some- 
 thing in a low tone , when , after a delay , another man 
 come . Boldwood enter , and the door be close 
 behind he , and he walk the world no more . 
 long before this time Weatherbury have be 
 thoroughly arouse , and the wild deed which have ter- 
 minate Boldwood 's merrymaking become know to 
 all . of those out of the house Oak be one of the 
 first to hear of the catastrophe , and when he enter 
 the room , which be about five minute after Boldwood 's 
 exit , the scene be terrible . all the female guest be 
 huddle aghast against the wall like sheep in a storm , 
 and the man be bewilder as to what to do . as for 
 Bathsheba , she have change . she be sit on the 
 floor beside the body of Troy , his head pillow in her 
 lap , where she have herself lift it . with one hand she 
 hold her handkerchief to his breast and cover the 
 wound , though scarcely a single drop of blood have 
 flow , and with the other she tightly clasp one of 
 his . the household convulsion have make she herself 
 again . the temporary coma have cease , and activity 
 have come with the necessity for it . deed of endur- 
 ance , which seem ordinary in philosophy , be rare in 
 conduct , and Bathsheba be astonishing all around she 
 now , for her philosophy be her conduct , and she 
 seldom think practicable what she do not practise . 
 she be of the stuff of which great man 's mother 
 be make . she be indispensable to high generation , 
 hat at tea party , fear in shop , and love at crisis . 
 troy recumbent in his wife 's lap form now the sole 
 spectacle in the middle of the spacious room . 
 " Gabriel . " she say , automatically , when he enter , 
 turn up a face of which only the wellknown line 
 remain to tell he it be her , all else in the picture 
 have fade quite . " ride to Casterbridge instantly 
 for a surgeon . it be , I believe , useless , but go . Mr. 
 Boldwood have shoot my husband . " 
 her statement of the fact in such quiet and simple 
 word come with more force than a tragic declamation , 
 and have somewhat the effect of set the distort 
 image in each mind present into proper focus . Oak , 
 almost before he have comprehend anything beyond 
 the brief abstract of the event , hurry out of the 
 room , saddle a horse and ride away . not till he have 
 ride more than a mile do it occur to he that he 
 would have do well by send some other man 
 on this errand , remain himself in the house . what 
 have become of Boldwood ? he should have be 
 look after . be he mad - have there be a quarrel ? 
 then how have Troy get there ? where have he come 
 from ? how do this remarkable reappearance effect 
 itself when he be suppose by many to be at the 
 bottom of the sea ? Oak have in some slight measure 
 be prepare for the presence of Troy by hear a 
 rumour of his return just before enter Boldwood 's 
 house ; but before he have weigh that information , this 
 fatal event have be superimpose . however , it be too 
 late now to think of send another messenger , and 
 he ride on , in the excitement of these self - inquiry 
 not discern , when about three mile from Caster- 
 bridge , a square - figured pedestrian pass along 
 under the dark hedge in the same direction as his 
 own . 
 the mile necessary to be traverse , and other 
 hindrance incidental to the lateness of the hour and 
 the darkness of the night , delay the arrival of Mr , 
 Aldritch , the surgeon ; and more than three hour 
 pass between the time at which the shot be fire 
 and that of his enter the house . Oak be addition- 
 ally detain in Casterbridge through have to give 
 notice to the authority of what have happen ; and 
 he then find that Boldwood have also enter the 
 town , and deliver himself up . 
 in the meantime the surgeon , have hasten into 
 the hall at Boldwood 's , find it in darkness and quite 
 deserted . he go on to the back of the house , 
 where he discover in the kitchen an old man , of 
 whom he make inquiry . 
 " she be have he take away to her own house , sir , " 
 say his informant . 
 " who have ? " say the doctor . 
 " Mrs. Troy . ' a be quite dead , sir . " 
 this be astonishing information . " she have no 
 right to do that . " say the doctor . " there will have 
 to be an inquest , and she should have wait to know 
 what to do . " 
 " yes , sir ; it be hint to she that she have well 
 wait till the law be know . but she say law be 
 nothing to she , and she would not   let her dear husband 's 
 corpse bide neglect for folk to stare at for all the 
 crowner in England . " 
 Mr. Aldritch drive at once back again up the 
 hill to Bathsheba 's . the first person he meet be 
 poor Liddy , who seem literally to have dwindle 
 small in these few latter hour . " what have be 
 do ? " he say . 
 " I do not   know , sir . " say Liddy , with suspended 
 breath . " my mistress have do it all . " 
 " where be she ? " 
 " Upstairs with he , sir . when he be bring 
 home and take upstairs , she say she want no 
 further help from the man . and then she call I , 
 and make I fill the bath , and after that tell I I 
 have well go and lie down because I look so ill . 
 then she lock herself into the room alone with he , 
 and would not let a nurse come in , or anybody at all . 
 but I think I would wait in the next room in case she 
 should want I . I hear she move about inside 
 for more than an hour , but she only come out once , 
 and that be for more candle , because hers have burn 
 down into the socket . she say we be to let she 
 know when you or Mr. thirdly come , sir . " 
 Oak enter with the parson at this moment , and 
 they all go upstairs together , precede by Liddy 
 Smallbury . everything be silent as the grave when 
 they pause on the landing . Liddy knock , and 
 Bathsheba 's dress be hear rustle across the room : 
 the key turn in the lock , and she open the door . 
 her look be calm and nearly rigid , like a slightly 
 animate bust of Melpomene . 
 " oh , Mr. Aldritch , you have come at last . " she 
 murmur from her lip merely , and throw back the 
 door . " ah , and Mr. Thirdly . well , all be do , and 
 anybody in the world may see he now . " she then 
 pass by he , cross the landing , and enter 
 another room . 
 look into the chamber of death she have vacate 
 they see by the light of the candle which be on the 
 drawer a tall straight shape lie at the further end 
 of the bedroom , wrap in white . everything around 
 be quite orderly . the doctor go in , and after a 
 few minute return to the landing again , where 
 Oak and the parson still wait . 
 " it be all do , indeed , as she say . " remark Mr. 
 Aldritch , in a subdued voice . " the body have be 
 undressed and properly lay out in grave clothe . 
 Gracious Heaven - this mere girl ! she must have the 
 nerve of a stoic ! " 
 " the heart of a wife merely . " float in a whisper 
 about the ear of the three , and turn they see 
 Bathsheba in the midst of they . then , as if at that 
 instant to prove that her fortitude have be more of 
 will than of spontaneity , she silently sink down between 
 they and be a shapeless heap of drapery on the floor . 
 the simple consciousness that superhuman strain be 
 no long require have at once put a period to her 
 power to continue it . 
 they take she away into a further room , and the 
 medical attendance which have be useless in Troy 's 
 case be invaluable in Bathsheba 's , who fall into a 
 series of fainting - fit that have a serious aspect for a 
 time . the sufferer be get to bed , and Oak , find 
 from the bulletin that nothing really dreadful be to 
 be apprehend on her score , leave the house . Liddy 
 keep watch in Bathsheba 's chamber , where she hear 
 her mistress , moan in whisper through the dull 
 slow hour of that wretched night : " o it be my fault 
  - how can I live ! o Heaven , how can I live ! " 
 CHAPTER LV 
 the MARCH following - " BATHSHEBA BOLDWOOD " 
 we pass rapidly on into the month of March , to a 
 breezy day without sunshine , frost , or dew . on Yai - 
 bury Hill , about midway between Weatherbury and 
 Casterbridge , where the turnpike road pass over 
 the crest , a numerous concourse of people have 
 gather , the eye of the great number be fre- 
 quently stretch afar in a northerly direction . the 
 group consist of a throng of idler , a party of 
 javelin - man , and two trumpeter , and in the midst 
 be carriage , one of which contain the high 
 sheriff . with the idler , many of whom have mount 
 to the top of a cutting form for the road , be several 
 Weatherbury man and boy - among other Poorgrass , 
 Coggan , and Cain Ball . 
 at the end of half - an - hour a faint dust be see in 
 the expected quarter , and shortly after a travelling- 
 carriage , bring one of the two judge on the Western 
 Circuit , come up the hill and halt on the top . the 
 judge change carriage whilst a flourish be blow 
 by the big - cheeked trumpeter , and a procession be 
 form of the vehicle and javelin - man , they all pro- 
 ceede towards the town , except the Weatherbury 
 man , who as soon as they have see the judge move 
 off return home again to their work . 
 " Joseph , I seed you squeeze close to the carriage , " 
 say Coggan , as they walk . " do ye notice my lord 
 judge 's face ? " 
 " I do . " say Poorgrass . " I look hard at en , as 
 if I would read his very soul ; and there be mercy 
 in his eye - or to speak with the exact truth require 
 of we at this solemn time , in the eye that be towards 
 I . " 
 " well , I hope for the good . " say Coggan , though 
 bad that must be . however , I shall not   go to the trial , 
 and I would advise the rest of ye that bain't   want to bide 
 away . ' twill disturb his mind more than anything to 
 see we there star at he as if he be a show . " 
 " the very thing I say this morning . " observe Joseph , 
 " justice be come to weigh he in the balance , " I say 
 in my reflectious way , " and if he be find want , so 
 be it unto he , " and a bystander say " hear , hear , 
 a man who can talk like that ought to be hear . " 
 but I do not   like dwell upon it , for my few word 
 be my few word , and not much ; though the speech 
 of some man be rumour abroad as though by nature 
 form for such . " 
 " so ' tis , Joseph . and now , neighbour , as I say , 
 every man bide at home . " 
 the resolution be adhere to ; and all wait 
 anxiously for the news next day . their suspense 
 be divert , however , by a discovery which be make 
 in the afternoon , throw more light on Boldwood 's 
 conduct and condition than any detail which have 
 precede it . 
 that he have be from the time of Greenhill Fair 
 until the fatal Christmas Eve in excited and unusual 
 mood be know to those who have be intimate 
 with he ; but nobody imagine that there have show 
 in he unequivocal symptom of the mental derange- 
 ment which Bathsheba and Oak , alone of all other 
 and at different time , have momentarily suspect . 
 in a locked closet be now discover an extraordinary 
 collection of article . there be several set of lady " 
 dress in the piece , of sundry expensive material ; 
 silk and satin , poplin and velvet , all of colour 
 which from Bathsheba 's style of dress might have be 
 judge to be her favourite . there be two muff , 
 sable and ermine . above all there be a case of 
 jewellery , contain four heavy gold bracelet and 
 several locket and ring , all of fine quality and manu- 
 facture . these thing have be buy in Bath and 
 other town from time to time , and bring home by 
 stealth . they be all carefully pack in paper , and 
 each package be label " Bathsheba Boldwood . " a 
 date be subjoin six year in advance in every 
 instance . 
 these somewhat pathetic evidence of a mind craze 
 with care and love be the subject of discourse in 
 Warren 's malt - house when Oak enter from Caster- 
 bridge with tiding of the kiln glow shine upon 
 it , tell the tale sufficiently well . Boldwood , as every 
 one suppose he would do , have plead guilty , and 
 have be sentence to death . 
 the conviction that Boldwood have not be morally 
 responsible for his later act now become general . fact 
 elicit previous to the trial have point strongly in the 
 same direction , but they have not be of sufficient weight 
 to lead to an order for an examination into the state 
 of Boldwood 's mind . it be astonishing , now that a 
 presumption of insanity be raise , how many collateral 
 circumstance be remember to which a condition 
 of mental disease seem to afford the only explanation 
  - among other , the unprecedented neglect of his corn 
 stack in the previous summer . 
 a petition be address to the Home Secretary , 
 advance the circumstance which appear to justify 
 a request for a reconsideration of the sentence . it be 
 not " numerously sign " by the inhabitant of Caster- 
 bridge , as be usual in such case , for Boldwood have 
 never make many friend over the counter . the shop 
 think it very natural that a man who , by import 
 direct from the producer , have daringly set aside the 
 first great principle of provincial existence , namely 
 that God make country village to supply customer 
 to county town , should have confuse idea about 
 the Decalogue . the prompter be a few merciful 
 man who have perhaps too feelingly consider the 
 fact latterly unearth , and the result be that evidence 
 be take which it be hop might remove the crime 
 in a moral point of view , out of the category of wilful 
 murder , and lead it to be regard as a sheer outcome 
 of madness . 
 the upshot of the petition be wait for in Weather- 
 bury with solicitous interest . the execution have be 
 fix for eight o'clock on a Saturday morning about a 
 fortnight after the sentence be pass , and up to 
 Friday afternoon no answer have be receive . at 
 that time Gabriel come from Casterbridge Gaol , whither 
 he have be to wish Boldwood good - bye , and turn 
 down a by - street to avoid the town . when past the last 
 house he hear a hammering , and lift his bowed 
 head he look back for a moment . over the chimney 
 he could see the upper part of the gaol entrance , rich 
 and glow in the afternoon sun , and some move 
 figure be there . they be carpenter lift a post 
 into a vertical position within the parapet . he with- 
 draw his eye quickly , and hasten on . 
 it be dark when he reach home , and half the 
 village be out to meet he . 
 " no tiding . " Gabriel say , wearily . " and I be afraid 
 there be no hope . I have   be with he more than two 
 hour . " 
 " do ye think he REALLY be out of his mind when he 
 do it ? " say Smallbury . 
 " I can not   honestly say that I do . " Oak reply . " how- 
 ever , that we can talk of another time . have there be 
 any change in mistress this afternoon ? " 
 " none at all . " 
 " be she downstairs ? " 
 " no . and get on so nicely as she be too . 
 she be but very little well now again than she be at 
 Christmas . she keep on ask if you be come , and 
 if there be news , till one 's weary out wi ' answer she . 
 shall I go and say you have   come ? " 
 " no . " say Oak . " there be a chance yet ; but I 
 could not   stay in town any long - after see he too , 
 so Laban - Laban be here , be not   he ? " 
 " yes . " say Tall . 
 " what I have   arrange be , that you shall ride to town 
 the last thing to - night ; leave here about nine , and wait 
 a while there , get home about twelve . if nothing 
 have be receive by eleven to - night , they say there be 
 no chance at all . " 
 " I do so hope his life will be spar . " say Liddy . 
 " if it be not , she will go out of her mind too . poor thing ; 
 her suffering have be dreadful ; she deserve any- 
 body 's pity . " 
 " be she alter much ? " say Coggan . 
 " if you have not   see poor mistress since Christmas , 
 you would not   know she . " say Liddy . " her eye be so 
 miserable that she be not the same woman . only two 
 year ago she be a romping girl , and now she be this ! " 
 Laban depart as direct , and at eleven o'clock 
 that night several of the villager stroll along the 
 road to Casterbridge and await his arrival - among 
 they Oak , and nearly all the rest of Bathsheba 's man . 
 Gabriel 's anxiety be great that Boldwood might be 
 save , even though in his conscience he feel that he 
 ought to die ; for there have be quality in the farmer 
 which Oak love . at last , when they all be weary 
 the tramp of a horse be hear in the distance - 
 first dead , as if on turf it trode , 
 then , clatter on the village road 
 in other pace than forth he yode . 
 " we shall soon know now , one way or other . " say 
 Coggan , and they all step down from the bank on 
 which they have be stand into the road , and the 
 rider prance into the midst of they . 
 " be that you , Laban ? " say Gabriel . 
 " yes - ' tis come . he be not to die . ' tis confine- 
 ment during her Majesty 's pleasure . " 
 " Hurrah ! " say Coggan , with a swell heart . " God 's 
 above the devil yet ! " 
 CHAPTER lvi 
 beauty in LONELINESS - after all 
 BATHSHEBA revive with the spring . the utter 
 prostration that have follow the low fever from which 
 she have suffer diminish perceptibly when all un- 
 certainty upon every subject have come to an end . 
 but she remain alone now for the great part of 
 her time , and stay in the house , or at furth go 
 into the garden . she shun every one , even Liddy , 
 and could be bring to make no confidence , and to 
 ask for no sympathy . 
 as the summer draw on she pass more of her time 
 in the open air , and begin to examine into farming 
 matter from sheer necessity , though she never ride 
 out or personally superintend as at former time . 
 one Friday evening in August she walk a little way 
 along the road and enter the village for the first time 
 since the sombre event of the precede Christmas . 
 none of the old colour have as yet come to her cheek , 
 and its absolute paleness be heighten by the jet black 
 of her gown , till it appear preternatural . when she 
 reach a little shop at the other end of the place , 
 which stand nearly opposite to the churchyard , bath- 
 sheba hear sing inside the church , and she know 
 that the singer be practise . she cross the road , 
 open the gate , and enter the graveyard , the high 
 sill of the church window effectually screen she 
 from the eye of those gather within . her stealthy 
 walk be to the nook wherein Troy have work at 
 planting flower upon Fanny Robin 's grave , and she 
 come to the marble tombstone . 
 a motion of satisfaction enliven her face as she 
 read the complete inscription . first come the word of 
 Troy himself : - 
 erect BY FRANCIS TROY 
 in BELOVED MEMORY of 
 FANNY ROBIN , 
 who die OCTOBER 9 , 18 - , 
 AGED 20 year . 
 Underneath this be now inscribe in new letter : - 
 in the same grave lie 
 the remain of the AFORESAID 
 FRANCIS TROY , 
 who die DECEMBER 24th , 18 - , 
 Whilst she stand and read and meditate the tone of 
 the organ begin again in the church , and she go 
 with the same light step round to the porch and listen . 
 the door be close , and the choir be learn a new 
 hymn . Bathsheba be stir by emotion which 
 latterly she have assume to be altogether dead within 
 she . the little attenuate voice of the child 
 bring to her ear in destinct utterance the word they 
 sing without thought or comprehension - 
 Lead , kindly Light , amid the encircle gloom , 
 lead Thou I on . 
 Bathsheba 's feeling be always to some extent de- 
 pendent upon her whim , as be the case with many other 
 woman . something big come into her throat and an 
 uprising to her eye - and she think that she would 
 allow the imminent tear to flow if they wish . they 
 do flow and plenteously , and one fall upon the stone 
 bench beside she . once that she have begin to cry for 
 she hardly know what , she could not leave off for crowd- 
 ing thought she know too well . she would have give 
 anything in the world to be , as those child be , un- 
 concern at the meaning of their word , because too 
 innocent to feel the necessity for any such expression . 
 all the impassioned scene of her brief expenence 
 seem to revive with add emotion at that moment , 
 and those scene which have be without emotion 
 during enactment have emotion then . yet grief come 
 to she rather as a luxury than as the scourge of former 
 time . 
 owe to Bathsheba 's face be bury in her hand 
 she do not notice a form which come quietly into the 
 porch , and on see she , first move as if to retreat , 
 then pause and regard she . Bathsheba do not raise 
 her head for some time , and when she look round 
 her face be wet , and her eye drown and dim . " Mr. 
 Oak . " exclaim she , disconcert , " how long have you 
 be here ? " 
 " a few minute , ma'am . " say Oak , respectfully . 
 " be you go in ? " say Bathsheba ; and there come 
 from within the church as from a prompter - 
 l love the garish day , and , spite of fear , 
 pride rule my will : remember not past year . 
 " I be . " say Gabriel . " I be one of the bass singer , 
 you know . I have sing bass for several month . 
 " indeed : I be not   aware of that . I will leave you , then . " 
 which I have love long since , and lose awhile , 
 sing the child . 
 " do not   let I drive you away , mistress . I think I 
 will not   go in to - night . " 
 " o no - you do not   drive I away . 
 then they stand in a state of some embarrassment 
 Bathsheba try to wipe she dreadfully drench and 
 inflame face without his notice she . at length Oak 
 say , I have   not see you - I mean speak to you - since 
 ever so long , have I ? " but he fear to bring distress- 
 ing memorie back , and interrupt himself with : " be 
 you go into church ? " 
 " no . " she say . I come to see the tombstone 
 privately - to see if they have cut the inscription as I 
 wish Mr. Oak , you need not   mind speak to I , if 
 you wish to , on the matter which be in both our mind 
 at this moment . " 
 " and have they do it as you wish ? " say Oak . 
 " yes . come and see it , if you have not already . " 
 so together they go and read the tomb . " eight 
 month ago ! " Gabriel murmur when he see the date . 
 " it seem like yesterday to I . " 
 and to I as if it be year ago - long year , and 
 I have be dead between . and now I be go home , 
 Mr. Oak . " 
 Oak walk after she . " I want to name a small 
 matter to you as soon as I could . " he say , with hesitation . 
 " merrily about business , and I think I may just mention it 
 now , if you will allow I . " 
 " o yes , certainly . " 
 it be that I may soon have to give up the manage- 
 ment of your farm , Mrs. Troy . the fact be , I be think- 
 ing of leave England - not yet , you know - next 
 spring . " 
 " leave England ! " she say , in surprise and 
 genuine disappointment . " why , Gabriel , what be you 
 go to do that for ? " 
 " well , I have   think it well . " Oak stammer out . 
 " California be the spot I have   have in my mind to try . " 
 " but it be understand everywhere that you be go 
 to take poor Mr. Boldwood 's farm on your own account . " 
 " I have   have the refusal o ' it ' tis true ; but nothing be 
 settle yet , and I have reason for give up . I shall 
 finish out my year there as manager for the trustee , 
 but no more . " 
 " and what shall I do without you ? oh , Gabriel , I 
 do not   think you ought to go away . you have   be with 
 I so long - through bright time and dark time - such 
 old friend that as we be - that it seem unkind almost . I 
 have fancy that if you lease the other farm as master , 
 you might still give a help look across at mine . and 
 now go away ! " 
 " I would have willingly . " 
 " yet now that I be more helpless than ever you go 
 away ! " 
 " yes , that be the ill fortune o ' it . " say Gabriel , in a 
 distressed tone . " and it be because of that very help- 
 lessness that I feel bound to go . good afternoon , 
 ma'am " he conclude , in evident anxiety to get 
 away , and at once go out of the churchyard by a 
 path she could follow on no pretence whatever . 
 Bathsheba go home , her mind occupy with a 
 new trouble , which be rather harass than deadly 
 be calculate to do good by divert she from the 
 chronic gloom of her life . she be set think a great 
 deal about Oak and of his which to shun she ; and there 
 occur to Bathsheba several incident of latter in- 
 tercourse with he , which , trivial when singly view 
 amount together to a perceptible disinclination for 
 her society . it break upon she at length as a great 
 pain that her last old disciple be about to forsake she 
 and flee . he who have believe in she and argue on 
 her side when all the rest of the world be against she , 
 have at last like the other become weary and neglectful 
 of the old cause , and be leave she to fight her battle 
 alone . 
 three week go on , and more evidence of his 
 want of interest in she be forthcoming . she notice 
 that instead of enter the small parlour or office 
 where the farm account be keep , and waiting , or 
 leave a memorandum as he have hitherto do during 
 her seclusion , Oak never come at all when she be likely 
 to be there , only enter at unseasonable hour when 
 her presence in that part of the house be least to be 
 expect . whenever he want direction he send a 
 message , or note with neither head nor signature , to 
 which she be oblige to reply in the same off - hand 
 style . poor Bathsheba begin to suffer now from the 
 most torture sting of ali - a sensation that she be 
 despise . 
 the autumn wear away gloomily enough amid these 
 melancholy conjecture , and Christmas - day come , com- 
 plete a year of her legal widowhood , and two year 
 and a quarter of her life alone . on examine she 
 heart it appear beyond measure strange that the sub- 
 ject of which the season might have be suppose 
 suggestive - the event in the hall at Boldwood 's - be 
 not agitate she at all ; but instead , an agonizing con- 
 viction that everybody abjure she - for what she could 
 not tell - and that Oak be the ringleader of the 
 recusant . come out of church that day she look 
 round in hope that Oak , whose bass voice she have 
 hear roll out from the gallery overhead in a most 
 unconcerned manner , might chance to linger in her path 
 in the old way . there he be , as usual , come down 
 the path behind she . but on see Bathsheba turn , he 
 look aside , and as soon as he get beyond the gate , 
 and there be the bare excuse for a divergence , he 
 make one , and vanish . 
 the next morning bring the culminate stroke ; 
 she have be expect it long . it be a formal notice 
 by letter from he that he should not renew his engage- 
 ment with she for the following Lady - day . 
 Bathsheba actually sit and cry over this letter most 
 bitterly . she be aggrieve and wound that the 
 possession of hopeless love from Gabriel , which she have 
 after all 
 grow to regard as her inalienable right for life , should 
 have be withdraw just at his own pleasure in this 
 way . she be bewilder too by the prospect of have 
 to rely on her own resource again : it seem to herself 
 that she never could again acquire energy sufficient to 
 go to market , barter , and sell . since Troy 's death Oak 
 have attend all sale and fair for she , transact her 
 business at the same time with his own . what should 
 she do now ? her life be become a desolation . 
 so desolate be Bathsheba this evening , that in an 
 absolute hunger for pity and sympathy , and miserable in 
 that she appear to have outlive the only true friend- 
 ship she have ever own , she put on her bonnet and 
 cloak and go down to Oak 's house just after sunset , 
 guide on her way by the pale primrose ray of a 
 crescent moon a few day old . 
 a lively firelight shone from the window , but nobody 
 be visible in the room . she tap nervously , and 
 then think it doubtful if it be right for a single 
 woman to call upon a bachelor who live alone , although 
 he be her manager , and she might be suppose to call 
 on business without any real impropriety . Gabriel 
 open the door , and the moon shine upon his fore- 
 haad . 
 " Mr. Oak . " say Bathsheba , faintly . 
 " yes ; I be Mr. Oak . " say Gabriel . " who have I 
 the honour - o how stupid of I , not to know you , 
 mistress ! " 
 " I shall not be your mistress much long , shall I 
 Gabriel ? " she say , in pathetic tone . 
 " well , no . I suppose - but come in , ma'am . oh - 
 and I will get a light . " Oak reply , with some awkwardness . 
 " no ; not on my account . " 
 " it be so seldom that I get a lady visitor that I be 
 afraid I have not   proper accommodation . will you sit 
 down , please ? here be a chair , and there be one , too . 
 I be sorry that my chair all have wood seat , and be 
 rather hard , but I be think of get some new 
 one . " Oak place two or three for she . 
 " they be quite easy enough for I . " 
 so down she sit , and down sit he , the fire dancing 
 in their face , and upon the old furniture 
 all a - sheenen 
 Wi ' long year o ' handlen , 
 that form Oak 's array of household possession , which 
 send back a dancing reflection in reply . it be very 
 odd to these two person , who know each other pass 
 well , that the mere circumstance of their meeting in a 
 new place and in a new way should make they so 
 awkward and constrain . in the field , or at her house , 
 there have never be any embarrassment ; but now that 
 Oak have become the entertainer their life seem to be 
 move back again to the day when they be stranger . 
 " you will think it strange that I have come , but - " 
 " o no ; not at all . " 
 " but I think - Gabriel , I have be uneasy in the 
 belief that I have offend you , and that you be go 
 away on that account . it grieve I very much and 
 I could not   help come . " 
 " offended I ! as if you could do that , Bathsheba ! " 
 " have not   I ? " she ask , gladly . " but , what be you 
 go away for else ? " 
 " I be not go to emigrate , you know ; I be not 
 aware that you would wish I not to when I tell ' ee or I 
 should not   ha ' thought of do it . " he say , simply . " I 
 have arrange for Little Weatherbury Farm and shall 
 have it in my own hand at Lady - day . you know I have 
 have a share in it for some time . still , that would not 
 prevent my attend to your business as before , have not 
 it be that thing have be say about we . " 
 " what ? " say Bathsheba , in surprise . " thing say 
 about you and I ! what be they ? " 
 " I can not tell you . " 
 " it would be wise if you be to , I think . you have 
 play the part of mentor to I many time , and I do not 
 see why you should fear to do it now . " 
 " it be nothing that you have do , this time . the 
 top and tail o't be this - that I be sniff about here , 
 and wait for poor Boldwood 's farm , with a thought 
 of get you some day . " 
 " get I ! what do that mean ? " 
 " marry o ' ' ee , in plain british . you ask I to 
 tell , so you must not   blame I . " 
 Bathsheba do not look quite so alarmed as if a 
 cannon have be discharge by her ear , which be what 
 Oak have expect . " marry I ! I do not   know it 
 be that you mean . " she say , quietly . " such a thing 
 as that be too absurd - too soon - to think of , by far ! " 
 " yes ; of course , it be too absurd . I do not   desire any 
 such thing ; I should think that be plain enough by 
 this time . surely , surely you be the last person in the 
 world I think of marry . it be too absurd , as you say 
 " Too - s - s - soon " be the word I use . " 
 " I must beg your pardon for correct you , but you 
 say , " too absurd , " and so do I. " 
 " I beg your pardon too ! she return , with tear 
 in her eye . " " too soon " be what I say . but it 
 do not   matter a bit - not at ali - but I only mean , 
 " too soon " indeed , I do not , Mr. Oak , and you must 
 believe I ! " 
 Gabriel look her long in the face , but the firelight 
 be faint there be not much to be see . " Bathsheba , " 
 he say , tenderly and in surprise , and come close : 
 " if I only know one thing - whether you would allow I 
 to love you and win you , and marry you after ali - if I 
 only know that ! " 
 " but you never will know . " she murmur . 
 " why ? " 
 " because you never ask . 
 " oh - oh ! " say Gabriel , with a low laugh of joyous- 
 ness . " my own dear - " 
 " you ought not to have send I that harsh letter 
 this morning . " she interrupt . " it show you do not 
 care a bit about I , and be ready to desert I like 
 all the rest of they ! it be very cruel of you , consider- 
 ing I be the first sweetheart that you ever have , and 
 you be the first I ever have ; and I shall not forget it ! " 
 " now , Bathsheba , be ever anybody so provoke 
 he say , laugh . " you know it be purely that I , as 
 an unmarried man , carry on a business for you as a 
 very take young woman , have a proper hard part to 
 play - more particular that people know I have a sort 
 of feel for'ee ; and I fancy , from the way we be 
 mention together , that it might injure your good name . 
 nobody know the heat and fret I have be cause 
 by it . " 
 " and be that all ? " 
 " All . " 
 " oh , how glad I be I come ! " she exclaim , thank- 
 fully , as she rise from her seat . " I have think so 
 much more of you since I fancy you do not want 
 even to see I again . but I must be go now , or I 
 shall be miss . why Gabriel . " she say , with a slight 
 laugh , as they go to the door , " it seem exactly as if 
 I have come court you - how dreadful ! " 
 " and quite right too . " say Oak . " I have   dance at 
 your skittish heel , my beautiful Bathsheba , for many a 
 long mile , and many a long day ; and it be hard to be- 
 grudge I this one visit . " 
 he accompany she up the hill , explain to she 
 the detail of his forthcoming tenure of the other farm . 
 they speak very little of their mutual feeling ; pretty 
 phrase and warm expression be probably un- 
 necessary between such try friend . Theirs be that 
 substantial affection which arise   if any arise at all 
 when the two who be throw together begin first by 
 know the rougher side of each other 's character , 
 and not the good till far on , the romance grow 
 up in the interstice of a mass of hard prosaic reality . 
 this good - fellowship - camaraderie - usually occur 
 through similarity of pursuit , be unfortunately seldom 
 superadded to love between the sex , because man and 
 woman associate , not in their labour , but in their 
 pleasure merely . where , however , happy circumstance 
 permit its development , the compound feeling prove 
 itself to be the only love which be strong as death - that 
 love which many water can not quench , nor the flood 
 drown , beside which the passion usually call by the 
 name be evanescent as steam . 
 CHAPTER LVII 
 a foggy night and morning - CONCLUSION 
 " the most private , secret , plainest wedding that it be 
 possible to have . " 
 those have be Bathsheba 's word to Oak one 
 evening , some time after the event of the precede 
 chapter , and he meditate a full hour by the clock upon 
 how to carry out her wish to the letter . 
 " a licence - o yes , it must be a licence . " he say 
 to himself at last . " very well , then ; first , a license . " 
 on a dark night , a few day later , Oak come with 
 mysterious step from the surrogate 's door , in Caster- 
 bridge . on the way home he hear a heavy tread in 
 front of he , and , overtake the man , find he to be 
 Coggan . they walk together into the village until 
 they come to a little lane behind the church , lead 
 down to the cottage of Laban Tall , who have lately be 
 instal as clerk of the parish , and be yet in mortal 
 terror at church on Sundays when he hear his lone 
 voice among certain hard word of the Psalms , whither 
 no man venture to follow he . 
 " well , good - night , Coggan . " say Oak , " I be go 
 down this way . " 
 " oh ! " say Coggan , surprise ; " what be go on to- 
 night then , make so bold Mr. Oak ? " 
 it seem rather ungenerous not to tell Coggan , 
 under the circumstance , for Coggan have be true as 
 steel all through the time of Gabriel 's unhappiness about 
 Bathsheba , and Gabriel say , " you can keep a secret , 
 Coggan ? " 
 " you have   prove I , and you know . " 
 " yes , I have , and I do know . well , then , mistress 
 and I mean to get married to - morrow morning . " 
 " Heaven 's high tower ! and yet I have   think of 
 such a thing from time to time ; true , I have . but 
 keep it so close ! well , there , ' tis no consarn of 
 amine , and I wish ' ee joy o ' she . " 
 " thank you , Coggan . but I assure ' ee that this 
 great hush be not what I wish for at all , or what 
 either of we would have wish if it have not   be for 
 certain thing that would make a gay wedding seem 
 hardly the thing . Bathsheba have a great wish that all 
 the parish shall not be in church , look at she - she be 
 shylike and nervous about it , in fact - so I be do 
 this to humour she . " 
 " ay , I see : quite right , too , I suppose I must say . 
 and you be now go down to the clerk . " 
 " yes ; you may as well come with I . " 
 " I be afeard your labour in keep it close will be 
 throw away . " say Coggan , as they walk along . 
 " Labe Tall 's old woman will horn it all over parish in 
 half - an - hour . " 
 " so she will , upon my life ; I never think of 
 that . " say Oak , pausing . " yet I must tell he to- 
 night , I suppose , for he be work so far off , and leave 
 early . " 
 " I will tell ' ee how we could tackle she . " say Coggan . 
 " I will knock and ask to speak to Laban outside the door , 
 you stand in the background . then he will come out , 
 and you can tell yer tale . she will never guess what I 
 want en for ; and I will make up a few word about the 
 farm - work , as a blind . " 
 this scheme be consider feasible ; and Coggan 
 advance boldly , and rap at Mrs. Tall 's door . Mrs. 
 Tall herself open it . 
 " I want to have a word with Laban . " 
 " he be not at home , and will not   be this side of eleven 
 o'clock . He've   be force to go over to Yalbury since 
 shut out work . I shall do quite as well . " 
 " I hardly think you will . stop a moment ; " and 
 Coggan step round the corner of the porch to consult 
 Oak . 
 " who be t'other man , then ? " say Mrs. Tall . 
 " only a friend . " say Coggan . 
 " say he be want to meet mistress near church - hatch 
 to - morrow morning at ten . " say Oak , in a whisper . 
 " that he must come without fail , and wear his good 
 clothe . " 
 " the clothe will floor we as safe as house ! " say Coggan . 
 " it can not   be help say Oak . " tell she . " 
 so Coggan deliver the message . " Mind , het or 
 wet , blow or snow , he must come , add Jan. " ' tis 
 very particular , indeed . the fact be , ' tis to witness she 
 sign some law - work about take share wi ' another 
 farmer for a long span o ' year . there , that be what ' tis , 
 and now I have   tell ' ee , Mother Tall , in a way I should not 
 ha ' do if I have not   love ' ee so hopeless well . " 
 Coggan retire before she could ask any far ; 
 and next they call at the vicar 's in a manner which 
 excite no curiosity at all . then Gabriel go home , 
 and prepare for the morrow . 
 " Liddy . " say Bathsheba , on go to bed that night , 
 " I want you to call I at seven o'clock to - morrow , in 
 case I should not   wake . " 
 " but you always do wake afore then , ma'am . " 
 " yes , but I have something important to do , which 
 I will tell you of when the time come , and it be good to 
 make sure . " 
 CONCLUSION 
 Bathsheba , however , awake voluntarily at four , nor 
 could she by any contrivance get to sleep again . about 
 six , be quite positive that her watch have stop 
 during the night , she could wait no long . she go 
 and tap at Liddy 's door , and after some labour awake 
 she . 
 " but I think it be I who have to call you ? " say 
 the bewildered Liddy . " and it be not   six yet . " 
 indeed it be ; how can you tell such a story , Liddy ? 
 I know it must be ever so much past seven . come to 
 my room as soon as you can ; I want you to give my 
 hair a good brushing . " 
 when Liddy come to Bathsheba 's room her mistress 
 be already wait . Liddy could not understand 
 this extraordinary promptness . " whatever be go on , 
 ma'am ? " she say . 
 " well , I will tell you . " say Bathsheba , with a mischiev- 
 ous smile in her bright eye . " Farmer Oak be come 
 here to dine with I to - day ! " 
 " Farmer Oak - and nobody else ? - you two alone ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " but be it safe , ma'am , after what be be say ? " ask 
 her companion , dubiously . " a woman 's good name be 
 such a perishable article that - - " 
 Bathsheba laugh with a flushed cheek , and 
 whisper in Liddy 's ear , although there be nobody 
 present . then Liddy star and exclaim , " soul 
 alive , what news ! it make my heart go quite 
 bumpity - bump " 
 " it make mine rather furious , too . " say Bathsheba . 
 " however , there be no get out of it now ! " 
 it be a damp disagreeable morning . nevertheless , 
 at twenty minute to ten o'clock , Oak come out of his 
 house , and 
 go up the hill side 
 with that sort of stride 
 a man put out when walk in search of a bride , 
 and knock Bathsheba 's door . ten minute later 
 a large and a small umbrella might have be see 
 move from the same door , and through the mist along 
 the road to the church . the distance be not more 
 than a quarter of a mile , and these two sensible person 
 deem it unnecessary to drive . an observer must have 
 be very close indeed to discover that the form under 
 the umbrella be those of Oak and Bathsheba , arm - in- 
 arm for the first time in their life , Oak in a greatcoat 
 extend to his knee , and Bathsheba in a cloak that 
 reach her clog . yet , though so plainly dress 
 there be a certain rejuvenate appearance about she : - 
 as though a rose should shut and be a bud again . 
 Repose have again incarnadine her cheek ; and have , 
 at Gabriel 's request , arrange her hair this morning as 
 she have wear it year ago on Norcombe Hill , she seem 
 in his eye remarkably like a girl of that fascinating 
 dream , which , consider that she be now only three 
 or four - and - twenty , be perhaps not very wonderful . in 
 the church be Tall , Liddy , and the parson , and in a 
 remarkably short space of time the deed be do . 
 the two sit down very quietly to tea in Bathsheba 's 
 parlour in the evening of the same day , for it have be 
 arrange that Farmer Oak should go there to live , since 
 he have as yet neither money , house , nor furniture worthy 
 of the name , though he be on a sure way towards they , 
 whilst Bathsheba be , comparatively , in a plethora of all 
 three . 
 just as Bathsheba be pour out a cup of tea , 
 their ear be greet by the firing of a cannon , 
 follow by what seem like a tremendous blowing of 
 trumpet , in the front of the house . 
 " there ! " say Oak , laughing , " I know those fellow 
 be up to something , by the look on their face ; " 
 Oak take up the light and go into the porch , 
 follow by Bathsheba with a shawl over her head . the 
 ray fall upon a group of male figure gather upon the 
 gravel in front , who , when they see the newly - marry 
 couple in the porch , set up a loud " Hurrah ! " and at 
 the same moment bang again go the cannon in the 
 background , follow by a hideous clang of music from 
 a drum , tambourine , clarionet , serpent , hautboy , tenor- 
 viol , and double - bass - the only remain relic of the 
 true and original Weatherbury band - venerable worm- 
 eat instrument , which have celebrate in their own 
 person the victory of Marlhorough , under the finger 
 of the forefather of those who play they now . the 
 performer come forward , and march up to the 
 front . 
 " those bright boy , Mark Clark and Jan , be at the 
 bottom of all this . " say Oak . " come in , soul , and 
 have something to eat and drink wi ' I and my wife . " 
 " not to - night . " say Mr. Clark , with evident self- 
 denial . " thank ye all the same ; but we will call at a 
 more seemly time . however , we could not   think of 
 let the day pass without a note of admiration of 
 some sort . if ye could send a drop of som'at down to 
 Warren 's , why so it be . here 's long life and happiness 
 to neighbour Oak and his comely bride ! " 
 " thank ye ; thank ye all . " say Gabriel . " a bit and 
 a drop shall be send to Warren 's for ye at once . I have 
 a thought that we might very likely get a salute of some 
 sort from our old friend , and I be say so to my 
 wife but now . " 
 " Faith . " say Coggan , in a critical tone , turn to his 
 companion , " the man hev learn to say " my wife " 
 in a wonderful naterel way , consider how very youth- 
 ful he be in wedlock as yet - hey , neighbour all ? " 
 " I never heerd a skilful old married feller of twenty 
 year " stand pipe " my wife " in a more used note 
 than ' a did . " say Jacob Smallbury . " it might have be 
 a little more true to nater if't have be speak a little 
 chillier , but that be not   to be expect just now . 
 " that improvement will come wi ' time . " say Jan , 
 twirl his eye . 
 then Oak laugh , and Bathsheba smile   for she 
 never laugh readily now , and their friend turn to 
 go . 
 " yes ; I suppose that be the size o't . " say Joseph 
 Poorgrass with a cheerful sigh as they move away ; 
 " and I wish he joy o ' she ; though I be once or 
 twice upon say to - day with holy Hosea , in my 
 scripture manner , which be my second nature . " Ephraim 
 be join to idol : let he alone . " but since ' tis as ' tis 
 why , it might have be bad , and I feel my thank 
 accordingly . " 
 the END 
