tess of the d'urberville 

 a pure Woman 

 Faithfully present by 

 THOMAS HARDY 







 content 

  phase the First : the Maiden , I - XI 

  phase the second : Maiden no More , XII - XV 

  Phase the Third : the Rally , XVI - XXIV 

  phase the Fourth : the Consequence , XXV - XXXIV 

  phase the Fifth : the woman pay , XXXV - XLIV 

  phase the Sixth : the Convert , XLV - LII 

  phase the Seventh : Fulfilment , LIII - LIX 





 phase the First : the Maiden 


 I 


 on an evening in the latter part of May a middle - aged man be walk 
 homeward from Shaston to the village of Marlott , in the adjoining 
 Vale of Blakemore , or Blackmoor . the pair of leg that carry he 
 be rickety , and there be a bias in his gait which incline he 
 somewhat to the left of a straight line . he occasionally give a 
 smart nod , as if in confirmation of some opinion , though he be not 
 think of anything in particular . an empty egg - basket be sling 
 upon his arm , the nap of his hat be ruffle , a patch be quite 
 wear away at its brim where his thumb come in take it off . 
 presently he be meet by an elderly parson astride on a gray mare , 
 who , as he ride , hum a wandering tune . 

 " good night t'ee , " say the man with the basket . 

 " good night , Sir John , " say the parson . 

 the pedestrian , after another pace or two , halt , and turn round . 

 " now , sir , beg your pardon ; we meet last market - day on this road 
 about this time , and I say ' good night , ' and you make reply ' good 
 night , Sir John , ' as now . " 

 " I do , " say the parson . 

 " and once before that - near a month ago . " 

 " I may have . " 

 " then what might your meaning be in call I ' Sir John ' these 
 different time , when I be plain Jack Durbeyfield , the haggler ? " 

 the parson ride a step or two nearer . 

 " it be only my whim , " he say ; and , after a moment 's hesitation : " it 
 be on account of a discovery I make some little time ago , whilst I 
 be hunt up pedigree for the new county history . I be Parson 
 Tringham , the antiquary , of Stagfoot Lane . do not   you really know , 
 Durbeyfield , that you be the lineal representative of the ancient 
 and knightly family of the d'Urbervilles , who derive their descent 
 from Sir Pagan d'Urberville , that renowned knight who come from 
 Normandy with William the Conqueror , as appear by Battle Abbey 
 Roll ? " 

 " never hear it before , sir ! " 

 " well it be true . throw up your chin a moment , so that I may catch 
 the profile of your face well . yes , that be the d'Urberville nose 
 and chin - a little debased . your ancestor be one of the twelve 
 knight who assist the Lord of Estremavilla in Normandy in his 
 conquest of Glamorganshire . branch of your family hold manor over 
 all this part of England ; their name appear in the Pipe Rolls in the 
 time of King Stephen . in the reign of King John one of they be rich 
 enough to give a manor to the Knights Hospitallers ; and in Edward the 
 Second 's time your forefather Brian be summon to Westminster to 
 attend the great Council there . you decline a little in Oliver 
 Cromwell 's time , but to no serious extent , and in Charles the 
 Second 's reign you be make Knights of the Royal Oak for your 
 loyalty . aye , there have be generation of Sir Johns among 
 you , and if knighthood be hereditary , like a baronetcy , as it 
 practically be in old time , when man be knight from father 
 to son , you would be Sir John now . " 

 " ye do not   say so ! " 

 " in short , " conclude the parson , decisively smack his leg with 
 his switch , " there be hardly such another family in England . " 

 " daze my eye , and be not   there ? " say Durbeyfield . " and here have I 
 be knock about , year after year , from pillar to post , as if I 
 be no more than the commonest feller in the parish ... and how long 
 hev this news about I be know , Pa'son tringham ? " 

 the clergyman explain that , as far as he be aware , it have quite 
 die out of knowledge , and could hardly be say to be know at all . 
 his own investigation have begin on a day in the precede spring 
 when , have be engage in trace the vicissitude of the 
 d'Urberville family , he have observe Durbeyfield 's name on his 
 waggon , and have thereupon be lead to make inquiry about his 
 father and grandfather till he have no doubt on the subject . 

 " at first I resolve not to disturb you with such a useless piece of 
 information , " say he . " however , our impulse be too strong for our 
 judgement sometimes . I think you might perhaps know something of 
 it all the while . " 

 " well , I have hear once or twice , ' tis true , that my family have see 
 well day afore they come to Blackmoor . but I take no notice o't , 
 think it to mean that we have once keep two horse where we now 
 keep only one . I have   get a wold silver spoon , and a wold graven seal 
 at home , too ; but , Lord , what be a spoon and seal ? ... and to think 
 that I and these noble d'Urbervilles be one flesh all the time . 
 ' Twas say that my gr't - granfer have secret , and do not   care to talk 
 of where he come from ... and where do we raise our smoke , now , 
 parson , if I may make so bold ; I mean , where do we d'urbervilles 
 live ? " 

 " you do not   live anywhere . you be extinct - as a county family . " 

 " that be bad . " 

 " yes - what the mendacious family chronicle call extinct in the male 
 line - that be , go down - go under . " 

 " then where do we lie ? " 

 " at Kingsbere - sub - greenhill : row and row of you in your vault , 
 with your effigy under purbeck - marble canopy . " 

 " and where be our family mansion and estate ? " 

 " you have not   any . " 

 " oh ? no land neither ? " 

 " none ; though you once have them in abundance , as I say , for you 
 family consist of numerous branch . in this county there be a 
 seat of yours at Kingsbere , and another at Sherton , and another in 
 Millpond , and another at Lullstead , and another at Wellbridge . " 

 " and shall we ever come into our own again ? " 

 " ah - that I can not   tell ! " 

 " and what have I well do about it , sir ? " ask Durbeyfield , after a 
 pause . 

 " oh - nothing , nothing ; except chasten yourself with the thought of 
 ' how be the mighty fall . ' it be a fact of some interest to the 
 local historian and genealogist , nothing more . there be several 
 family among the cottager of this county of almost equal lustre . 
 good night . " 

 " but you will turn back and have a quart of beer wi ' I on the strength 
 o't , Pa'son Tringham ? there be a very pretty brew in tap at the pure 
 drop - though , to be sure , not so good as at Rolliver 's . " 

 " no , thank you - not this evening , Durbeyfield . you have   have enough 
 already . " conclude thus , the parson ride on his way , with doubt 
 as to his discretion in retail this curious bit of lore . 

 when he be go , Durbeyfield walk a few step in a profound 
 reverie , and then sit down upon the grassy bank by the roadside , 
 deposit his basket before he . in a few minute a youth appear 
 in the distance , walk in the same direction as that which have be 
 pursue by Durbeyfield . the latter , on see he , hold up his hand , 
 and the lad quicken his pace and come near . 

 " boy , take up that basket ! I want ' ee to go on an errand for I . " 

 the lath - like stripling frown . " who be you , then , John 
 Durbeyfield , to order I about and call I ' boy ' ? you know my 
 name as well as I know your ! " 

 " do you , do you ? that be the secret - that be the secret ! now obey my 
 order , and take the message I be go to charge ' ee wi ' ... well , 
 Fred , I do not   mind tell you that the secret be that I be one of a 
 noble race - it have be just find out by I this present afternoon , 
 P.M. " and as he make the announcement , Durbeyfield , decline from 
 his sit position , luxuriously stretch himself out upon the bank 
 among the daisy . 

 the lad stand before Durbeyfield , and contemplate his length from 
 crown to toe . 

 " Sir John d'Urberville - that be who I be , " continue the prostrate 
 man . " that be if knight be baronet - which they be . ' Tis 
 record in history all about I . dost know of such a place , lad , 
 as Kingsbere - sub - greenhill ? " 

 " Ees . I have   be there to Greenhill Fair . " 

 " well , under the church of that city there lie - " 

 " ' tisn't   a city , the place I mean ; leastwise ' twaddn ' when I be 
 there - ' twa a little one - eye , blink sort o ' place . " 

 " never you mind the place , boy , that be not the question before we . 
 under the church of that there parish lie my ancestor - hundred of 
 them - in coat of mail and jewel , in gr't lead coffin weigh ton 
 and ton . there be not a man in the county o ' South - Wessex that be 
 get grander and nobler skillenton in his family than I. " 

 " oh ? " 

 " now take up that basket , and goo on to Marlott , and when you have   come 
 to the Pure Drop Inn , tell them to send a horse and carriage to I 
 immed'ately , to carry I hwome . and in the bottom o ' the carriage 
 they be to put a noggin o ' rum in a small bottle , and chalk it up 
 to my account . and when you have   do that goo on to my house with 
 the basket , and tell my wife to put away that washing , because she 
 need not   finish it , and wait till I come hwome , as I have   news to tell 
 she . " 

 as the lad stand in a dubious attitude , Durbeyfield put his hand in 
 his pocket , and produce a shilling , one of the chronically few that 
 he possess . 

 " here be for your labour , lad . " 

 this make a difference in the young man 's estimate of the position . 

 " yes , Sir John . thank ' ee . anything else I can do for ' ee , Sir 
 John ? " 

 " tell them at hwome that I should like for supper , - well , lamb 's fry 
 if they can get it ; and if they can not , black - pot ; and if they can not 
 get that , well chitterling will do . " 

 " yes , Sir John . " 

 the boy take up the basket , and as he set out the note of a brass 
 band be hear from the direction of the village . 

 " what be that ? " say Durbeyfield . " not on account o ' I ? " 

 " ' tis the woman 's club - walking , Sir John . why , your da'ter be one o ' 
 the member . " 

 " to be sure - I would quite forgot it in my thought of great thing ! 
 well , vamp on to Marlott , will ye , and order that carriage , and 
 maybe I will drive round and inspect the club . " 

 the lad depart , and Durbeyfield lie wait on the grass and 
 daisy in the evening sun . not a soul pass that way for a long 
 while , and the faint note of the band be the only human sound 
 audible within the rim of blue hill . 



 II 


 the village of Marlott lie amid the north - eastern undulation of the 
 beautiful Vale of Blakemore , or Blackmoor , aforesaid , an engirdle 
 and seclude region , for the most part untrodden as yet by tourist or 
 landscape - painter , though within a four hour ' journey from London . 

 it be a vale whose acquaintance be well make by view it from the 
 summit of the hill that surround it - except perhaps during the 
 drought of summer . an unguided ramble into its recess in bad 
 weather be apt to engender dissatisfaction with its narrow , tortuous , 
 and miry way . 

 this fertile and sheltered tract of country , in which the field be 
 never brown and the spring never dry , be bound on the south by the 
 bold chalk ridge that embrace the prominence of Hambledon Hill , 
 Bulbarrow , Nettlecombe - Tout , Dogbury , High Stoy , and Bubb down . the 
 traveller from the coast , who , after plod northward for a score 
 of mile over calcareous down and corn - land , suddenly reach 
 the verge of one of these escarpment , be surprised and delight 
 to behold , extend like a map beneath he , a country differ 
 absolutely from that which he have pass through . behind he the 
 hill be open , the sun blaze down upon field so large as to give 
 an unenclosed character to the landscape , the lane be white , the 
 hedge low and plashed , the atmosphere colourless . here , in the 
 valley , the world seem to be construct upon a small and more 
 delicate scale ; the field be mere paddock , so reduce that from 
 this height their hedgerow appear a network of dark green thread 
 overspread the pale green of the grass . the atmosphere beneath 
 be languorous , and be so ting with azure that what artist call the 
 middle distance partake also of that hue , while the horizon beyond 
 be of the deep ultramarine . arable land be few and limited ; 
 with but slight exception the prospect be a broad rich mass of grass 
 and tree , mantle minor hill and dale within the major . such be 
 the Vale of Blackmoor . 

 the district be of historic , no less than of topographical interest . 
 the Vale be know in former time as the Forest of White Hart , from 
 a curious legend of King Henry III 's reign , in which the killing by 
 a certain Thomas de la Lynd of a beautiful white hart which the king 
 have run down and spar , be make the occasion of a heavy fine . 
 in those day , and till comparatively recent time , the country be 
 densely woode . even now , trace of its early condition be to be 
 find in the old oak copse and irregular belt of timber that yet 
 survive upon its slope , and the hollow - trunke tree that shade so 
 many of its pasture . 

 the forest have depart , but some old custom of their shade 
 remain . many , however , linger only in a metamorphosed or disguised 
 form . the May - Day dance , for instance , be to be discern on 
 the afternoon under notice , in the guise of the club revel , or 
 " club - walking , " as it be there call . 

 it be an interesting event to the young inhabitant of Marlott , 
 though its real interest be not observe by the participator in the 
 ceremony . its singularity lie less in the retention of a custom of 
 walk in procession and dance on each anniversary than in the 
 member be solely woman . in man 's club such celebration be , 
 though expire , less uncommon ; but either the natural shyness of the 
 soft sex , or a sarcastic attitude on the part of male relative , 
 have denude such woman 's club as remain   if any other do   or this 
 their glory and consummation . the club of Marlott alone live to 
 uphold the local Cerealia . it have walk for hundred of year , if 
 not as benefit - club , as votive sisterhood of some sort ; and it walk 
 still . 

 the banded one be all dress in white gown - a gay survival from 
 Old Style day , when cheerfulness and May - time be synonyms - day 
 before the habit of take long view have reduce emotion to a 
 monotonous average . their first exhibition of themselves be in a 
 processional march of two and two round the parish . ideal and real 
 clash slightly as the sun light up their figure against the green 
 hedge and creeper - lace house - front ; for , though the whole troop 
 wear white garment , no two white be alike among they . some 
 approach pure blanch ; some have a bluish pallor ; some wear by the 
 old character   which have possibly lain by fold for many a year 
 incline to a cadaverous tint , and to a georgian style . 

 in addition to the distinction of a white frock , every woman and girl 
 carry in her right hand a peel willow wand , and in she leave a 
 bunch of white flower . the peeling of the former , and the selection 
 of the latter , have be an operation of personal care . 

 there be a few middle - aged and even elderly woman in the train , 
 their silver - wiry hair and wrinkle face , scourge by time and 
 trouble , have almost a grotesque , certainly a pathetic , appearance 
 in such a jaunty situation . in a true view , perhaps , there be more 
 to be gather and tell of each anxious and experience one , to whom 
 the year be draw nigh when she should say , " I have no pleasure 
 in they , " than of her juvenile comrade . but let the elder be pass 
 over here for those under whose bodice the life throb quick and 
 warm . 

 the young girl form , indeed , the majority of the band , and their 
 head of luxuriant hair reflect in the sunshine every tone of gold , 
 and black , and brown . some have beautiful eye , other a beautiful 
 nose , other a beautiful mouth and figure : few , if any , have all . a 
 difficulty of arrange their lip in this crude exposure to public 
 scrutiny , an inability to balance their head , and to dissociate 
 self - consciousness from their feature , be apparent in they , and 
 show that they be genuine country girl , unaccustomed to many 
 eye . 

 and as each and all of they be warm without by the sun , so each 
 have a private little sun for her soul to bask in ; some dream , some 
 affection , some hobby , at least some remote and distant hope which , 
 though perhaps starve to nothing , still live on , as hope will . 
 they be all cheerful , and many of they merry . 

 they come round by the Pure Drop Inn , and be turn out of the 
 high road to pass through a wicket - gate into the meadow , when one of 
 the woman say - 

 " the load - a - Lord ! why , Tess Durbeyfield , if there be not   thy father 
 rid hwome in a carriage ! " 

 a young member of the band turn her head at the exclamation . 
 she be a fine and handsome girl - not handsomer than some other , 
 possibly - but her mobile peony mouth and large innocent eye add 
 eloquence to colour and shape . she wear a red ribbon in her hair , 
 and be the only one of the white company who could boast of such 
 a pronounced adornment . as she look round Durbeyfield be see 
 move along the road in a chaise belong to the Pure Drop , drive 
 by a frizzle - head brawny damsel with her gown - sleeve roll above 
 her elbow . this be the cheerful servant of that establishment , 
 who , in her part of factotum , turn groom and ostler at time . 
 Durbeyfield , lean back , and with his eye close luxuriously , be 
 wave his hand above his head , and sing in a slow recitative - 

 " I have -got - a - gr't - family - vault - at - kingsbere - and 
 knight - forefather - in - lead - coffin - there ! " 

 the clubbist titter , except the girl call Tess - in whom a slow 
 heat seem to rise at the sense that her father be make himself 
 foolish in their eye . 

 " he be tired , that be all , " she say hastily , " and he have get a lift 
 home , because our own horse have to rest to - day . " 

 " bless thy simplicity , Tess , " say her companion . " he be get his 
 market - nitch . haw - haw ! " 

 " look here ; I will not   walk another inch with you , if you say any joke 
 about he ! " Tess cry , and the colour upon her cheek spread over 
 her face and neck . in a moment her eye grow moist , and her glance 
 droop to the ground . perceive that they have really pain she 
 they say no more , and order again prevail . Tess 's pride would not 
 allow she to turn her head again , to learn what her father 's meaning 
 be , if he have any ; and thus she move on with the whole body to the 
 enclosure where there be to be dance on the green . by the time 
 the spot be reach she have recover her equanimity , and tap she 
 neighbour with her wand and talk as usual . 

 Tess Durbeyfield at this time of her life be a mere vessel of 
 emotion untincture by experience . the dialect be on her tongue 
 to some extent , despite the village school : the characteristic 
 intonation of that dialect for this district be the voicing 
 approximately render by the syllable UR , probably as rich an 
 utterance as any to be find in human speech . the pout - up deep red 
 mouth to which this syllable be native have hardly as yet settle 
 into its definite shape , and her low lip have a way of thrust the 
 middle of her top one upward , when they close together after a word . 

 phase of her childhood lurk in her aspect still . as she walk 
 along to - day , for all her bounce handsome womanliness , you could 
 sometimes see her twelfth year in her cheek , or her ninth sparkling 
 from her eye ; and even her fifth would flit over the curve of her 
 mouth now and then . 

 yet few know , and still few consider this . a small minority , 
 mainly stranger , would look long at she in casually pass by , and 
 grow momentarily fascinate by her freshness , and wonder if they 
 would ever see she again : but to almost everybody she be a fine and 
 picturesque country girl , and no more . 

 nothing be see or hear far of Durbeyfield in his triumphal 
 chariot under the conduct of the ostleress , and the club have 
 enter the allotted space , dancing begin . as there be no man in 
 the company , the girl dance at first with each other , but when the 
 hour for the close of labour draw on , the masculine inhabitant of 
 the village , together with other idler and pedestrian , gather 
 round the spot , and appear inclined to negotiate for a partner . 

 among these on - looker be three young man of a superior class , 
 carry small knapsack strap to their shoulder , and stout 
 stick in their hand . their general likeness to each other , and 
 their consecutive age , would almost have suggest that they might 
 be , what in fact they be , brother . the eld wear the white tie , 
 high waistcoat , and thin - brim hat of the regulation curate ; the 
 second be the normal undergraduate ; the appearance of the third and 
 young would hardly have be sufficient to characterize he ; there 
 be an uncribbed , uncabined aspect in his eye and attire , imply 
 that he have hardly as yet find the entrance to his professional 
 groove . that he be a desultory tentative student of something and 
 everything might only have be predict of he . 

 these three brother tell casual acquaintance that they be spend 
 their Whitsun holiday in a walk tour through the Vale of 
 Blackmoor , their course be south - westerly from the town of Shaston 
 on the north - east . 

 they leant over the gate by the highway , and inquire as to the 
 meaning of the dance and the white - frocked maid . the two elder of 
 the brother be plainly not intend to linger more than a moment , 
 but the spectacle of a bevy of girl dance without male partner 
 seem to amuse the third , and make he in no hurry to move on . he 
 unstrappe his knapsack , put it , with his stick , on the hedge - bank , 
 and open the gate . 

 " what be you go to do , Angel ? " ask the eld . 

 " I be inclined to go and have a fling with they . why not all of 
 we - just for a minute or two - it will not detain we long ? " 

 " no - no ; nonsense ! " say the first . " dance in public with a troop 
 of country hoyden - suppose we should be see ! come along , or it 
 will be dark before we get to Stourcastle , and there be no place we 
 can sleep at near than that ; besides , we must get through another 
 chapter of a Counterblast to Agnosticism before we turn in , now I 
 have take the trouble to bring the book . " 

 " all right - I will overtake you and Cuthbert in five minute ; do not 
 stop ; I give my word that I will , Felix . " 

 the two elder reluctantly leave he and walk on , take their 
 brother 's knapsack to relieve he in follow , and the young 
 enter the field . 

 " this be a thousand pity , " he say gallantly , to two or three of 
 the girl nearest he , as soon as there be a pause in the dance . 
 " where be your partner , my dear ? " 

 " they have   not leave off work yet , " answer one of the bold . 
 " they will be here by and by . till then , will you be one , sir ? " 

 " certainly . but what be one among so many ! " 

 " well than none . ' tis melancholy work face and foot it to one 
 of your own sort , and no clipsing and colle at all . now , pick and 
 choose . " 

 " ' ssh - do not   be so for'ard ! " say a shyer girl . 

 the young man , thus invite , glance they over , and attempt some 
 discrimination ; but , as the group be all so new to he , he could 
 not very well exercise it . he take almost the first that come to 
 hand , which be not the speaker , as she have expect ; nor do it 
 happen to be Tess Durbeyfield . Pedigree , ancestral skeleton , 
 monumental record , the d'Urberville lineament , do not help Tess in 
 her life 's battle as yet , even to the extent of attract to she a 
 dancing - partner over the head of the commonest peasantry . so much 
 for Norman blood unaide by victorian lucre . 

 the name of the eclipse girl , whatever it be , have not be hand 
 down ; but she be envy by all as the first who enjoy the luxury 
 of a masculine partner that evening . yet such be the force of 
 example that the village young man , who have not hasten to enter 
 the gate while no intruder be in the way , now drop in quickly , 
 and soon the couple become leaven with rustic youth to a marked 
 extent , till at length the plain woman in the club be no long 
 compel to foot it on the masculine side of the figure . 

 the church clock strike , when suddenly the student say that he must 
 leave - he have be forget himself - he have to join his companion . 
 as he fall out of the dance his eye light on Tess Durbeyfield , 
 whose own large orb wear , to tell the truth , the faint aspect of 
 reproach that he have not choose she . he , too , be sorry then that , 
 owe to her backwardness , he have not observe she ; and with that in 
 his mind he leave the pasture . 

 on account of his long delay he start in a flying - run down the lane 
 westward , and have soon pass the hollow and mount the next rise . 
 he have not yet overtake his brother , but he pause to get breath , 
 and look back . he could see the white figure of the girl in the 
 green enclosure whirling about as they have whirl when he be among 
 they . they seem to have quite forget he already . 

 all of they , except , perhaps , one . this white shape stand apart 
 by the hedge alone . from her position he know it to be the pretty 
 maiden with whom he have not dance . trifle as the matter be , he 
 yet instinctively feel that she be hurt by his oversight . he wish 
 that he have ask she ; he wish that he have inquire her name . she 
 be so modest , so expressive , she have look so soft in her thin 
 white gown that he feel he have act stupidly . 

 however , it could not be help , and turn , and bend himself to 
 a rapid walk , he dismiss the subject from his mind . 



 III 


 as for Tess Durbeyfield , she do not so easily dislodge the incident 
 from her consideration . she have no spirit to dance again for a long 
 time , though she might have have plenty of partner ; but ah ! they do 
 not speak so nicely as the strange young man have do . it be not 
 till the ray of the sun have absorb the young stranger 's retreating 
 figure on the hill that she shake off her temporary sadness and 
 answer she would - be partner in the affirmative . 

 she remain with her comrade till dusk , and participate with a 
 certain zest in the dancing ; though , be heart - whole as yet , she 
 enjoy tread a measure purely for its own sake ; little divining 
 when she see " the soft torment , the bitter sweet , the pleasing 
 pain , and the agreeable distress " of those girl who have be 
 woo and win , what she herself be capable of in that kind . the 
 struggle and wrangle of the lad for her hand in a jig be an 
 amusement to she - no more ; and when they become fierce she rebuke 
 they . 

 she might have stay even later , but the incident of her father 's 
 odd appearance and manner return upon the girl 's mind to make she 
 anxious , and wonder what have become of he she drop away from 
 the dancer and bent her step towards the end of the village at 
 which the parental cottage lay . 

 while yet many score yard off , other rhythmic sound than those she 
 have quit become audible to she ; sound that she know well - so 
 well . they be a regular series of thumping from the interior of 
 the house , occasion by the violent rocking of a cradle upon a stone 
 floor , to which movement a feminine voice keep time by sing , in a 
 vigorous gallopade , the favourite ditty of " the spotted cow " - 


  I see her lie do'-own in yon'-der green gro'-ove ; 
  come , love ! ' and I will tell ' you where ! ' 


 the cradle - rock and the song would cease simultaneously for a 
 moment , and an exclamation at high vocal pitch would take the 
 place of the melody . 

 " God bless thy diment eye ! and thy waxen cheek ! and thy cherry 
 mouth ! and thy Cubit 's thigh ! and every bit o ' thy bless body ! " 

 after this invocation the rocking and the singing would recommence , 
 and the " spotted cow " proceed as before . so matter stand when Tess 
 open the door and pause upon the mat within it , survey the 
 scene . 

 the interior , in spite of the melody , strike upon the girl 's sens 
 with an unspeakable dreariness . from the holiday gaiety of the 
 field - the white gown , the nosegay , the willow - wand , the whirling 
 movement on the green , the flash of gentle sentiment towards the 
 stranger - to the yellow melancholy of this one - candle spectacle , 
 what a step ! besides the jar of contrast there come to she a chill 
 self - reproach that she have not return soon , to help her mother 
 in these domesticity , instead of indulge herself out - of - door . 

 there stand her mother amid the group of child , as Tess have leave 
 she , hang over the Monday washing - tub , which have now , as always , 
 linger on to the end of the week . out of that tub have come the day 
 before - Tess feel it with a dreadful sting of remorse - the very white 
 frock upon she back which she have so carelessly green about the 
 skirt on the damp grass - which have be wring up and iron by her 
 mother 's own hand . 

 as usual , Mrs Durbeyfield be balance on one foot beside the tub , 
 the other be engage in the aforesaid business of rock she 
 young child . the cradle - rocker have do hard duty for so many 
 year , under the weight of so many child , on that flagstone floor , 
 that they be wear nearly flat , in consequence of which a huge jerk 
 accompany each swing of the cot , fling the baby from side to 
 side like a weaver 's shuttle , as Mrs Durbeyfield , excite by her 
 song , trod the rocker with all the spring that be leave in she after 
 a long day 's seething in the sud . 

 Nick - knock , nick - knock , go the cradle ; the candle - flame stretch 
 itself tall , and begin jig up and down ; the water dribble from 
 the matron 's elbow , and the song gallop on to the end of the 
 verse , Mrs Durbeyfield regard her daughter the while . even now , 
 when burden with a young family , Joan Durbeyfield be a passionate 
 lover of tune . no ditty float into Blackmoor Vale from the outer 
 world but Tess 's mother catch up its notation in a week . 

 there still faintly beam from the woman 's feature something of 
 the freshness , and even the prettiness , of her youth ; render it 
 probable that the personal charm which Tess could boast of be in 
 main part her mother 's gift , and therefore unknightly , unhistorical . 

 " I will rock the cradle for ' ee , mother , " say the daughter gently . 
 " or I will take off my good frock and help you wring up ? I think you 
 have finish long ago . " 

 her mother bear Tess no ill - will for leave the housework to her 
 single - handed effort for so long ; indeed , Joan seldom upbraid 
 her thereon at any time , feel but slightly the lack of Tess 's 
 assistance whilst her instinctive plan for relieve herself of her 
 labour lie in postpone they . to - night , however , she be even in a 
 blither mood than usual . there be a dreaminess , a pre - occupation , 
 an exaltation , in the maternal look which the girl could not 
 understand . 

 " well , I be glad you have   come , " her mother say , as soon as the last 
 note have pass out of she . " I want to go and fetch your father ; 
 but what be more'n that , I want to tell ' ee what have happen . y'll 
 be fess enough , my poppet , when th'st know ! "   Mrs Durbeyfield 
 habitually speak the dialect ; her daughter , who have pass the Sixth 
 Standard in the National School under a London - train mistress , 
 speak two language : the dialect at home , more or less ; ordinary 
 English abroad and to person of quality . 

 " since I have   be away ? " Tess ask . 

 " ay ! " 

 " have it anything to do with father 's make such a mommet of himself 
 in thik carriage this afternoon ? why do ' er ? I feel inclined to 
 sink into the ground with shame ! " 

 " that wer all a part of the larry ! we have   be find to be the 
 great gentlefolk in the whole county - reach all back long 
 before Oliver Grumble 's time - to the day of the Pagan Turks - with 
 monument , and vault , and crest , and ' scutcheon , and the Lord 
 know what all . in Saint Charles 's day we be make Knights o ' the 
 Royal Oak , our real name be d'Urberville ! ... do not   that make 
 your bosom plim ? ' twa on this account that your father ride home 
 in the vlee ; not because he have be drink , as people suppose . " 

 " I be glad of that . will it do we any good , mother ? " 

 " o yes ! ' tis thoughte that great thing may come o't . no doubt a 
 mampus of volk of our own rank will be down here in their carriage 
 as soon as ' tis know . your father learn it on his way hwome 
 from Shaston , and he have be tell I the whole pedigree of the 
 matter . " 

 " where be father now ? " ask Tess suddenly . 

 her mother give irrelevant information by way of answer : " he call 
 to see the doctor to - day in Shaston . it be not consumption at all , 
 it seem . it be fat round his heart , ' a say . there , it be like 
 this . " Joan Durbeyfield , as she speak , curve a sodden thumb 
 and forefinger to the shape of the letter c , and use the other 
 forefinger as a pointer . " ' at the present moment , ' he say to your 
 father , ' your heart be enclose all round there , and all round 
 there ; this space be still open , ' ' a say . ' as soon as it do 
 meet , so , ' " - Mrs Durbeyfield close her finger into a circle 
 complete - " ' off you will go like a shadder , Mr Durbeyfield , ' ' a say . 
 ' you mid last ten year ; you mid go off in ten month , or ten day . ' " 

 Tess look alarmed . her father possibly to go behind the eternal 
 cloud so soon , notwithstanding this sudden greatness ! 

 " but where be father ? " she ask again . 

 her mother put on a deprecating look . " now do not   you be burst out 
 angry ! the poor man - he feel so rafted after his uplifting by the 
 pa'son 's news - that he go up to Rolliver 's half an hour ago . he do 
 want to get up his strength for his journey to - morrow with that load 
 of beehive , which must be deliver , family or no . he will have to 
 start shortly after twelve to - night , as the distance be so long . " 

 " get up his strength ! " say Tess impetuously , the tear well to 
 her eye . " o my God ! go to a public - house to get up his strength ! 
 and you as well agree as he , mother ! " 

 her rebuke and her mood seem to fill the whole room , and to impart 
 a cowed look to the furniture , and candle , and child play 
 about , and to her mother 's face . 

 " no , " say the latter touchily , " I be not agree . I have be 
 wait for ' ee to bide and keep house while I go fetch he . " 

 " I will go . " 

 " o no , Tess . you see , it would be no use . " 

 Tess do not expostulate . she know what her mother 's objection 
 mean . Mrs Durbeyfield 's jacket and bonnet be already hang 
 slily upon a chair by her side , in readiness for this contemplated 
 jaunt , the reason for which the matron deplore more than its 
 necessity . 

 " and take the Compleat Fortune - Teller to the outhouse , " Joan 
 continue , rapidly wipe her hand , and don the garment . 

 the Compleat Fortune - Teller be an old thick volume , which lie on a 
 table at her elbow , so wear by pocket that the margin have reach 
 the edge of the type . Tess take it up , and her mother start . 

 this go to hunt up her shiftless husband at the inn be one of 
 Mrs Durbeyfield 's still extant enjoyment in the muck and muddle of 
 rear child . to discover he at Rolliver 's , to sit there for 
 an hour or two by his side and dismiss all thought and care of the 
 child during the interval , make she happy . a sort of halo , an 
 occidental glow , come over life then . trouble and other reality 
 take on themselves a metaphysical impalpability , sink to mere 
 mental phenomenon for serene contemplation , and no long stand as 
 press concretion which chafe body and soul . the youngster , 
 not immediately within sight , seem rather bright and desirable 
 appurtenance than otherwise ; the incident of daily life be not 
 without humorousness and jollity in their aspect there . she feel a 
 little as she have use to feel when she sit by she now wed husband 
 in the same spot during his wooing , shut her eye to his defect 
 of character , and regard he only in his ideal presentation as 
 lover . 

 Tess , be leave alone with the young child , go first to the 
 outhouse with the fortune - telling book , and stuff it into the 
 thatch . a curious fetishistic fear of this grimy volume on the part 
 of her mother prevent she ever allow it to stay in the house all 
 night , and hither it be bring back whenever it have be consult . 
 between the mother , with her fast - perish lumber of superstition , 
 folk - lore , dialect , and orally transmit ballad , and the daughter , 
 with her train national teaching and standard knowledge under an 
 infinitely Revised Code , there be a gap of two hundred year as 
 ordinarily understand . when they be together the Jacobean and the 
 victorian age be juxtapose . 

 return along the garden path Tess muse on what the mother could 
 have wish to ascertain from the book on this particular day . she 
 guess the recent ancestral discovery to bear upon it , but do not 
 divine that it solely concerned herself . dismiss this , however , 
 she busy herself with sprinkle the linen dry during the 
 day - time , in company with her nine - year - old brother Abraham , and her 
 sister Eliza - Louisa of twelve and a half , call " ' Liza - Lu , " the 
 young one be put to bed . there be an interval of four year 
 and more between Tess and the next of the family , the two who have 
 fill the gap have die in their infancy , and this lend she a 
 deputy - maternal attitude when she be alone with her junior . next 
 in juvenility to Abraham come two more girl , Hope and Modesty ; then 
 a boy of three , and then the baby , who have just complete his first 
 year . 

 all these young soul be passenger in the Durbeyfield 
 ship - entirely dependent on the judgement of the two Durbeyfield 
 adult for their pleasure , their necessity , their health , even 
 their existence . if the head of the Durbeyfield household choose 
 to sail into difficulty , disaster , starvation , disease , degradation , 
 death , thither be these half - dozen little captive under hatch 
 compel to sail with they - six helpless creature , who have never 
 be ask if they wish for life on any term , much less if they 
 wish for it on such hard condition as be involve in be of 
 the shiftless house of Durbeyfield . some people would like to know 
 whence the poet whose philosophy be in these day deem as profound 
 and trustworthy as his song be breezy and pure , get his authority 
 for speak of " Nature 's holy plan . " 

 it grow later , and neither father nor mother reappear . Tess look 
 out of the door , and take a mental journey through Marlott . the 
 village be shut its eye . candle and lamp be be put 
 out everywhere : she could inwardly behold the extinguisher and the 
 extend hand . 

 her mother 's fetching simply mean one more to fetch . Tess begin to 
 perceive that a man in indifferent health , who propose to start on a 
 journey before one in the morning , ought not to be at an inn at this 
 late hour celebrate his ancient blood . 

 " Abraham , " she say to her little brother , " do you put on your 
 hat - you bain't   afraid ? - and go up to Rolliver 's , and see what have 
 go wi ' father and mother . " 

 the boy jump promptly from his seat , and open the door , and the 
 night swallow he up . half an hour pass yet again ; neither man , 
 woman , nor child return . Abraham , like his parent , seem to have 
 be lime and catch by the ensnare inn . 

 " I must go myself , " she say . 

 ' Liza - Lu then go to bed , and Tess , lock they all in , start on 
 her way up the dark and crooked lane or street not make for hasty 
 progress ; a street lay out before inch of land have value , and when 
 one - handed clock sufficiently subdivide the day . 



 IV 


 Rolliver 's inn , the single alehouse at this end of the long and 
 broken village , could only boast of an off - licence ; hence , as 
 nobody could legally drink on the premise , the amount of overt 
 accommodation for consumer be strictly limit to a little board 
 about six inch wide and two yard long , fix to the garden paling 
 by piece of wire , so as to form a ledge . on this board thirsty 
 stranger deposit their cup as they stand in the road and drank , 
 and throw the dreg on the dusty ground to the pattern of Polynesia , 
 and wish they could have a restful seat inside . 

 thus the stranger . but there be also local customer who feel the 
 same wish ; and where there be a will there be a way . 

 in a large bedroom upstairs , the window of which be thickly 
 curtain with a great woollen shawl lately discard by the 
 landlady , Mrs Rolliver , be gather on this evening nearly a dozen 
 person , all seek beatitude ; all old inhabitant of the nearer 
 end of Marlott , and frequenter of this retreat . not only do the 
 distance to the the Pure Drop , the fully - license tavern at the 
 further part of the dispersed village , render its accommodation 
 practically unavailable for dweller at this end ; but the far more 
 serious question , the quality of the liquor , confirm the prevalent 
 opinion that it be well to drink with Rolliver in a corner of the 
 housetop than with the other landlord in a wide house . 

 a gaunt four - post bedstead which stand in the room afford 
 sit - space for several person gather round three of its side ; 
 a couple more man have elevate themselves on a chest of drawer ; 
 another rest on the oak - carve " cwoffer " ; two on the wash - stand ; 
 another on the stool ; and thus all be , somehow , seat at their 
 ease . the stage of mental comfort to which they have arrive at this 
 hour be one wherein their soul expand beyond their skin , and 
 spread their personality warmly through the room . in this process 
 the chamber and its furniture grow more and more dignified and 
 luxurious ; the shawl hang at the window take upon itself the 
 richness of tapestry ; the brass handle of the chest of drawer be 
 as golden knocker ; and the carve bedpost seem to have some 
 kinship with the magnificent pillar of Solomon 's temple . 

 Mrs Durbeyfield , have quickly walk hitherward after part from 
 Tess , open the front door , cross the downstairs room , which be 
 in deep gloom , and then unfasten the stair - door like one whose 
 finger know the trick of the latch well . her ascent of the 
 crooked staircase be a slow process , and her face , as it rise into 
 the light above the last stair , encounter the gaze of all the party 
 assemble in the bedroom . 

 " - be a few private friend I have   ask in to keep up club - walking 
 at my own expense , " the landlady exclaim at the sound of footstep , 
 as glibly as a child repeat the Catechism , while she peer over 
 the stair . " oh , ' tis you , Mrs Durbeyfield - Lard - how you frighten 
 I ! - I think it might be some gaffer send by Gover'ment . " 

 Mrs Durbeyfield be welcome with glance and nod by the remainder 
 of the conclave , and turn to where her husband sit . he be hum 
 absently to himself , in a low tone : " I be as good as some folk here 
 and there ! I have   get a great family vault at Kingsbere - sub - greenhill , 
 and fine skillenton than any man in Wessex ! " 

 " I have   something to tell ' ee that be come into my head about that - a 
 grand projick ! " whisper his cheerful wife . " here , John , do not   ' ee 
 see I ? " she nudge he , while he , look through she as through a 
 window - pane , go on with his recitative . 

 " hush ! do not   ' ee sing so loud , my good man , " say the landlady ; " in 
 case any member of the Gover'ment should be pass , and take away my 
 licend . " 

 " he be tell ' ee what be happen to we , I suppose ? " ask Mrs 
 Durbeyfield . 

 " yes - in a way . D'ye think there be any money hang by it ? " 

 " ah , that be the secret , " say Joan Durbeyfield sagely . " however , 
 ' tis well to be kin to a coach , even if you do not   ride in ' en . " she 
 drop her public voice , and continue in a low tone to her husband : 
 " I have   be think since you bring the news that there be a great 
 rich lady out by Trantridge , on the edge o ' the Chase , of the name of 
 d'Urberville . " 

 " hey - what be that ? " say Sir John . 

 she repeat the information . " that lady must be our relation , " she 
 say . " and my projick be to send Tess to claim kin . " 

 " there be a lady of the name , now you mention it , " say Durbeyfield . 
 " Pa'son Tringham do not   think of that . but she be nothing beside 
 we - a junior branch of we , no doubt , hail long since King Norman 's 
 day . " 

 while this question be be discuss neither of the pair notice , 
 in their preoccupation , that little Abraham have creep into the room , 
 and be await an opportunity of ask they to return . 

 " she be rich , and she would be sure to take notice o ' the maid , " 
 continue Mrs Durbeyfield ; " and ' twill be a very good thing . I do not 
 see why two branch o ' one family should not be on visit term . " 

 " yes ; and we will all claim kin ! " say Abraham brightly from under the 
 bedstead . " and we will all go and see she when Tess have go to live 
 with she ; and we will ride in her coach and wear black clothe ! " 

 " how do you come here , child ? what nonsense be ye talk ! go away , 
 and play on the stair till father and mother be ready ! ... well , 
 Tess ought to go to this other member of our family . she would be sure 
 to win the lady - Tess would ; and likely enough ' twould lead to some 
 noble gentleman marry she . in short , I know it . " 

 " how ? " 

 " I try her fate in the Fortune - Teller , and it bring out that 
 very thing ! ... you should ha ' see how pretty she look to - day ; 
 her skin be as sumple as a duchess ' . " 

 " what say the maid herself to go ? " 

 " I have   not ask she . she do not   know there be any such lady - relation 
 yet . but it would certainly put she in the way of a grand marriage , 
 and she will not   say nay to go . " 

 " Tess be queer . " 

 " but she be tractable at bottom . leave she to I . " 

 though this conversation have be private , sufficient of its import 
 reach the understanding of those around to suggest to they that 
 the Durbeyfields have weighty concern to talk of now than common 
 folk have , and that Tess , their pretty eld daughter , have fine 
 prospect in store . 

 " Tess be a fine figure o ' fun , as I say to myself to - day when I zeed 
 her vamp round parish with the rest , " observe one of the elderly 
 boozer in an undertone . " but Joan Durbeyfield must mind that she 
 do not   get green malt in floor . " it be a local phrase which have a 
 peculiar meaning , and there be no reply . 

 the conversation become inclusive , and presently other footstep be 
 hear cross the room below . 

 " - be a few private friend ask in to - night to keep up 
 club - walking at my own expense . " the landlady have rapidly re - use 
 the formula she keep on hand for intruder before she recognize that 
 the newcomer be Tess . 

 even to her mother 's gaze the girl 's young feature look sadly 
 out of place amid the alcoholic vapour which float here as 
 no unsuitable medium for wrinkle middle - age ; and hardly be a 
 reproachful flash from Tess 's dark eye need to make her father 
 and mother rise from their seat , hastily finish their ale , and 
 descend the stair behind she , Mrs Rolliver 's caution follow 
 their footstep . 

 " no noise , please , if ye'll be so good , my dear ; or I mid lose my 
 licend , and be summons'd , and I do not   know what all ! ' Night t'ye ! " 

 they go home together , Tess hold one arm of her father , and Mrs 
 Durbeyfield the other . he have , in truth , drunk very little - not a 
 fourth of the quantity which a systematic tippler could carry to 
 church on a Sunday afternoon without a hitch in his easting or 
 genuflection ; but the weakness of Sir John 's constitution make 
 mountain of his petty sin in this kind . on reach the fresh 
 air he be sufficiently unsteady to incline the row of three at one 
 moment as if they be march to London , and at another as if they 
 be march to Bath - which produce a comical effect , frequent 
 enough in family on nocturnal homegoing ; and , like most comical 
 effect , not quite so comic after all . the two woman valiantly 
 disguise these force excursion and countermarch as well as they 
 could from Durbeyfield , their cause , and from Abraham , and from 
 themselves ; and so they approach by degree their own door , the 
 head of the family burst suddenly into his former refrain as he 
 draw near , as if to fortify his soul at sight of the smallness of 
 his present residence - 

 " I have   get a fam - ily vault at Kingsbere ! " 

 " hush - do not   be so silly , Jacky , " say his wife . " your be not the 
 only family that be of ' count in wold day . look at the Anktells , 
 and Horseys , and the Tringhams themselves - go to seed a'most as 
 much as you - though you be big folk than they , that be true . 
 thank God , I be never of no family , and have nothing to be ashamed 
 of in that way ! " 

 " do not   you be so sure o ' that . from you nater ' tis my belief you have 
 disgrace yourself more than any o ' us , and be king and queen 
 outright at one time . " 

 Tess turn the subject by say what be far more prominent in her 
 own mind at the moment than thought of her ancestry - " I be afraid 
 father will not   be able to take the journey with the beehive to - morrow 
 so early . " 

 " I ? I shall be all right in an hour or two , " say Durbeyfield . 


 it be eleven o'clock before the family be all in bed , and 
 two o'clock next morning be the late hour for start with 
 the beehive if they be to be deliver to the retailer in 
 Casterbridge before the Saturday market begin , the way thither lie 
 by bad road over a distance of between twenty and thirty mile , and 
 the horse and waggon being of the slow . at half - past one Mrs 
 Durbeyfield come into the large bedroom where Tess and all her 
 little brother and sister sleep . 

 " the poor man can not   go , " she say to her eld daughter , whose great 
 eye have open the moment her mother 's hand touch the door . 

 Tess sit up in bed , lose in a vague interspace between a dream and 
 this information . 

 " but somebody must go , " she reply . " it be late for the hive 
 already . swarm will soon be over for the year ; and it we put off 
 take them till next week 's market the call for them will be past , and 
 they will be throw on our hand . " 

 Mrs Durbeyfield look unequal to the emergency . " some young feller , 
 perhaps , would go ? one of they who be so much after dance with 
 ' ee yesterday , " she presently suggest . 

 " o no - I would not   have it for the world ! " declare Tess proudly . 
 " and let everybody know the reason - such a thing to be ashamed 
 of ! I think I could go if Abraham could go with I to kip I 
 company . " 

 her mother at length agree to this arrangement . little Abraham be 
 arouse from his deep sleep in a corner of the same apartment , and 
 make to put on his clothe while still mentally in the other world . 
 meanwhile Tess have hastily dress herself ; and the twain , lighting 
 a lantern , go out to the stable . the rickety little waggon be 
 already laden , and the girl lead out the horse , Prince , only a degree 
 less rickety than the vehicle . 

 the poor creature look wonderingly round at the night , at the 
 lantern , at their two figure , as if he could not believe that at 
 that hour , when every live thing be intend to be in shelter and 
 at rest , he be call upon to go out and labour . they put a stock 
 of candle - end into the lantern , hang the latter to the off - side of 
 the load , and direct the horse onward , walk at his shoulder at 
 first during the uphill part of the way , in order not to overload 
 an animal of so little vigour . to cheer themselves as well as they 
 could , they make an artificial morning with the lantern , some bread 
 and butter , and their own conversation , the real morning be far 
 from come . Abraham , as he more fully awake   for he have move in a 
 sort of trance so far , begin to talk of the strange shape assume 
 by the various dark object against the sky ; of this tree that look 
 like a rag tiger spring from a lair ; of that which resemble a 
 giant 's head . 

 when they have pass the little town of Stourcastle , dumbly somnolent 
 under its thick brown thatch , they reach high ground . still 
 high , on their left , the elevation call Bulbarrow , or bealbarrow , 
 well - nigh the high in South Wessex , swell into the sky , 
 engirdle by its earthen trench . from hereabout the long road be 
 fairly level for some distance onward . they mount in front of the 
 waggon , and Abraham grow reflective . 

 " Tess ! " he say in a preparatory tone , after a silence . 

 " yes , Abraham . " 

 " bain't   you glad that we have   become gentlefolk ? " 

 " not particular glad . " 

 " but you be glad that you ' m go to marry a gentleman ? " 

 " what ? " say Tess , lift her face . 

 " that our great relation will help ' ee to marry a gentleman . " 

 " I ? our great relation ? we have no such relation . what have put 
 that into your head ? " 

 " I hear them talk about it up at Rolliver 's when I go to find 
 father . there be a rich lady of our family out at Trantridge , and 
 mother say that if you claim kin with the lady , she would put ' ee in 
 the way of marry a gentleman . " 

 his sister become abruptly still , and lapse into a pondering 
 silence . Abraham talk on , rather for the pleasure of utterance 
 than for audition , so that his sister 's abstraction be of no 
 account . he leant back against the hive , and with upturned face 
 make observation on the star , whose cold pulse be beat 
 amid the black hollow above , in serene dissociation from these two 
 wisps of human life . he ask how far away those twinkler be , 
 and whether God be on the other side of they . but ever and anon 
 his childish prattle recur to what impress his imagination 
 even more deeply than the wonder of creation . if Tess be make 
 rich by marry a gentleman , would she have money enough to buy a 
 spyglass so large that it would draw the star as near to she as 
 Nettlecombe - Tout ? 

 the renew subject , which seem to have impregnate the whole 
 family , fill Tess with impatience . 

 " never mind that now ! " she exclaim . 

 " do you say the star be world , Tess ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " all like ours ? " 

 " I do not   know ; but I think so . they sometimes seem to be like the 
 apple on our stubbard - tree . Most of they splendid and sound - a few 
 blighted . " 

 " which do we live on - a splendid one or a blighted one ? " 

 " a blighted one . " 

 " ' tis very unlucky that we do not   pitch on a sound one , when there 
 be so many more of them ! " 

 " yes . " 

 " be it like that REALLY , Tess ? " say Abraham , turn to her much 
 impressed , on reconsideration of this rare information . " how would 
 it have be if we have pitch on a sound one ? " 

 " well , father would not   have cough and creep about as he do , 
 and would not   have get too tipsy to go on this journey ; and mother 
 would not   have be always wash , and never get finish . " 

 " and you would have be a rich lady ready - make , and not have have to 
 be make rich by marry a gentleman ? " 

 " o Aby , do not   - do not   talk of that any more ! " 

 leave to his reflection Abraham soon grow drowsy . Tess be not 
 skilful in the management of a horse , but she think that she could 
 take upon herself the entire conduct of the load for the present and 
 allow Abraham to go to sleep if he wish to do so . she make he a 
 sort of nest in front of the hive , in such a manner that he could 
 not fall , and , take the rein into her own hand , jog on as 
 before . 

 Prince require but slight attention , lack energy for superfluous 
 movement of any sort . with no long a companion to distract she , 
 Tess fall more deeply into reverie than ever , her back lean 
 against the hive . the mute procession past her shoulder of tree 
 and hedge become attach to fantastic scene outside reality , and 
 the occasional heave of the wind become the sigh of some immense sad 
 soul , conterminous with the universe in space , and with history in 
 time . 

 then , examine the mesh of event in her own life , she seem to see 
 the vanity of her father 's pride ; the gentlemanly suitor await 
 herself in her mother 's fancy ; to see he as a grimacing personage , 
 laugh at her poverty and her shroud knightly ancestry . 
 everything grow more and more extravagant , and she no long know how 
 time pass . a sudden jerk shake she in her seat , and Tess awake 
 from the sleep into which she , too , have fall . 

 they be a long way far on than when she have lose consciousness , 
 and the waggon have stop . a hollow groan , unlike anything she have 
 ever hear in her life , come from the front , follow by a shout of 
 " Hoi there ! " 

 the lantern hang at her waggon have go out , but another be 
 shin in her face - much bright than her own have be . something 
 terrible have happen . the harness be entangle with an object 
 which block the way . 

 in consternation Tess jump down , and discover the dreadful truth . 
 the groan have proceed from her father 's poor horse Prince . the 
 morning mail - cart , with its two noiseless wheel , speed along 
 these lane like an arrow , as it always do , have drive into her slow 
 and unlighted equipage . the pointed shaft of the cart have enter 
 the breast of the unhappy Prince like a sword , and from the wound his 
 life 's blood be spout in a stream , and fall with a hiss into 
 the road . 

 in her despair Tess spring forward and put her hand upon the hole , 
 with the only result that she become splash from face to skirt with 
 the crimson drop . then she stand helplessly look on . Prince 
 also stand firm and motionless as long as he could ; till he suddenly 
 sink down in a heap . 

 by this time the mail - cart man have join she , and begin drag and 
 unharness the hot form of Prince . but he be already dead , and , 
 see that nothing more could be do immediately , the mail - cart man 
 return to his own animal , which be uninjured . 

 " you be on the wrong side , " he say . " I be bind to go on with the 
 mail - bag , so that the good thing for you to do be bide here with 
 your load . I will send somebody to help you as soon as I can . it be 
 get daylight , and you have nothing to fear . " 

 he mount and speed on his way ; while Tess stand and wait . the 
 atmosphere turn pale , the bird shake themselves in the hedge , 
 arise , and twitter ; the lane show all its white feature , and 
 Tess show her , still whiter . the huge pool of blood in front of 
 she be already assume the iridescence of coagulation ; and when the 
 sun rise a hundred prismatic hue be reflect from it . Prince lie 
 alongside , still and stark ; his eye half open , the hole in his chest 
 look scarcely large enough to have let out all that have animate 
 he . 

 " ' tis all my do - all mine ! " the girl cry , gaze at the 
 spectacle . " no excuse for I - none . what will mother and father 
 live on now ? Aby , Aby ! " she shake the child , who have sleep soundly 
 through the whole disaster . " we can not   go on with our load - Prince 
 be kill ! " 

 when Abraham realize all , the furrow of fifty year be 
 extemporize on his young face . 

 " why , I dance and laugh only yesterday ! " she go on to herself . 
 " to think that I be such a fool ! " 

 " ' tis because we be on a blighted star , and not a sound one , be not 
 it , Tess ? " murmur Abraham through his tear . 

 in silence they wait through an interval which seem endless . at 
 length a sound , and an approach object , prove to they that the 
 driver of the mail - car have be as good as his word . a farmer 's 
 man from near Stourcastle come up , lead a strong cob . he be 
 harness to the waggon of beehive in the place of Prince , and the 
 load take on towards Casterbridge . 

 the evening of the same day see the empty waggon reach again the 
 spot of the accident . Prince have lain there in the ditch since the 
 morning ; but the place of the blood - pool be still visible in the 
 middle of the road , though scratch and scrap over by pass 
 vehicle . all that be leave of Prince be now hoist into the 
 waggon he have formerly haul , and with his hoof in the air , and his 
 shoe shin in the set sunlight , he retrace the eight or nine 
 mile to Marlott . 

 Tess have go back early . how to break the news be more than she 
 could think . it be a relief to her tongue to find from the face of 
 her parent that they already know of their loss , though this do not 
 lessen the self - reproach which she continue to heap upon herself for 
 her negligence . 

 but the very shiftlessness of the household render the misfortune 
 a less terrifying one to they than it would have be to a thriving 
 family , though in the present case it mean ruin , and in the other it 
 would only have mean inconvenience . in the Durbeyfield countenance 
 there be nothing of the red wrath that would have burn upon the 
 girl from parent more ambitious for her welfare . nobody blame Tess 
 as she blame herself . 

 when it be discover that the knacker and tanner would give only a 
 very few shilling for Prince 's carcase because of his decrepitude , 
 Durbeyfield rise to the occasion . 

 " no , " say he stoically , " I will not   sell his old body . when we 
 d'Urbervilles be knight in the land , we do not   sell our charger 
 for cat 's meat . let them keep their shilling ! he've   serve I well 
 in his lifetime , and I will not   part from he now . " 

 he work hard the next day in dig a grave for Prince in the 
 garden than he have work for month to grow a crop for his family . 
 when the hole be ready , Durbeyfield and his wife tie a rope round 
 the horse and drag he up the path towards it , the child 
 follow in funeral train . Abraham and ' Liza - Lu sob , Hope and 
 Modesty discharge their grief in loud blare which echo from the 
 wall ; and when Prince be tumble in they gather round the grave . 
 the bread - winner have be take away from they ; what would they do ? 

 " be he go to heaven ? " ask Abraham , between the sob . 

 then Durbeyfield begin to shovel in the earth , and the child cry 
 anew . all except Tess . her face be dry and pale , as though she 
 regard herself in the light of a murderess . 



 V 


 the haggle business , which have mainly depend on the horse , become 
 disorganized forthwith . distress , if not penury , loom in the 
 distance . Durbeyfield be what be locally call a slack - twist 
 fellow ; he have good strength to work at time ; but the time could 
 not be rely on to coincide with the hour of requirement ; and , 
 have be unaccustomed to the regular toil of the day - labourer , 
 he be not particularly persistent when they do so coincide . 

 Tess , meanwhile , as the one who have drag her parent into this 
 quagmire , be silently wonder what she could do to help they out 
 of it ; and then her mother broach her scheme . 

 " we must take the up wi ' the down , Tess , " say she ; " and never 
 could your high blood have be find out at a more call - for 
 moment . you must try your friend . do ye know that there be a very 
 rich Mrs d'Urberville live on the outskirt o ' the Chase , who must 
 be our relation ? you must go to she and claim kin , and ask for some 
 help in our trouble . " 

 " I should not   care to do that , " say Tess . " if there be such a lady , 
 ' twould be enough for we if she be friendly - not to expect she to 
 give we help . " 

 " you could win her round to do anything , my dear . besides , perhaps 
 there be more in it than you know of . I have   hear what I have   hear , 
 good - now . " 

 the oppressive sense of the harm she have do lead Tess to be more 
 deferential than she might otherwise have be to the maternal 
 wish ; but she could not understand why her mother should find such 
 satisfaction in contemplate an enterprise of , to she , such doubtful 
 profit . her mother might have make inquiry , and have discover 
 that this Mrs d'Urberville be a lady of unequalled virtue and 
 charity . but Tess 's pride make the part of poor relation one of 
 particular distaste to she . 

 " I would rather try to get work , " she murmur . 

 " Durbeyfield , you can settle it , " say his wife , turn to where he 
 sit in the background . " if you say she ought to go , she will go . " 

 " I do not   like my child go and make themselves beholden to 
 strange kin , " murmur he . " I be the head of the noble branch o ' 
 the family , and I ought to live up to it . " 

 his reason for stay away be bad to Tess than her own 
 objection to go . " well , as I kill the horse , mother , " she say 
 mournfully , " I suppose I ought to do something . I do not   mind go 
 and see she , but you must leave it to I about ask for help . 
 and do not   go think about she make a match for I - it be silly . " 

 " very well say , Tess ! " observe her father sententiously . 

 " who say I have such a thought ? " ask Joan . 

 " I fancy it be in your mind , mother . but I will go . " 

 rise early next day she walk to the hill - town call Shaston , 
 and there take advantage of a van which twice in the week run from 
 Shaston eastward to Chaseborough , pass near Trantridge , the parish 
 in which the vague and mysterious Mrs d'Urberville have her residence . 

 Tess Durbeyfield 's route on this memorable morning lie amid the 
 north - eastern undulation of the Vale in which she have be bear , and 
 in which her life have unfold . the Vale of Blackmoor be to her the 
 world , and its inhabitant the race thereof . from the gate and 
 stile of Marlott she have look down its length in the wonder 
 day of infancy , and what have be mystery to she then be not 
 much less than mystery to she now . she have see daily from her 
 chamber - window tower , village , faint white mansion ; above all , 
 the town of Shaston stand majestically on its height ; its window 
 shin like lamp in the evening sun . she have hardly ever visit 
 the place , only a small tract even of the Vale and its environ be 
 know to she by close inspection . much less have she be far outside 
 the valley . every contour of the surround hill be as personal 
 to she as that of her relative ' face ; but for what lie beyond , her 
 judgment be dependent on the teaching of the village school , where 
 she have hold a lead place at the time of her leaving , a year or 
 two before this date . 

 in those early day she have be much love by other of her own 
 sex and age , and have use to be see about the village as one of 
 three - all nearly of the same year - walk home from school side 
 by side ; tess the middle one - in a pink print pinafore , of a finely 
 reticulated pattern , wear over a stuff frock that have lose its 
 original colour for a nondescript tertiary - marching on upon long 
 stalky leg , in tight stocking which have little ladder - like hole 
 at the knee , tear by kneel in the road and bank in search of 
 vegetable and mineral treasure ; her then earth - colour hair hang 
 like pot - hook ; the arm of the two outside girl rest round the 
 waist of Tess ; her arm on the shoulder of the two supporter . 

 as Tess grow old , and begin to see how matter stand , she feel 
 quite a Malthusian towards her mother for thoughtlessly give she so 
 many little sister and brother , when it be such a trouble to nurse 
 and provide for they . her mother 's intelligence be that of a happy 
 child : Joan Durbeyfield be simply an additional one , and that not 
 the eld , to her own long family of waiter on Providence . 

 however , Tess become humanely beneficent towards the small one , 
 and to help they as much as possible she use , as soon as she leave 
 school , to lend a hand at haymake or harvesting on neighbouring 
 farm ; or , by preference , at milking or butter - make process , 
 which she have learn when her father have own cow ; and be 
 deft - finger it be a kind of work in which she excel . 

 every day seem to throw upon her young shoulder more of the 
 family burden , and that Tess should be the representative of the 
 Durbeyfields at the d'Urberville mansion come as a thing of course . 
 in this instance it must be admit that the Durbeyfields be 
 put their fair side outward . 

 she alight from the van at Trantridge Cross , and ascend on foot 
 a hill in the direction of the district know as the Chase , on the 
 border of which , as she have be inform , Mrs d'Urberville 's seat , 
 the Slopes , would be find . it be not a manorial home in the 
 ordinary sense , with field , and pasture , and a grumble farmer , 
 out of whom the owner have to squeeze an income for himself and his 
 family by hook or by crook . it be more , far more ; a country - house 
 build for enjoyment pure and simple , with not an acre of troublesome 
 land attach to it beyond what be require for residential 
 purpose , and for a little fancy farm keep in hand by the owner , and 
 tend by a bailiff . 

 the crimson brick lodge come first in sight , up to its eave in dense 
 evergreen . Tess think this be the mansion itself till , pass 
 through the side wicket with some trepidation , and onward to a point 
 at which the drive take a turn , the house proper stand in full view . 
 it be of recent erection - indeed almost new - and of the same rich 
 red colour that form such a contrast with the evergreen of the 
 lodge . far behind the corner of the house - which rise like a 
 geranium bloom against the subdue colour around - stretch the soft 
 azure landscape of the Chase - a truly venerable tract of forest land , 
 one of the few remain woodland in England of undoubted primaeval 
 date , wherein Druidical mistletoe be still find on aged oak , and 
 where enormous yew - tree , not plant by the hand of man grow as 
 they have grow when they be pollard for bow . all this sylvan 
 antiquity , however , though visible from the Slopes , be outside the 
 immediate boundary of the estate . 

 everything on this snug property be bright , thriving , and well keep ; 
 acre of glass - house stretch down the incline to the copse at 
 their foot . everything look like money - like the last coin issue 
 from the Mint . the stable , partly screen by austrian pine 
 and evergreen oak , and fit with every late appliance , be 
 as dignified as Chapels - of - ease . on the extensive lawn stand an 
 ornamental tent , its door be towards she . 

 Simple Tess Durbeyfield stand at gaze , in a half - alarm attitude , 
 on the edge of the gravel sweep . her foot have bring she onward to 
 this point before she have quite realize where she be ; and now all 
 be contrary to her expectation . 

 " I think we be an old family ; but this be all new ! " she say , in 
 her artlessness . she wish that she have not fall in so readily 
 with her mother 's plan for " claim kin , " and have endeavour to 
 gain assistance nearer home . 


 the d'Urbervilles - or Stoke - d'Urbervilles , as they at first call 
 themselves - who own all this , be a somewhat unusual family to 
 find in such an old - fashioned part of the country . Parson Tringham 
 have speak truly when he say that our shambling John Durbeyfield be 
 the only really lineal representative of the old d'Urberville family 
 exist in the county , or near it ; he might have add , what he know 
 very well , that the Stoke - d'Urbervilles be no more d'Urbervilles of 
 the true tree then he be himself . yet it must be admit that this 
 family form a very good stock whereon to regraft a name which sadly 
 want such renovation . 

 when old Mr Simon Stoke , latterly deceased , have make his fortune as 
 an honest merchant   some say money - lender   in the North , he decide 
 to settle as a county man in the South of England , out of hail of 
 his business district ; and in do this he feel the necessity of 
 recommence with a name that would not too readily identify he with 
 the smart tradesman of the past , and that would be less commonplace 
 than the original bald , stark word . con for an hour in the 
 British Museum the page of work devote to extinct , half - extinct , 
 obscure , and ruin family appertain to the quarter of England 
 in which he propose to settle , he consider that d'Urberville 
 look and sound as well as any of they : and d'Urberville 
 accordingly be annex to his own name for himself and his heir 
 eternally . yet he be not an extravagant - minded man in this , and in 
 construct his family tree on the new basis be duly reasonable in 
 frame his inter - marriage and aristocratic link , never insert 
 a single title above a rank of strict moderation . 

 of this work of imagination poor Tess and her parent be naturally 
 in ignorance - much to their discomfiture ; indeed , the very 
 possibility of such annexation be unknown to they ; who suppose 
 that , though to be well - favour might be the gift of fortune , a 
 family name come by nature . 

 Tess still stand hesitate like a bather about to make his plunge , 
 hardly know whether to retreat or to persevere , when a figure come 
 forth from the dark triangular door of the tent . it be that of a 
 tall young man , smoking . 

 he have an almost swarthy complexion , with full lip , badly mould , 
 though red and smooth , above which be a well - groom black moustache 
 with curl point , though his age could not be more than three- or 
 four - and - twenty . despite the touch of barbarism in his contour , 
 there be a singular force in the gentleman 's face , and in his bold 
 rolling eye . 

 " well , my Beauty , what can I do for you ? " say he , come forward . 
 and perceive that she stand quite confound : " never mind I . I be 
 Mr d'Urberville . have you come to see I or my mother ? " 

 this embodiment of a d'Urberville and a namesake differ even more 
 from what Tess have expect than the house and ground have differ . 
 she have dream of an aged and dignified face , the sublimation of 
 all the d'Urberville lineament , furrow with incarnate memory 
 represent in hieroglyphic the century of her family 's and 
 England 's history . but she screw herself up to the work in hand , 
 since she could not get out of it , and answer - 

 " I come to see your mother , sir . " 

 " I be afraid you can not see she - she be an invalid , " reply the 
 present representative of the spurious house ; for this be Mr Alec , 
 the only son of the lately deceased gentleman . " can not I answer your 
 purpose ? what be the business you wish to see she about ? " 

 " it be not   business - it be - I can hardly say what ! " 

 " pleasure ? " 

 " oh no . why , sir , if I tell you , it will seem - " 

 Tess 's sense of a certain ludicrousness in her errand be now 
 so strong that , notwithstanding her awe of he , and her general 
 discomfort at be here , her rosy lip curve towards a smile , 
 much to the attraction of the swarthy Alexander . 

 " it be so very foolish , " she stammer ; " I fear can not   tell you ! " 

 " never mind ; I like foolish thing . try again , my dear , " say he 
 kindly . 

 " Mother ask I to come , " Tess continue ; " and , indeed , I be in the 
 mind to do so myself likewise . but I do not think it would be like 
 this . I come , sir , to tell you that we be of the same family as 
 you . " 

 " Ho ! poor relation ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " stoke ? " 

 " no ; d'Urbervilles . " 

 " ay , ay ; I mean d'Urbervilles . " 

 " our name be wear away to Durbeyfield ; but we have several proof 
 that we be d'Urbervilles . antiquarian hold we be , - and - and we 
 have an old seal , mark with a ramp lion on a shield , and a 
 castle over he . and we have a very old silver spoon , round in the 
 bowl like a little ladle , and mark with the same castle . but it 
 be so worn that mother use it to stir the pea - soup . " 

 " a castle argent be certainly my crest , " say he blandly . " and my 
 arm a lion rampant . " 

 " and so mother say we ought to make ourselves beknown to you - as 
 we have   lose our horse by a bad accident , and be the old branch o ' 
 the family . " 

 " very kind of your mother , I be sure . and I , for one , do not   regret 
 her step . " Alec look at Tess as he speak , in a way that make she 
 blush a little . " and so , my pretty girl , you have   come on a friendly 
 visit to we , as relation ? " 

 " I suppose I have , " falter Tess , look uncomfortable again . 

 " well - there be no harm in it . where do you live ? what be you ? " 

 she give he brief particular ; and respond to further inquiry 
 tell he that she be intend to go back by the same carrier who 
 have bring she . 

 " it be a long while before he return past Trantridge Cross . 
 suppose we walk round the ground to pass the time , my pretty Coz ? " 

 Tess wish to abridge her visit as much as possible ; but the young 
 man be press , and she consent to accompany he . he conduct 
 she about the lawn , and flower - bed , and conservatory ; and thence 
 to the fruit - garden and greenhouse , where he ask she if she like 
 strawberry . 

 " yes , " say Tess , " when they come . " 

 " they be already here . " D'Urberville begin gather specimen 
 of the fruit for she , hand they back to she as he stoop ; and , 
 presently , select a specially fine product of the " British Queen " 
 variety , he stand up and hold it by the stem to her mouth . 

 " no - no ! " she say quickly , put her finger between his hand and 
 her lip . " I would rather take it in my own hand . " 

 " nonsense ! " he insist ; and in a slight distress she part her lip 
 and take it in . 

 they have spend some time wander desultorily thus , Tess eat in 
 a half - please , half - reluctant state whatever d'Urberville offer 
 she . when she could consume no more of the strawberry he fill 
 her little basket with they ; and then the two pass round to the 
 rose - tree , whence he gather blossom and give she to put in her 
 bosom . she obey like one in a dream , and when she could affix no 
 more he himself tuck a bud or two into her hat , and heap she 
 basket with other in the prodigality of his bounty . at last , 
 look at his watch , he say , " now , by the time you have have 
 something to eat , it will be time for you to leave , if you want to 
 catch the carrier to Shaston . come here , and I will see what grub I 
 can find . " 

 Stoke d'Urberville take she back to the lawn and into the tent , where 
 he leave she , soon reappear with a basket of light luncheon , which 
 he put before her himself . it be evidently the gentleman 's wish not 
 to be disturb in this pleasant tete - a - tete by the servantry . 

 " do you mind my smoking ? " he ask . 

 " oh , not at all , sir . " 

 he watch she pretty and unconscious munching through the skein of 
 smoke that pervade the tent , and Tess Durbeyfield do not divine , 
 as she innocently look down at the rose in her bosom , that there 
 behind the blue narcotic haze be potentially the " tragic mischief " 
 of her drama - one who stand fair to be the blood - red ray in the 
 spectrum of her young life . she have an attribute which amount 
 to a disadvantage just now ; and it be this that cause Alec 
 d'Urberville 's eye to rivet themselves upon she . it be a 
 luxuriance of aspect , a fulness of growth , which make she appear more 
 of a woman than she really be . she have inherit the feature from 
 her mother without the quality it denote . it have trouble her mind 
 occasionally , till her companion have say that it be a fault which 
 time would cure . 

 she soon have finish her lunch . " now I be go home , sir , " she 
 say , rise . 

 " and what do they call you ? " he ask , as he accompany she along 
 the drive till they be out of sight of the house . 

 " Tess Durbeyfield , down at Marlott . " 

 " and you say your people have lose their horse ? " 

 " i - kill he ! " she answer , her eye fill with tear as she 
 give particular of Prince 's death . " and I do not   know what to do 
 for father on account of it ! " 

 " I must think if I can not do something . my mother must find a berth 
 for you . but , Tess , no nonsense about ' d'urberville ' ; - ' Durbeyfield ' 
 only , you know - quite another name . " 

 " I wish for no well , sir , " say she with something of dignity . 

 for a moment - only for a moment - when they be in the turning of the 
 drive , between the tall rhododendron and conifer , before the lodge 
 become visible , he incline his face towards she as if - but , no : he 
 think well of it , and let she go . 

 thus the thing begin . have she perceive this meeting 's import she 
 might have ask why she be doom to be see and covet that day 
 by the wrong man , and not by some other man , the right and desire 
 one in all respect - as nearly as humanity can supply the right 
 and desire ; yet to he who amongst her acquaintance might have 
 approximate to this kind , she be but a transient impression , half 
 forget . 

 in the ill - judge execution of the well - judge plan of thing the 
 call seldom produce the comer , the man to love rarely coincide with 
 the hour for love . nature do not often say " see ! " to her poor 
 creature at a time when see can lead to happy doing ; or reply 
 " here ! " to a body 's cry of " where ? " till the hide - and - seek have become 
 an irksome , outworn game . we may wonder whether at the acme and 
 summit of the human progress these anachronism will be correct by 
 a fine intuition , a close interaction of the social machinery than 
 that which now jolt we round and along ; but such completeness be not 
 to be prophesy , or even conceive as possible . enough that in the 
 present case , as in million , it be not the two half of a perfect 
 whole that confront each other at the perfect moment ; a missing 
 counterpart wander independently about the earth wait in 
 crass obtuseness till the late time come . out of which maladroit 
 delay sprang anxiety , disappointment , shock , catastrophe , and 
 pass - strange destiny . 

 when d'Urberville get back to the tent he sit down astride on a 
 chair , reflect , with a pleased gleam in his face . then he break 
 into a loud laugh . 

 " well , I be damned ! what a funny thing ! ha - ha - ha ! and what a crumby 
 girl ! " 



 VI 


 Tess go down the hill to Trantridge Cross , and inattentively wait 
 to take her seat in the van return from Chaseborough to Shaston . 
 she do not know what the other occupant say to she as she enter , 
 though she answer they ; and when they have start anew she ride 
 along with an inward and not an outward eye . 

 one among her fellow - traveller address she more pointedly than 
 any have speak before : " why , you be quite a posy ! and such rose in 
 early June ! " 

 then she become aware of the spectacle she present to their 
 surprised vision : rose at her breast ; rose in her hat ; rose 
 and strawberry in her basket to the brim . she blush , and 
 say confusedly that the flower have be give to she . when the 
 passenger be not look she stealthily remove the more prominent 
 bloom from her hat and place they in the basket , where she cover 
 they with her handkerchief . then she fall to reflect again , and 
 in look downwards a thorn of the rose remain in her breast 
 accidentally prick her chin . like all the cottager in Blackmoor 
 Vale , Tess be steep in fancy and prefigurative superstition ; 
 she think this an ill omen - the first she have notice that day . 

 the van travel only so far as Shaston , and there be several 
 mile of pedestrian descent from that mountain - town into the vale to 
 Marlott . her mother have advise she to stay here for the night , at 
 the house of a cottage - woman they know , if she should feel too tired 
 to come on ; and this Tess do , not descend to her home till the 
 follow afternoon . 

 when she enter the house she perceive in a moment from her 
 mother 's triumphant manner that something have occur in the 
 interim . 

 " oh yes ; I know all about it ! I tell ' ee it would be all right , and 
 now ' tis prove ! " 

 " since I have   be away ? what have ? " say Tess rather wearily . 

 her mother survey the girl up and down with arch approval , and go 
 on banteringly : " so you have   bring them round ! " 

 " how do you know , mother ? " 

 " I have   have a letter . " 

 Tess then remember that there would have be time for this . 

 " they say - Mrs d'Urberville say - that she want you to look after a 
 little fowl - farm which be her hobby . but this be only her artful way 
 of get ' ee there without raise your hope . she be go to own 
 ' ee as kin - that be the meaning o't . " 

 " but I do not   see she . " 

 " you zid somebody , I suppose ? " 

 " I see her son . " 

 " and do he own ' ee ? " 

 " well - he call I Coz . " 

 " An ' I know it ! Jacky - he call her Coz ! " cry Joan to her 
 husband . " well , he speak to his mother , of course , and she do want 
 ' ee there . " 

 " but I do not   know that I be apt at tend fowl , " say the dubious 
 Tess . 

 " then I do not   know who be apt . you have   be'n bear in the business , and 
 bring up in it . they that be bear in a business always know more 
 about it than any ' prentice . besides , that be only just a show of 
 something for you to do , that you midn't   feel beholden . " 

 " I do not   altogether think I ought to go , " say Tess thoughtfully . 
 " who write the letter ? will you let I look at it ? " 

 " Mrs d'Urberville write it . here it be . " 

 the letter be in the third person , and briefly inform Mrs 
 Durbeyfield that her daughter 's service would be useful to that lady 
 in the management of her poultry - farm , that a comfortable room would 
 be provide for she if she could come , and that the wage would be on 
 a liberal scale if they like she . 

 " oh - that be all ! " say Tess . 

 " you could not   expect she to throw her arm round ' ee , an ' to kiss and 
 to coll ' ee all at once . " 

 Tess look out of the window . 

 " I would rather stay here with father and you , " she say . 

 " but why ? " 

 " I would rather not tell you why , mother ; indeed , I do not   quite know 
 why . " 

 a week afterwards she come in one evening from an unavaile search 
 for some light occupation in the immediate neighbourhood . her idea 
 have be to get together sufficient money during the summer to 
 purchase another horse . hardly have she cross the threshold before 
 one of the child dance across the room , say , " the gentleman 's 
 be here ! " 

 her mother hasten to explain , smile break from every inch of 
 her person . Mrs d'Urberville 's son have call on horseback , have 
 be rid by chance in the direction of Marlott . he have wish 
 to know , finally , in the name of his mother , if Tess could really 
 come to manage the old lady 's fowl - farm or not ; the lad who have 
 hitherto superintend the bird have prove untrustworthy . " Mr 
 d'Urberville say you must be a good girl if you be at all as you 
 appear ; he know you must be worth your weight in gold . he be very 
 much interested in ' ee - truth to tell . " 

 Tess seem for the moment really please to hear that she have win 
 such high opinion from a stranger when , in her own esteem , she have 
 sink so low . 

 " it be very good of he to think that , " she murmur ; " and if I be 
 quite sure how it would be live there , I would go any - when . " 

 " he be a mighty handsome man ! " 

 " I do not   think so , " say Tess coldly . 

 " well , there be your chance , whether or no ; and I be sure he wear a 
 beautiful diamond ring ! " 

 " yes , " say little Abraham , brightly , from the window - bench ; " and 
 I seed it ! and it do twinkle when he put his hand up to his 
 mistarsher . mother , why do our grand relation keep on put his 
 hand up to his mistarsher ? " 

 " Hark at that child ! " cry Mrs Durbeyfield , with parenthetic 
 admiration . 

 " perhaps to show his diamond ring , " murmur Sir John , dreamily , from 
 his chair . 

 " I will think it over , " say Tess , leave the room . 

 " well , she be make a conquest o ' the young branch of we , straight 
 off , " continue the matron to her husband , " and she be a fool if she 
 do not   follow it up . " 

 " I do not   quite like my child go away from home , " say the 
 haggler . " as the head of the family , the rest ought to come to I . " 

 " but do let she go , Jacky , " coax his poor witless wife . " he be 
 strike wi ' her - you can see that . he call she Coz ! he will marry 
 she , most likely , and make a lady of she ; and then she will be what 
 her forefather be . " 

 John Durbeyfield have more conceit than energy or health , and this 
 supposition be pleasant to he . 

 " well , perhaps that be what young Mr d'Urberville mean , " he admit ; 
 " and sure enough he mid have serious thought about improve his 
 blood by link on to the old line . Tess , the little rogue ! and 
 have she really pay them a visit to such an end as this ? " 

 meanwhile Tess be walk thoughtfully among the gooseberry - bush 
 in the garden , and over Prince 's grave . when she come in her mother 
 pursue her advantage . 

 " well , what be you go to do ? " she ask . 

 " I wish I have see Mrs d'Urberville , " say Tess . 

 " I think you mid as well settle it . then you will see she soon 
 enough . " 

 her father cough in his chair . 

 " I do not   know what to say ! " answer the girl restlessly . " it be for 
 you to decide . I kill the old horse , and I suppose I ought to do 
 something to get ye a new one . but - but - I do not   quite like Mr 
 d'Urberville be there ! " 

 the child , who have make use of this idea of Tess be take up by 
 their wealthy kinsfolk   which they imagine the other family to be 
 as a species of dolorifuge after the death of the horse , begin to cry 
 at Tess 's reluctance , and tease and reproach she for hesitate . 

 " Tess will not   go - o - o and be make a la - a - dy of ! - no , she say she 
 will - o - on't ! " they wail , with square mouth . " and we shall not   have a 
 nice new horse , and lot o ' golden money to buy fairling ! and tess 
 will not   look pretty in her well cloze no mo - o - ore ! " 

 her mother chime in to the same tune : a certain way she have of 
 make her labour in the house seem heavy than they be by 
 prolong they indefinitely , also weigh in the argument . her 
 father alone preserve an attitude of neutrality . 

 " I will go , " say Tess at last . 

 her mother could not repress her consciousness of the nuptial vision 
 conjure up by the girl 's consent . 

 " that be right ! for such a pretty maid as ' tis , this be a fine 
 chance ! " 

 Tess smile crossly . 

 " I hope it be a chance for earn money . it be no other kind of 
 chance . you have well say nothing of that silly sort about parish . " 

 Mrs Durbeyfield do not promise . she be not quite sure that she do 
 not feel proud enough , after the visitor 's remark , to say a good 
 deal . 

 thus it be arrange ; and the young girl write , agree to be ready 
 to set out on any day on which she might be require . she be duly 
 inform that Mrs d'Urberville be glad of her decision , and that a 
 spring - cart should be send to meet she and her luggage at the top 
 of the Vale on the day after the morrow , when she must hold herself 
 prepare to start . Mrs d'Urberville 's handwriting seem rather 
 masculine . 

 " a cart ? " murmur Joan Durbeyfield doubtingly . " it might have be 
 a carriage for her own kin ! " 

 have at last take her course Tess be less restless and 
 abstract , go about her business with some self - assurance in the 
 thought of acquire another horse for her father by an occupation 
 which would not be onerous . she have hop to be a teacher at the 
 school , but the fate seem to decide otherwise . be mentally 
 old than her mother she do not regard Mrs Durbeyfield 's 
 matrimonial hope for she in a serious aspect for a moment . the 
 light - minded woman have be discover good match for her daughter 
 almost from the year of her birth . 



 VII 


 on the morning appoint for her departure Tess be awake before 
 dawn - at the marginal minute of the dark when the grove be still 
 mute , save for one prophetic bird who sing with a clear - voice 
 conviction that he at least know the correct time of day , the rest 
 preserve silence as if equally convinced that he be mistaken . she 
 remain upstairs packing till breakfast - time , and then come down in 
 her ordinary week - day clothe , her Sunday apparel be carefully 
 fold in her box . 

 her mother expostulate . " you will never set out to see your folk 
 without dress up more the dand than that ? " 

 " but I be go to work ! " say Tess . 

 " well , yes , " say Mrs Durbeyfield ; and in a private tone , " at first 
 there mid be a little pretence o't ... but I think it will be wise 
 of ' ee to put your good side outward , " she add . 

 " very well ; I suppose you know well , " reply Tess with calm 
 abandonment . 

 and to please her parent the girl put herself quite in Joan 's hand , 
 say serenely - " do what you like with I , mother . " 

 Mrs Durbeyfield be only too delighted at this tractability . 
 first she fetch a great basin , and wash Tess 's hair with such 
 thoroughness that when dry and brush it look twice as much as 
 at other time . she tie it with a broad pink ribbon than usual . 
 then she put upon she the white frock that Tess have wear at the 
 club - walking , the airy fulness of which , supplement her enlarged 
  coiffure , impart to her develop figure an amplitude which 
 belie her age , and might cause she to be estimate as a woman when 
 she be not much more than a child . 

 " I declare there be a hole in my stocking - heel ! " say Tess . 

 " never mind hole in your stocking - they do not   speak ! when I be a 
 maid , so long as I have a pretty bonnet the devil might ha ' find I 
 in heel . " 

 her mother 's pride in the girl 's appearance lead she to step back , 
 like a painter from his easel , and survey her work as a whole . 

 " you must zee yourself ! " she cry . " it be much well than you be 
 t'other day . " 

 as the look - glass be only large enough to reflect a very small 
 portion of Tess 's person at one time , Mrs Durbeyfield hang a black 
 cloak outside the casement , and so make a large reflector of the 
 pane , as it be the will not of bedeck cottager to do . after this 
 she go downstairs to her husband , who be sit in the low 
 room . 

 " I will tell ' ee what ' tis , Durbeyfield , " say she exultingly ; " he will 
 never have the heart not to love she . but whatever you do , do not   zay 
 too much to Tess of his fancy for she , and this chance she have get . 
 she be such an odd maid that it mid zet she against he , or against 
 go there , even now . if all go well , I shall certainly be for 
 make some return to pa'son at Stagfoot Lane for tell we - dear , 
 good man ! " 

 however , as the moment for the girl 's set out draw nigh , when the 
 first excitement of the dressing have pass off , a slight misgiving 
 find place in Joan Durbeyfield 's mind . it prompt the matron to 
 say that she would walk a little way - as far as to the point where 
 the acclivity from the valley begin its first steep ascent to 
 the outer world . at the top Tess be go to be meet with the 
 spring - cart send by the Stoke - d'Urbervilles , and her box have already 
 be wheel ahead towards this summit by a lad with truck , to be in 
 readiness . 

 see their mother put on her bonnet , the young child clamour 
 to go with she . 

 " I do want to walk a little - way wi ' Sissy , now she be go to marry 
 our gentleman - cousin , and wear fine cloze ! " 

 " now , " say Tess , flush and turn quickly , " I will hear no more o ' 
 that ! mother , how could you ever put such stuff into their head ? " 

 " go to work , my dear , for our rich relation , and help get enough 
 money for a new horse , " say Mrs Durbeyfield pacifically . 

 " Goodbye , father , " say Tess , with a lumpy throat . 

 " Goodbye , my maid , " say Sir John , raise his head from his breast 
 as he suspend his nap , induce by a slight excess this morning in 
 honour of the occasion . " well , I hope my young friend will like such 
 a comely sample of his own blood . and tell'n , Tess , that be sink , 
 quite , from our former grandeur , I will sell he the title - yes , sell 
 it - and at no onreasonable figure . " 

 " not for less than a thousand pound ! " cry Lady Durbeyfield . 

 " tell'n - I will take a thousand pound . well , I will take less , when 
 I come to think o't . he will adorn it well than a poor lammicken 
 feller like myself can . tell'n he shall hae it for a hundred . but 
 I will not   stand upon trifle - tell'n he shall hae it for fifty - for 
 twenty pound ! yes , twenty pound - that be the low . Dammy , family 
 honour be family honour , and I will not   take a penny less ! " 

 Tess 's eye be too full and her voice too choke to utter the 
 sentiment that be in she . she turn quickly , and go out . 

 so the girl and their mother all walk together , a child on each 
 side of Tess , hold her hand and look at she meditatively from 
 time to time , as at one who be about to do great thing ; her mother 
 just behind with the small ; the group form a picture of honest 
 beauty flank by innocence , and back by simple - souled vanity . 
 they follow the way till they reach the beginning of the ascent , 
 on the crest of which the vehicle from Trantridge be to receive she , 
 this limit have be fix to save the horse the labour of the last 
 slope . far away behind the first hill the cliff - like dwelling 
 of Shaston break the line of the ridge . nobody be visible in the 
 elevated road which skirt the ascent save the lad whom they have 
 send on before they , sit on the handle of the barrow that 
 contain all Tess 's worldly possession . 

 " Bide here a bit , and the cart will soon come , no doubt , " say Mrs 
 Durbeyfield . " yes , I see it yonder ! " 

 it have come - appear suddenly from behind the forehead of the 
 near upland , and stop beside the boy with the barrow . her 
 mother and the child thereupon decide to go no far , and 
 bid they a hasty goodbye , Tess bend her step up the hill . 

 they see her white shape draw near to the spring - cart , on which she 
 box be already place . but before she have quite reach it another 
 vehicle shoot out from a clump of tree on the summit , come round the 
 bend of the road there , pass the luggage - cart , and halt beside 
 Tess , who look up as if in great surprise . 

 her mother perceive , for the first time , that the second vehicle be 
 not a humble conveyance like the first , but a spick - and - span gig or 
 dog - cart , highly varnished and equip . the driver be a young man 
 of three- or four - and - twenty , with a cigar between his tooth ; wear 
 a dandy cap , drab jacket , breech of the same hue , white neckcloth , 
 stick - up collar , and brown driving - glove - in short , he be the 
 handsome , horsey young buck who have visit Joan a week or two before 
 to get her answer about Tess . 

 Mrs Durbeyfield clap her hand like a child . then she look 
 down , then star again . could she be deceive as to the meaning of 
 this ? 

 " be dat the gentleman - kinsman who will make Sissy a lady ? " ask the 
 young child . 

 meanwhile the muslined form of Tess could be see stand still , 
 undecided , beside this turn - out , whose owner be talk to she . 
 her seem indecision be , in fact , more than indecision : it be 
 misgive . she would have prefer the humble cart . the young 
 man dismount , and appear to urge she to ascend . she turn she 
 face down the hill to her relative , and regard the little group . 
 something seem to quicken she to a determination ; possibly the 
 thought that she have kill Prince . she suddenly step up ; he 
 mount beside she , and immediately whip on the horse . in a 
 moment they have pass the slow cart with the box , and disappear 
 behind the shoulder of the hill . 

 directly Tess be out of sight , and the interest of the matter as a 
 drama be at an end , the little one ' eye fill with tear . the 
 young child say , " I wish poor , poor Tess be not   go away to be a 
 lady ! " and , lower the corner of his lip , burst out cry . the 
 new point of view be infectious , and the next child do likewise , 
 and then the next , till the whole three of they wail loud . 

 there be tear also in Joan Durbeyfield 's eye as she turn to 
 go home . but by the time she have get back to the village she be 
 passively trust to the favour of accident . however , in bed that 
 night she sigh , and her husband ask she what be the matter . 

 " oh , I do not   know exactly , " she say . " I be think that perhaps 
 it would ha ' be well if Tess have not go . " 

 " ought not   ye to have think of that before ? " 

 " well , ' tis a chance for the maid - still , if ' twere the doing again , 
 I would not   let she go till I have find out whether the gentleman 
 be really a good - hearted young man and choice over she as his 
 kinswoman . " 

 " yes , you ought , perhaps , to ha ' do that , " snore Sir John . 

 Joan Durbeyfield always manage to find consolation somewhere : " well , 
 as one of the genuine stock , she ought to make her way with ' en , if 
 she play her trump card aright . and if he do not   marry she afore he 
 will after . for that he be all afire wi ' love for she any eye can 
 see . " 

 " what be her trump card ? her d'Urberville blood , you mean ? " 

 " no , stupid ; her face - as ' twas mine . " 



 VIII 


 have mount beside she , Alec d'Urberville drive rapidly along 
 the crest of the first hill , chat compliment to Tess as they 
 go , the cart with her box be leave far behind . rise still , an 
 immense landscape stretch around they on every side ; behind , the 
 green valley of her birth , before , a gray country of which she know 
 nothing except from her first brief visit to Trantridge . thus they 
 reach the verge of an incline down which the road stretch in a 
 long straight descent of nearly a mile . 

 ever since the accident with her father 's horse Tess Durbeyfield , 
 courageous as she naturally be , have be exceedingly timid on 
 wheel ; the least irregularity of motion startle she . she begin to 
 get uneasy at a certain recklessness in her conductor 's driving . 

 " you will go down slow , sir , I suppose ? " she say with attempt 
 unconcern . 

 D'Urberville look round upon she , nip his cigar with the tip of 
 his large white centre - tooth , and allow his lip to smile slowly of 
 themselves . 

 " why , Tess , " he answer , after another whiff or two , " it be not   a 
 brave bounce girl like you who ask that ? why , I always go down at 
 full gallop . there be nothing like it for raise your spirit . " 

 " but perhaps you need not now ? " 

 " ah , " he say , shake his head , " there be two to be reckon with . 
 it be not I alone . Tib have to be consider , and she have a very 
 queer temper . " 

 " who ? " 

 " why , this mare . I fancy she look round at I in a very grim way 
 just then . do not   you notice it ? " 

 " do not   try to frighten I , sir , " say Tess stiffly . 

 " well , I do not . if any live man can manage this horse I can : I 
 will not   say any live man can do it - but if such have the power , I be 
 he . " 

 " why do you have such a horse ? " 

 " ah , well may you ask it ! it be my fate , I suppose . Tib have kill 
 one chap ; and just after I buy she she nearly kill I . and 
 then , take my word for it , I nearly kill she . but she be touchy 
 still , very touchy ; and one 's life be hardly safe behind she 
 sometimes . " 

 they be just begin to descend ; and it be evident that the 
 horse , whether of her own will or of his   the latter be the more 
 likely , know so well the reckless performance expect of she that 
 she hardly require a hint from behind . 

 down , down , they speed , the wheel hum like a top , the dog - cart 
 rock right and leave , its axis acquire a slightly oblique set 
 in relation to the line of progress ; the figure of the horse rise 
 and fall in undulation before they . sometimes a wheel be off 
 the ground , it seem , for many yard ; sometimes a stone be send 
 spinning over the hedge , and flinty spark from the horse 's hoof 
 outshone the daylight . the aspect of the straight road enlarge with 
 their advance , the two bank divide like a splitting stick ; one 
 rush past at each shoulder . 

 the wind blow through Tess 's white muslin to her very skin , and she 
 wash hair fly out behind . she be determined to show no open 
 fear , but she clutch d'Urberville 's rein - arm . 

 " do not   touch my arm ! we shall be throw out if you do ! hold on 
 round my waist ! " 

 she grasp his waist , and so they reach the bottom . 

 " safe , thank God , in spite of your fooling ! " say she , her face on 
 fire . 

 " tess - fie ! that be temper ! " say d'Urberville . 

 " ' tis truth . " 

 " well , you need not let go your hold of I so thanklessly the moment 
 you feel yourself our of danger . " 

 she have not consider what she have be do ; whether he be man 
 or woman , stick or stone , in her involuntary hold on he . recover 
 her reserve , she sit without reply , and thus they reach the 
 summit of another declivity . 

 " now then , again ! " say d'Urberville . 

 " no , no ! " say Tess . " show more sense , do , please . " 

 " but when people find themselves on one of the high point in the 
 county , they must get down again , " he retort . 

 he loosen rein , and away they go a second time . D'Urberville 
 turn his face to she as they rock , and say , in playful raillery : 
 " now then , put your arm round my waist again , as you do before , my 
 Beauty . " 

 " never ! " say Tess independently , hold on as well as she could 
 without touch he . 

 " let I put one little kiss on those holmberry lip , Tess , or even on 
 that warm cheek , and I will stop - on my honour , I will ! " 

 Tess , surprise beyond measure , slide far back still on her seat , 
 at which he urge the horse anew , and rock she the more . 

 " will nothing else do ? " she cry at length , in desperation , her 
 large eye star at he like those of a wild animal . this dress 
 she up so prettily by her mother have apparently be to lamentable 
 purpose . 

 " nothing , dear Tess , " he reply . 

 " oh , I do not   know - very well ; I do not   mind ! " she pant miserably . 

 he draw rein , and as they slow he be on the point of imprint 
 the desire salute , when , as if hardly yet aware of her own modesty , 
 she dodge aside . his arm be occupy with the rein there be 
 leave he no power to prevent her manoeuvre . 

 " now , damn it - I will break both our neck ! " swear she capriciously 
 passionate companion . " so you can go from your word like that , you 
 young witch , can you ? " 

 " very well , " say Tess , " I will not move since you be so determined ! 
 but I - think you would be kind to I , and protect I , as my 
 kinsman ! " 

 " Kinsman be hang ! now ! " 

 " but I do not   want anybody to kiss I , sir ! " she implore , a big 
 tear begin to roll down her face , and the corner of her mouth 
 tremble in her attempt not to cry . " and I would not   ha ' come if 
 I have know ! " 

 he be inexorable , and she sit still , and d'Urberville give she the 
 kiss of mastery . no soon have he do so than she flush with 
 shame , take out her handkerchief , and wipe the spot on her cheek 
 that have be touch by his lip . his ardour be nettle at the 
 sight , for the act on her part have be unconsciously do . 

 " you be mighty sensitive for a cottage girl ! " say the young man . 

 Tess make no reply to this remark , of which , indeed , she do not 
 quite comprehend the drift , unheede the snub she have administer 
 by her instinctive rub upon her cheek . she have , in fact , undo the 
 kiss , as far as such a thing be physically possible . with a dim 
 sense that he be vex she look steadily ahead as they trot on 
 near Melbury Down and Wingreen , till she see , to her consternation , 
 that there be yet another descent to be undergone . 

 " you shall be make sorry for that ! " he resume , his injure tone 
 still remain , as he flourish the whip anew . " unless , that is , 
 you agree willingly to let I do it again , and no handkerchief . " 

 she sigh . " very well , sir ! " she say . " oh - let I get my hat ! " 

 at the moment of speak her hat have blow off into the road , their 
 present speed on the upland be by no mean slow . D'Urberville 
 pull up , and say he would get it for she , but Tess be down on the 
 other side . 

 she turn back and pick up the article . 

 " you look pretty with it off , upon my soul , if that be possible , " he 
 say , contemplate she over the back of the vehicle . " now then , up 
 again ! what be the matter ? " 

 the hat be in place and tie , but Tess have not step forward . 

 " no , sir , " she say , reveal the red and ivory of her mouth as her 
 eye light in defiant triumph ; " not again , if I know it ! " 

 " what - you will not   get up beside I ? " 

 " no ; I shall walk . " 

 " ' tis five or six mile yet to Trantridge . " 

 " I do not   care if ' tis dozen . besides , the cart be behind . " 

 " you artful hussy ! now , tell I - do not   you make that hat blow off 
 on purpose ? I will swear you do ! " 

 her strategic silence confirm his suspicion . 

 then d'Urberville cursed and swear at she , and call she everything 
 he could think of for the trick . turn the horse suddenly he try 
 to drive back upon she , and so hem she in between the gig and the 
 hedge . but he could not do this short of injure she . 

 " you ought to be ashamed of yourself for use such wicked word ! " 
 cry Tess with spirit , from the top of the hedge into which she have 
 scramble . " I do not   like ' ee at all ! I hate and det you ! I will 
 go back to mother , I will ! " 

 D'Urberville 's bad temper clear up at sight of her ; and he laugh 
 heartily . 

 " well , I like you all the well , " he say . " come , let there be 
 peace . I will never do it any more against your will . my life upon 
 it now ! " 

 still Tess could not be induce to remount . she do not , however , 
 object to his keep his gig alongside she ; and in this manner , at 
 a slow pace , they advance towards the village of Trantridge . from 
 time to time d'Urberville exhibit a sort of fierce distress at 
 the sight of the tramping he have drive she to undertake by his 
 misdemeanour . she might in truth have safely trust he now ; but he 
 have forfeit her confidence for the time , and she keep on the ground 
 progressing thoughtfully , as if wonder whether it would be wise 
 to return home . her resolve , however , have be take , and it seem 
 vacillate even to childishness to abandon it now , unless for graver 
 reason . how could she face her parent , get back her box , and 
 disconcert the whole scheme for the rehabilitation of her family on 
 such sentimental ground ? 

 a few minute later the chimney of the Slopes appear in view , and 
 in a snug nook to the right the poultry - farm and cottage of tess ' 
 destination . 



 IX 


 the community of fowl to which Tess have be appoint as 
 supervisor , purveyor , nurse , surgeon , and friend make its 
 headquarters in an old thatched cottage stand in an enclosure that 
 have once be a garden , but be now a trampled and sand square . 
 the house be overrun with ivy , its chimney be enlarge by the 
 bough of the parasite to the aspect of a ruin tower . the low 
 room be entirely give over to the bird , who walk about they 
 with a proprietary air , as though the place have be build by 
 themselves , and not by certain dusty copyholder who now lay east 
 and west in the churchyard . the descendant of these bygone owner 
 feel it almost as a slight to their family when the house which have 
 so much of their affection , have cost so much of their forefather ' 
 money , and have be in their possession for several generation 
 before the d'Urbervilles come and build here , be indifferently 
 turn into a fowl - house by Mrs Stoke - d'Urberville as soon as the 
 property fall into hand accord to law . " ' twas good enough for 
 Christians in grandfather 's time , " they say . 

 the room wherein dozen of infant have wail at their nursing now 
 resound with the tapping of nascent chick . distracted hen in 
 coop occupy spot where formerly stand chair support sedate 
 agriculturist . the chimney - corner and once - blaze hearth be now 
 fill with invert beehive , in which the hen lay their egg ; 
 while out of door the plot that each succeed householder have 
 carefully shape with his spade be tear by the cock in wildest 
 fashion . 

 the garden in which the cottage stand be surround by a wall , and 
 could only be enter through a door . 

 when Tess have occupy herself about an hour the next morning in 
 alter and improve the arrangement , accord to her skilled 
 idea as the daughter of a professed poulterer , the door in the wall 
 open and a servant in white cap and apron enter . she have come 
 from the manor - house . 

 " Mrs d'Urberville want the fowl as usual , " she say ; but perceive 
 that Tess do not quite understand , she explain , " Mis'ess be a old 
 lady , and blind . " 

 " blind ! " say Tess . 

 almost before she misgive at the news could find time to shape 
 itself she take , under her companion 's direction , two of the 
 most beautiful of the Hamburghs in her arm , and follow the 
 maid - servant , who have likewise take two , to the adjacent mansion , 
 which , though ornate and impose , show trace everywhere on this 
 side that some occupant of its chamber could bend to the love of 
 dumb creature - feather float within view of the front , and 
 hen - coop standing on the grass . 

 in a sitting - room on the ground - floor , ensconce in an armchair with 
 she back to the light , be the owner and mistress of the estate , a 
 white - haired woman of not more than sixty , or even less , wear a 
 large cap . she have the mobile face frequent in those whose sight 
 have decay by stage , have be laboriously strive after , and 
 reluctantly let go , rather than the stagnant mien apparent in person 
 long sightless or bear blind . Tess walk up to this lady with she 
 feather charge - one sit on each arm . 

 " ah , you be the young woman come to look after my bird ? " say Mrs 
 d'Urberville , recognize a new footstep . " I hope you will be kind 
 to they . my bailiff tell I you be quite the proper person . 
 well , where be they ? ah , this be Strut ! but he be hardly so 
 lively to - day , be he ? he be alarmed at be handle by a stranger , 
 I suppose . and Phena too - yes , they be a little frightened - be not 
 you , dear ? but they will soon get use to you . " 

 while the old lady have be speak Tess and the other maid , in 
 obedience to her gesture , have place the fowl severally in her lap , 
 and she have feel they over from head to tail , examine their beak , 
 their comb , the mane of the cock , their wing , and their claw . 
 her touch enable she to recognize they in a moment , and to discover 
 if a single feather be crippled or draggle . she handle their 
 crop , and know what they have eat , and if too little or too much ; 
 her face enact a vivid pantomime of the criticism pass in her 
 mind . 

 the bird that the two girl have bring in be duly return to the 
 yard , and the process be repeat till all the pet cock and hen 
 have be submit to the old woman - Hamburghs , Bantams , Cochins , 
 brahma , dorking , and such other sort as be in fashion just 
 then - her perception of each visitor be seldom at fault as she 
 receive the bird upon her knee . 

 it remind Tess of a Confirmation , in which Mrs d'Urberville be the 
 bishop , the fowl the young people present , and herself and the 
 maid - servant the parson and curate of the parish bring they up . 
 at the end of the ceremony Mrs d'Urberville abruptly ask Tess , 
 wrinkling and twitch her face into undulation , " can you whistle ? " 

 " Whistle , Ma'am ? " 

 " yes , whistle tune . " 

 Tess could whistle like most other country - girl , though the 
 accomplishment be one which she do not care to profess in genteel 
 company . however , she blandly admit that such be the fact . 

 " then you will have to practise it every day . I have a lad who do it 
 very well , but he have leave . I want you to whistle to my bullfinch ; 
 as I can not see they , I like to hear they , and we teach them air 
 that way . tell she where the cage be , Elizabeth . you must begin 
 to - morrow , or they will go back in their piping . they have be 
 neglect these several day . " 

 " Mr d'Urberville whistle to them this morning , ma'am , " say 
 Elizabeth . 

 " he ! Pooh ! " 

 the old lady 's face crease into furrow of repugnance , and she make 
 no further reply . 

 thus the reception of Tess by her fancied kinswoman terminate , and 
 the bird be take back to their quarter . the girl 's surprise at 
 Mrs d'Urberville 's manner be not great ; for since see the size of 
 the house she have expect no more . but she be far from be aware 
 that the old lady have never hear a word of the so - call kinship . 
 she gather that no great affection flow between the blind woman 
 and her son . but in that , too , she be mistaken . Mrs d'Urberville 
 be not the first mother compel to love her offspring resentfully , 
 and to be bitterly fond . 


 in spite of the unpleasant initiation of the day before , tess 
 incline to the freedom and novelty of her new position in the 
 morning when the sun shine , now that she be once instal there ; 
 and she be curious to test her power in the unexpected direction 
 ask of she , so as to ascertain her chance of retain her post . 
 as soon as she be alone within the walled garden she sit herself 
 down on a coop , and seriously screw up her mouth for the 
 long - neglect practice . she find her former ability to have 
 degenerate to the production of a hollow rush of wind through the 
 lip , and no clear note at all . 

 she remain fruitlessly blow and blow , wonder how she 
 could have so grow out of the art which have come by nature , till 
 she become aware of a movement among the ivy - bough which cloak 
 the garden - wall no less then the cottage . look that way she 
 behold a form spring from the coping to the plot . it be alec 
 d'Urberville , whom she have not set eye on since he have conduct 
 she the day before to the door of the gardener 's cottage where she 
 have lodging . 

 " upon my honour ! " cry he , " there be never before such a beautiful 
 thing in Nature or art as you look , ' Cousin ' Tess   ' Cousin ' have a 
 faint ring of mockery . I have be watch you from over the 
 wall - sit like IM - patience on a monument , and pout up that 
 pretty red mouth to whistle shape , and whooing and whooing , and 
 privately swear , and never be able to produce a note . why , 
 you be quite cross because you can not   do it . " 

 " I may be cross , but I do not   swear . " 

 " ah ! I understand why you be try - those bully ! my mother 
 want you to carry on their musical education . how selfish of she ! 
 as if attend to these curst cock and hen here be not enough 
 work for any girl . I would flatly refuse , if I be you . " 

 " but she want I particularly to do it , and to be ready by to - morrow 
 morning . " 

 " do she ? well then - I will give you a lesson or two . " 

 " oh no , you will not ! " say Tess , withdraw towards the door . 

 " nonsense ; I do not   want to touch you . see - I will stand on this side 
 of the wire - netting , and you can keep on the other ; so you may feel 
 quite safe . now , look here ; you screw up your lip too harshly . 
 there ' tis - so . " 

 he suit the action to the word , and whistle a line of " take , o 
 take those lip away . " but the allusion be lose upon Tess . 

 " now try , " say d'Urberville . 

 she attempt to look reserve ; her face put on a sculptural 
 severity . but he persist in his demand , and at last , to get rid of 
 he , she do put up her lip as direct for produce a clear note ; 
 laugh distressfully , however , and then blush with vexation that 
 she have laugh . 

 he encourage she with " try again ! " 

 Tess be quite serious , painfully serious by this time ; and she 
 try - ultimately and unexpectedly emit a real round sound . 
 the momentary pleasure of success get the well of she ; her eye 
 enlarge , and she involuntarily smile in his face . 

 " that be it ! now I have start you - you will go on beautifully . 
 there - I say I would not come near you ; and , in spite of such 
 temptation as never before fall to mortal man , I will keep my 
 word ... tess , do you think my mother a queer old soul ? " 

 " I do not   know much of she yet , sir . " 

 " you will find she so ; she must be , to make you learn to whistle to her 
 bullfinch . I be rather out of her book just now , but you will be 
 quite in favour if you treat her live - stock well . good morning . if 
 you meet with any difficulty and want help here , do not   go to the 
 bailiff , come to I . " 


 it be in the economy of this regime that Tess Durbeyfield have 
 undertake to fill a place . her first day 's experience be fairly 
 typical of those which follow through many succeed day . a 
 familiarity with Alec d'Urberville 's presence - which that young man 
 carefully cultivate in she by playful dialogue , and by jestingly 
 call she his cousin when they be alone - remove much of her 
 original shyness of he , without , however , implant any feeling 
 which could engender shyness of a new and tenderer kind . but she be 
 more pliable under his hand than a mere companionship would have 
 make she , owe to her unavoidable dependence upon his mother , and , 
 through that lady 's comparative helplessness , upon he . 

 she soon find that whistle to the bullfinch in Mrs 
 d'Urberville 's room be no such onerous business when she have 
 regain the art , for she have catch from her musical mother numerous 
 air that suit those songster admirably . a far more satisfactory 
 time than when she practise in the garden be this whistle by the 
 cage each morning . unrestraine by the young man 's presence she 
 throw up her mouth , put her lip near the bar , and pip away in 
 easeful grace to the attentive listener . 

 Mrs d'Urberville sleep in a large four - post bedstead hang with heavy 
 damask curtain , and the bullfinch occupy the same apartment , 
 where they flit about freely at certain hour , and make little 
 white spot on the furniture and upholstery . once while Tess be at 
 the window where the cage be range , give her lesson as usual , 
 she think she hear a rustling behind the bed . the old lady be 
 not present , and turn round the girl have an impression that 
 the toe of a pair of boot be visible below the fringe of the 
 curtain . thereupon her whistle become so disjointed that the 
 listener , if such there be , must have discover her suspicion of 
 his presence . she search the curtain every morning after that , 
 but never find anybody within they . Alec d'Urberville have evidently 
 think well of his freak to terrify she by an ambush of that kind . 



 X 


 every village have its idiosyncrasy , its constitution , often its own 
 code of morality . the levity of some of the young woman in and 
 about Trantridge be mark , and be perhaps symptomatic of the 
 choice spirit who rule the Slopes in that vicinity . the place have 
 also a more abide defect ; it drink hard . the staple conversation 
 on the farm around be on the uselessness of save money ; and 
 smock - frock arithmetician , lean on their plough or hoe , would 
 enter into calculation of great nicety to prove that parish relief 
 be a full provision for a man in his old age than any which could 
 result from saving out of their wage during a whole lifetime . 

 the chief pleasure of these philosopher lie in go every Saturday 
 night , when work be do , to Chaseborough , a decayed market - town two 
 or three mile distant ; and , return in the small hour of the next 
 morning , to spend Sunday in sleep off the dyspeptic effect of the 
 curious compound sell to they as beer by the monopolizer of the 
 once - independent inn . 

 for a long time Tess do not join in the weekly pilgrimage . but 
 under pressure from matron not much old than herself - for a 
 field - man 's wage be as high at twenty - one as at forty , marriage 
 be early here - tess at length consent to go . her first experience 
 of the journey afford she more enjoyment than she have expect , 
 the hilariousness of the other be quite contagious after her 
 monotonous attention to the poultry - farm all the week . she go again 
 and again . be graceful and interesting , stand moreover on the 
 momentary threshold of womanhood , her appearance draw down upon she 
 some sly regard from lounger in the street of Chaseborough ; hence , 
 though sometimes her journey to the town be make independently , she 
 always search for her fellow at nightfall , to have the protection 
 of their companionship homeward . 

 this have go on for a month or two when there come a Saturday in 
 September , on which a fair and a market coincide ; and the pilgrim 
 from Trantridge seek double delight at the inn on that account . 
 Tess 's occupation make she late in set out , so that her comrade 
 reach the town long before she . it be a fine September evening , 
 just before sunset , when yellow light struggle with blue shade in 
 hairlike line , and the atmosphere itself form a prospect without 
 aid from more solid object , except the innumerable wing insect 
 that dance in it . through this low - light mistiness Tess walk 
 leisurely along . 

 she do not discover the coincidence of the market with the fair till 
 she have reach the place , by which time it be close upon dusk . her 
 limited marketing be soon complete ; and then as usual she begin to 
 look about for some of the Trantridge cottager . 

 at first she could not find they , and she be inform that most of 
 they have go to what they call a private little jig at the house 
 of a hay - trusser and peat - dealer who have transaction with their 
 farm . he live in an out - of - the - way nook of the townlet , and in 
 try to find she course thither her eye fall upon Mr d'Urberville 
 standing at a street corner . 

 " what - my beauty ? you here so late ? " he say . 

 she tell he that she be simply wait for company homeward . 

 " I will see you again , " say he over her shoulder as she go on down 
 the back lane . 

 approach the hay - trusser , she could hear the fiddled note of 
 a reel proceeding from some building in the rear ; but no sound of 
 dancing be audible - an exceptional state of thing for these part , 
 where as a rule the stamping drown the music . the front door be 
 open she could see straight through the house into the garden at the 
 back as far as the shade of night would allow ; and nobody appear 
 to her knock , she traverse the dwelling and go up the path to the 
 outhouse whence the sound have attract she . 

 it be a windowless erection use for storage , and from the open door 
 there float into the obscurity a mist of yellow radiance , which at 
 first Tess think to be illuminate smoke . but on draw nearer 
 she perceive that it be a cloud of dust , light by candle within the 
 outhouse , whose beam upon the haze carry forward the outline of 
 the doorway into the wide night of the garden . 

 when she come close and look in she behold indistinct form 
 race up and down to the figure of the dance , the silence of their 
 footfall arise from their be overshoe in ' scroff " - that be 
 to say , the powdery residuum from the storage of peat and other 
 product , the stirring of which by their turbulent foot create the 
 nebulosity that involve the scene . through this float , fusty 
  debris of peat and hay , mix with the perspiration and warmth of 
 the dancer , and form together a sort of vegeto - human pollen , the 
 mute fiddle feebly push their note , in marked contrast to the 
 spirit with which the measure be tread out . they cough as 
 they dance , and laugh as they cough . of the rush couple 
 there could barely be discern more than the high light - the 
 indistinctness shape they to satyrs clasp nymph - a multiplicity 
 of Pans whirl a multiplicity of syrinx ; Lotis attempt to 
 elude Priapus , and always fail . 

 at interval a couple would approach the doorway for air , and 
 the haze no long veil their feature , the demigod resolve 
 themselves into the homely personality of her own next - door 
 neighbour . could Trantridge in two or three short hour have 
 metamorphose itself thus madly ! 

 some Sileni of the throng sit on bench and hay - truss by the wall ; 
 and one of they recognize she . 

 " the maid do not   think it respectable to dance at the Flower - de - luce , " 
 he explain . " they do not   like to let everybody see which be their 
 fancy - man . besides , the house sometimes shut up just when their 
 jint begin to get grease . so we come here and send out for 
 liquor . " 

 " but when be any of you go home ? " ask Tess with some anxiety . 

 " now - a'most directly . this be all but the last jig . " 

 she wait . the reel draw to a close , and some of the party be in 
 the mind of start . but other would not , and another dance be 
 form . this surely would end it , think Tess . but it merge in 
 yet another . she become restless and uneasy ; yet , have wait so 
 long , it be necessary to wait long ; on account of the fair the 
 road be dot with rove character of possibly ill intent ; and , 
 though not fearful of measurable danger , she fear the unknown . 
 have she be near Marlott she would have have less dread . 

 " do not   ye be nervous , my dear good soul , " expostulate , between his 
 cough , a young man with a wet face and his straw hat so far back 
 upon his head that the brim encircle it like the nimbus of a saint . 
 " what be yer hurry ? to - morrow be Sunday , thank God , and we can sleep 
 it off in church - time . now , have a turn with I ? " 

 she do not abhor dancing , but she be not go to dance here . the 
 movement grow more passionate : the fiddler behind the luminous 
 pillar of cloud now and then vary the air by play on the wrong 
 side of the bridge or with the back of the bow . but it do not 
 matter ; the pant shape spin onwards . 

 they do not vary their partner if their inclination be to stick 
 to previous one . change partner simply mean that a satisfactory 
 choice have not as yet be arrive at by one or other of the pair , 
 and by this time every couple have be suitably match . it be then 
 that the ecstasy and the dream begin , in which emotion be the matter 
 of the universe , and matter but an adventitious intrusion likely to 
 hinder you from spin where you want to spin . 

 suddenly there be a dull thump on the ground : a couple have fall , 
 and lie in a mixed heap . the next couple , unable to check its 
 progress , come topple over the obstacle . an inner cloud of dust 
 rise around the prostrate figure amid the general one of the room , 
 in which a twitch entanglement of arm and leg be discernible . 

 " you shall catch it for this , my gentleman , when you get home ! " burst 
 in female accent from the human heap - those of the unhappy partner 
 of the man whose clumsiness have cause the mishap ; she happen 
 also to be his recently marry wife , in which assortment there be 
 nothing unusual at Trantridge as long as any affection remain 
 between wed couple ; and , indeed , it be not uncustomary in their 
 later life , to avoid make odd lot of the single people between 
 whom there might be a warm understanding . 

 a loud laugh from behind Tess 's back , in the shade of the garden , 
 unite with the titter within the room . she look round , and see 
 the red coal of a cigar : Alec d'Urberville be stand there alone . 
 he beckon to she , and she reluctantly retreat towards he . 

 " well , my Beauty , what be you do here ? " 

 she be so tired after her long day and her walk that she confide 
 her trouble to he - that she have be wait ever since he see she 
 to have their company home , because the road at night be strange to 
 she . " but it seem they will never leave off , and I really think I 
 will wait no long . " 

 " certainly do not . I have only a saddle - horse here to - day ; but come 
 to the Flower - de - luce , and I will hire a trap , and drive you home with 
 I . " 

 Tess , though flatter , have never quite get over her original 
 mistrust of he , and , despite their tardiness , she prefer to walk 
 home with the work - folk . so she answer that she be much oblige 
 to he , but would not trouble he . " I have say that I will wait for 
 them , and they will expect I to now . " 

 " very well , Miss Independence . please yourself ... then I shall not 
 hurry ... my good Lord , what a kick - up they be have there ! " 

 he have not put himself forward into the light , but some of they 
 have perceive he , and his presence lead to a slight pause and a 
 consideration of how the time be fly . as soon as he have re - lit 
 a cigar and walk away the trantridge people begin to collect 
 themselves from amid those who have come in from other farm , and 
 prepare to leave in a body . their bundle and basket be gather 
 up , and half an hour later , when the clock - chime sound a quarter 
 past eleven , they be straggle along the lane which lead up the 
 hill towards their home . 

 it be a three - mile walk , along a dry white road , make whiter 
 to - night by the light of the moon . 

 Tess soon perceive as she walk in the flock , sometimes with this 
 one , sometimes with that , that the fresh night air be produce 
 staggering and serpentine course among the man who have partake too 
 freely ; some of the more careless woman also be wander in their 
 gait - to wit , a dark virago , Car Darch , dub Queen of Spades , till 
 lately a favourite of d'Urberville 's ; Nancy , her sister , nickname 
 the Queen of Diamonds ; and the young married woman who have already 
 tumble down . yet however terrestrial and lumpy their appearance 
 just now to the mean unglamoured eye , to themselves the case be 
 different . they follow the road with a sensation that they be 
 soar along in a support medium , possess of original and 
 profound thought , themselves and surround nature form 
 an organism of which all the part harmoniously and joyously 
 interpenetrate each other . they be as sublime as the moon and 
 star above they , and the moon and star be as ardent as they . 

 Tess , however , have undergo such painful experience of this kind in 
 her father 's house that the discovery of their condition spoil the 
 pleasure she be begin to feel in the moonlight journey . yet she 
 stick to the party , for reason above give . 

 in the open highway they have progress in scatter order ; but now 
 their route be through a field - gate , and the foremost find a 
 difficulty in open it , they close up together . 

 this lead pedestrian be car the queen of Spades , who carry a 
 wicker - basket contain her mother 's grocery , her own drapery , 
 and other purchase for the week . the basket be large and heavy , 
 Car have place it for convenience of porterage on the top of her 
 head , where it ride on in jeopardized balance as she walk with 
 arm akimbo . 

 " well - whatever be that a - creep down thy back , Car Darch ? " say 
 one of the group suddenly . 

 all look at car . her gown be a light cotton print , and from the 
 back of her head a kind of rope could be see descend to some 
 distance below her waist , like a Chinaman 's queue . 

 " ' tis her hair fall down , " say another . 

 no ; it be not her hair : it be a black stream of something ooze 
 from her basket , and it glisten like a slimy snake in the cold 
 still ray of the moon . 

 " ' tis treacle , " say an observant matron . 

 treacle it be . Car 's poor old grandmother have a weakness for the 
 sweet stuff . Honey she have in plenty out of her own hive , but 
 treacle be what her soul desire , and Car have be about to give she 
 a treat of surprise . hastily lower the basket the dark girl find 
 that the vessel contain the syrup have be smash within . 

 by this time there have arise a shout of laughter at the 
 extraordinary appearance of Car 's back , which irritate the dark 
 queen into get rid of the disfigurement by the first sudden mean 
 available , and independently of the help of the scoffer . she rush 
 excitedly into the field they be about to cross , and fling 
 herself flat on she back upon the grass , begin to wipe her gown 
 as well as she could by spin horizontally on the herbage and 
 drag herself over it upon her elbow . 

 the laughter rang louder ; they cling to the gate , to the post , 
 rest on their stave , in the weakness engender by their 
 convulsion at the spectacle of car . our heroine , who have hitherto 
 hold her peace , at this wild moment could not help join in with 
 the rest . 

 it be a misfortune - in more way than one . no soon do the dark 
 queen hear the soberer rich note of Tess among those of the other 
 work - people than a long - smoulder sense of rivalry inflame she to 
 madness . she spring to her foot and closely face the object of her 
 dislike . 

 " how dar th ' laugh at I , hussy ! " she cry . 

 " I could not   really help it when t'others do , " apologize Tess , 
 still titter . 

 " ah , th'st think th ' beest everybody , dostn't , because th ' beest 
 first favourite with he just now ! but stop a bit , my lady , stop a 
 bit ! I be as good as two of such ! look here - here be at ' ee ! " 

 to Tess 's horror the dark queen begin strip off the bodice of 
 her gown - which for the add reason of its ridicule condition she 
 be only too glad to be free of - till she have bar her plump neck , 
 shoulder , and arm to the moonshine , under which they look as 
 luminous and beautiful as some Praxitelean creation , in their 
 possession of the faultless rotundity of a lusty country - girl . 
 she close her fist and square up at Tess . 

 " indeed , then , I shall not fight ! " say the latter majestically ; " and 
 if I have know you be of that sort , I would not   have so let myself 
 down as to come with such a whorage as this be ! " 

 the rather too inclusive speech bring down a torrent of 
 vituperation from other quarter upon fair Tess 's unlucky head , 
 particularly from the Queen of Diamonds , who have stand in the 
 relation to d'Urberville that Car have also be suspect of , unite 
 with the latter against the common enemy . several other woman also 
 chime in , with an animus which none of they would have be so 
 fatuous as to show but for the rollick evening they have pass . 
 thereupon , find Tess unfairly browbeat , the husband and lover 
 try to make peace by defend she ; but the result of that attempt 
 be directly to increase the war . 

 Tess be indignant and ashamed . she no long mind the loneliness 
 of the way and the lateness of the hour ; her one object be to get 
 away from the whole crew as soon as possible . she know well enough 
 that the well among they would repent of their passion next day . 
 they be all now inside the field , and she be edge back to rush 
 off alone when a horseman emerge almost silently from the corner of 
 the hedge that screen the road , and Alec d'Urberville look round 
 upon they . 

 " what the devil be all this row about , work - folk ? " he ask . 

 the explanation be not readily forthcoming ; and , in truth , he do 
 not require any . have hear their voice while yet some way off he 
 have ride creepingly forward , and learn enough to satisfy himself . 

 Tess be stand apart from the rest , near the gate . he bent over 
 towards she . " jump up behind I , " he whisper , " and we will get shoot 
 of the scream cat in a jiffy ! " 

 she feel almost ready to faint , so vivid be her sense of the crisis . 
 at almost any other moment of her life she would have refuse such 
 proffer aid and company , as she have refuse they several time 
 before ; and now the loneliness would not of itself have force she 
 to do otherwise . but come as the invitation do at the particular 
 juncture when fear and indignation at these adversary could be 
 transform by a spring of the foot into a triumph over they , she 
 abandon herself to her impulse , climb the gate , put she toe upon 
 his instep , and scramble into the saddle behind he . the pair be 
 speed away into the distant gray by the time that the contentious 
 reveller become aware of what have happen . 

 the queen of Spades forget the stain on her bodice , and stand 
 beside the Queen of Diamonds and the new - married , staggering young 
 woman - all with a gaze of fixity in the direction in which the 
 horse 's tramp be diminish into silence on the road . 

 " what be ye look at ? " ask a man who have not observe the 
 incident . 

 " Ho - ho - ho ! " laugh dark car . 

 " Hee - hee - hee ! " laugh the tippling bride , as she steady herself on 
 the arm of her fond husband . 

 " Heu - heu - heu ! " laugh dark Car 's mother , stroke her moustache as 
 she explain laconically : " out of the frying - pan into the fire ! " 

 then these child of the open air , whom even excess of alcohol 
 could scarce injure permanently , betook themselves to the field - path ; 
 and as they go there move onward with they , around the shadow of 
 each one 's head , a circle of opalized light , form by the moon 's 
 ray upon the glistening sheet of dew . each pedestrian could see 
 no halo but his or her own , which never desert the head - shadow , 
 whatever its vulgar unsteadiness might be ; but adhere to it , and 
 persistently beautify it ; till the erratic motion seem an 
 inherent part of the irradiation , and the fume of their breathing 
 a component of the night 's mist ; and the spirit of the scene , and 
 of the moonlight , and of Nature , seem harmoniously to mingle with 
 the spirit of wine . 



 XI 


 the twain canter along for some time without speech , Tess as she 
 clung to he still pant in her triumph , yet in other respect 
 dubious . she have perceive that the horse be not the spirited one 
 he sometimes rise , and feel no alarm on that score , though her seat 
 be precarious enough despite her tight hold of he . she beg he 
 to slow the animal to a walk , which alec accordingly do . 

 " neatly do , be it not , dear Tess ? " he say by and by . 

 " yes ! " say she . " I be sure I ought to be much oblige to you . " 

 " and be you ? " 

 she do not reply . 

 " Tess , why do you always dislike my kissing you ? " 

 " I suppose - because I do not   love you . " 

 " you be quite sure ? " 

 " I be angry with you sometimes ! " 

 " ah , I half fear as much . " nevertheless , Alec do not object to 
 that confession . he know that anything be well then frigidity . 
 " why have not   you tell I when I have make you angry ? " 

 " you know very well why . because I can not help myself here . " 

 " I have not   offend you often by love - making ? " 

 " you have sometimes . " 

 " how many time ? " 

 " you know as well as I - too many time . " 

 " every time I have try ? " 

 she be silent , and the horse amble along for a considerable 
 distance , till a faint luminous fog , which have hang in the hollow 
 all the evening , become general and envelop they . it seem to 
 hold the moonlight in suspension , render it more pervasive than in 
 clear air . whether on this account , or from absent - mindedness , or 
 from sleepiness , she do not perceive that they have long ago pass 
 the point at which the lane to Trantridge branch from the highway , 
 and that her conductor have not take the Trantridge track . 

 she be inexpressibly weary . she have rise at five o'clock every 
 morning of that week , have be on foot the whole of each day , and on 
 this evening have in addition walk the three mile to Chaseborough , 
 wait three hour for her neighbour without eat or drinking , 
 her impatience to start they prevent either ; she have then walk 
 a mile of the way home , and have undergo the excitement of the 
 quarrel , till , with the slow progress of their steed , it be now 
 nearly one o'clock . only once , however , be she overcome by actual 
 drowsiness . in that moment of oblivion her head sink gently against 
 he . 

 D'Urberville stop the horse , withdraw his foot from the stirrup , 
 turn sideways on the saddle , and enclose her waist with his arm to 
 support she . 

 this immediately put she on the defensive , and with one of those 
 sudden impulse of reprisal to which she be liable she give he a 
 little push from she . in his ticklish position he nearly lose his 
 balance and only just avoid roll over into the road , the horse , 
 though a powerful one , be fortunately the quiet he ride . 

 " that be devilish unkind ! " he say . " I mean no harm - only to keep 
 you from fall . " 

 she ponder suspiciously , till , think that this might after all 
 be true , she relent , and say quite humbly , " I beg your pardon , 
 sir . " 

 " I will not   pardon you unless you show some confidence in I . good 
 God ! " he burst out , " what be I , to be repulse so by a mere chit like 
 you ? for near three mortal month have you trifle with my feeling , 
 elude I , and snub I ; and I will not   stand it ! " 

 " I will leave you to - morrow , sir . " 

 " no , you will not leave I to - morrow ! will you , I ask once more , 
 show your belief in I by let I clasp you with my arm ? come , 
 between we two and nobody else , now . we know each other well ; and 
 you know that I love you , and think you the prettiest girl in the 
 world , which you be . may not   I treat you as a lover ? " 

 she draw a quick pettish breath of objection , writhe uneasily on 
 her seat , look far ahead , and murmur , " I do not   know - I wish - how 
 can I say yes or no when - " 

 he settle the matter by clasp his arm round she as he desire , 
 and Tess express no far negative . thus they sidle 
 slowly onward till it strike she they have be advance for an 
 unconscionable time - far long than be usually occupy by the 
 short journey from Chaseborough , even at this walking pace , and 
 that they be no long on hard road , but in a mere trackway . 

 " why , where be we ? " she exclaim . 

 " pass by a wood . " 

 " a wood - what wood ? surely we be quite out of the road ? " 

 " a bit of the Chase - the old wood in England . it be a lovely 
 night , and why should we not prolong our ride a little ? " 

 " how could you be so treacherous ! " say Tess , between archness and 
 real dismay , and get rid of his arm by pull open his finger 
 one by one , though at the risk of slip off herself . " just when 
 I have   be put such trust in you , and oblige you to please you , 
 because I think I have wrong you by that push ! please set I 
 down , and let I walk home . " 

 " you can not walk home , darling , even if the air be clear . we be 
 mile away from Trantridge , if I must tell you , and in this grow 
 fog you might wander for hour among these tree . " 

 " never mind that , " she coax . " put I down , I beg you . I do not 
 mind where it be ; only let I get down , sir , please ! " 

 " very well , then , I will - on one condition . have bring you 
 here to this out - of - the - way place , I feel myself responsible for 
 your safe - conduct home , whatever you may yourself feel about it . 
 as to your get to Trantridge without assistance , it be quite 
 impossible ; for , to tell the truth , dear , owe to this fog , which so 
 disguise everything , I do not   quite know where we be myself . now , 
 if you will promise to wait beside the horse while I walk through the 
 bush till I come to some road or house , and ascertain exactly our 
 whereabouts , I will deposit you here willingly . when I come back I will 
 give you full direction , and if you insist upon walk you may ; or 
 you may ride - at your pleasure . " 

 she accept these term , and slide off on the near side , though not 
 till he have steal a cursory kiss . he spring down on the other side . 

 " I suppose I must hold the horse ? " say she . 

 " oh no ; it be not necessary , " reply Alec , pat the panting 
 creature . " he be have enough of it for to - night . " 

 he turn the horse 's head into the bush , hitch he on to a 
 bough , and make a sort of couch or nest for she in the deep mass of 
 dead leaf . 

 " now , you sit there , " he say . " the leaf have not get damp as yet . 
 just give an eye to the horse - it will be quite sufficient . " 

 he take a few step away from she , but , return , say , " by the bye , 
 Tess , your father have a new cob to - day . somebody give it to he . " 

 " somebody ? you ! " 

 D'Urberville nod . 

 " o how very good of you that be ! " she exclaim , with a painful sense 
 of the awkwardness of have to thank he just then . 

 " and the child have some toy . " 

 " I do not   know - you ever send they anything ! " she murmur , much 
 move . " I almost wish you have not - yes , I almost wish it ! " 

 " why , dear ? " 

 " it - hamper I so . " 

 " Tessy - do not   you love I ever so little now ? " 

 " I be grateful , " she reluctantly admit . " but I fear I do not - " 
 the sudden vision of his passion for herself as a factor in this 
 result so distress she that , begin with one slow tear , and 
 then follow with another , she weep outright . 

 " do not   cry , dear , dear one ! now sit down here , and wait till I 
 come . " she passively sit down amid the leaf he have heap , and 
 shiver slightly . " be you cold ? " he ask . 

 " not very - a little . " 

 he touch she with his finger , which sink into she as into down . 
 " you have only that puffy muslin dress on - how be that ? " 

 " it be my good summer one . ' twas very warm when I start , and I 
 do not   know I be go to ride , and that it would be night . " 

 " night grow chilly in September . let I see . " he pull off a 
 light overcoat that he have wear , and put it round her tenderly . 
 " that be it - now you will feel warm , " he continue . " now , my pretty , 
 rest there ; I shall soon be back again . " 

 have button the overcoat round her shoulder he plunge into the 
 webs of vapour which by this time form veil between the tree . 
 she could hear the rustling of the branch as he ascend the 
 adjoining slope , till his movement be no loud than the hopping 
 of a bird , and finally die away . with the setting of the moon the 
 pale light lessen , and Tess become invisible as she fall into 
 reverie upon the leaf where he have leave she . 

 in the meantime Alec d'Urberville have push on up the slope to clear 
 his genuine doubt as to the quarter of the Chase they be in . he 
 have , in fact , ride quite at random for over an hour , take any 
 turning that come to hand in order to prolong companionship with she , 
 and give far more attention to Tess 's moonlit person than to any 
 wayside object . a little rest for the jade animal be desirable , 
 he do not hasten his search for landmark . a clamber over the 
 hill into the adjoining vale bring he to the fence of a highway 
 whose contour he recognize , which settle the question of their 
 whereabouts . D'Urberville thereupon turn back ; but by this time 
 the moon have quite go down , and partly on account of the fog the 
 Chase be wrap in thick darkness , although morning be not far 
 off . he be oblige to advance with outstretche hand to avoid 
 contact with the bough , and discover that to hit the exact spot 
 from which he have start be at first entirely beyond he . roam 
 up and down , round and round , he at length hear a slight movement of 
 the horse close at hand ; and the sleeve of his overcoat unexpectedly 
 catch his foot . 

 " Tess ! " say d'Urberville . 

 there be no answer . the obscurity be now so great that he could 
 see absolutely nothing but a pale nebulousness at his foot , which 
 represent the white muslin figure he have leave upon the dead leaf . 
 everything else be blackness alike . D'Urberville stoop ; and hear 
 a gentle regular breathing . he kneel and bent lower , till her breath 
 warm his face , and in a moment his cheek be in contact with her . 
 she be sleep soundly , and upon her eyelash there linger 
 tear . 

 darkness and silence rule everywhere around . above they rise the 
 primeval yew and oak of the Chase , in which there poise gentle 
 roosting bird in their last nap ; and about they steal the hopping 
 rabbit and hare . but , might some say , where be Tess 's guardian 
 angel ? where be the providence of her simple faith ? perhaps , like 
 that other god of whom the ironical Tishbite speak , he be talk , 
 or he be pursue , or he be in a journey , or he be sleep and 
 not to be awake . 

 why it be that upon this beautiful feminine tissue , sensitive as 
 gossamer , and practically blank as snow as yet , there should have 
 be trace such a coarse pattern as it be doom to receive ; why 
 so often the coarse appropriate the finer thus , the wrong man the 
 woman , the wrong woman the man , many thousand year of analytical 
 philosophy have fail to explain to our sense of order . one may , 
 indeed , admit the possibility of a retribution lurk in the present 
 catastrophe . doubtless some of Tess d'Urberville 's mail ancestor 
 rollick home from a fray have deal the same measure even more 
 ruthlessly towards peasant girl of their time . but though to visit 
 the sin of the father upon the child may be a morality good 
 enough for divinity , it be scorn by average human nature ; and it 
 therefore do not mend the matter . 

 as Tess 's own people down in those retreat be never tired of say 
 among each other in their fatalistic way : " it be to be . " there 
 lie the pity of it . an immeasurable social chasm be to divide our 
 heroine 's personality thereafter from that previous self of her 
 who step from her mother 's door to try her fortune at Trantridge 
 poultry - farm . 


 END of PHASE the first 





 phase the second : Maiden no More 



 XII 


 the basket be heavy and the bundle be large , but she lug they 
 along like a person who do not find her especial burden in material 
 thing . occasionally she stop to rest in a mechanical way by some 
 gate or post ; and then , give the baggage another hitch upon she 
 full round arm , go steadily on again . 

 it be a Sunday morning in late October , about four month after Tess 
 Durbeyfield 's arrival at Trantridge , and some few week subsequent to 
 the night ride in the Chase . the time be not long past daybreak , 
 and the yellow luminosity upon the horizon behind her back light 
 the ridge towards which her face be set - the barrier of the vale 
 wherein she have of late be a stranger - which she would have to 
 climb over to reach her birthplace . the ascent be gradual on this 
 side , and the soil and scenery differ much from those within 
 Blakemore Vale . even the character and accent of the two people 
 have shade of difference , despite the amalgamate effect of a 
 roundabout railway ; so that , though less than twenty mile from the 
 place of her sojourn at Trantridge , her native village have seem a 
 far - away spot . the field - folk shut in there trade northward and 
 westward , travel , court , and marry northward and westward , 
 think northward and westward ; those on this side mainly direct 
 their energy and attention to the east and south . 

 the incline be the same down which d'Urberville have drive she so 
 wildly on that day in June . Tess go up the remainder of its length 
 without stop , and on reach the edge of the escarpment gaze 
 over the familiar green world beyond , now half - veil in mist . it 
 be always beautiful from here ; it be terribly beautiful to Tess 
 to - day , for since her eye last fall upon it she have learn that the 
 serpent hiss where the sweet bird sing , and her view of life have 
 be totally change for she by the lesson . verily another girl than 
 the simple one she have be at home be she who , bow by thought , 
 stand still here , and turn to look behind she . she could not bear 
 to look forward into the Vale . 

 ascend by the long white road that Tess herself have just labour 
 up , she see a two - wheeled vehicle , beside which walk a man , who 
 hold up his hand to attract her attention . 

 she obey the signal to wait for he with unspeculative repose , and 
 in a few minute man and horse stop beside she . 

 " why do you slip away by stealth like this ? " say d'Urberville , with 
 upbraid breathlessness ; " on a Sunday morning , too , when people 
 be all in bed ! I only discover it by accident , and I have be 
 drive like the deuce to overtake you . just look at the mare . why 
 go off like this ? you know that nobody wish to hinder your go . 
 and how unnecessary it have be for you to toil along on foot , and 
 encumber yourself with this heavy load ! I have follow like a 
 madman , simply to drive you the rest of the distance , if you will not 
 come back . " 

 " I shall not   come back , " say she . 

 " I think you would not   - I say so ! well , then , put up your basket , 
 and let I help you on . " 

 she listlessly place her basket and bundle within the dog - cart , and 
 step up , and they sit side by side . she have no fear of he now , 
 and in the cause of her confidence her sorrow lay . 

 D'Urberville mechanically light a cigar , and the journey be continue 
 with broken unemotional conversation on the commonplace object by 
 the wayside . he have quite forget his struggle to kiss she when , 
 in the early summer , they have drive in the opposite direction along 
 the same road . but she have not , and she sit now , like a puppet , 
 reply to his remark in monosyllable . after some mile they come 
 in view of the clump of tree beyond which the village of Marlott 
 stand . it be only then that she still face show the least 
 emotion , a tear or two begin to trickle down . 

 " what be you cry for ? " he coldly ask . 

 " I be only think that I be bear over there , " murmur Tess . 

 " well - we must all be bear somewhere . " 

 " I wish I have never be bear - there or anywhere else ! " 

 " Pooh ! well , if you do not   wish to come to Trantridge why do you 
 come ? " 

 she do not reply . 

 " you do not   come for love of I , that I will swear . " 

 " ' tis quite true . if I have go for love o ' you , if I have ever 
 sincerely love you , if I love you still , I should not so loathe and 
 hate myself for my weakness as I do now ! ... my eye be daze by 
 you for a little , and that be all . " 

 he shrug his shoulder . she resume - 

 " I do not   understand your meaning till it be too late . " 

 " that be what every woman say . " 

 " how can you dare to use such word ! " she cry , turn impetuously 
 upon he , her eye flash as the latent spirit   of which he be to 
 see more some day   awake in she . " my God ! I could knock you out of 
 the gig ! do it never strike your mind that what every woman say 
 some woman may feel ? " 

 " very well , " he say , laugh ; " I be sorry to wound you . I do 
 wrong - I admit it . " he drop into some little bitterness as he 
 continue : " only you need not   be so everlastingly fling it in my 
 face . I be ready to pay to the uttermost farthing . you know you 
 need not work in the field or the dairy again . you know you may 
 clothe yourself with the good , instead of in the bald plain way you 
 have lately affect , as if you could not   get a ribbon more than you 
 earn . " 

 her lip lift slightly , though there be little scorn , as a rule , 
 in her large and impulsive nature . 

 " I have say I will not take anything more from you , and I will 
 not - I can not ! I should be your creature to go on do that , and 
 I will not ! " 

 " one would think you be a princess from your manner , in addition 
 to a true and original d'Urberville - ha ! ha ! well , Tess , dear , I 
 can say no more . I suppose I be a bad fellow - a damn bad fellow . 
 I be bear bad , and I have live bad , and I shall die bad in all 
 probability . but , upon my lost soul , I will not   be bad towards you 
 again , Tess . and if certain circumstance should arise - you 
 understand - in which you be in the least need , the least difficulty , 
 send I one line , and you shall have by return whatever you require . 
 I may not be at Trantridge - I be go to London for a time - I can not 
 stand the old woman . but all letter will be forward . " 

 she say that she do not wish he to drive she far , and they 
 stop just under the clump of tree . D'Urberville alight , and 
 lift she down bodily in his arm , afterwards place her article 
 on the ground beside she . she bow to he slightly , her eye just 
 linger in his ; and then she turn to take the parcel for 
 departure . 

 Alec d'Urberville remove his cigar , bent towards she , and say - 

 " you be not go to turn away like that , dear ! come ! " 

 " if you wish , " she answer indifferently . " see how you have   master 
 I ! " 

 she thereupon turn round and lift her face to his , and remain 
 like a marble term while he imprint a kiss upon her cheek - half 
 perfunctorily , half as if z have not yet quite die out . her eye 
 vaguely rest upon the remotest tree in the lane while the kiss be 
 give , as though she be nearly unconscious of what he do . 

 " now the other side , for old acquaintance ' sake . " 

 she turn her head in the same passive way , as one might turn at the 
 request of a sketcher or hairdresser , and he kiss the other side , 
 his lip touch cheek that be damp and smoothly chill as the 
 skin of the mushroom in the field around . 

 " you do not   give I your mouth and kiss I back . you never willingly 
 do that - you will never love I , I fear . " 

 " I have say so , often . it be true . I have never really and truly 
 love you , and I think I never can . " she add mournfully , " perhaps , 
 of all thing , a lie on this thing would do the most good to I now ; 
 but I have honour enough left , little as ' tis , not to tell that lie . 
 if I do love you , I may have the good o ' cause for let you know 
 it . but I do not . " 

 he emit a laboured breath , as if the scene be get rather 
 oppressive to his heart , or to his conscience , or to his gentility . 

 " well , you be absurdly melancholy , Tess . I have no 
 reason for flatter you now , and I can say plainly 
 that you need not be so sad . you can hold your own for 
 beauty against any woman of these part , gentle or 
 simple ; I say it to you as a practical man and 
 well - wisher . if you be wise you will show it to the 
 world more than you do before it fade ... and yet , 
 Tess , will you come back to I ! upon my soul , I do not 
 like to let you go like this ! " 

 " never , never ! I make up my mind as soon as I see - what I ought to 
 have see soon ; and I will not   come . " 

 " then good morning , my four month ' cousin - good - bye ! " 

 he leap up lightly , arrange the rein , and be go between the 
 tall red - berried hedge . 

 Tess do not look after he , but slowly wound along the crooked lane . 
 it be still early , and though the sun 's low limb be just free of 
 the hill , his ray , ungenial and peering , address the eye rather 
 than the touch as yet . there be not a human soul near . Sad October 
 and her sad self seem the only two existence haunt that 
 lane . 

 as she walk , however , some footstep approach behind she , the 
 footstep of a man ; and owe to the briskness of his advance he be 
 close at her heel and have say " good morning " before she have be 
 long aware of his propinquity . he appear to be an artisan of some 
 sort , and carry a tin pot of red paint in his hand . he ask 
 in a business - like manner if he should take her basket , which she 
 permit he to do , walk beside he . 

 " it be early to be astir this Sabbath morn ! " he say cheerfully . 

 " yes , " say Tess . 

 " when most people be at rest from their week 's work . " 

 she also assent to this . 

 " though I do more real work to - day than all the week besides . " 

 " do you ? " 

 " all the week I work for the glory of man , and on Sunday for the 
 glory of God . that be more real than the other - hey ? I have a little 
 to do here at this stile . " the man turn , as he speak , to an 
 opening at the roadside lead into a pasture . " if you will wait a 
 moment , " he add , " I shall not be long . " 

 as he have her basket she could not well do otherwise ; and she wait , 
 observe he . he set down her basket and the tin pot , and stir 
 the paint with the brush that be in it begin paint large square 
 letter on the middle board of the three compose the stile , place 
 a comma after each word , as if to give pause while that word be 
 drive well home to the reader 's heart - 


  THY , damnation , SLUMBERETH , not . 
  2 Pet . ii . 3 . 


 against the peaceful landscape , the pale , decay tint of the 
 copse , the blue air of the horizon , and the lichene stile - board , 
 these star vermilion word shine forth . they seem to shout 
 themselves out and make the atmosphere ring . some people might have 
 cry " alas , poor theology ! " at the hideous defacement - the last 
 grotesque phase of a creed which have serve mankind well in its time . 
 but the word enter Tess with accusatory horror . it be as if this 
 man have know her recent history ; yet he be a total stranger . 

 have finish his text he pick up her basket , and she 
 mechanically resume her walk beside he . 

 " do you believe what you paint ? " she ask in low tone . 

 " believe that tex ? do I believe in my own existence ! " 

 " but , " say she tremulously , ' suppose your sin be not of your own 
 seek ? " 

 he shake his head . 

 " I can not split hair on that burn query , " he say . " I have 
 walk hundred of mile this past summer , paint these texe on 
 every wall , gate , and stile the length and breadth of this district . 
 I leave their application to the heart of the people who read them . " 

 " I think they be horrible , " say Tess . " crush ! kill ! " 

 " that be what they be mean to be ! " he reply in a trade voice . 
 " but you should read my hot one - they I kip for slum and 
 seaport . they would make ye wriggle ! not but what this be a very good 
 tex for rural district . ... ah - there be a nice bit of blank wall up 
 by that barn stand to waste . I must put one there - one that it 
 will be good for dangerous young female like yerself to heed . will 
 ye wait , missy ? " 

 " no , " say she ; and take her basket Tess trudge on . a little way 
 forward she turn her head . the old gray wall begin to advertise 
 a similar fiery lettering to the first , with a strange and unwonted 
 mien , as if distressed at duty it have never before be call upon 
 to perform . it be with a sudden flush that she read and realize 
 what be to be the inscription he be now halfway through - 


  THOU , SHALT , not , COMMIT - 


 her cheerful friend see she look , stop his brush , and shout - 

 " if you want to ask for edification on these thing of moment , 
 there be a very earnest good man go to preach a charity - sermon 
 to - day in the parish you be go to - Mr Clare of Emminster . I be 
 not of his persuasion now , but he be a good man , and he will expound as 
 well as any parson I know . ' twa he begin the work in I . " 

 but Tess do not answer ; she throbbingly resume her walk , her eye 
 fix on the ground . " Pooh - I do not   believe God say such thing ! " 
 she murmur contemptuously when her flush have die away . 

 a plume of smoke soar up suddenly from her father 's chimney , the 
 sight of which make her heart ache . the aspect of the interior , when 
 she reach it , make her heart ache more . her mother , who have just 
 come down stair , turn to greet she from the fireplace , where she 
 be kindle bark - oak twig under the breakfast kettle . the young 
 child be still above , as be also her father , it be Sunday 
 morning , when he feel justified in lie an additional half - hour . 

 " well ! - my dear Tess ! " exclaim her surprised mother , jump up and 
 kiss the girl . " how be ye ? I do not   see you till you be in upon 
 I ! have you come home to be marry ? " 

 " no , I have not come for that , mother . " 

 " then for a holiday ? " 

 " yes - for a holiday ; for a long holiday , " say Tess . 

 " what , be not   your cousin go to do the handsome thing ? " 

 " he be not my cousin , and he be not go to marry I . " 

 her mother eye she narrowly . 

 " come , you have not tell I all , " she say . 

 then Tess go up to her mother , put her face upon Joan 's neck , and 
 tell . 

 " and yet th'st not get he to marry ' ee ! " reiterate her mother . " any 
 woman would have do it but you , after that ! " 

 " perhaps any woman would except I . " 

 " it would have be something like a story to come back with , if 
 you have ! " continue Mrs Durbeyfield , ready to burst into tear of 
 vexation . " after all the talk about you and he which have reach 
 we here , who would have expect it to end like this ! why do not   ye 
 think of do some good for your family instead o ' thinking only of 
 yourself ? see how I have   get to teave and slave , and your poor weak 
 father with his heart clog like a dripping - pan . I do hope for 
 something to come out o ' this ! to see what a pretty pair you and he 
 make that day when you drive away together four month ago ! see what 
 he have give we - all , as we think , because we be his kin . but if 
 he be not , it must have be do because of his love for ' ee . and 
 yet you have   not get he to marry ! " 

 get alec d'Urberville in the mind to marry she ! he marry she ! on 
 matrimony he have never once say a word . and what if he have ? how a 
 convulsive snatching at social salvation might have impel she to 
 answer he she could not say . but her poor foolish mother little 
 know her present feeling towards this man . perhaps it be unusual 
 in the circumstance , unlucky , unaccountable ; but there it be ; and 
 this , as she have say , be what make she det herself . she have 
 never wholly care for he ; she do not at all care for he now . she 
 have dread he , wince before he , succumb to adroit advantage 
 he take of her helplessness ; then , temporarily blind by his ardent 
 manner , have be stir to confuse surrender awhile : have suddenly 
 despise and dislike he , and have run away . that be all . hate he 
 she do not quite ; but he be dust and ash to she , and even for her 
 name 's sake she scarcely wish to marry he . 

 " you ought to have be more careful if you do not   mean to get he to 
 make you his wife ! " 

 " o mother , my mother ! " cry the agonize girl , turn passionately 
 upon her parent as if her poor heart would break . " how could I be 
 expect to know ? I be a child when I leave this house four month 
 ago . why do not   you tell I there be danger in man - folk ? why 
 do not   you warn I ? lady know what to fend hand against , because 
 they read novel that tell they of these trick ; but I never have the 
 chance o ' learning in that way , and you do not help I ! " 

 her mother be subdue . 

 " I think if I speak of his fond feeling and what they might lead 
 to , you would be hontish wi ' he and lose your chance , " she murmur , 
 wipe her eye with her apron . " well , we must make the good of it , 
 I suppose . ' tis nater , after all , and what do please God ! " 



 XIII 


 the event of Tess Durbeyfield 's return from the manor of her bogus 
 kinsfolk be rumour abroad , if rumour be not too large a word for 
 a space of a square mile . in the afternoon several young girl of 
 Marlott , former schoolfellow and acquaintance of Tess , call to 
 see she , arrive dress in their well starch and iron , as 
 become visitor to a person who have make a transcendent conquest   as 
 they suppose , and sit round the room look at she with great 
 curiosity . for the fact that it be this say thirty - first cousin , 
 Mr d'Urberville , who have fall in love with she , a gentleman 
 not altogether local , whose reputation as a reckless gallant and 
 heartbreaker be begin to spread beyond the immediate boundary 
 of Trantridge , lend Tess 's suppose position , by its fearsomeness , a 
 far high fascination that it would have exercise if unhazardous . 

 their interest be so deep that the young one whisper when she 
 back be turn - 

 " how pretty she be ; and how that good frock do set she off ! I 
 believe it cost an immense deal , and that it be a gift from he . " 

 Tess , who be reach up to get the tea - thing from the 
 corner - cupboard , do not hear these commentary . if she have hear 
 they , she might soon have set her friend right on the matter . but 
 her mother hear , and Joan 's simple vanity , have be deny the 
 hope of a dash marriage , feed itself as well as it could upon 
 the sensation of a dash flirtation . upon the whole she feel 
 gratify , even though such a limited and evanescent triumph should 
 involve her daughter 's reputation ; it might end in marriage yet , and 
 in the warmth of her responsiveness to their admiration she invite 
 her visitor to stay to tea . 

 their chatter , their laughter , their good - humour innuendo , above 
 all , their flash and flickering of envy , revive Tess 's spirit 
 also ; and , as the evening wear on , she catch the infection of their 
 excitement , and grow almost gay . the marble hardness leave her face , 
 she move with something of her old bounding step , and flush in all 
 her young beauty . 

 at moment , in spite of thought , she would reply to their inquiry 
 with a manner of superiority , as if recognize that her experience 
 in the field of courtship have , indeed , be slightly enviable . but 
 so far be she from be , in the word of Robert South , " in love 
 with her own ruin , " that the illusion be transient as lightning ; 
 cold reason come back to mock her spasmodic weakness ; the ghastliness 
 of her momentary pride would convict she , and recall she to reserved 
 listlessness again . 

 and the despondency of the next morning 's dawn , when it be no long 
 Sunday , but Monday ; and no good clothe ; and the laugh visitor 
 be go , and she awake alone in her old bed , the innocent young 
 child breathe softly around she . in place of the excitement of 
 her return , and the interest it have inspire , she see before her a 
 long and stony highway which she have to tread , without aid , and with 
 little sympathy . her depression be then terrible , and she could 
 have hide herself in a tomb . 

 in the course of a few week Tess revive sufficiently to show 
 herself so far as be necessary to get to church one Sunday morning . 
 she like to hear the chanting - such as it be - and the old Psalms , 
 and to join in the Morning Hymn . that innate love of melody , which 
 she have inherit from her ballad - sing mother , give the simple 
 music a power over she which could well - nigh drag her heart out of 
 her bosom at time . 

 to be as much out of observation as possible for reason of her own , 
 and to escape the gallantry of the young man , she set out before 
 the chiming begin , and take a back seat under the gallery , close to 
 the lumber , where only old man and woman come , and where the bi 
 stand on end among the churchyard tool . 

 Parishioners drop in by two and three , deposit themselves 
 in row before she , rest three - quarter of a minute on their 
 forehead as if they be pray , though they be not ; then sit up , 
 and look around . when the chant come on , one of her favourite 
 happen to be choose among the rest - the old double chant 
 " Langdon " - but she do not know what it be call , though she would 
 much have like to know . she think , without exactly word the 
 thought , how strange and god - like be a composer 's power , who from 
 the grave could lead through sequence of emotion , which he alone have 
 feel at first , a girl like she who have never hear of his name , and 
 never would have a clue to his personality . 

 the people who have turn their head turn they again as the 
 service proceed ; and at last observe she , they whisper to each 
 other . she know what their whisper be about , grow sick at heart , 
 and feel that she could come to church no more . 

 the bedroom which she share with some of the child form she 
 retreat more continually than ever . here , under her few square yard 
 of thatch , she watch wind , and snow , and rain , gorgeous sunset , 
 and successive moon at their full . so close keep she that at length 
 almost everybody think she have go away . 

 the only exercise that Tess take at this time be after dark ; and it 
 be then , when out in the wood , that she seem least solitary . she 
 know how to hit to a hair' - breadth that moment of evening when the 
 light and the darkness be so evenly balance that the constraint of 
 day and the suspense of night neutralize each other , leave absolute 
 mental liberty . it be then that the plight of be alive become 
 attenuate to its least possible dimension . she have no fear of the 
 shadow ; her sole idea seem to be to shun mankind - or rather that 
 cold accretion call the world , which , so terrible in the mass , be 
 so unformidable , even pitiable , in its unit . 

 on these lonely hill and dale her quiescent glide be of a piece 
 with the element she move in . her flexuous and stealthy figure 
 become an integral part of the scene . at time her whimsical fancy 
 would intensify natural process around she till they seem a part 
 of her own story . rather they become a part of it ; for the world be 
 only a psychological phenomenon , and what they seem they be . the 
 midnight air and gust , moan amongst the tightly - wrap bud and 
 bark of the winter twig , be formulae of bitter reproach . a wet 
 day be the expression of irremediable grief at her weakness in the 
 mind of some vague ethical being whom she could not class definitely 
 as the God of her childhood , and could not comprehend as any other . 

 but this encompassment of her own characterization , base on shred 
 of convention , people by phantom and voice antipathetic to she , 
 be a sorry and mistaken creation of Tess 's fancy - a cloud of moral 
 hobgoblin by which she be terrify without reason . it be they 
 that be out of harmony with the actual world , not she . walk 
 among the sleep bird in the hedge , watch the skip rabbit 
 on a moonlit warren , or stand under a pheasant - laden bough , she 
 look upon herself as a figure of Guilt intrude into the haunt 
 of Innocence . but all the while she be make a distinction where 
 there be no difference . feel herself in antagonism , she be 
 quite in accord . she have be make to break an accept social law , 
 but no law know to the environment in which she fancy herself such 
 an anomaly . 



 XIV 


 it be a hazy sunrise in August . the dense nocturnal vapour , 
 attack by the warm beam , be divide and shrink into isolated 
 fleece within hollow and covert , where they wait till they 
 should be dry away to nothing . 

 the sun , on account of the mist , have a curious sentient , personal 
 look , demand the masculine pronoun for its adequate expression . 
 his present aspect , couple with the lack of all human form in the 
 scene , explain the old - time heliolatry in a moment . one could 
 feel that a saner religion have never prevail under the sky . the 
 luminary be a golden - haired , beaming , mild - eye , God - like creature , 
 gaze down in the vigour and intentness of youth upon an earth that 
 be brim with interest for he . 

 his light , a little later , break though chink of cottage shutter , 
 throw stripe like red - hot poker upon cupboard , chest of 
 drawer , and other furniture within ; and awakening harvester who 
 be not already astir . 

 but of all ruddy thing that morning the bright be two broad 
 arm of paint wood , which rise from the margin of yellow cornfield 
 hard by Marlott village . they , with two other below , form the 
 revolve maltese cross of the reaping - machine , which have be 
 bring to the field on the previous evening to be ready for 
 operation this day . the paint with which they be smear , 
 intensify in hue by the sunlight , impart to they a look of 
 have be dip in liquid fire . 

 the field have already be " open " ; that be to say , a lane a few 
 foot wide have be hand - cut through the wheat along the whole 
 circumference of the field for the first passage of the horse and 
 machine . 

 two group , one of man and lad , the other of woman , have come down 
 the lane just at the hour when the shadow of the eastern hedge - top 
 strike the west hedge midway , so that the head of the group be 
 enjoy sunrise while their foot be still in the dawn . they 
 disappear from the lane between the two stone post which flank 
 the near field - gate . 

 presently there arise from within a ticking like the love - making of 
 the grasshopper . the machine have begin , and a move concatenation 
 of three horse and the aforesaid long rickety machine be visible 
 over the gate , a driver sit upon one of the haul horse , 
 and an attendant on the seat of the implement . along one side of 
 the field the whole wain go , the arm of the mechanical reaper 
 revolving slowly , till it pass down the hill quite out of sight . 
 in a minute it come up on the other side of the field at the same 
 equable pace ; the glistening brass star in the forehead of the fore 
 horse first catch the eye as it rise into view over the stubble , 
 then the bright arm , and then the whole machine . 

 the narrow lane of stubble encompass the field grow wider with 
 each circuit , and the stand corn be reduce to a small area as 
 the morning wear on . rabbit , hare , snake , rat , mouse , retreat 
 inward as into a fastness , unaware of the ephemeral nature of their 
 refuge , and of the doom that await they later in the day when , 
 their covert shrink to a more and more horrible narrowness , they 
 be huddle together , friend and foe , till the last few yard of 
 upright wheat fall also under the tooth of the unerre reaper , and 
 they be every one put to death by the stick and stone of the 
 harvester . 

 the reaping - machine leave the fall corn behind it in little heap , 
 each heap be of the quantity for a sheaf ; and upon these the 
 active binder in the rear lay their hand - mainly woman , but some 
 of they man in print shirt , and trouser support round their 
 waist by leather strap , render useless the two button behind , 
 which twinkle and bristle with sunbeam at every movement of each 
 wearer , as if they be a pair of eye in the small of his back . 

 but those of the other sex be the most interesting of this company 
 of binder , by reason of the charm which be acquire by woman when 
 she become part and parcel of outdoor nature , and be not merely 
 an object set down therein as at ordinary time . a field - man be a 
 personality afield ; a field - woman be a portion of the field ; she have 
 somehow lose her own margin , imbibe the essence of her surrounding , 
 and assimilate herself with it . 

 the woman - or rather girl , for they be mostly young - wear draw 
 cotton bonnet with great flap curtain to keep off the sun , and 
 glove to prevent their hand be wound by the stubble . there 
 be one wear a pale pink jacket , another in a cream - colour 
 tight - sleeve gown , another in a petticoat as red as the arm of the 
 reaping - machine ; and other , old , in the brown - rough " wropper " 
 or over - all - the old - establish and most appropriate dress of the 
 field - woman , which the young one be abandon . this morning the 
 eye return involuntarily to the girl in the pink cotton jacket , she 
 be the most flexuous and finely - draw figure of they all . but 
 her bonnet be pull so far over her brow that none of her face be 
 disclose while she bind , though her complexion may be guess from 
 a stray twine or two of dark brown hair which extend below the 
 curtain of her bonnet . perhaps one reason why she seduce casual 
 attention be that she never court it , though the other woman often 
 gaze around they . 

 her bind proceed with clock - like monotony . from the sheaf last 
 finish she draw a handful of ear , pat their tip with she 
 leave palm to bring they even . then , stoop low , she move forward , 
 gather the corn with both hand against her knee , and push 
 her left gloved hand under the bundle to meet the right on the other 
 side , hold the corn in an embrace like that of a lover . she 
 bring the end of the bond together , and kneel on the sheaf while 
 she tie it , beat back her skirt now and then when lift by the 
 breeze . a bit of her naked arm be visible between the buff leather 
 of the gauntlet and the sleeve of her gown ; and as the day wear on 
 its feminine smoothness become scarify by the stubble and bleed . 

 at interval she stand up to rest , and to retie she disarrange 
 apron , or to pull her bonnet straight . then one can see the oval 
 face of a handsome young woman with deep dark eye and long heavy 
 cling tress , which seem to clasp in a beseech way anything 
 they fall against . the cheek be pale , the tooth more regular , 
 the red lip thin than be usual in a country - breed girl . 

 it be Tess Durbeyfield , otherwise d'Urberville , somewhat change - the 
 same , but not the same ; at the present stage of her existence live 
 as a stranger and an alien here , though it be no strange land that 
 she be in . after a long seclusion she have come to a resolve to 
 undertake outdoor work in her native village , the busy season of 
 the year in the agricultural world have arrive , and nothing that 
 she could do within the house be so remunerative for the time as 
 harvesting in the field . 

 the movement of the other woman be more or less similar to Tess 's , 
 the whole bevy of they draw together like dancer in a quadrille 
 at the completion of a sheaf by each , every one place her sheaf on 
 end against those of the rest , till a shock , or ' stitch " as it be 
 here call , of ten or a dozen be form . 

 they go to breakfast , and come again , and the work proceed as 
 before . as the hour of eleven draw near a person watch she might 
 have notice that every now and then Tess 's glance flit wistfully 
 to the brow of the hill , though she do not pause in her sheafing . 
 on the verge of the hour the head of a group of child , of age 
 range from six to fourteen , rise over the stubbly convexity of the 
 hill . 

 the face of Tess flush slightly , but still she do not pause . 

 the eld of the comer , a girl who wear a triangular shawl , its 
 corner draggle on the stubble , carry in her arm what at first 
 sight seem to be a doll , but prove to be an infant in long 
 clothe . another bring some lunch . the harvester cease work , 
 take their provision , and sit down against one of the shock . here 
 they fall to , the man ply a stone jar freely , and pass round a 
 cup . 

 Tess Durbeyfield have be one of the last to suspend her labour . 
 she sit down at the end of the shock , her face turn somewhat away 
 from her companion . when she have deposit herself a man in a 
 rabbit - skin cap , and with a red handkerchief tuck into his belt , 
 hold the cup of ale over the top of the shock for she to drink . but 
 she do not accept his offer . as soon as her lunch be spread she 
 call up the big girl , her sister , and take the baby of she , who , 
 glad to be relieve of the burden , go away to the next shock and 
 join the other child play there . tess , with a curiously 
 stealthy yet courageous movement , and with a still rise colour , 
 unfasten her frock and begin suckle the child . 

 the man who sit near considerately turn their face towards the 
 other end of the field , some of they begin to smoke ; one , with 
 absent - minded fondness , regretfully stroke the jar that would no 
 long yield a stream . all the woman but Tess fall into animate 
 talk , and adjust the disarrange knot of their hair . 

 when the infant have take its fill , the young mother sit it upright 
 in her lap , and look into the far distance , dandle it with a 
 gloomy indifference that be almost dislike ; then all of a sudden she 
 fall to violently kiss it some dozen of time , as if she could 
 never leave off , the child cry at the vehemence of an onset which 
 strangely combine passionateness with contempt . 

 " she be fond of that there child , though she mid pretend to hate en , 
 and say she wish the baby and she too be in the churchyard , " 
 observe the woman in the red petticoat . 

 " she will soon leave off say that , " reply the one in buff . " Lord , 
 ' tis wonderful what a body can get use to o ' that sort in time ! " 

 " a little more than persuade have to do wi ' the come o't , I 
 reckon . there be they that hear a sobbing one night last year in 
 the Chase ; and it mid ha ' go hard wi ' a certain party if folk have 
 come along . " 

 " well , a little more , or a little less , ' twa a thousand pity that 
 it should have happen to she , of all other . but ' tis always the 
 comeliest ! the plain one be as safe as church - hey , Jenny ? " the 
 speaker turn to one of the group who certainly be not ill - define 
 as plain . 

 it be a thousand pity , indeed ; it be impossible for even an enemy 
 to feel otherwise on look at Tess as she sit there , with her 
 flower - like mouth and large tender eye , neither black nor blue nor 
 grey nor violet ; rather all those shade together , and a hundred 
 other , which could be see if one look into their iris - shade 
 behind shade - tint beyond tint - around pupil that have no bottom ; an 
 almost standard woman , but for the slight incautiousness of character 
 inherit from her race . 

 a resolution which have surprise herself have bring she into the 
 field this week for the first time during many month . after 
 wear and waste her palpitating heart with every engine of regret 
 that lonely inexperience could devise , common sense have illuminate 
 she . she feel that she would do well to be useful again - to taste 
 anew sweet independence at any price . the past be past ; whatever 
 it have be , it be no more at hand . whatever its consequence , 
 time would close over they ; they would all in a few year be as if 
 they have never be , and she herself grass down and forget . 
 meanwhile the tree be just as green as before ; the bird sing and 
 the sun shine as clearly now as ever . the familiar surrounding have 
 not darken because of her grief , nor sicken because of her pain . 

 she might have see that what have bow her head so profoundly - the 
 thought of the world 's concern at her situation - be found on an 
 illusion . she be not an existence , an experience , a passion , a 
 structure of sensation , to anybody but herself . to all humankind 
 besides , Tess be only a pass thought . even to friend she be 
 no more than a frequently pass thought . if she make herself 
 miserable the livelong night and day it be only this much to 
 they - " ah , she make herself unhappy . " if she try to be cheerful , 
 to dismiss all care , to take pleasure in the daylight , the flower , 
 the baby , she could only be this idea to they - " ah , she bear it 
 very well . " moreover , alone in a desert island would she have be 
 wretched at what have happen to she ? not greatly . if she could 
 have be but just create , to discover herself as a spouseless 
 mother , with no experience of life except as the parent of a nameless 
 child , would the position have cause she to despair ? no , she would 
 have take it calmly , and find pleasure therein . Most of the misery 
 have be generate by her conventional aspect , and not by her innate 
 sensation . 

 whatever Tess 's reasoning , some spirit have induce she to dress 
 herself up neatly as she have formerly do , and come out into the 
 field , harvest - hand be greatly in demand just then . this be 
 why she have bear herself with dignity , and have look people calmly 
 in the face at time , even when hold the baby in her arm . 

 the harvest - man rise from the shock of corn , and stretch their 
 limb , and extinguish their pipe . the horse , which have be 
 unharness and feed , be again attach to the scarlet machine . 
 Tess , have quickly eat her own meal , beckon to her eld 
 sister to come and take away the baby , fasten her dress , put on 
 the buff glove again , and stoop anew to draw a bond from the last 
 complete sheaf for the tying of the next . 

 in the afternoon and evening the proceeding of the morning be 
 continue , Tess stay on till dusk with the body of harvester . 
 then they all ride home in one of the large wagon , in the company 
 of a broad tarnished moon that have rise from the ground to the 
 eastward , its face resemble the outworn gold - leaf halo of some 
 worm - eat tuscan saint . Tess 's female companion sing song , and 
 show themselves very sympathetic and glad at her reappearance out 
 of door , though they could not refrain from mischievously throw 
 in a few verse of the ballad about the maid who go to the merry 
 green wood and come back a change state . there be counterpoise 
 and compensation in life ; and the event which have make of she a 
 social warning have also for the moment make she the most interesting 
 personage in the village to many . their friendliness win she still 
 far away from herself , their lively spirit be contagious , and 
 she become almost gay . 

 but now that her moral sorrow be pass away a fresh one arise on 
 the natural side of she which know no social law . when she reach 
 home it be to learn to her grief that the baby have be suddenly 
 take ill since the afternoon . some such collapse have be probable , 
 so tender and puny be its frame ; but the event come as a shock 
 nevertheless . 

 the baby 's offence against society in come into the world be 
 forget by the girl - mother ; her soul 's desire be to continue that 
 offence by preserve the life of the child . however , it soon grow 
 clear that the hour of emancipation for that little prisoner of the 
 flesh be to arrive early than her bad misgiving have conjecture . 
 and when she have discover this she be plunge into a misery which 
 transcend that of the child 's simple loss . her baby have not be 
 baptize . 

 Tess have drift into a frame of mind which accept passively the 
 consideration that if she should have to burn for what she have do , 
 burn she must , and there be an end of it . like all village girl , 
 she be well ground in the Holy Scriptures , and have dutifully 
 study the history of Aholah and Aholibah , and know the inference 
 to be draw therefrom . but when the same question arise with regard 
 to the baby , it have a very different colour . her darling be about 
 to die , and no salvation . 

 it be nearly bedtime , but she rush downstairs and ask if she 
 might send for the parson . the moment happen to be one at which 
 her father 's sense of the antique nobility of his family be high , 
 and his sensitiveness to the smudge which Tess have set upon that 
 nobility most pronounce , for he have just return from his weekly 
 booze at Rolliver 's Inn . no parson should come inside his door , he 
 declare , pry into his affair , just then , when , by her shame , it 
 have become more necessary than ever to hide they . he lock the door 
 and put the key in his pocket . 

 the household go to bed , and , distress beyond measure , Tess 
 retire also . she be continually wake as she lay , and in the 
 middle of the night find that the baby be still bad . it be 
 obviously die - quietly and painlessly , but none the less surely . 

 in her misery she rock herself upon the bed . the clock strike the 
 solemn hour of one , that hour when fancy stalk outside reason , and 
 malignant possibility stand rock - firm as fact . she think of 
 the child consign to the nethermost corner of hell , as its double 
 doom for lack of baptism and lack of legitimacy ; see the arch - fiend 
 toss it with his three - pronged fork , like the one they use for 
 heat the oven on bake day ; to which picture she add many 
 other quaint and curious detail of torment sometimes teach the 
 young in this christian country . the lurid presentment so powerfully 
 affect her imagination in the silence of the sleep house that 
 her nightgown become damp with perspiration , and the bedstead shake 
 with each throb of her heart . 

 the infant 's breathing grow more difficult , and the mother 's mental 
 tension increase . it be useless to devour the little thing with 
 kiss ; she could stay in bed no long , and walk feverishly about 
 the room . 

 " o merciful God , have pity ; have pity upon my poor baby ! " she cry . 
 " heap as much anger as you want to upon I , and welcome ; but pity the 
 child ! " 

 she leant against the chest of drawer , and murmur incoherent 
 supplication for a long while , till she suddenly start up . 

 " ah ! perhaps baby can be save ! perhaps it will be just the same ! " 

 she speak so brightly that it seem as though her face might have 
 shine in the gloom surround she . she light a candle , and go to 
 a second and a third bed under the wall , where she awake her young 
 sister and brother , all of whom occupy the same room . pull 
 out the washing - stand so that she could get behind it , she pour 
 some water from a jug , and make they kneel around , put their 
 hand together with finger exactly vertical . while the child , 
 scarcely awake , awe - stricken at her manner , their eye grow large 
 and large , remain in this position , she take the baby from her 
 bed - a child 's child - so immature as scarce to seem a sufficient 
 personality to endow its producer with the maternal title . Tess then 
 stand erect with the infant on her arm beside the basin ; the next 
 sister hold the Prayer - Book open before she , as the clerk at church 
 hold it before the parson ; and thus the girl set about baptize she 
 child . 

 her figure look singularly tall and impose as she stand in her 
 long white nightgown , a thick cable of twisted dark hair hang 
 straight down she back to her waist . the kindly dimness of the weak 
 candle abstract from her form and feature the little blemish 
 which sunlight might have reveal - the stubble scratch upon her 
 wrist , and the weariness of her eye - her high enthusiasm have 
 a transfiguring effect upon the face which have be her undoing , 
 show it as a thing of immaculate beauty , with a touch of dignity 
 which be almost regal . the little one kneel round , their sleepy 
 eye blink and red , await her preparation full of a suspend 
 wonder which their physical heaviness at that hour would not allow to 
 become active . 

 the most impressed of they say : 

 " be you really go to christen he , Tess ? " 

 the girl - mother reply in a grave affirmative . 

 " what be his name go to be ? " 

 she have not think of that , but a name suggest by a phrase in 
 the book of Genesis come into her head as she proceed with the 
 baptismal service , and now she pronounce it : 

 " SORROW , I baptize thee in the name of the Father , and of the Son , 
 and of the Holy Ghost . " 

 she sprinkle the water , and there be silence . 

 " say ' amen , ' child . " 

 the tiny voice pip in obedient response , " amen ! " 

 Tess go on : 

 " we receive this child " - and so forth - " and do sign he with the sign 
 of the Cross . " 

 here she dip her hand into the basin , and fervently draw an 
 immense cross upon the baby with her forefinger , continue with 
 the customary sentence as to his manfully fighting against sin , 
 the world , and the devil , and be a faithful soldier and servant 
 unto his life 's end . she duly go on with the Lord 's Prayer , the 
 child lisp it after she in a thin gnat - like wail , till , at the 
 conclusion , raise their voice to clerk 's pitch , they again pip 
 into silence , " amen ! " 

 then their sister , with much augmented confidence in the efficacy 
 of the sacrament , pour forth from the bottom of her heart the 
 thanksgiving that follow , utter it boldly and triumphantly in the 
 stopt - diapason note which her voice acquire when her heart be in 
 her speech , and which will never be forget by those who know she . 
 the ecstasy of faith almost apotheosize she ; it set upon her face a 
 glowing irradiation , and bring a red spot into the middle of each 
 cheek ; while the miniature candle - flame invert in her eye - pupil 
 shine like a diamond . the child gaze up at she with more and 
 more reverence , and no long have a will for question . she do 
 not look like Sissy to they now , but as a be large , towering , and 
 awful - a divine personage with whom they have nothing in common . 

 Poor Sorrow 's campaign against sin , the world , and the devil be 
 doom to be of limited brilliancy - luckily perhaps for himself , 
 consider his beginning . in the blue of the morning that fragile 
 soldier and servant breathe his last , and when the other child 
 awake they cry bitterly , and beg Sissy to have another pretty 
 baby . 

 the calmness which have possess Tess since the christening remain 
 with she in the infant 's loss . in the daylight , indeed , she feel she 
 terror about his soul to have be somewhat exaggerated ; whether 
 well found or not , she have no uneasiness now , reason that 
 if Providence would not ratify such an act of approximation 
 she , for one , do not value the kind of heaven lose by the 
 irregularity - either for herself or for her child . 

 so pass away Sorrow the Undesired - that intrusive creature , that 
 bastard gift of shameless Nature , who respect not the social law ; 
 a waif to whom eternal Time have be a matter of day merely , who 
 know not that such thing as year and century ever be ; to whom 
 the cottage interior be the universe , the week 's weather climate , 
 new - bear babyhood human existence , and the instinct to suck human 
 knowledge . 

 Tess , who muse on the christening a good deal , wonder if it be 
 doctrinally sufficient to secure a christian burial for the child . 
 nobody could tell this but the parson of the parish , and he be a 
 new - comer , and do not know she . she go to his house after dusk , 
 and stand by the gate , but could not summon courage to go in . the 
 enterprise would have be abandon if she have not by accident meet 
 he come homeward as she turn away . in the gloom she do not 
 mind speak freely . 

 " I should like to ask you something , sir . " 

 he express his willingness to listen , and she tell the story of the 
 baby 's illness and the extemporize ordinance . " and now , sir , " she 
 add earnestly , " can you tell I this - will it be just the same for 
 he as if you have baptize he ? " 

 have the natural feeling of a tradesman at find that a job he 
 should have be call in for have be unskilfully botch by his 
 customer among themselves , he be disposed to say no . yet the 
 dignity of the girl , the strange tenderness in her voice , combine 
 to affect his nobler impulse - or rather those that he have leave in 
 he after ten year of endeavour to graft technical belief on actual 
 scepticism . the man and the ecclesiastic fight within he , and the 
 victory fall to the man . 

 " my dear girl , " he say , " it will be just the same . " 

 " then will you give he a christian burial ? " she ask quickly . 

 the Vicar feel himself cornered . hearing of the baby 's illness , he 
 have conscientiously go to the house after nightfall to perform the 
 rite , and , unaware that the refusal to admit he have come from Tess 's 
 father and not from Tess , he could not allow the plea of necessity 
 for its irregular administration . 

 " ah - that be another matter , " he say . 

 " another matter - why ? " ask Tess , rather warmly . 

 " well - I would willingly do so if only we two be concern . but I 
 must not - for certain reason . " 

 " just for once , sir ! " 

 " really I must not . " 

 " o sir ! " she seize his hand as she speak . 

 he withdraw it , shake his head . 

 " then I do not   like you ! " she burst out , " and I will never come to your 
 church no more ! " 

 " do not   talk so rashly . " 

 " perhaps it will be just the same to he if you do not ? ... will it 
 be just the same ? do not   for God 's sake speak as saint to sinner , but 
 as you yourself to I myself - poor I ! " 

 how the Vicar reconcile his answer with the strict notion he 
 suppose himself to hold on these subject it be beyond a layman 's 
 power to tell , though not to excuse . somewhat move , he say in 
 this case also - 

 " it will be just the same . " 

 so the baby be carry in a small deal box , under an ancient woman 's 
 shawl , to the churchyard that night , and bury by lantern - light , 
 at the cost of a shilling and a pint of beer to the sexton , in that 
 shabby corner of God 's allotment where he let the nettle grow , 
 and where all unbaptized infant , notorious drunkard , suicide , 
 and other of the conjecturally damned be lay . in spite of the 
 untoward surrounding , however , Tess bravely make a little cross of 
 two lath and a piece of string , and have bind it with flower , 
 she stick it up at the head of the grave one evening when she could 
 enter the churchyard without be see , put at the foot also 
 a bunch of the same flower in a little jar of water to keep they 
 alive . what matter be it that on the outside of the jar the eye of 
 mere observation note the word " Keelwell 's marmalade " ? the eye of 
 maternal affection do not see they in its vision of high thing . 



 XV 


 " by experience , " say Roger Ascham , " we find out a short way by 
 a long wandering . " not seldom that long wandering unfit we for 
 further travel , and of what use be our experience to we then ? Tess 
 Durbeyfield 's experience be of this incapacitate kind . at last 
 she have learn what to do ; but who would now accept she do ? 

 if before go to the d'Urbervilles ' she have vigorously move under 
 the guidance of sundry gnomic text and phrase know to she and to 
 the world in general , no doubt she would never have be impose on . 
 but it have not be in Tess 's power - nor be it in anybody 's power - to 
 feel the whole truth of golden opinion while it be possible to 
 profit by they . she - and how many more - might have ironically say 
 to God with Saint Augustine : " Thou hast counsel a well course 
 than Thou hast permit . " 

 she remain at her father 's house during the winter month , pluck 
 fowl , or cram turkey and geese , or make clothe for her 
 sister and brother out of some finery which d'Urberville have give 
 she , and she have put by with contempt . apply to he she would not . 
 but she would often clasp her hand behind her head and muse when she 
 be suppose to be work hard . 

 she philosophically note date as they come past in the revolution 
 of the year ; the disastrous night of her undo at Trantridge with 
 its dark background of the Chase ; also the date of the baby 's birth 
 and death ; also her own birthday ; and every other day individualize 
 by incident in which she have take some share . she suddenly think 
 one afternoon , when look in the glass at her fairness , that there 
 be yet another date , of great importance to she than those ; that 
 of her own death , when all these charm would have disappear ; a day 
 which lie sly and unseen among all the other day of the year , give 
 no sign or sound when she annually pass over it ; but not the less 
 surely there . when be it ? why do she not feel the chill of each 
 yearly encounter with such a cold relation ? she have Jeremy Taylor 's 
 think that some time in the future those who have know she would 
 say : " it be the - - th , the day that poor Tess Durbeyfield die " ; and 
 there would be nothing singular to their mind in the statement . of 
 that day , doom to be her terminus in time through all the age , she 
 do not know the place in month , week , season or year . 

 almost at a leap Tess thus change from simple girl to complex woman . 
 symbol of reflectiveness pass into her face , and a note of tragedy 
 at time into her voice . her eye grow large and more eloquent . 
 she become what would have be call a fine creature ; her aspect 
 be fair and arresting ; her soul that of a woman whom the turbulent 
 experience of the last year or two have quite fail to demoralize . 
 but for the world 's opinion those experience would have be simply 
 a liberal education . 

 she have hold so aloof of late that her trouble , never generally 
 know , be nearly forget in Marlott . but it become evident to she 
 that she could never be really comfortable again in a place which 
 have see the collapse of her family 's attempt to " claim kin " - and , 
 through she , even close union - with the rich d'Urbervilles . at 
 least she could not be comfortable there till long year should have 
 obliterate her keen consciousness of it . yet even now Tess feel the 
 pulse of hopeful life still warm within she ; she might be happy in 
 some nook which have no memory . to escape the past and all that 
 appertain thereto be to annihilate it , and to do that she would 
 have to get away . 

 be once lose always lose really true of chastity ? she would ask 
 herself . she might prove it false if she could veil bygone . the 
 recuperative power which pervade organic nature be surely not 
 deny to maidenhood alone . 

 she wait a long time without find opportunity for a new 
 departure . a particularly fine spring come round , and the stir of 
 germination be almost audible in the bud ; it move she , as it move 
 the wild animal , and make she passionate to go . at last , one day in 
 early May , a letter reach she from a former friend of her mother 's , 
 to whom she have address inquiry long before - a person whom she 
 have never see - that a skilful milkmaid be require at a dairy - house 
 many mile to the southward , and that the dairyman would be glad to 
 have she for the summer month . 

 it be not quite so far off as could have be wish ; but it be 
 probably far enough , her radius of movement and repute have be 
 so small . to person of limited sphere , mile be as geographical 
 degree , parish as county , county as province and kingdom . 

 on one point she be resolve : there should be no more d'Urberville 
 air - castle in the dream and deed of her new life . she would be 
 the dairymaid Tess , and nothing more . her mother know Tess 's feeling 
 on this point so well , though no word have pass between they on the 
 subject , that she never allude to the knightly ancestry now . 

 yet such be human inconsistency that one of the interest of the 
 new place to she be the accidental virtue of its lying near her 
 forefather ' country   for they be not blakemore man , though her 
 mother be Blakemore to the bone . the dairy call Talbothays , 
 for which she be bind , stand not remotely from some of the former 
 estate of the d'Urbervilles , near the great family vault of her 
 granddame and their powerful husband . she would be able to look at 
 they , and think not only that d'Urberville , like Babylon , have fall , 
 but that the individual innocence of a humble descendant could lapse 
 as silently . all the while she wonder if any strange good thing 
 might come of she be in her ancestral land ; and some spirit within 
 she rise automatically as the sap in the twig . it be unexpected 
 youth , surge up anew after its temporary check , and bring with 
 it hope , and the invincible instinct towards self - delight . 


 END of PHASE the second 





 phase the Third : the Rally 



 XVI 


 on a thyme - scented , bird - hatch morning in May , between two and 
 three year after the return from trantridge - silent , reconstructive 
 year for Tess Durbeyfield - she leave her home for the second time . 

 have pack up her luggage so that it could be send to she later , 
 she start in a hire trap for the little town of Stourcastle , 
 through which it be necessary to pass on her journey , now in a 
 direction almost opposite to that of her first adventure . on the 
 curve of the near hill she look back regretfully at Marlott and 
 her father 's house , although she have be so anxious to get away . 

 her kindre dwell there would probably continue their daily 
 life as heretofore , with no great diminution of pleasure in their 
 consciousness , although she would be far off , and they deprive of 
 her smile . in a few day the child would engage in their game as 
 merrily as ever , without the sense of any gap leave by her departure . 
 this leaving of the young child she have decide to be for the 
 well ; be she to remain they would probably gain less good by her 
 precept than harm by her example . 

 she go through Stourcastle without pause and onward to a junction 
 of highway , where she could await a carrier 's van that run to the 
 south - west ; for the railway which engirdle this interior tract of 
 country have never yet strike across it . while wait , however , 
 there come along a farmer in his spring cart , drive approximately 
 in the direction that she wish to pursue . though he be a stranger 
 to she she accept his offer of a seat beside he , ignore that 
 its motive be a mere tribute to her countenance . he be go to 
 Weatherbury , and by accompany he thither she could walk the 
 remainder of the distance instead of travel in the van by way of 
 Casterbridge . 

 Tess do not stop at Weatherbury , after this long drive , far than 
 to make a slight nondescript meal at noon at a cottage to which the 
 farmer recommend she . Thence she start on foot , basket in hand , 
 to reach the wide upland of heath divide this district from the 
 low - lie mead of a further valley in which the dairy stand that be 
 the aim and end of her day 's pilgrimage . 

 Tess have never before visit this part of the country , and yet she 
 feel akin to the landscape . not so very far to the left of she she 
 could discern a dark patch in the scenery , which inquiry confirm 
 she in suppose to be tree mark the environ of Kingsbere - in 
 the church of which parish the bone of her ancestor - her useless 
 ancestor - lie entombed . 

 she have no admiration for they now ; she almost hat they for the 
 dance they have lead she ; not a thing of all that have be theirs do 
 she retain but the old seal and spoon . " Pooh - I have as much of 
 mother as father in I ! " she say . " all my prettiness come from 
 she , and she be only a dairymaid . " 

 the journey over the intervene upland and lowland of Egdon , 
 when she reach they , be a more troublesome walk than she have 
 anticipate , the distance be actually but a few mile . it be 
 two hour , owe to sundry wrong turning , ere she find herself 
 on a summit command the long - seek - for vale , the Valley of the 
 Great Dairies , the valley in which milk and butter grow to rankness , 
 and be produce more profusely , if less delicately , than at her 
 home - the verdant plain so well water by the river Var or Froom . 

 it be intrinsically different from the Vale of Little Dairies , 
 Blackmoor Vale , which , save during her disastrous sojourn at 
 Trantridge , she have exclusively know till now . the world be draw 
 to a large pattern here . the enclosure number fifty acre 
 instead of ten , the farmstead be more extended , the group of 
 cattle form tribe hereabout ; there only family . these myriad 
 of cow stretch under her eye from the far east to the far west 
 outnumber any she have ever see at one glance before . the green 
 lea be speckle as thickly with they as a canvas by Van Alsloot 
 or Sallaert with burgher . the ripe hue of the red and dun kine 
 absorb the evening sunlight , which the white - coat animal 
 return to the eye in ray almost dazzle , even at the distant 
 elevation on which she stand . 

 the bird's - eye perspective before she be not so luxuriantly 
 beautiful , perhaps , as that other one which she know so well ; yet it 
 be more cheer . it lack the intensely blue atmosphere of the 
 rival vale , and its heavy soil and scent ; the new air be clear , 
 bracing , ethereal . the river itself , which nourish the grass 
 and cow of these renowned dairy , flow not like the stream in 
 Blackmoor . those be slow , silent , often turbid ; flow over 
 bed of mud into which the incautious wader might sink and vanish 
 unaware . the Froom water be clear as the pure River of Life 
 show to the Evangelist , rapid as the shadow of a cloud , with 
 pebbly shallow that prattle to the sky all day long . there the 
 water - flower be the lily ; the crow - foot here . 

 either the change in the quality of the air from heavy to light , or 
 the sense of be amid new scene where there be no invidious eye 
 upon she , send up her spirit wonderfully . her hope mingle with 
 the sunshine in an ideal photosphere which surround she as she 
 bound along against the soft south wind . she hear a pleasant 
 voice in every breeze , and in every bird 's note seem to lurk a 
 joy . 

 her face have latterly change with change state of mind , 
 continually fluctuate between beauty and ordinariness , accord as 
 the thought be gay or grave . one day she be pink and flawless ; 
 another pale and tragical . when she be pink she be feel less 
 than when pale ; her more perfect beauty accord with her less 
 elevated mood ; her more intense mood with her less perfect beauty . 
 it be her good face physically that be now set against the south 
 wind . 

 the irresistible , universal , automatic tendency to find sweet 
 pleasure somewhere , which pervade all life , from the mean to the 
 high , have at length master Tess . be even now only a young 
 woman of twenty , one who mentally and sentimentally have not finish 
 grow , it be impossible that any event should have leave upon she 
 an impression that be not in time capable of transmutation . 

 and thus her spirit , and her thankfulness , and her hope , rise 
 higher and high . she try several ballad , but find they 
 inadequate ; till , recollect the psalter that her eye have so often 
 wander over of a Sunday morning before she have eat of the tree 
 of knowledge , she chant : " o ye Sun and Moon ... o ye Stars ... ye 
 Green thing upon the Earth ... ye Fowls of the Air ... beast and 
 Cattle ... child of Men ... bless ye the Lord , praise he and 
 magnify he for ever ! " 

 she suddenly stop and murmur : " but perhaps I do not   quite know 
 the Lord as yet . " 

 and probably the half - unconscious rhapsody be a fetishistic 
 utterance in a monotheistic setting ; woman whose chief companion 
 be the form and force of outdoor Nature retain in their soul far 
 more of the Pagan fantasy of their remote forefather than of the 
 systematize religion teach their race at later date . however , Tess 
 find at least approximate expression for her feeling in the old 
  Benedicite that she have lisp from infancy ; and it be enough . 
 such high contentment with such a slight initial performance as that 
 of have start towards a mean of independent living be a part of 
 the Durbeyfield temperament . Tess really wish to walk uprightly , 
 while her father do nothing of the kind ; but she resemble he in 
 be content with immediate and small achievement , and in have no 
 mind for laborious effort towards such petty social advancement as 
 could alone be effect by a family so heavily handicapped as the 
 once powerful d'Urbervilles be now . 

 there be , it might be say , the energy of her mother 's unexpended 
 family , as well as the natural energy of Tess 's year , rekindle 
 after the experience which have so overwhelm she for the time . let 
 the truth be tell - woman do as a rule live through such humiliation , 
 and regain their spirit , and again look about they with an 
 interested eye . while there be life there be hope be a conviction not 
 so entirely unknown to the " betray " as some amiable theorist would 
 have we believe . 

 Tess Durbeyfield , then , in good heart , and full of zest for life , 
 descend the Egdon slope lower and low towards the dairy of her 
 pilgrimage . 

 the marked difference , in the final particular , between the rival 
 vale now show itself . the secret of Blackmoor be well discover 
 from the height around ; to read aright the valley before she it be 
 necessary to descend into its midst . when Tess have accomplish this 
 feat she find herself to be stand on a carpet level , which 
 stretch to the east and west as far as the eye could reach . 

 the river have steal from the high tract and bring in particle 
 to the vale all this horizontal land ; and now , exhaust , aged , and 
 attenuate , lie serpentine along through the midst of its former 
 spoil . 

 not quite sure of her direction , Tess stand still upon the hem 
 expanse of verdant flatness , like a fly on a billiard - table of 
 indefinite length , and of no more consequence to the surrounding 
 than that fly . the sole effect of her presence upon the placid 
 valley so far have be to excite the mind of a solitary heron , which , 
 after descend to the ground not far from her path , stand with neck 
 erect , look at she . 

 suddenly there arise from all part of the lowland a prolonged and 
 repeat call - " Waow ! waow ! waow ! " 

 from the furth east to the furth west the cry spread as if by 
 contagion , accompany in some case by the barking of a dog . it be 
 not the expression of the valley 's consciousness that beautiful Tess 
 have arrive , but the ordinary announcement of milking - time - half - past 
 four o'clock , when the dairyman set about get in the cow . 

 the red and white herd near at hand , which have be phlegmatically 
 wait for the call , now troop towards the steading in the 
 background , their great bag of milk swing under they as they 
 walk . Tess follow slowly in their rear , and enter the barton 
 by the open gate through which they have enter before she . long 
 thatch shed stretch round the enclosure , their slope encrust 
 with vivid green moss , and their eave support by wooden post 
 rub to a glossy smoothness by the flank of infinite cow 
 and calf of bygone year , now pass to an oblivion almost 
 inconceivable in its profundity . between the post be range 
 the milcher , each exhibit herself at the present moment to a 
 whimsical eye in the rear as a circle on two stalk , down the centre 
 of which a switch move pendulum - wise ; while the sun , lower itself 
 behind this patient row , throw their shadow accurately inward upon 
 the wall . thus it throw shadow of these obscure and homely figure 
 every evening with as much care over each contour as if it have be 
 the profile of a court beauty on a palace wall ; copy they as 
 diligently as it have copy olympian shape on marble facade long 
 ago , or the outline of Alexander , Caesar , and the Pharaohs . 

 they be the less restful cow that be stall . those that would 
 stand still of their own will be milk in the middle of the yard , 
 where many of such well behave one stand wait now - all prime 
 milcher , such as be seldom see out of this valley , and not always 
 within it ; nourish by the succulent feed which the water - mead 
 supply at this prime season of the year . those of they that be 
 spot with white reflect the sunshine in dazzle brilliancy , 
 and the polished brass knob of their horn glitter with something 
 of military display . their large - veined udder hang ponderous as 
 sandbag , the teat stick out like the leg of a gipsy 's crock ; 
 and as each animal linger for her turn to arrive the milk ooze 
 forth and fall in drop to the ground . 



 XVII 


 the dairymaid and man have flock down from their cottage and out 
 of the dairy - house with the arrival of the cow from the mead ; the 
 maid walk in patten , not on account of the weather , but to keep 
 their shoe above the mulch of the barton . each girl sit down on 
 her three - legged stool , her face sideways , her right cheek rest 
 against the cow , and look musingly along the animal 's flank at Tess 
 as she approach . the male milker , with hat - brim turn down , 
 rest flat on their forehead and gaze on the ground , do not 
 observe she . 

 one of these be a sturdy middle - aged man - whose long white " pinner " 
 be somewhat fine and clean than the wrap of the other , and 
 whose jacket underneath have a presentable marketing aspect - the 
 master - dairyman , of whom she be in quest , his double character as 
 a work milker and butter maker here during six day , and on the 
 seventh as a man in shin broad - cloth in his family pew at church , 
 be so marked as to have inspire a rhyme : 


  Dairyman Dick 
  all the week : - 
  on Sundays Mister Richard Crick . 


 see Tess stand at gaze he go across to she . 

 the majority of dairyman have a cross manner at milk time , but it 
 happen that Mr Crick be glad to get a new hand - for the day be 
 busy one now - and he receive she warmly ; inquire for her mother 
 and the rest of the family -   though this as a matter of form merely , 
 for in reality he have not be aware of Mrs Durbeyfield 's existence 
 till apprise of the fact by a brief business - letter about Tess . 

 " oh - ay , as a lad I know your part o ' the country very well , " he 
 say terminatively . " though I have   never be there since . and a aged 
 woman of ninety that use to live nigh here , but be dead and go long 
 ago , tell I that a family of some such name as your in Blackmoor 
 Vale come originally from these part , and that ' twere a old ancient 
 race that have all but perish off the earth - though the new 
 generation do not   know it . but , Lord , I take no notice of the old 
 woman 's rambling , not i. " 

 " oh no - it be nothing , " say Tess . 

 then the talk be of business only . 

 " you can milk them clean , my maidy ? I do not   want my cow go azew at 
 this time o ' year . " 

 she reassure he on that point , and he survey she up and down . 
 she have be stay indoor a good deal , and her complexion have 
 grow delicate . 

 " quite sure you can stand it ? ' tis comfortable enough here for rough 
 folk ; but we do not   live in a cowcumber frame . " 

 she declare that she could stand it , and her zest and willingness 
 seem to win he over . 

 " well , I suppose you will want a dish o ' tay , or victual of some sort , 
 hey ? not yet ? well , do as ye like about it . but faith , if ' twa I , 
 I should be as dry as a kex wi ' travel so far . " 

 " I will begin milk now , to get my hand in , " say Tess . 

 she drink a little milk as temporary refreshment - to the 
 surprise - indeed , slight contempt - of Dairyman Crick , to whose mind 
 it have apparently never occur that milk be good as a beverage . 

 " oh , if ye can swaller that , be it so , " he say indifferently , while 
 hold up the pail that she sip from . " ' tis what I hain't 
 touch for year - not i. Rot the stuff ; it would lie in my innerd 
 like lead . you can try your hand upon she , " he pursue , nod to 
 the near cow . " not but what she do milk rather hard . we have   hard 
 one and we have   easy one , like other folk . however , you will find out 
 that soon enough . " 

 when Tess have change her bonnet for a hood , and be really on her 
 stool under the cow , and the milk be squirt from her fist 
 into the pail , she appear to feel that she really have lay a new 
 foundation for her future . the conviction breed serenity , her pulse 
 slow , and she be able to look about she . 

 the milker form quite a little battalion of man and maid , the 
 man operate on the hard - teate animal , the maid on the kindly 
 nature . it be a large dairy . there be nearly a hundred 
 milcher under Crick 's management , all tell ; and of the herd the 
 master - dairyman milk six or eight with his own hand , unless away 
 from home . these be the cow that milk hard of all ; for his 
 journey - milkman be more or less casually hire , he would not 
 entrust this half - dozen to their treatment , lest , from indifference , 
 they should not milk they fully ; nor to the maid , lest they should 
 fail in the same way for lack of finger - grip ; with the result that in 
 course of time the cow would " go azew " - that be , dry up . it be not 
 the loss for the moment that make slack milk so serious , but that 
 with the decline of demand there come decline , and ultimately 
 cessation , of supply . 

 after Tess have settle down to her cow there be for a time no talk 
 in the barton , and not a sound interfere with the purr of the 
 milk - jet into the numerous pail , except a momentary exclamation 
 to one or other of the beast request she to turn round or stand 
 still . the only movement be those of the milker ' hand up and 
 down , and the swing of the cow ' tail . thus they all work on , 
 encompass by the vast flat mead which extend to either slope 
 of the valley - a level landscape compound of old landscape long 
 forget , and , no doubt , differ in character very greatly from 
 the landscape they compose now . 

 " to my thinking , " say the dairyman , rise suddenly from a cow 
 he have just finish off , snatch up his three - legged stool in 
 one hand and the pail in the other , and move on to the next 
 hard - yielder in his vicinity , " to my thinking , the cow do not   gie 
 down their milk to - day as usual . upon my life , if Winker do begin 
 keep back like this , she will not be worth go under by 
 midsummer . " 

 " ' tis because there be a new hand come among we , " say Jonathan Kail . 
 " I have   notice such thing afore . " 

 " to be sure . it may be so . I do not   think o't . " 

 " I have   be tell that it go up into their horn at such time , " say 
 a dairymaid . 

 " well , as to go up into their horn , " reply Dairyman Crick 
 dubiously , as though even witchcraft might be limit by anatomical 
 possibility , " I could not   say ; I certainly could not . but as nott 
 cow will keep it back as well as the horn one , I do not   quite 
 agree to it . do ye know that riddle about the nott cow , Jonathan ? 
 why do nott cow give less milk in a year than horn ? " 

 " I do not ! " interpose the milkmaid , " why do they ? " 

 " because there bain't   so many of them , " say the dairyman . 
 " Howsomever , these gam'ster do certainly keep back their milk 
 to - day . folk , we must lift up a stave or two - that be the only cure 
 for't . " 

 song be often resort to in dairy hereabout as an enticement 
 to the cow when they show sign of withhold their usual yield ; 
 and the band of milker at this request burst into melody - in purely 
 business - like tone , it be true , and with no great spontaneity ; the 
 result , accord to their own belief , be a decide improvement 
 during the song 's continuance . when they have go through fourteen 
 or fifteen verse of a cheerful ballad about a murderer who be 
 afraid to go to bed in the dark because he see certain brimstone 
 flame around he , one of the male milker say - 

 " I wish singing on the stoop do not   use up so much of a man 's wind ! 
 you should get your harp , sir ; not but what a fiddle be good . " 

 Tess , who have give ear to this , think the word be address to 
 the dairyman , but she be wrong . a reply , in the shape of " why ? " 
 come as it be out of the belly of a dun cow in the stall ; it have 
 be speak by a milker behind the animal , whom she have not hitherto 
 perceive . 

 " oh yes ; there be nothing like a fiddle , " say the dairyman . " though 
 I do think that bull be more move by a tune than cow - at least 
 that be my experience . once there be an old aged man over at 
 Mellstock - William Dewy by name - one of the family that use to do 
 a good deal of business as tranter over there - Jonathan , do ye 
 mind ? - I know the man by sight as well as I know my own brother , in 
 a manner of speak . well , this man be a come home along from a 
 wedding , where he have be play his fiddle , one fine moonlight 
 night , and for shortness ' sake he take a cut across forty - acre , a 
 field lie that way , where a bull be out to grass . the bull seed 
 William , and take after he , horn aground , begad ; and though William 
 runne his good , and have not   MUCH drink in he   consider ' twas a 
 wedding , and the folk well off , he find he would never reach the fence 
 and get over in time to save himself . well , as a last thought , he 
 pull out his fiddle as he runne , and strike up a jig , turn to 
 the bull , and backing towards the corner . the bull soften down , 
 and stand still , look hard at William Dewy , who fiddle on and on ; 
 till a sort of a smile steal over the bull 's face . but no soon 
 do William stop his playing and turn to get over hedge than the 
 bull would stop his smile and lower his horn towards the seat of 
 William 's breech . well , William have to turn about and play on , 
 willy - nilly ; and ' twa only three o'clock in the world , and ' a know 
 that nobody would come that way for hour , and he so leery and tired 
 that ' a do not   know what to do . when he have scrap till about four 
 o'clock he feel that he verily would have to give over soon , and he 
 say to himself , ' there be only this last tune between I and eternal 
 welfare ! Heaven save I , or I be a do man . ' well , then he call to 
 mind how he have see the cattle kneel o ' Christmas eve in the dead o ' 
 night . it be not Christmas Eve then , but it come into his head to 
 play a trick upon the bull . so he break into the ' Tivity Hymm , just 
 as at Christmas carol - singing ; when , lo and behold , down go the 
 bull on his bended knee , in his ignorance , just as if ' twere the 
 true ' tivity night and hour . as soon as his horn friend be down , 
 William turn , clink off like a long - dog , and jump safe over 
 hedge , before the pray bull have get on his foot again to take 
 after he . William use to say that he have see a man look a fool 
 a good many time , but never such a fool as that bull look when 
 he find his pious feeling have be play upon , and ' twa not 
 Christmas Eve . ... yes , William Dewy , that be the man 's name ; and 
 I can tell you to a foot where be he a - lying in Mellstock Churchyard 
 at this very moment - just between the second yew - tree and the north 
 aisle . " 

 " it be a curious story ; it carry we back to medieval time , when 
 faith be a live thing ! " 

 the remark , singular for a dairy - yard , be murmur by the voice 
 behind the dun cow ; but as nobody understand the reference , no notice 
 be take , except that the narrator seem to think it might imply 
 scepticism as to his tale . 

 " well , ' tis quite true , sir , whether or no . I know the man well . " 

 " oh yes ; I have no doubt of it , " say the person behind the dun cow . 

 Tess 's attention be thus attract to the dairyman 's interlocutor , 
 of whom she could see but the mere patch , owe to his bury his 
 head so persistently in the flank of the milcher . she could not 
 understand why he should be address as ' sir " even by the dairyman 
 himself . but no explanation be discernible ; he remain under the 
 cow long enough to have milk three , utter a private ejaculation 
 now and then , as if he could not get on . 

 " take it gentle , sir ; take it gentle , " say the dairyman . " ' tis 
 knack , not strength , that do it . " 

 " so I find , " say the other , stand up at last and stretch his 
 arm . " I think I have finish she , however , though she make my 
 finger ache . " 

 Tess could then see he at full length . he wear the ordinary white 
 pinner and leather legging of a dairy - farmer when milk , and his 
 boot be clog with the mulch of the yard ; but this be all his 
 local livery . beneath it be something educate , reserved , subtle , 
 sad , differ . 

 but the detail of his aspect be temporarily thrust aside by 
 the discovery that he be one whom she have see before . such 
 vicissitude have Tess pass through since that time that for a 
 moment she could not remember where she have meet he ; and then it 
 flash upon she that he be the pedestrian who have join in the 
 club - dance at Marlott - the pass stranger who have come she know 
 not whence , have dance with other but not with she , and slightingly 
 leave she , and go on his way with his friend . 

 the flood of memory bring back by this revival of an incident 
 anterior to her trouble produce a momentary dismay lest , 
 recognize she also , he should by some mean discover her story . 
 but it pass away when she find no sign of remembrance in he . she 
 see by degree that since their first and only encounter his mobile 
 face have grow more thoughtful , and have acquire a young man 's 
 shapely moustache and beard - the latter of the pale straw colour 
 where it begin upon his cheek , and deepen to a warm brown far 
 from its root . under his linen milking - pinner he wear a dark 
 velveteen jacket , cord breech and gaiter , and a starched white 
 shirt . without the milking - gear nobody could have guess what 
 he be . he might with equal probability have be an eccentric 
 landowner or a gentlemanly ploughman . that he be but a novice at 
 dairy work she have realize in a moment , from the time he have spend 
 upon the milking of one cow . 

 meanwhile many of the milkmaid have say to one another of the 
 newcomer , " how pretty she be ! " with something of real generosity and 
 admiration , though with a half hope that the auditor would qualify 
 the assertion - which , strictly speak , they might have do , 
 prettiness be an inexact definition of what strike the eye in 
 Tess . when the milking be finish for the evening they straggle 
 indoor , where Mrs Crick , the dairyman 's wife - who be too 
 respectable to go out milk herself , and wear a hot stuff gown in 
 warm weather because the dairymaid wear print - be give an eye 
 to the lead and thing . 

 only two or three of the maid , Tess learn , sleep in the dairy - house 
 besides herself , most of the helper go to their home . she see 
 nothing at supper - time of the superior milker who have comment on 
 the story , and ask no question about he , the remainder of the 
 evening be occupy in arrange her place in the bed - chamber . 
 it be a large room over the milk - house , some thirty foot long ; the 
 sleep - cot of the other three indoor milkmaid be in the same 
 apartment . they be bloom young woman , and , except one , rather 
 old than herself . by bedtime Tess be thoroughly tired , and fall 
 asleep immediately . 

 but one of the girl , who occupy an adjoining bed , be more wakeful 
 than Tess , and would insist upon relate to the latter various 
 particular of the homestead into which she have just enter . the 
 girl 's whisper word mingle with the shade , and , to Tess 's drowsy 
 mind , they seem to be generate by the darkness in which they 
 float . 

 " Mr Angel Clare - he that be learn milking , and that play 
 the harp - never say much to we . he be a pa'son 's son , and be 
 too much take up wi ' his own thought to notice girl . he be 
 the dairyman 's pupil - learn farming in all its branch . he 
 have learn sheep - farming at another place , and he be now master 
 dairy - work .... yes , he be quite the gentleman - bear . his father be 
 the Reverent Mr Clare at Emminster - a good many mile from here . " 

 " oh - I have hear of he , " say her companion , now awake . " a very 
 earnest clergyman , be he not ? " 

 " yes - that he be - the earnest man in all Wessex , they say - the 
 last of the old Low Church sort , they tell I - for all about here be 
 what they call high . all his son , except our Mr Clare , be make 
 pa'son too . " 

 Tess have not at this hour the curiosity to ask why the present Mr 
 Clare be not make a parson like his brother , and gradually fall 
 asleep again , the word of her informant come to she along with the 
 smell of the cheese in the adjoining cheeseloft , and the measured 
 dripping of the whey from the wring downstairs . 



 xviii 


 Angel Clare rise out of the past not altogether as a distinct 
 figure , but as an appreciative voice , a long regard of fix , 
 abstract eye , and a mobility of mouth somewhat too small and 
 delicately line for a man 's , though with an unexpectedly firm close 
 of the low lip now and then ; enough to do away with any inference 
 of indecision . nevertheless , something nebulous , preoccupied , vague , 
 in his bearing and regard , mark he as one who probably have no very 
 definite aim or concern about his material future . yet as a lad 
 people have say of he that he be one who might do anything if he 
 try . 

 he be the young son of his father , a poor parson at the other end 
 of the county , and have arrive at Talbothays Dairy as a six month ' 
 pupil , after go the round of some other farm , his object be 
 to acquire a practical skill in the various process of farming , 
 with a view either to the Colonies or the tenure of a home - farm , as 
 circumstance might decide . 

 his entry into the rank of the agriculturist and breeder be a 
 step in the young man 's career which have be anticipate neither 
 by himself nor by other . 

 Mr Clare the elder , whose first wife have die and leave he a 
 daughter , marry a second late in life . this lady have somewhat 
 unexpectedly bring he three son , so that between Angel , the 
 young , and his father the Vicar there seem to be almost a 
 missing generation . of these boy the aforesaid Angel , the child of 
 his old age , be the only son who have not take a University degree , 
 though he be the single one of they whose early promise might have 
 do full justice to an academical training . 

 some two or three year before Angel 's appearance at the Marlott 
 dance , on a day when he have leave school and be pursue his study 
 at home , a parcel come to the Vicarage from the local bookseller 's , 
 direct to the Reverend James Clare . the Vicar have open it and 
 find it to contain a book , read a few page ; whereupon he jump up 
 from his seat and go straight to the shop with the book under his 
 arm . 

 " why have this be send to my house ? " he ask peremptorily , hold 
 up the volume . 

 " it be order , sir . " 

 " not by I , or any one belong to I , I be happy to say . " 

 the shopkeeper look into his order - book . 

 " oh , it have be misdirect , sir , " he say . " it be order by Mr 
 Angel Clare , and should have be send to he . " 

 Mr Clare wince as if he have be strike . he go home pale and 
 deject , and call Angel into his study . 

 " look into this book , my boy , " he say . " what do you know about it ? " 

 " I order it , " say Angel simply . 

 " what for ? " 

 " to read . " 

 " how can you think of read it ? " 

 " how can I ? why - it be a system of philosophy . there be no more 
 moral , or even religious , work publish . " 

 " yes - moral enough ; I do not   deny that . but religious ! - and for you , 
 who intend to be a minister of the Gospel ! " 

 " since you have allude to the matter , father , " say the son , with 
 anxious thought upon his face , " I should like to say , once for 
 all , that I should prefer not to take order . I fear I could not 
 conscientiously do so . I love the Church as one love a parent . 
 I shall always have the warm affection for she . there be no 
 institution for whose history I have a deep admiration ; but I 
 can not honestly be ordain her minister , as my brother be , while 
 she refuse to liberate her mind from an untenable redemptive 
 theolatry . " 

 it have never occur to the straightforward and simple - minded Vicar 
 that one of his own flesh and blood could come to this ! he be 
 stultify , shocked , paralysed . and if Angel be not go to 
 enter the Church , what be the use of send he to Cambridge ? the 
 University as a step to anything but ordination seem , to this man 
 of fix idea , a preface without a volume . he be a man not merely 
 religious , but devout ; a firm believer - not as the phrase be now 
 elusively construe by theological thimble - rigger in the Church and 
 out of it , but in the old and ardent sense of the evangelical school : 
 one who could 


  indeed opine 
  that the Eternal and Divine 
  Did , eighteen century ago 
  in very truth ... 


 Angel 's father try argument , persuasion , entreaty . 

 " no , father ; I can not underwrite Article four   leave alone the rest , 
 take it ' in the literal and grammatical sense ' as require by the 
 Declaration ; and , therefore , I can not   be a parson in the present state 
 of affair , " say Angel . " my whole instinct in matter of religion 
 be towards reconstruction ; to quote your favorite Epistle to the 
 Hebrews , ' the removing of those thing that be shake , as of thing 
 that be make , that those thing which can not be shake may remain . ' " 

 his father grieve so deeply that it make Angel quite ill to see he . 

 " what be the good of your mother and I economize and stint 
 ourselves to give you a University education , if it be not to be use 
 for the honour and glory of God ? " his father repeat . 

 " why , that it may be use for the honour and glory of man , father . " 

 perhaps if Angel have persevere he might have go to Cambridge like 
 his brother . but the Vicar 's view of that seat of learn as a 
 step - stone to Orders alone be quite a family tradition ; and so 
 root be the idea in his mind that perseverance begin to appear to 
 the sensitive son akin to an intent to misappropriate a trust , and 
 wrong the pious head of the household , who have be and be , as his 
 father have hint , compel to exercise much thrift to carry out 
 this uniform plan of education for the three young man . 

 " I will do without Cambridge , " say Angel at last . " I feel that I 
 have no right to go there in the circumstance . " 

 the effect of this decisive debate be not long in show 
 themselves . he spend year and year in desultory study , 
 undertaking , and meditation ; he begin to evince considerable 
 indifference to social form and observance . the material 
 distinction of rank and wealth he increasingly despise . even the 
 " good old family "   to use a favourite phrase of a late local worthy 
 have no aroma for he unless there be good new resolution in its 
 representative . as a balance to these austerity , when he go to 
 live in London to see what the world be like , and with a view to 
 practise a profession or business there , he be carry off his 
 head , and nearly entrap by a woman much old than himself , though 
 luckily he escape not greatly the bad for the experience . 

 early association with country solitude have breed in he an 
 unconquerable , and almost unreasonable , aversion to modern town life , 
 and shut he out from such success as he might have aspire to by 
 follow a mundane calling in the impracticability of the spiritual 
 one . but something have to be do ; he have waste many valuable 
 year ; and have an acquaintance who be start on a thriving life 
 as a Colonial farmer , it occur to Angel that this might be a lead 
 in the right direction . farming , either in the Colonies , America , or 
 at home - farming , at any rate , after become well qualified for the 
 business by a careful apprenticeship - that be a vocation which would 
 probably afford an independence without the sacrifice of what he 
 value even more than a competency - intellectual liberty . 

 so we find Angel Clare at six - and - twenty here at talbothay as a 
 student of kine , and , as there be no house near at hand in which 
 he could get a comfortable lodging , a boarder at the dairyman 's . 

 his room be an immense attic which run the whole length of the 
 dairy - house . it could only be reach by a ladder from the 
 cheese - loft , and have be close up for a long time till he arrive 
 and select it as his retreat . here Clare have plenty of space , and 
 could often be hear by the dairy - folk pacing up and down when the 
 household have go to rest . a portion be divide off at one end by 
 a curtain , behind which be his bed , the outer part be furnish 
 as a homely sit - room . 

 at first he live up above entirely , read a good deal , and 
 strum upon an old harp which he have buy at a sale , say when 
 in a bitter humour that he might have to get his living by it in the 
 street some day . but he soon prefer to read human nature by 
 take his meal downstairs in the general dining - kitchen , with the 
 dairyman and his wife , and the maid and man , who all together form 
 a lively assembly ; for though but few milk hand sleep in the 
 house , several join the family at meal . the long Clare reside 
 here the less objection have he to his company , and the more do he 
 like to share quarter with they in common . 

 much to his surprise he take , indeed , a real delight in their 
 companionship . the conventional farm - folk of his imagination - 
 personify in the newspaper - press by the pitiable dummy know as 
 Hodge - be obliterate after a few day ' residence . at close 
 quarter no Hodge be to be see . at first , it be true , when Clare 's 
 intelligence be fresh from a contrast society , these friend with 
 whom he now hobnob seem a little strange . sit down as a 
 level member of the dairyman 's household seem at the outset an 
 undignified proceeding . the idea , the mode , the surrounding , 
 appear retrogressive and unmeaning . but with live on there , 
 day after day , the acute sojourner become conscious of a new aspect 
 in the spectacle . without any objective change whatever , variety 
 have take the place of monotonousness . his host and his host 's 
 household , his man and his maid , as they become intimately know to 
 Clare , begin to differentiate themselves as in a chemical process . 
 the thought of Pascal 's be bring home to he : " a mesure qu'on a 
 plus d'esprit , on trouve qu'il y a plus d'hommes originaux . Les 
 gen du commun ne trouvent pas de difference entre les homme . " 
 the typical and unvarying Hodge cease to exist . he have be 
 disintegrate into a number of varied fellow - creature - being of 
 many mind , being infinite in difference ; some happy , many serene , a 
 few depressed , one here and there bright even to genius , some stupid , 
 other wanton , other austere ; some mutely Miltonic , some potentially 
 Cromwellian - into man who have private view of each other , as he have 
 of his friend ; who could applaud or condemn each other , amuse or 
 sadden themselves by the contemplation of each other 's foible or 
 vice ; man every one of whom walk in his own individual way the 
 road to dusty death . 

 unexpectedly he begin to like the outdoor life for its own sake , 
 and for what it bring , apart from its bearing on his own propose 
 career . consider his position he become wonderfully free from the 
 chronic melancholy which be take hold of the civilized race with 
 the decline of belief in a beneficent power . for the first time of 
 late year he could read as his musing incline he , without any eye 
 to cram for a profession , since the few farming handbook which 
 he deem it desirable to master occupy he but little time . 

 he grow away from old association , and see something new in life and 
 humanity . secondarily , he make close acquaintance with phenomena 
 which he have before know but darkly - the season in their mood , 
 morning and evening , night and noon , wind in their different 
 temper , tree , water and mist , shade and silence , and the voice 
 of inanimate thing . 


 the early morning be still sufficiently cool to render a fire 
 acceptable in the large room wherein they breakfast ; and , by 
 Mrs Crick 's order , who hold that he be too genteel to mess at 
 their table , it be Angel Clare 's custom to sit in the yawning 
 chimney - corner during the meal , his cup - and - saucer and plate be 
 place on a hinged flap at his elbow . the light from the long , wide , 
 mullione window opposite shone in upon his nook , and , assist by a 
 secondary light of cold blue quality which shine down the chimney , 
 enable he to read there easily whenever disposed to do so . between 
 Clare and the window be the table at which his companion sit , their 
 munching profile rise sharp against the pane ; while to the side 
 be the milk - house door , through which be visible the rectangular 
 lead in row , full to the brim with the morning 's milk . at the 
 further end the great churn could be see revolve , and its 
 slip - slopping hear - the move power be discernible through the 
 window in the form of a spiritless horse walk in a circle and 
 drive by a boy . 

 for several day after Tess 's arrival Clare , sit abstractedly 
 read from some book , periodical , or piece of music just come by 
 post , hardly notice that she be present at table . she talk so 
 little , and the other maid talk so much , that the babble do not 
 strike he as possess a new note , and he be ever in the habit 
 of neglect the particular of an outward scene for the general 
 impression . one day , however , when he have be con one of his 
 music - score , and by force of imagination be hear the tune in 
 his head , he lapse into listlessness , and the music - sheet roll 
 to the hearth . he look at the fire of log , with its one flame 
 pirouette on the top in a die dance after the breakfast - cooking 
 and boiling , and it seem to jig to his inward tune ; also at the two 
 chimney crook dangle down from the cotterel , or cross - bar , plume 
 with soot , which quiver to the same melody ; also at the half - empty 
 kettle whine an accompaniment . the conversation at the table mix 
 in with his phantasmal orchestra till he think : " what a fluty voice 
 one of those milkmaid have ! I suppose it be the new one . " 

 Clare look round upon she , seat with the other . 

 she be not look towards he . indeed , owe to his long silence , 
 his presence in the room be almost forget . 

 " I do not   know about ghost , " she be say ; " but I do know that our 
 soul can be make to go outside our body when we be alive . " 

 the dairyman turn to she with his mouth full , his eye charge 
 with serious inquiry , and his great knife and fork   breakfast be 
 breakfast here   plant erect on the table , like the beginning of 
 a gallow . 

 " what - really now ? and be it so , maidy ? " he say . 

 " a very easy way to feel them go , " continue Tess , " be to lie on the 
 grass at night and look straight up at some big bright star ; and , by 
 fix your mind upon it , you will soon find that you be hundred 
 and hundred o ' mile away from your body , which you do not   seem to 
 want at all . " 

 the dairyman remove his hard gaze from Tess , and fix it on his 
 wife . 

 " now that be a rum thing , Christianer - hey ? to think o ' the mile 
 I have   vamp o ' starlight night these last thirty year , courting , or 
 trading , or for doctor , or for nurse , and yet never have the least 
 notion o ' that till now , or feel my soul rise so much as an inch 
 above my shirt - collar . " 

 the general attention be draw to she , include that of the 
 dairyman 's pupil , Tess flush , and remark evasively that it be 
 only a fancy , resume her breakfast . 

 Clare continue to observe she . she soon finish her eating , and 
 have a consciousness that Clare be regard she , begin to trace 
 imaginary pattern on the tablecloth with her forefinger with the 
 constraint of a domestic animal that perceive itself to be watch . 

 " what a fresh and virginal daughter of Nature that milkmaid be ! " he 
 say to himself . 

 and then he seem to discern in her something that be familiar , 
 something which carry he back into a joyous and unforeseee past , 
 before the necessity of take thought have make the heavens gray . he 
 conclude that he have behold she before ; where he could not tell . a 
 casual encounter during some country ramble it certainly have be , 
 and he be not greatly curious about it . but the circumstance be 
 sufficient to lead he to select Tess in preference to the other 
 pretty milkmaid when he wish to contemplate contiguous womankind . 



 XIX 


 in general the cow be milk as they present themselves , without 
 fancy or choice . but certain cow will show a fondness for a 
 particular pair of hand , sometimes carry this predilection so far 
 as to refuse to stand at all except to their favourite , the pail of a 
 stranger be unceremoniously kick over . 

 it be Dairyman Crick 's rule to insist on break down these 
 partiality and aversion by constant interchange , since otherwise , 
 in the event of a milkman or maid go away from the dairy , he be 
 place in a difficulty . the maid ' private aim , however , be the 
 reverse of the dairyman 's rule , the daily selection by each damsel of 
 the eight or ten cow to which she have grow accustomed render the 
 operation on their willing udder surprisingly easy and effortless . 

 Tess , like her compeer , soon discover which of the cow have a 
 preference for her style of manipulation , and her finger have 
 become delicate from the long domiciliary imprisonment to which 
 she have subject herself at interval during the last two or three 
 year , she would have be glad to meet the milcher ' view in 
 this respect . out of the whole ninety - five there be eight in 
 particular - Dumpling , Fancy , Lofty , Mist , Old Pretty , Young Pretty , 
 Tidy , and Loud - who , though the teat of one or two be as hard as 
 carrot , give down to she with a readiness that make her work on they 
 a mere touch of the finger . know , however , the dairyman 's wish , 
 she endeavour conscientiously to take the animal just as they 
 come , expect the very hard yielder which she could not yet 
 manage . 

 but she soon find a curious correspondence between the ostensibly 
 chance position of the cow and her wish in this matter , till she 
 feel that their order could not be the result of accident . the 
 dairyman 's pupil have lend a hand in get the cow together of 
 late , and at the fifth or sixth time she turn her eye , as she 
 rest against the cow , full of sly inquiry upon he . 

 " Mr Clare , you have range the cow ! " she say , blush ; and in 
 make the accusation , symptom of a smile gently lift her upper 
 lip in spite of she , so as to show the tip of her tooth , the low 
 lip remain severely still . 

 " well , it make no difference , " say he . " you will always be here to 
 milk they . " 

 " do you think so ? I hope I shall ! but I do not   know . " 

 she be angry with herself afterwards , think that he , unaware of 
 her grave reason for like this seclusion , might have mistake she 
 meaning . she have speak so earnestly to he , as if his presence 
 be somehow a factor in her wish . her misgiving be such that at 
 dusk , when the milking be over , she walk in the garden alone , to 
 continue her regret that she have disclose to he her discovery of 
 his considerateness . 

 it be a typical summer evening in June , the atmosphere be in 
 such delicate equilibrium and so transmissive that inanimate object 
 seem endow with two or three sens , if not five . there be no 
 distinction between the near and the far , and an auditor feel close 
 to everything within the horizon . the soundlessness impress she as 
 a positive entity rather than as the mere negation of noise . it be 
 break by the strumming of string . 

 Tess have hear those note in the attic above her head . dim , 
 flatten , constrain by their confinement , they have never appeal 
 to she as now , when they wander in the still air with a stark 
 quality like that of nudity . to speak absolutely , both instrument 
 and execution be poor ; but the relative be all , and as she listen 
 Tess , like a fascinated bird , could not leave the spot . far from 
 leave she draw up towards the performer , keep behind the hedge 
 that he might not guess her presence . 

 the outskirt of the garden in which Tess find herself have be 
 leave uncultivated for some year , and be now damp and rank with 
 juicy grass which send up mist of pollen at a touch ; and with tall 
 bloom weed emit offensive smell - weed whose red and yellow 
 and purple hue form a polychrome as dazzle as that of cultivated 
 flower . she go stealthily as a cat through this profusion of 
 growth , gather cuckoo - spittle on her skirt , crack snail that 
 be underfoot , stain her hand with thistle - milk and slug - slime , 
 and rub off upon her naked arm sticky blight which , though 
 snow - white on the apple - tree trunk , make madder stain on her skin ; 
 thus she draw quite near to Clare , still unobserved of he . 

 Tess be conscious of neither time nor space . the exaltation which 
 she have describe as be producible at will by gaze at a star 
 come now without any determination of her ; she undulate upon the 
 thin note of the second - hand harp , and their harmony pass like 
 breeze through she , bring tear into her eye . the float 
 pollen seem to be his note make visible , and the dampness of 
 the garden the weeping of the garden 's sensibility . though near 
 nightfall , the rank - smell weed - flower glow as if they would not 
 close for intentness , and the wave of colour mix with the wave of 
 sound . 

 the light which still shine be derive mainly from a large hole in 
 the western bank of cloud ; it be like a piece of day leave behind 
 by accident , dusk have close in elsewhere . he conclude his 
 plaintive melody , a very simple performance , demand no great 
 skill ; and she wait , think another might be begin . but , tired 
 of play , he have desultorily come round the fence , and be ramble 
 up behind she . tess , her cheek on fire , move away furtively , as if 
 hardly move at all . 

 Angel , however , see her light summer gown , and he speak ; his low 
 tone reach she , though he be some distance off . 

 " what make you draw off in that way , Tess ? " say he . " be you 
 afraid ? " 

 " oh no , sir - not of outdoor thing ; especially just now when the 
 apple - blooth be fall , and everything be so green . " 

 " but you have your indoor fear - eh ? " 

 " well - yes , sir . " 

 " what of ? " 

 " I could not   quite say . " 

 " the milk turn sour ? " 

 " no . " 

 " life in general ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " ah - so have I , very often . this hobble of be alive be rather 
 serious , do not   you think so ? " 

 " it be - now you put it that way . " 

 " all the same , I should not   have expect a young girl like you to see 
 it so just yet . how be it you do ? " 

 she maintain a hesitate silence . 

 " Come , Tess , tell I in confidence . " 

 she think that he mean what be the aspect of thing to she , and 
 reply shyly - 

 " the tree have inquisitive eye , have not   they ? - that is , seem as 
 if they have . and the river say , - ' why do ye trouble I with your 
 look ? ' and you seem to see number of to - morrow just all in a 
 line , the first of they the big and clear , the other get 
 small and small as they stand far away ; but they all seem 
 very fierce and cruel and as if they say , ' I be come ! beware of 
 I ! beware of I ! ' ... but you , sir , can raise up dream with your 
 music , and drive all such horrid fancy away ! " 

 he be surprised to find this young woman - who though but a milkmaid 
 have just that touch of rarity about she which might make she the 
 envy of her housemates - shape such sad imagining . she be 
 express in her own native phrase - assist a little by her Sixth 
 Standard training - feeling which might almost have be call those 
 of the age - the ache of modernism . the perception arrest he less 
 when he reflect that what be call advanced idea be really in 
 great part but the late fashion in definition - a more accurate 
 expression , by word in logy and ism , of sensation which man and 
 woman have vaguely grasp for century . 

 still , it be strange that they should have come to she while yet so 
 young ; more than strange ; it be impressive , interesting , pathetic . 
 not guess the cause , there be nothing to remind he that 
 experience be as to intensity , and not as to duration . Tess 's 
 pass corporeal blight have be her mental harvest . 

 Tess , on her part , could not understand why a man of clerical family 
 and good education , and above physical want , should look upon it as a 
 mishap to be alive . for the unhappy pilgrim herself there be very 
 good reason . but how could this admirable and poetic man ever have 
 descend into the Valley of Humiliation , have feel with the man of 
 Uz - as she herself have feel two or three year ago - " my soul chooseth 
 strangling and death rather than my life . I loathe it ; I would not 
 live alway . " 

 it be true that he be at present out of his class . but she know 
 that be only because , like Peter the Great in a shipwright 's yard , 
 he be study what he want to know . he do not milk cow because 
 he be oblige to milk cow , but because he be learn to be a 
 rich and prosperous dairyman , landowner , agriculturist , and breeder 
 of cattle . he would become an american or Australian Abraham , 
 command like a monarch his flock and his herd , his spot 
 and his ring - strake , his man - servant and his maid . at time , 
 nevertheless , it do seem unaccountable to she that a decidedly 
 bookish , musical , think young man should have choose deliberately 
 to be a farmer , and not a clergyman , like his father and brother . 

 thus , neither have the clue to the other 's secret , they be 
 respectively puzzle at what each reveal , and await new knowledge 
 of each other 's character and mood without attempt to pry into 
 each other 's history . 


 every day , every hour , bring to he one more little stroke of 
 her nature , and to her one more of his . Tess be try to lead a 
 repressed life , but she little divine the strength of her own 
 vitality . 

 at first Tess seem to regard Angel Clare as an intelligence rather 
 than as a man . as such she compare he with herself ; and at every 
 discovery of the abundance of his illumination , of the distance 
 between her own modest mental standpoint and the unmeasurable , andean 
 altitude of his , she become quite deject , dishearten from all 
 further effort on her own part whatever . 

 he observe her dejection one day , when he have casually mention 
 something to she about pastoral life in ancient Greece . she be 
 gather the bud call " lord and lady " from the bank while he 
 speak . 

 " why do you look so woebegone all of a sudden ? " he ask . 

 " oh , ' tis only - about my own self , " she say , with a frail laugh of 
 sadness , fitfully begin to peel " a lady " meanwhile . " just a 
 sense of what might have be with I ! my life look as if it have 
 be waste for want of chance ! when I see what you know , what you 
 have read , and see , and think , I feel what a nothing I be ! I be 
 like the poor queen of Sheba who live in the Bible . there be no 
 more spirit in I . " 

 " bless my soul , do not   go troubling about that ! why , " he say with 
 some enthusiasm , " I should be only too glad , my dear Tess , to help 
 you to anything in the way of history , or any line of read you 
 would like to take up - " 

 " it be a lady again , " interrupt she , hold out the bud she have 
 peel . 

 " what ? " 

 " I mean that there be always more lady than lord when you come 
 to peel they . " 

 " never mind about the lord and lady . would you like to take up 
 any course of study - history , for example ? " 

 " sometimes I feel I do not   want to know anything more about it than I 
 know already . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " because what be the use of learn that I be one of a long row 
 only - find out that there be set down in some old book somebody 
 just like I , and to know that I shall only act her part ; make I 
 sad , that be all . the good be not to remember that your nature and 
 your past doing have be just like thousand ' and thousand ' , and 
 that your come life and doing will be like thousand 's and 
 thousand ' . " 

 " what , really , then , you do not   want to learn anything ? " 

 " I should not   mind learn why - why the sun do shine on the just and 
 the unjust alike , " she answer , with a slight quaver in her voice . 
 " but that be what book will not tell I . " 

 " Tess , fie for such bitterness ! " of course he speak with a 
 conventional sense of duty only , for that sort of wonder have not 
 be unknown to himself in bygone day . and as he look at the 
 unpracticed mouth and lip , he think that such a daughter of the 
 soil could only have catch up the sentiment by rote . she go on 
 peel the lord and lady till Clare , regard for a moment the 
 wave - like curl of her lash as they drop with her bent gaze on 
 her soft cheek , lingeringly go away . when he be go she stand 
 awhile , thoughtfully peel the last bud ; and then , awakening 
 from her reverie , fling it and all the crowd of floral nobility 
 impatiently on the ground , in an ebullition of displeasure with 
 herself for her niaiserie , and with a quicken warmth in her 
 heart of heart . 

 how stupid he must think she ! in an access of hunger for his good 
 opinion she bethink herself of what she have latterly endeavour to 
 forget , so unpleasant have be its issue - the identity of her family 
 with that of the knightly d'Urbervilles . barren attribute as it be , 
 disastrous as its discovery have be in many way to she , perhaps 
 Mr Clare , as a gentleman and a student of history , would respect 
 she sufficiently to forget her childish conduct with the lord and 
 lady if he know that those purbeck - marble and alabaster people in 
 Kingsbere Church really represent her own lineal forefather ; that 
 she be no spurious d'Urberville , compound of money and ambition 
 like those at Trantridge , but true d'Urberville to the bone . 

 but , before venture to make the revelation , dubious Tess indirectly 
 sound the dairyman as to its possible effect upon Mr Clare , by 
 ask the former if Mr Clare have any great respect for old county 
 family when they have lose all their money and land . 

 " Mr Clare , " say the dairyman emphatically , " be one of the most 
 rebell rozum you ever know - not a bit like the rest of his 
 family ; and if there be one thing that he do hate more than another 
 ' tis the notion of what be call a ' old family . he say that it 
 stand to reason that old family have do their spurt of work in 
 past day , and can not   have anything leave in them now . there be the 
 Billets and the Drenkhards and the Greys and the St Quintins and 
 the Hardys and the Goulds , who use to own the land for mile down 
 this valley ; you could buy them all up now for an old song a'most . 
 why , our little Retty Priddle here , you know , be one of the 
 Paridelles - the old family that use to own lot o ' the land out by 
 King 's Hintock , now own by the Earl o ' wessex , afore even he or 
 his be hear of . well , Mr Clare find this out , and speak quite 
 scornful to the poor girl for day . ' ah ! ' he say to she , ' you will 
 never make a good dairymaid ! all your skill be use up age ago 
 in Palestine , and you must lie fallow for a thousand year to git 
 strength for more deed ! ' a boy come here t'other day ask for 
 a job , and say his name be Matt , and when we ask he his surname 
 he say he would never hear that ' a have any surname , and when we ask 
 why , he say he suppose his folk have not   be ' stablishe long 
 enough . ' ah ! you be the very boy I want ! ' say Mr Clare , jump 
 up and shake hand wi'en ; ' I have   great hope of you ; ' and give he 
 half - a - crown . o no ! he can not   stomach old family ! " 

 after hear this caricature of Clare 's opinion poor Tess be glad 
 that she have not say a word in a weak moment about her family - even 
 though it be so unusually old almost to have go round the circle 
 and become a new one . besides , another diary - girl be as good as 
 she , it seem , in that respect . she hold her tongue about the 
 d'Urberville vault and the Knight of the Conqueror whose name she 
 bore . the insight afford into Clare 's character suggest to she 
 that it be largely owe to her suppose untraditional newness that 
 she have win interest in his eye . 



 XX 


 the season develop and mature . another year 's instalment of 
 flower , leaf , nightingale , thrush , finch , and such ephemeral 
 creature , take up their position where only a year ago other have 
 stand in their place when these be nothing more than germ and 
 inorganic particle . ray from the sunrise draw forth the bud and 
 stretch they into long stalk , lift up sap in noiseless stream , 
 open petal , and suck out scent in invisible jet and 
 breathing . 

 Dairyman Crick 's household of maid and man live on comfortably , 
 placidly , even merrily . their position be perhaps the happy of 
 all position in the social scale , be above the line at which 
 neediness end , and below the line at which the convenance begin 
 to cramp natural feeling , and the stress of threadbare modishness 
 make too little of enough . 

 thus pass the leafy time when arborescence seem to be the one 
 thing aim at out of door . Tess and Clare unconsciously study 
 each other , ever balanced on the edge of a passion , yet apparently 
 keep out of it . all the while they be converge , under an 
 irresistible law , as surely as two stream in one vale . 

 Tess have never in her recent life be so happy as she be now , 
 possibly never would be so happy again . she be , for one thing , 
 physically and mentally suited among these new surrounding . the 
 sapling which have root down to a poisonous stratum on the spot of 
 its sowing have be transplant to a deep soil . moreover she , and 
 Clare also , stand as yet on the debatable land between predilection 
 and love ; where no profundity have be reach ; no reflection 
 have set in , awkwardly inquire , " whither do this new current tend 
 to carry I ? what do it mean to my future ? how do it stand 
 towards my past ? " 

 Tess be the mere stray phenomenon to Angel Clare as yet - a rosy , 
 warm apparition which have only just acquire the attribute of 
 persistence in his consciousness . so he allow his mind to be 
 occupy with she , deem his preoccupation to be no more than a 
 philosopher 's regard of an exceedingly novel , fresh , and interesting 
 speciman of womankind . 

 they meet continually ; they could not help it . they meet daily in that 
 strange and solemn interval , the twilight of the morning , in the 
 violet or pink dawn ; for it be necessary to rise early , so very 
 early , here . milking be do betime ; and before the milking come 
 the skimming , which begin at a little past three . it usually fall 
 to the lot of some one or other of they to wake the rest , the first 
 be arouse by an alarm - clock ; and , as Tess be the late arrival , 
 and they soon discover that she could be depend upon not to sleep 
 though the alarm as other do , this task be thrust most frequently 
 upon she . no soon have the hour of three strike and whiz , 
 than she leave her room and run to the dairyman 's door ; then up the 
 ladder to Angel 's , call he in a loud whisper ; then wake her 
 fellow - milkmaid . by the time that Tess be dress Clare be 
 downstairs and out in the humid air . the remain maid and the 
 dairyman usually give themselves another turn on the pillow , and do 
 not appear till a quarter of an hour later . 

 the gray half - tone of daybreak be not the gray half - tone of the 
 day 's close , though the degree of their shade may be the same . in 
 the twilight of the morning , light seem active , darkness passive ; 
 in the twilight of evening it be the darkness which be active and 
 crescent , and the light which be the drowsy reverse . 

 be so often - possibly not always by chance - the first two person 
 to get up at the dairy - house , they seem to themselves the first 
 person up of all the world . in these early day of her residence 
 here Tess do not skim , but go out of door at once after rise , 
 where he be generally await she . the spectral , half - compound , 
 aqueous light which pervade the open mead impress they with 
 a feeling of isolation , as if they be Adam and Eve . at this 
 dim inceptive stage of the day Tess seem to clare to exhibit a 
 dignified largeness both of disposition and physique , an almost 
 regnant power , possibly because he know that at that preternatural 
 time hardly any woman so well endow in person as she be likely to 
 be walk in the open air within the boundary of his horizon ; very 
 few in all England . fair woman be usually asleep at mid - summer 
 dawn . she be close at hand , and the rest be nowhere . 

 the mixed , singular , luminous gloom in which they walk along 
 together to the spot where the cow lie often make he think of the 
 Resurrection hour . he little think that the Magdalen might be 
 at his side . whilst all the landscape be in neutral shade his 
 companion 's face , which be the focus of his eye , rise above the 
 mist stratum , seem to have a sort of phosphorescence upon it . she 
 look ghostly , as if she be merely a soul at large . in reality 
 her face , without appear to do so , have catch the cold gleam of 
 day from the north - east ; his own face , though he do not think of 
 it , wear the same aspect to she . 

 it be then , as have be say , that she impress he most deeply . 
 she be no long the milkmaid , but a visionary essence of woman - a 
 whole sex condense into one typical form . he call she Artemis , 
 Demeter , and other fanciful name half teasingly , which she do not 
 like because she do not understand they . 

 " call I Tess , " she would say askance ; and he do . 

 then it would grow light , and her feature would become simply 
 feminine ; they have change from those of a divinity who could confer 
 bliss to those of a being who crave it . 

 at these non - human hour they could get quite close to the waterfowl . 
 heron come , with a great bold noise as of open door and 
 shutter , out of the bough of a plantation which they frequent at 
 the side of the mead ; or , if already on the spot , hardily maintain 
 their standing in the water as the pair walk by , watch they by 
 move their head round in a slow , horizontal , passionless wheel , 
 like the turn of puppet by clockwork . 

 they could then see the faint summer fog in layer , woolly , level , 
 and apparently no thick than counterpane , spread about the meadow 
 in detach remnant of small extent . on the gray moisture of the 
 grass be mark where the cow have lie through the night - dark - green 
 island of dry herbage the size of their carcass , in the general 
 sea of dew . from each island proceed a serpentine trail , by which 
 the cow have ramble away to feed after get up , at the end of 
 which trail they find she ; the snore puff from her nostril , when 
 she recognize they , make an intenser little fog of her own amid 
 the prevail one . then they drive the animal back to the barton , 
 or sit down to milk they on the spot , as the case might require . 

 or perhaps the summer fog be more general , and the meadow lay like 
 a white sea , out of which the scatter tree rise like dangerous 
 rock . bird would soar through it into the upper radiance , and 
 hang on the wing sunning themselves , or alight on the wet rail 
 subdivide the mead , which now shine like glass rod . minute 
 diamond of moisture from the mist hung , too , upon Tess 's eyelash , 
 and drop upon her hair , like seed pearl . when the day grow quite 
 strong and commonplace these dry off she ; moreover , Tess then 
 lose she strange and ethereal beauty ; her tooth , lip , and eye 
 scintillate in the sunbeam and she be again the dazzlingly fair 
 dairymaid only , who have to hold she own against the other woman of 
 the world . 

 about this time they would hear Dairyman Crick 's voice , lecture the 
 non - resident milker for arrive late , and speak sharply to old 
 Deborah Fyander for not wash her hand . 

 " for Heaven 's sake , pop thy hand under the pump , Deb ! upon my soul , 
 if the London folk only know of thee and thy slovenly way , they would 
 swaller their milk and butter more mince than they do a'ready ; and 
 that be say a good deal . " 

 the milking progress , till towards the end Tess and Clare , in 
 common with the rest , could hear the heavy breakfast table drag 
 out from the wall in the kitchen by Mrs Crick , this be the 
 invariable preliminary to each meal ; the same horrible scrape 
 accompany its return journey when the table have be clear . 



 XXI 


 there be a great stir in the milk - house just after breakfast . the 
 churn revolve as usual , but the butter would not come . whenever 
 this happen the dairy be paralyze . squish , squash echo the 
 milk in the great cylinder , but never arise the sound they wait 
 for . 

 Dairyman Crick and his wife , the milkmaid Tess , Marian , Retty 
 Priddle , Izz Huett , and the married one from the cottage ; also 
 Mr Clare , Jonathan Kail , old Deborah , and the rest , stand gaze 
 hopelessly at the churn ; and the boy who keep the horse go outside 
 put on moon - like eye to show his sense of the situation . even the 
 melancholy horse himself seem to look in at the window in inquire 
 despair at each walk round . 

 " ' tis year since I go to Conjuror Trendle 's son in Egdon - year ! " 
 say the dairyman bitterly . " and he be nothing to what his father 
 have be . I have say fifty time , if I have say once , that I don't 
 believe in en ; though ' a do cast folk ' water very true . but I 
 shall have to go to ' n if he be alive . o yes , I shall have to go to 
 ' n , if this sort of thing continny ! " 

 even Mr Clare begin to feel tragical at the dairyman 's desperation . 

 " Conjuror Fall , t'other side of Casterbridge , that they use to call 
 ' wide - o ' , be a very good man when I be a boy , " say Jonathan Kail . 
 " but he be rotten as touchwood by now . " 

 " my grandfather use to go to Conjuror Mynterne , out at Owlscombe , 
 and a clever man a ' were , so I have   hear grandf'er say , " continue Mr 
 Crick . " but there be no such genuine folk about nowadays ! " 

 Mrs Crick 's mind keep near to the matter in hand . 

 " perhaps somebody in the house be in love , " she say tentatively . 
 " I have   hear tell in my young day that that will cause it . why , 
 Crick - that maid we have year ago , do ye mind , and how the butter 
 do not   come then - " 

 " ah yes , yes ! - but that be not   the right o't . it have nothing to do 
 with the love - making . I can mind all about it - ' twa the damage to 
 the churn . " 

 he turn to Clare . 

 " Jack Dollop , a ' hore' - bird of a fellow we have here as milker at one 
 time , sir , court a young woman over at Mellstock , and deceive she 
 as he have deceive many afore . but he have another sort o ' woman to 
 reckon wi ' this time , and it be not the girl herself . one Holy 
 Thursday of all day in the almanack , we be here as we mid be now , 
 only there be no churning in hand , when we zid the girl 's mother 
 come up to the door , wi ' a great brass - mount umbrella in her 
 hand that would ha ' fell an ox , and say ' do Jack Dollop work 
 here ? - because I want he ! I have a big bone to pick with he , I 
 can assure ' n ! ' and some way behind her mother walk Jack 's young 
 woman , cry bitterly into her handkercher . ' o Lard , here be a 
 time ! ' say Jack , look out o ' winder at them . ' she will murder I ! 
 where shall I get - where shall I - ? do not   tell she where I be ! ' 
 and with that he scramble into the churn through the trap - door , and 
 shut himself inside , just as the young woman 's mother bust into 
 the milk - house . ' the villain - where be he ? ' say she . ' I will claw 
 his face for'n , let I only catch he ! ' well , she hunt about 
 everywhere , ballyrag Jack by side and by seam , Jack lie 
 a'most stifle inside the churn , and the poor maid - or young woman 
 rather - stand at the door cry her eye out . I shall never 
 forget it , never ! ' twould have melt a marble stone ! but she 
 could not   find he nowhere at all . " 

 the dairyman pause , and one or two word of comment come from the 
 listener . 

 Dairyman Crick 's story often seem to be end when they be not 
 really so , and stranger be betray into premature interjection 
 of finality ; though old friend know well . the narrator go on - 

 " well , how the old woman should have have the wit to guess it I could 
 never tell , but she find out that he be inside that there churn . 
 without say a word she take hold of the winch   it be turn by 
 handpower then , and round she swing he , and Jack begin to flop 
 about inside . ' o Lard ! stop the churn ! let I out ! ' say he , pop 
 out his head . ' I shall be churn into a pummy ! '   he be a cowardly 
 chap in his heart , as such man mostly be . ' not till ye make amend 
 for ravage her virgin innocence ! ' say the old woman . ' stop the 
 churn you old witch ! ' scream he . ' you call I old witch , do ye , you 
 deceiver ! ' say she , ' when ye ought to ha ' be call I mother - law 
 these last five month ! ' and on go the churn , and Jack 's bone 
 rattle round again . well , none of we venture to interfere ; and at 
 last ' a promise to make it right wi ' she . ' yes - I will be as good as 
 my word ! ' he say . and so it end that day . " 

 while the listener be smile their comment there be a 
 quick movement behind their back , and they look round . tess , 
 pale - face , have go to the door . 

 " how warm ' tis to - day ! " she say , almost inaudibly . 

 it be warm , and none of they connect her withdrawal with the 
 reminiscence of the dairyman . he go forward and open the door 
 for she , say with tender raillery - 

 " why , maidy "   he frequently , with unconscious irony , give she this 
 pet name , " the prettiest milker I have   get in my dairy ; you must not 
 get so fagged as this at the first breath of summer weather , or we 
 shall be finely put to for want of ' ee by dog - day , shall not   we , Mr 
 Clare ? " 

 " I be faint - and - I think I be well out o ' door , " she say 
 mechanically ; and disappear outside . 

 fortunately for she the milk in the revolving churn at that moment 
 change its squashing for a decided flick - flack . 

 " ' tis come ! " cry Mrs Crick , and the attention of all be call 
 off from Tess . 

 that fair sufferer soon recover herself externally ; but she 
 remain much depressed all the afternoon . when the evening milking 
 be do she do not care to be with the rest of they , and go out 
 of door , wander along she know not whither . she be wretched - o 
 so wretched - at the perception that to her companion the dairyman 's 
 story have be rather a humorous narration than otherwise ; none of 
 they but herself seem to see the sorrow of it ; to a certainty , not 
 one know how cruelly it touch the tender place in her experience . 
 the evening sun be now ugly to she , like a great inflame wound in 
 the sky . only a solitary crack - voice reed - sparrow greet she from 
 the bush by the river , in a sad , machine - make tone , resemble that 
 of a past friend whose friendship she have outwear . 

 in these long June day the milkmaid , and , indeed , most of the 
 household , go to bed at sunset or soon , the morning work before 
 milking be so early and heavy at a time of full pail . tess 
 usually accompany her fellow upstairs . to - night , however , she be 
 the first to go to their common chamber ; and she have doze when the 
 other girl come in . she see they undress in the orange light 
 of the vanish sun , which flush their form with its colour ; she 
 doze again , but she be reawaken by their voice , and quietly 
 turn her eye towards they . 

 neither of her three chamber - companion have get into bed . they be 
 stand in a group , in their nightgown , barefoote , at the window , 
 the last red ray of the west still warm their face and neck and 
 the wall around they . all be watch somebody in the garden with 
 deep interest , their three face close together : a jovial and round 
 one , a pale one with dark hair , and a fair one whose tress be 
 auburn . 

 " do not   push ! you can see as well as I , " say Retty , the 
 auburn - haired and young girl , without remove her eye from the 
 window . 

 " ' tis no use for you to be in love with he any more than I , Retty 
 Priddle , " say jolly - face Marian , the eld , slily . " his thought 
 be of other cheek than thine ! " 

 Retty Priddle still look , and the other look again . 

 " there he be again ! " cry Izz Huett , the pale girl with dark damp 
 hair and keenly cut lip . 

 " you need not   say anything , Izz , " answer Retty . " for I zid you 
 kiss his shade . " 

 " what do you see she do ? " ask Marian . 

 " why - he be stand over the whey - tub to let off the whey , and the 
 shade of his face come upon the wall behind , close to Izz , who be 
 stand there fill a vat . she put her mouth against the wall and 
 kiss the shade of his mouth ; I zid she , though he do not . " 

 " o Izz Huett ! " say Marian . 

 a rosy spot come into the middle of Izz Huett 's cheek . 

 " well , there be no harm in it , " she declare , with attempt 
 coolness . " and if I be in love wi'en , so be Retty , too ; and so be 
 you , Marian , come to that . " 

 Marian 's full face could not blush past its chronic pinkness . 

 " I ! " she say . " what a tale ! ah , there he be again ! dear 
 eye - dear face - dear Mr Clare ! " 

 " there - you have   own it ! " 

 " so have you - so have we all , " say Marian , with the dry frankness of 
 complete indifference to opinion . " it be silly to pretend otherwise 
 amongst ourselves , though we need not own it to other folk . I would 
 just marry ' n to - morrow ! " 

 " so would I - and more , " murmur Izz Huett . 

 " and I too , " whisper the more timid Retty . 

 the listener grow warm . 

 " we can not   all marry he , " say Izz . 

 " we shall not , either of we ; which be bad still , " say the eld . 
 " there he be again ! " 

 they all three blow he a silent kiss . 

 " why ? " ask Retty quickly . 

 " because he like Tess Durbeyfield well , " say Marian , lower she 
 voice . " I have watch he every day , and have find it out . " 

 there be a reflective silence . 

 " but she do not   care anything for ' n ? " at length breathe Retty . 

 " well - I sometimes think that too . " 

 " but how silly all this be ! " say Izz Huett impatiently . " of course 
 he will not   marry any one of we , or Tess either - a gentleman 's son , 
 who be go to be a great landowner and farmer abroad ! more likely 
 to ask we to come wi'en as farm - hand at so much a year ! " 

 one sigh , and another sigh , and Marian 's plump figure sigh 
 big of all . somebody in bed hard by sigh too . tear come into 
 the eye of Retty Priddle , the pretty red - haired young - the last 
 bud of the Paridelles , so important in the county annal . they 
 watch silently a little long , their three face still close 
 together as before , and the triple hue of their hair mingle . but 
 the unconscious Mr Clare have go indoor , and they see he no more ; 
 and , the shade begin to deepen , they creep into their bed . 
 in a few minute they hear he ascend the ladder to his own room . 
 Marian be soon snore , but Izz do not drop into forgetfulness for 
 a long time . Retty Priddle cry herself to sleep . 

 the deeply - passione Tess be very far from sleep even then . this 
 conversation be another of the bitter pill she have be oblige to 
 swallow that day . Scarce the least feeling of jealousy arise in her 
 breast . for that matter she know herself to have the preference . 
 be more finely form , well educate , and , though the young 
 except Retty , more woman than either , she perceive that only the 
 slight ordinary care be necessary for hold she own in Angel 
 Clare 's heart against these her candid friend . but the grave 
 question be , ought she to do this ? there be , to be sure , hardly a 
 ghost of a chance for either of they , in a serious sense ; but there 
 be , or have be , a chance of one or the other inspire he with a 
 pass fancy for she , and enjoy the pleasure of his attention 
 while he stay here . such unequal attachment have lead to marriage ; 
 and she have hear from Mrs Crick that Mr Clare have one day ask , in 
 a laugh way , what would be the use of his marry a fine lady , 
 and all the while ten thousand acre of Colonial pasture to feed , 
 and cattle to rear , and corn to reap . a farm - woman would be the 
 only sensible kind of wife for he . but whether Mr Clare have speak 
 seriously or not , why should she , who could never conscientiously 
 allow any man to marry she now , and who have religiously determine 
 that she never would be tempt to do so , draw off Mr Clare 's 
 attention from other woman , for the brief happiness of sun 
 herself in his eye while he remain at Talbothays ? 



 XXII 


 they come downstairs yawn next morning ; but skim and milking 
 be proceed with as usual , and they go indoor to breakfast . 
 Dairyman Crick be discover stamp about the house . he have 
 receive a letter , in which a customer have complain that the butter 
 have a twang . 

 " and begad , so ' t have ! " say the dairyman , who hold in his left hand 
 a wooden slice on which a lump of butter be stick . " yes - taste for 
 yourself ! " 

 several of they gather round he ; and Mr Clare taste , Tess taste , 
 also the other indoor milkmaid , one or two of the milking - man , and 
 last of all Mrs Crick , who come out from the wait breakfast - table . 
 there certainly be a twang . 

 the dairyman , who have throw himself into abstraction to well 
 realize the taste , and so divine the particular specie of noxious 
 weed to which it appertain , suddenly exclaim - 

 " ' tis garlic ! and I think there be not   a blade leave in that mead ! " 

 then all the old hand remember that a certain dry mead , into which 
 a few of the cow have be admit of late , have , in year go by , 
 spoil the butter in the same way . the dairyman have not recognize 
 the taste at that time , and think the butter bewitch . 

 " we must overhaul that mead , " he resume ; " this must not   continny ! " 

 all have arm themselves with old pointed knife , they go out 
 together . as the inimical plant could only be present in very 
 microscopic dimension to have escape ordinary observation , to 
 find it seem rather a hopeless attempt in the stretch of rich 
 grass before they . however , they form themselves into line , all 
 assisting , owe to the importance of the search ; the dairyman at 
 the upper end with Mr Clare , who have volunteer to help ; then 
 Tess , Marian , Izz Huett , and Retty ; then Bill Lewell , Jonathan , and 
 the married dairywomen - Beck Knibbs , with her wooly black hair and 
 roll eye ; and flaxen Frances , consumptive from the winter damp 
 of the water - mead - who live in their respective cottage . 

 with eye fix upon the ground they creep slowly across a strip of 
 the field , return a little far down in such a manner that , 
 when they should have finish , not a single inch of the pasture but 
 would have fall under the eye of some one of they . it be a most 
 tedious business , not more than half a dozen shoot of garlic being 
 discoverable in the whole field ; yet such be the herb 's pungency 
 that probably one bite of it by one cow have be sufficient to season 
 the whole dairy 's produce for the day . 

 differ one from another in nature and mood so greatly as they 
 do , they yet form , bending , a curiously uniform row - automatic , 
 noiseless ; and an alien observer pass down the neighbouring lane 
 might well have be excuse for mass they as " Hodge " . as they 
 creep along , stoop low to discern the plant , a soft yellow gleam 
 be reflect from the buttercup into their shaded face , give 
 they an elfish , moonlit aspect , though the sun be pour upon their 
 back in all the strength of noon . 

 Angel Clare , who communistically stick to his rule of take part 
 with the rest in everything , glance up now and then . it be not , 
 of course , by accident that he walk next to Tess . 

 " well , how be you ? " he murmur . 

 " very well , thank you , sir , " she reply demurely . 

 as they have be discuss a score of personal matter only 
 half - an - hour before , the introductory style seem a little 
 superfluous . but they get no far in speech just then . they 
 creep and creep , the hem of her petticoat just touch his gaiter , 
 and his elbow sometimes brush her . at last the dairyman , who 
 come next , could stand it no long . 

 " upon my soul and body , this here stoop do fairly make my back 
 open and shut ! " he exclaim , straighten himself slowly with an 
 excruciated look till quite upright . " and you , maidy Tess , you 
 be not   well a day or two ago - this will make your head ache finely ! 
 do not   do any more , if you feel fainty ; leave the rest to finish it . " 

 Dairyman Crick withdraw , and Tess drop behind . Mr Clare also 
 step out of line , and begin privateere about for the weed . when 
 she find he near she , her very tension at what she have hear the 
 night before make she the first to speak . 

 " do not   they look pretty ? " she say . 

 " who ? " 

 " Izzy Huett and Retty . " 

 Tess have moodily decide that either of these maiden would make a 
 good farmer 's wife , and that she ought to recommend they , and obscure 
 her own wretched charm . 

 " Pretty ? well , yes - they be pretty girl - fresh looking . I have 
 often think so . " 

 " though , poor dear , prettiness will not   last long ! " 

 " o no , unfortunately . " 

 " they be excellent dairywoman . " 

 " yes : though not well than you . " 

 " they skim well than I. " 

 " do they ? " 

 Clare remain observe they - not without their observe he . 

 " she be colour up , " continue Tess heroically . 

 " who ? " 

 " Retty priddle . " 

 " oh ! why it that ? " 

 " because you be look at she . " 

 self - sacrifice as her mood might be , Tess could not well go far 
 and cry , " marry one of they , if you really do want a dairywoman and 
 not a lady ; and do not   think of marry I ! " she follow Dairyman 
 Crick , and have the mournful satisfaction of see that Clare 
 remain behind . 

 from this day she force herself to take pain to avoid he - never 
 allow herself , as formerly , to remain long in his company , even if 
 their juxtaposition be purely accidental . she give the other three 
 every chance . 

 Tess be woman enough to realize from their avowal to herself that 
 Angel Clare have the honour of all the dairymaid in his keeping , and 
 her perception of his care to avoid compromise the happiness of 
 either in the least degree breed a tender respect in Tess for what she 
 deem , rightly or wrongly , the self - control sense of duty show 
 by he , a quality which she have never expect to find in one of the 
 opposite sex , and in the absence of which more than one of the simple 
 heart who be his house - mates might have go weep on her 
 pilgrimage . 



 XXIII 


 the hot weather of July have creep upon they unawares , and the 
 atmosphere of the flat vale hang heavy as an opiate over the 
 dairy - folk , the cow , and the tree . hot steaming rain fall 
 frequently , make the grass where the cow feed yet more rank , and 
 hinder the late hay - making in the other mead . 

 it be Sunday morning ; the milking be do ; the outdoor milker 
 have go home . Tess and the other three be dress themselves 
 rapidly , the whole bevy have agree to go together to Mellstock 
 Church , which lie some three or four mile distant from the 
 dairy - house . she have now be two month at talbothay , and this 
 be her first excursion . 

 all the precede afternoon and night heavy thunderstorm have hiss 
 down upon the mead , and wash some of the hay into the river ; but 
 this morning the sun shine out all the more brilliantly for the 
 deluge , and the air be balmy and clear . 

 the crooked lane lead from their own parish to Mellstock run along 
 the low level in a portion of its length , and when the girl 
 reach the most depressed spot they find that the result of the 
 rain have be to flood the lane over - shoe to a distance of some fifty 
 yard . this would have be no serious hindrance on a week - day ; they 
 would have click through it in their high pattern and boot quite 
 unconcerned ; but on this day of vanity , this sun' - day , when flesh 
 go forth to coquet with flesh while hypocritically affect 
 business with spiritual thing ; on this occasion for wear their 
 white stocking and thin shoe , and their pink , white , and lilac 
 gown , on which every mud spot would be visible , the pool be an 
 awkward impediment . they could hear the church - bell calling - as yet 
 nearly a mile off . 

 " who would have expect such a rise in the river in summer - time ! " 
 say Marian , from the top of the roadside bank on which they have 
 climb , and be maintain a precarious footing in the hope of 
 creep along its slope till they be past the pool . 

 " we can not   get there anyhow , without walk right through it , or else 
 go round the Turnpike way ; and that would make we so very late ! " 
 say Retty , pause hopelessly . 

 " and I do colour up so hot , walk into church late , and all the 
 people star round , " say Marian , " that I hardly cool down again 
 till we get into the that - it - may - please - Thees . " 

 while they stand cling to the bank they hear a splashing round 
 the bend of the road , and presently appear Angel Clare , advance 
 along the lane towards they through the water . 

 four heart give a big throb simultaneously . 

 his aspect be probably as un - sabbatarian a one as a dogmatic 
 parson 's son often present ; his attire be his dairy clothe , 
 long wad boot , a cabbage - leaf inside his hat to keep his head 
 cool , with a thistle - spud to finish he off . " he be not go to 
 church , " say Marian . 

 " no - I wish he be ! " murmur Tess . 

 Angel , in fact , rightly or wrongly   to adopt the safe phrase of 
 evasive controversialist , prefer sermon in stone to sermon in 
 church and chapel on fine summer day . this morning , moreover , 
 he have go out to see if the damage to the hay by the flood be 
 considerable or not . on his walk he observe the girl from a long 
 distance , though they have be so occupy with their difficulty of 
 passage as not to notice he . he know that the water have rise at 
 that spot , and that it would quite check their progress . so he have 
 hasten on , with a dim idea of how he could help they - one of they 
 in particular . 

 the rosy - cheeked , bright - eyed quartet look so charming in their 
 light summer attire , cling to the roadside bank like pigeon on a 
 roof - slope , that he stop a moment to regard they before come 
 close . their gauzy skirt have brush up from the grass innumerable 
 fly and butterfly which , unable to escape , remain cage in 
 the transparent tissue as in an aviary . Angel 's eye at last fall 
 upon Tess , the hindmost of the four ; she , be full of suppress 
 laughter at their dilemma , could not help meet his glance 
 radiantly . 

 he come beneath they in the water , which do not rise over his long 
 boot ; and stand look at the entrap fly and butterfly . 

 " be you try to get to church ? " he say to Marian , who be in 
 front , include the next two in his remark , but avoid Tess . 

 " yes , sir ; and ' tis get late ; and my colour do come up so - " 

 " I will carry you through the pool - every Jill of you . " 

 the whole four flush as if one heart beat through they . 

 " I think you can not , sir , " say Marian . 

 " it be the only way for you to get past . stand still . nonsense - you 
 be not too heavy ! I would carry you all four together . now , Marian , 
 attend , " he continue , " and put your arm round my shoulder , so . 
 now ! hold on . that be well do . " 

 Marian have lower herself upon his arm and shoulder as direct , and 
 Angel stride off with she , his slim figure , as view from behind , 
 look like the mere stem to the great nosegay suggest by her . 
 they disappear round the curve of the road , and only his souse 
 footstep and the top ribbon of Marian 's bonnet tell where they be . 
 in a few minute he reappear . Izz Huett be the next in order upon 
 the bank . 

 " here he come , " she murmur , and they could hear that her lip be 
 dry with emotion . " and I have to put my arm round his neck and look 
 into his face as Marian do . " 

 " there be nothing in that , " say Tess quickly . 

 " there be a time for everything , " continue Izz , unheeding . " a time 
 to embrace , and a time to refrain from embrace ; the first be now 
 go to be mine . " 

 " fie - it be Scripture , Izz ! " 

 " yes , " say Izz , " I have   always a ' ear at church for pretty verse . " 

 Angel Clare , to whom three - quarter of this performance be a 
 commonplace act of kindness , now approach Izz . she quietly and 
 dreamily lower herself into his arm , and Angel methodically 
 march off with she . when he be hear return for the third time 
 Retty 's throb heart could be almost see to shake she . he go 
 up to the red - haired girl , and while he be seize she he glance at 
 Tess . his lip could not have pronounce more plainly , " it will soon 
 be you and I. " her comprehension appear in her face ; she could not 
 help it . there be an understanding between they . 

 poor little Retty , though by far the light weight , be the most 
 troublesome of Clare 's burden . Marian have be like a sack of meal , 
 a dead weight of plumpness under which he have literally stagger . 
 Izz have ride sensibly and calmly . Retty be a bunch of hysteric . 

 however , he get through with the disquiet creature , deposit she , 
 and return . Tess could see over the hedge the distant three in a 
 group , stand as he have place they on the next rise ground . it 
 be now her turn . she be embarrassed to discover that excitement at 
 the proximity of Mr Clare 's breath and eye , which she have contemn 
 in her companion , be intensify in herself ; and as if fearful of 
 betray her secret , she palter with he at the last moment . 

 " I may be able to clim ' along the bank perhaps - I can clim ' well 
 than they . you must be so tired , Mr Clare ! " 

 " no , no , Tess , " say he quickly . and almost before she be aware , 
 she be seat in his arm and rest against his shoulder . 

 " Three Leahs to get one Rachel , " he whisper . 

 " they be well woman than I , " she reply , magnanimously stick 
 to her resolve . 

 " not to I , " say Angel . 

 he see she grow warm at this ; and they go some step in silence . 

 " I hope I be not too heavy ? " she say timidly . 

 " o no . you should lift Marian ! such a lump . you be like an 
 undulating billow warm by the sun . and all this fluff of muslin 
 about you be the froth . " 

 " it be very pretty - if I seem like that to you . " 

 " do you know that I have undergo three - quarter of this labour 
 entirely for the sake of the fourth quarter ? " 

 " no . " 

 " I do not expect such an event to - day . " 

 " nor I ... the water come up so sudden . " 

 that the rise in the water be what she understand he to refer to , 
 the state of breathing belie . Clare stand still and inclince his 
 face towards her . 

 " o Tessy ! " he exclaim . 

 the girl 's cheek burn to the breeze , and she could not look into 
 his eye for her emotion . it remind Angel that he be somewhat 
 unfairly take advantage of an accidental position ; and he go no 
 far with it . no definite word of love have cross their lip 
 as yet , and suspension at this point be desirable now . however , 
 he walk slowly , to make the remainder of the distance as long as 
 possible ; but at last they come to the bend , and the rest of their 
 progress be in full view of the other three . the dry land be 
 reach , and he set she down . 

 her friend be look with round thoughtful eye at she and he , 
 and she could see that they have be talk of she . he hastily bid 
 they farewell , and splash back along the stretch of submerged road . 

 the four move on together as before , till Marian break the silence 
 by say - 

 " no - in all truth ; we have no chance against she ! " she look 
 joylessly at Tess . 

 " what do you mean ? " ask the latter . 

 " he like ' ee good - the very good ! we could see it as he bring 
 ' ee . he would have kiss ' ee , if you have encourage he to do it , 
 ever so little . " 

 " no , no , " say she . 

 the gaiety with which they have set out have somehow vanish ; and 
 yet there be no enmity or malice between they . they be generous 
 young soul ; they have be rear in the lonely country nook where 
 fatalism be a strong sentiment , and they do not blame she . such 
 supplanting be to be . 

 Tess 's heart ache . there be no concealing from herself the fact 
 that she love Angel Clare , perhaps all the more passionately from 
 know that the other have also lose their heart to he . there be 
 contagion in this sentiment , especially among woman . and yet that 
 same hungry nature have fight against this , but too feebly , and the 
 natural result have follow . 

 " I will never stand in your way , nor in the way of either of you ! " 
 she declare to Retty that night in the bedroom   her tear run 
 down . " I can not   help this , my dear ! I do not   think marry be in 
 his mind at all ; but if he be ever to ask I I should refuse he , 
 as I should refuse any man . " 

 " oh ! would you ? why ? " say wonder Retty . 

 " it can not be ! but I will be plain . put myself quite on one 
 side , I do not   think he will choose either of you . " 

 " I have never expect it - thought of it ! " moan Retty . " but o ! I 
 wish I be dead ! " 

 the poor child , tear by a feeling which she hardly understand , turn 
 to the other two girl who come upstairs just then . 

 " we be friend with she again , " she say to they . " she think no 
 more of his choose she than we do . " 

 so the reserve go off , and they be confide and warm . 

 " I do not   seem to care what I do now , " say Marian , whose mood be 
 turn to its low bass . " I be go to marry a dairyman at 
 Stickleford , who be ask I twice ; but - my soul - I would put an end 
 to myself rather'n be his wife now ! why do not   ye speak , Izz ? " 

 " to confess , then , " murmur Izz , " I make sure to - day that he be 
 go to kiss I as he hold I ; and I lay still against his breast , 
 hop and hop , and never move at all . but he do not . I do not 
 like biding here at talbothay any long ! I shall go hwome . " 

 the air of the sleep - chamber seem to palpitate with the 
 hopeless passion of the girl . they writhe feverishly under the 
 oppressiveness of an emotion thrust on they by cruel Nature 's law - an 
 emotion which they have neither expect nor desire . the incident 
 of the day have fan the flame that be burn the inside of their 
 heart out , and the torture be almost more than they could endure . 
 the difference which distinguish they as individual be 
 abstract by this passion , and each be but portion of one organism 
 call sex . there be so much frankness and so little jealousy 
 because there be no hope . each one be a girl of fair common sense , 
 and she do not delude herself with any vain conceit , or deny she 
 love , or give herself air , in the idea of outshine the other . 
 the full recognition of the futility of their infatuation , from a 
 social point of view ; its purposeless beginning ; its self - bound 
 outlook ; its lack of everything to justify its existence in the eye 
 of civilization   while lack nothing in the eye of Nature ; the one 
 fact that it do exist , ecstasize they to a kill joy - all this 
 impart to they a resignation , a dignity , which a practical and 
 sordid expectation of win he as a husband would have destroy . 

 they toss and turn on their little bed , and the cheese - wring 
 drip monotonously downstairs . 

 " B ' you awake , Tess ? " whisper one , half - an - hour later . 

 it be Izz Huett 's voice . 

 Tess reply in the affirmative , whereupon also Retty and Marian 
 suddenly fling the bedclothe off they , and sigh - 

 " so be we ! " 

 " I wonder what she be like - the lady they say his family have look 
 out for he ! " 

 " I wonder , " say Izz . 

 " some lady look out for he ? " gasp Tess , start . " I have never 
 hear o ' that ! " 

 " o yes - ' tis whisper ; a young lady of his own rank , choose by his 
 family ; a Doctor of Divinity 's daughter near his father 's parish of 
 Emminster ; he do not   much care for she , they say . but he be sure to 
 marry she . " 

 they have hear so very little of this ; yet it be enough to build up 
 wretched dolorous dream upon , there in the shade of the night . they 
 picture all the detail of his being win round to consent , of the 
 wedding preparation , of the bride 's happiness , of her dress and 
 veil , of her blissful home with he , when oblivion would have fall 
 upon themselves as far as he and their love be concern . thus 
 they talk , and ache , and weep till sleep charm their sorrow 
 away . 

 after this disclosure Tess nourish no far foolish thought that 
 there lurk any grave and deliberate import in Clare 's attention 
 to she . it be a pass summer love of her face , for love 's own 
 temporary sake - nothing more . and the thorny crown of this sad 
 conception be that she whom he really do prefer in a cursory way 
 to the rest , she who know herself to be more impassioned in nature , 
 cleverer , more beautiful than they , be in the eye of propriety far 
 less worthy of he than the homelier one whom he ignore . 



 XXIV 


 amid the ooze fatness and warm ferment of the Froom Vale , at a 
 season when the rush of juice could almost be hear below the hiss 
 of fertilization , it be impossible that the most fanciful love 
 should not grow passionate . the ready bosom exist there be 
 impregnate by their surrounding . 

 July pass over their head , and the thermidorean weather which come 
 in its wake seem an effort on the part of Nature to match the state 
 of heart at Talbothays Dairy . the air of the place , so fresh in the 
 spring and early summer , be stagnant and enervate now . its heavy 
 scent weigh upon they , and at mid - day the landscape seem lie 
 in a swoon . ethiopic scorching brown the upper slope of the 
 pasture , but there be still bright green herbage here where the 
 watercourse purl . and as Clare be oppress by the outward 
 heat , so be he burden inwardly by wax fervour of passion for 
 the soft and silent Tess . 

 the rain have pass , the upland be dry . the wheel of the 
 dairyman 's spring - cart , as he speed home from market , lick up the 
 pulverize surface of the highway , and be follow by white riband 
 of dust , as if they have set a thin powder - train on fire . the cow 
 jump wildly over the five - bar barton - gate , madden by the 
 gad - fly ; Dairyman Crick keep his shirt - sleeve permanently roll up 
 from Monday to Saturday ; open window have no effect in ventilation 
 without open door , and in the dairy - garden the blackbird and 
 thrush creep about under the currant - bush , rather in the manner 
 of quadruped than of wing creature . the fly in the kitchen 
 be lazy , teasing , and familiar , crawl about in the unwonted 
 place , on the floor , into drawer , and over the back of the 
 milkmaid ' hand . conversation be concern sunstroke ; while 
 butter - making , and still more butter - keeping , be a despair . 

 they milk entirely in the mead for coolness and convenience , 
 without drive in the cow . during the day the animal obsequiously 
 follow the shadow of the small tree as it move round the stem 
 with the diurnal roll ; and when the milker come they could hardly 
 stand still for the fly . 

 on one of these afternoon four or five unmilked cow chance to 
 stand apart from the general herd , behind the corner of a hedge , 
 among they be Dumpling and Old Pretty , who love Tess 's hand 
 above those of any other maid . when she rise from her stool under a 
 finish cow , Angel Clare , who have be observe she for some time , 
 ask she if she would take the aforesaid creature next . she 
 silently assent , and with her stool at arm 's length , and the pail 
 against her knee , go round to where they stand . soon the sound of 
 Old Pretty 's milk fizz into the pail come through the hedge , and 
 then Angel feel inclined to go round the corner also , to finish off a 
 hard - yield milcher who have stray there , he be now as capable 
 of this as the dairyman himself . 

 all the man , and some of the woman , when milking , dig their forehead 
 into the cow and gaze into the pail . but a few - mainly the young 
 one - rest their head sideways . this be Tess Durbeyfield 's 
 habit , her temple press the milcher 's flank , her eye fix on 
 the far end of the meadow with the quiet of one lose in meditation . 
 she be milk Old Pretty thus , and the sun chance to be on the 
 milking - side , it shine flat upon her pink - gown form and her white 
 curtain - bonnet , and upon her profile , render it keen as a cameo 
 cut from the dun background of the cow . 

 she do not know that Clare have follow her round , and that he sit 
 under his cow watch she . the stillness of her head and feature 
 be remarkable : she might have be in a trance , her eye open , yet 
 unseeing . nothing in the picture move but Old Pretty 's tail and 
 Tess 's pink hand , the latter so gently as to be a rhythmic pulsation 
 only , as if they be obey a reflex stimulus , like a beat 
 heart . 

 how very lovable her face be to he . yet there be nothing ethereal 
 about it ; all be real vitality , real warmth , real incarnation . and 
 it be in her mouth that this culminate . eye almost as deep and 
 speak he have see before , and cheek perhaps as fair ; brow as 
 arch , a chin and throat almost as shapely ; her mouth he have see 
 nothing to equal on the face of the earth . to a young man with the 
 least fire in he that little upward lift in the middle of her red 
 top lip be distract , infatuate , madden . he have never before 
 see a woman 's lip and tooth which force upon his mind with such 
 persistent iteration the old Elizabethan simile of rose fill with 
 snow . perfect , he , as a lover , might have call they off - hand . but 
 no - they be not perfect . and it be the touch of the imperfect 
 upon the would - be perfect that give the sweetness , because it be 
 that which give the humanity . 

 Clare have study the curve of those lip so many time that he 
 could reproduce they mentally with ease : and now , as they again 
 confront he , clothe with colour and life , they send an aura 
 over his flesh , a breeze through his nerve , which well nigh produce 
 a qualm ; and actually produce , by some mysterious physiological 
 process , a prosaic sneeze . 

 she then become conscious that he be observe she ; but she would 
 not show it by any change of position , though the curious dream - like 
 fixity disappear , and a close eye might easily have discern that 
 the rosiness of her face deepen , and then fade till only a tinge 
 of it be leave . 

 the influence that have pass into Clare like an excitation from the 
 sky do not die down . resolution , reticence , prudence , fear , 
 fall back like a defeat battalion . he jump up from his seat , 
 and , leave his pail to be kick over if the milcher have such a 
 mind , go quickly towards the desire of his eye , and , kneel down 
 beside she , clasp she in his arm . 

 Tess be take completely by surprise , and she yield to his embrace 
 with unreflecte inevitableness . have see that it be really her 
 lover who have advance , and no one else , her lip part , and she 
 sink upon he in her momentary joy , with something very like an 
 ecstatic cry . 

 he have be on the point of kiss that too tempting mouth , but he 
 check himself , for tender conscience ' sake . 

 " forgive I , Tess dear ! " he whisper . " I ought to have ask . 
 I - do not know what I be do . I do not mean it as a liberty . 
 I be devoted to you , Tessy , dearest , in all sincerity ! " 

 Old Pretty by this time have look round , puzzle ; and see two 
 people crouch under she where , by immemorial custom , there should 
 have be only one , lift her hind leg crossly . 

 " she be angry - she do not   know what we mean - she will kick over the 
 milk ! " exclaim Tess , gently strive to free herself , her eye 
 concern with the quadrupe 's action , her heart more deeply 
 concerned with herself and Clare . 

 she slip up from her seat , and they stand together , his arm still 
 encircle she . Tess 's eye , fix on distance , begin to fill . 

 " why do you cry , my darling ? " he say . 

 " o - I do not   know ! " she murmur . 

 as she see and feel more clearly the position she be in she become 
 agitated and try to withdraw . 

 " well , I have betray my feeling , Tess , at last , " say he , with a 
 curious sigh of desperation , signify unconsciously that his heart 
 have outrun his judgement . " that i - love you dearly and truly I need 
 not say . but I - it shall go no far now - it distress you - I be 
 as surprised as you be . you will not think I have presume upon 
 your defencelessness - be too quick and unreflecting , will you ? " 

 " N ' - I can not   tell . " 

 he have allow she to free herself ; and in a minute or two the 
 milking of each be resume . nobody have behold the gravitation of 
 the two into one ; and when the dairyman come round by that screened 
 nook a few minute later , there be not a sign to reveal that 
 the markedly sunder pair be more to each other than mere 
 acquaintance . yet in the interval since Crick 's last view of they 
 something have occur which change the pivot of the universe for 
 their two nature ; something which , have he know its quality , the 
 dairyman would have despise , as a practical man ; yet which be base 
 upon a more stubborn and resistless tendency than a whole heap of 
 so - call practicality . a veil have be whisk aside ; the tract 
 of each one 's outlook be to have a new horizon thenceforward - for a 
 short time or for a long . 


 END of PHASE the THIRD 





 phase the Fourth : the Consequence 



 XXV 


 Clare , restless , go out into the dusk when evening draw on , she who 
 have win he have retire to her chamber . 

 the night be as sultry as the day . there be no coolness after dark 
 unless on the grass . road , garden - path , the house - front , the 
 barton - wall be warm as hearth , and reflect the noontime 
 temperature into the noctambulist 's face . 

 he sit on the east gate of the dairy - yard , and know not what to think 
 of himself . feel have indeed smother judgement that day . 

 since the sudden embrace , three hour before , the twain have keep 
 apart . she seem still , almost alarm , at what have occur , 
 while the novelty , unpremeditation , mastery of circumstance 
 disquiet he - palpitating , contemplative being that he be . he 
 could hardly realize their true relation to each other as yet , and 
 what their mutual bearing should be before third party 
 thenceforward . 

 Angel have come as pupil to this dairy in the idea that his temporary 
 existence here be to be the mere episode in his life , soon pass 
 through and early forget ; he have come as to a place from which 
 as from a screen alcove he could calmly view the absorb world 
 without , and , apostrophize it with Walt Whitman - 


  crowd of man and woman attire in the usual costume , 
  how curious you be to I ! - 


 resolve upon a plan for plunge into that world anew . but behold , 
 the absorbing scene have be import hither . what have be the 
 engrossing world have dissolve into an unintereste outer dumb - show ; 
 while here , in this apparently dim and unimpassioned place , novelty 
 have volcanically start up , as it have never , for he , start up 
 elsewhere . 

 every window of the house be open , Clare could hear across the 
 yard each trivial sound of the retire household . the dairy - house , 
 so humble , so insignificant , so purely to he a place of constrain 
 sojourn that he have never hitherto deem it of sufficient importance 
 to be reconnoitre as an object of any quality whatever in the 
 landscape ; what be it now ? the aged and lichene brick gable 
 breathe forth " Stay ! " the window smile , the door coax and 
 beckon , the creeper blush confederacy . a personality within 
 it be so far - reach in her influence as to spread into and make 
 the brick , mortar , and whole overhang sky throb with a burning 
 sensibility . whose be this mighty personality ? a milkmaid 's . 

 it be amazing , indeed , to find how great a matter the life of the 
 obscure dairy have become to he . and though new love be to be hold 
 partly responsible for this , it be not solely so . many besides 
 Angel have learn that the magnitude of life be not as to their 
 external displacement , but as to their subjective experience . the 
 impressionable peasant lead a large , full , more dramatic life 
 than the pachydermatous king . look at it thus , he find that life 
 be to be see of the same magnitude here as elsewhere . 

 despite his heterodoxy , fault , and weakness , Clare be a man with 
 a conscience . Tess be no insignificant creature to toy with and 
 dismiss ; but a woman live her precious life - a life which , to 
 herself who endure or enjoy it , possess as great a dimension 
 as the life of the mighty to himself . upon her sensation 
 the whole world depend to Tess ; through her existence all her 
 fellow - creature exist , to she . the universe itself only come into 
 be for Tess on the particular day in the particular year in which 
 she be bear . 

 this consciousness upon which he have intrude be the single 
 opportunity of existence ever vouchsafe to Tess by an unsympathetic 
 First Cause - she all ; she every and only chance . how then should he 
 look upon she as of less consequence than himself ; as a pretty trifle 
 to caress and grow weary of ; and not deal in the great seriousness 
 with the affection which he know that he have awaken in she - so 
 fervid and so impressionable as she be under her reserve - in order 
 that it might not agonize and wreck she ? 

 to encounter her daily in the accustomed manner would be to develop 
 what have begin . live in such close relation , to meet mean to 
 fall into endearment ; flesh and blood could not resist it ; and , 
 have arrive at no conclusion as to the issue of such a tendency , 
 he decide to hold aloof for the present from occupation in which 
 they would be mutually engage . as yet the harm do be small . 

 but it be not easy to carry out the resolution never to approach 
 she . he be drive towards she by every heave of his pulse . 

 he think he would go and see his friend . it might be possible 
 to sound they upon this . in less than five month his term here 
 would have end , and after a few additional month spend upon other 
 farm he would be fully equip in agricultural knowledge and in 
 a position to start on his own account . would not a farmer want a 
 wife , and should a farmer 's wife be a drawing - room wax - figure , or a 
 woman who understand farming ? notwithstanding the pleasing answer 
 return to he by the silence , he resolve to go his journey . 

 one morning when they sit down to breakfast at Talbothays Dairy some 
 maid observe that she have not see anything of Mr Clare that day . 

 " o no , " say Dairyman Crick . " Mr Clare have go hwome to emminster 
 to spend a few day wi ' his kinsfolk . " 

 for four impassioned one around that table the sunshine of the 
 morning go out at a stroke , and the bird muffle their song . 
 but neither girl by word or gesture reveal her blankness . " he be 
 get on towards the end of his time wi ' I , " add the dairyman , 
 with a phlegm which unconsciously be brutal ; " and so I suppose he 
 be begin to see about his plan elsewhere . " 

 " how much long be he to bide here ? " ask Izz Huett , the only 
 one of the gloom - stricken bevy who could trust her voice with the 
 question . 

 the other wait for the dairyman 's answer as if their life hung 
 upon it ; Retty , with part lip , gaze on the tablecloth , Marian 
 with heat add to her redness , Tess throb and look out at 
 the mead . 

 " well , I can not   mind the exact day without look at my 
 memorandum - book , " reply Crick , with the same intolerable unconcern . 
 " and even that may be alter a bit . he will bide to get a little 
 practice in the calving out at the straw - yard , for certain . he will 
 hang on till the end of the year I should say . " 

 four month or so of torture ecstasy in his society - of " pleasure 
 girdle about with pain " . after that the blackness of unutterable 
 night . 


 at this moment of the morning Angel Clare be rid along a narrow 
 lane ten mile distant from the breakfaster , in the direction of 
 his father 's vicarage at Emminster , carry , as well as he could , 
 a little basket which contain some black - pudding and a bottle of 
 mead , send by Mrs Crick , with her kind respect , to his parent . the 
 white lane stretch before he , and his eye be upon it ; but they 
 be star into next year , and not at the lane . he love she ; 
 ought he to marry she ? dare he to marry she ? what would his mother 
 and his brother say ? what would he himself say a couple of year 
 after the event ? that would depend upon whether the germ of staunch 
 comradeship underlay the temporary emotion , or whether it be a 
 sensuous joy in her form only , with no substratum of everlastingness . 

 his father 's hill - surround little town , the Tudor church - tower of 
 red stone , the clump of tree near the vicarage , come at last into 
 view beneath he , and he ride down towards the well - know gate . 
 cast a glance in the direction of the church before enter his 
 home , he behold stand by the vestry - door a group of girl , of 
 age between twelve and sixteen , apparently await the arrival of 
 some other one , who in a moment become visible ; a figure somewhat 
 old than the school - girl , wear a broad - brim hat and 
 highly - starch cambric morning - gown , with a couple of book in her 
 hand . 

 Clare know she well . he could not be sure that she observe he ; he 
 hop she do not , so as to render it unnecessary that he should go 
 and speak to she , blameless creature that she be . an overpowering 
 reluctance to greet she make he decide that she have not see he . 
 the young lady be Miss Mercy Chant , the only daughter of his 
 father 's neighbour and friend , whom it be his parent ' quiet hope 
 that he might we d some day . she be great at Antinomianism and 
 Bible - class , and be plainly go to hold a class now . Clare 's 
 mind fly to the impassione , summer - steep heathen in the Var 
 Vale , their rosy face court - patch with cow - dropping ; and to one 
 the most impassioned of they all . 

 it be on the impulse of the moment that he have resolve to trot 
 over to Emminster , and hence have not write to apprise his mother 
 and father , aim , however , to arrive about the breakfast hour , 
 before they should have go out to their parish duty . he be 
 a little late , and they have already sit down to the morning meal . 
 the group at the table jump up to welcome he as soon as he 
 enter . they be his father and mother , his brother the Reverend 
 Felix - curate at a town in the adjoining county , home for the inside 
 of a fortnight - and his other brother , the Reverend Cuthbert , the 
 classical scholar , and Fellow and Dean of his College , down from 
 Cambridge for the long vacation . his mother appear in a cap and 
 silver spectacle , and his father look what in fact he be - an 
 earnest , God - fear man , somewhat gaunt , in year about sixty - five , 
 his pale face line with thought and purpose . over their head hang 
 the picture of Angel 's sister , the eld of the family , sixteen 
 year his senior , who have marry a missionary and go out to 
 Africa . 

 Old Mr Clare be a clergyman of a type which , within the last twenty 
 year , have well nigh drop out of contemporary life . a spiritual 
 descendant in the direct line from Wycliff , Huss , Luther , Calvin ; an 
 Evangelical of the Evangelicals , a Conversionist , a man of apostolic 
 simplicity in life and think , he have in his raw youth make up his 
 mind once for all in the deep question of existence , and admit 
 no further reasoning on they thenceforward . he be regard even by 
 those of his own date and school of thinking as extreme ; while , on 
 the other hand , those totally opposed to he be unwillingly win 
 to admiration for his thoroughness , and for the remarkable power he 
 show in dismiss all question as to principle in his energy for 
 apply they . he love Paul of Tarsus , like St John , hat St 
 James as much as he dare , and regard with mixed feeling Timothy , 
 Titus , and Philemon . the New Testament be less a Christiad then a 
 Pauliad to his intelligence - less an argument than an intoxication . 
 his creed of determinism be such that it almost amount to a 
 vice , and quite amount , on its negative side , to a renunciative 
 philosophy which have cousinship with that of Schopenhauer and 
 Leopardi . he despise the Canons and Rubric , swear by the Articles , 
 and deem himself consistent through the whole category - which in a 
 way he might have be . one thing he certainly be - sincere . 

 to the aesthetic , sensuous , pagan pleasure in natural life and lush 
 womanhood which his son Angel have lately be experience in Var 
 Vale , his temper would have be antipathetic in a high degree , have 
 he either by inquiry or imagination be able to apprehend it . once 
 upon a time Angel have be so unlucky as to say to his father , in 
 a moment of irritation , that it might have result far well for 
 mankind if Greece have be the source of the religion of modern 
 civilization , and not Palestine ; and his father 's grief be of that 
 blank description which could not realize that there might lurk a 
 thousandth part of a truth , much less a half truth or a whole truth , 
 in such a proposition . he have simply preach austerely at Angel for 
 some time after . but the kindness of his heart be such that he 
 never resent anything for long , and welcome his son to - day with a 
 smile which be as candidly sweet as a child 's . 

 Angel sit down , and the place feel like home ; yet he do not so much 
 as formerly feel himself one of the family gather there . every 
 time that he return hither he be conscious of this divergence , 
 and since he have last share in the Vicarage life it have grow even 
 more distinctly foreign to his own than usual . its transcendental 
 aspiration - still unconsciously base on the geocentric view of 
 thing , a zenithal paradise , a nadiral hell - be as foreign to his 
 own as if they have be the dream of people on another planet . 
 Latterly he have see only Life , feel only the great passionate pulse 
 of existence , unwarped , uncontorted , untrammelle by those creed 
 which futilely attempt to check what wisdom would be content to 
 regulate . 

 on their part they see a great difference in he , a grow 
 divergence from the Angel Clare of former time . it be chiefly a 
 difference in his manner that they notice just now , particularly 
 his brother . he be get to behave like a farmer ; he fling his 
 leg about ; the muscle of his face have grow more expressive ; his 
 eye look as much information as his tongue speak , and more . the 
 manner of the scholar have nearly disappear ; still more the manner 
 of the drawing - room young man . a prig would have say that he have 
 lose culture , and a prude that he have become coarse . such be the 
 contagion of domiciliary fellowship with the Talbothays nymph and 
 swain . 

 after breakfast he walk with his two brother , non - evangelical , 
 well - educate , hall - mark young man , correct to their remotest 
 fibre , such unimpeachable model as be turn out yearly by 
 the lathe of a systematic tuition . they be both somewhat 
 short - sighted , and when it be the custom to wear a single eyeglass 
 and string they wear a single eyeglass and string ; when it be the 
 custom to wear a double glass they wear a double glass ; when it be 
 the custom to wear spectacle they wear spectacle straightway , all 
 without reference to the particular variety of defect in their own 
 vision . when Wordsworth be enthrone they carry pocket copy ; 
 and when Shelley be belittle they allow he to grow dusty on 
 their shelf . when Correggio 's Holy Families be admire , they 
 admire Correggio 's Holy Families ; when he be decry in favour 
 of Velasquez , they sedulously follow suit without any personal 
 objection . 

 if these two noticed Angel 's grow social ineptness , he notice 
 their grow mental limitation . Felix seem to he all Church ; 
 Cuthbert all College . his Diocesan Synod and Visitations be the 
 mainspring of the world to the one ; Cambridge to the other . each 
 brother candidly recognize that there be a few unimportant score 
 of million of outsider in civilized society , person who be 
 neither University man nor churchman ; but they be to be tolerate 
 rather than reckon with and respect . 

 they be both dutiful and attentive son , and be regular in their 
 visit to their parent . Felix , though an offshoot from a far more 
 recent point in the devolution of theology than his father , be less 
 self - sacrifice and disintereste . more tolerant than his father of 
 a contradictory opinion , in its aspect as a danger to its holder , he 
 be less ready than his father to pardon it as a slight to his own 
 teaching . Cuthbert be , upon the whole , the more liberal - minded , 
 though , with great subtlety , he have not so much heart . 

 as they walk along the hillside Angel 's former feeling revive 
 in he - that whatever their advantage by comparison with himself , 
 neither see or set forth life as it really be live . perhaps , as 
 with many man , their opportunity of observation be not so good 
 as their opportunity of expression . neither have an adequate 
 conception of the complicated force at work outside the smooth and 
 gentle current in which they and their associate float . neither 
 see the difference between local truth and universal truth ; that what 
 the inner world say in their clerical and academic hearing be quite 
 a different thing from what the outer world be think . 

 " I suppose it be farm or nothing for you now , my dear fellow , " 
 Felix be say , among other thing , to his young brother , as 
 he look through his spectacle at the distant field with sad 
 austerity . " and , therefore , we must make the good of it . but I do 
 entreat you to endeavour to keep as much as possible in touch with 
 moral ideal . farming , of course , mean rough it externally ; but 
 high thinking may go with plain living , nevertheless . " 

 " of course it may , " say Angel . " be it not prove nineteen hundred 
 year ago - if I may trespass upon your domain a little ? why should 
 you think , Felix , that I be likely to drop my high thinking and my 
 moral ideal ? " 

 " well , I fancy , from the tone of your letter and our 
 conversation - it may be fancy only - that you be somehow lose 
 intellectual grasp . have not   it strike you , Cuthbert ? " 

 " now , Felix , " say Angel drily , " we be very good friend , you 
 know ; each of we tread our allotted circle ; but if it come to 
 intellectual grasp , I think you , as a contented dogmatist , have 
 well leave mine alone , and inquire what have become of your . " 

 they return down the hill to dinner , which be fix at any time at 
 which their father 's and mother 's morning work in the parish usually 
 conclude . convenience as regard afternoon caller be the last 
 thing to enter into the consideration of unselfish Mr and Mrs Clare ; 
 though the three son be sufficiently in unison on this matter to 
 wish that their parent would conform a little to modern notion . 

 the walk have make they hungry , Angel in particular , who be now 
 an outdoor man , accustom to the profuse dape inemptae of the 
 dairyman 's somewhat coarsely - laden table . but neither of the old 
 people have arrive , and it be not till the son be almost tired of 
 wait that their parent enter . the self - deny pair have be 
 occupy in coax the appetite of some of their sick parishioner , 
 whom they , somewhat inconsistently , try to keep imprison in the 
 flesh , their own appetite be quite forget . 

 the family sit down to table , and a frugal meal of cold viand 
 be deposit before they . Angel look round for Mrs Crick 's 
 black - pudding , which he have direct to be nicely grill as they 
 do they at the dairy , and of which he wish his father and mother 
 to appreciate the marvellous herbal savour as highly as he do 
 himself . 

 " ah ! you be look for the black - pudding , my dear boy , " observe 
 Clare 's mother . " but I be sure you will not mind do without they 
 as I be sure your father and I shall not , when you know the reason . 
 I suggest to he that we should take Mrs Crick 's kind present to 
 the child of the man who can earn nothing just now because of his 
 attack of delirium tremen ; and he agree that it would be a great 
 pleasure to they ; so we do . " 

 " of course , " say Angel cheerfully , look round for the mead . 

 " I find the mead so extremely alcoholic , " continue his mother , 
 " that it be quite unfit for use as a beverage , but as valuable 
 as rum or brandy in an emergency ; so I have put it in my 
 medicine - closet . " 

 " we never drink spirit at this table , on principle , " add his 
 father . 

 " but what shall I tell the dairyman 's wife ? " say Angel . 

 " the truth , of course , " say his father . 

 " I rather want to say we enjoy the mead and the black - pudding 
 very much . she be a kind , jolly sort of body , and be sure to ask I 
 directly I return . " 

 " you can not , if we do not , " Mr Clare answer lucidly . 

 " ah - no ; though that mead be a drop of pretty tipple . " 

 " a what ? " say Cuthbert and Felix both . 

 " oh - ' tis an expression they use down at talbothay , " reply Angel , 
 blushing . he feel that his parent be right in their practice if 
 wrong in their want of sentiment , and say no more . 



 XXVI 


 it be not till the evening , after family prayer , that Angel find 
 opportunity of broach to his father one or two subject near his 
 heart . he have string himself up to the purpose while kneel behind 
 his brother on the carpet , study the little nail in the heel of 
 their walking boot . when the service be over they go out of the 
 room with their mother , and Mr Clare and himself be leave alone . 

 the young man first discuss with the elder his plan for the 
 attainment of his position as a farmer on an extensive scale - either 
 in England or in the Colonies . his father then tell he that , as he 
 have not be put to the expense of send Angel up to Cambridge , he 
 have feel it his duty to set by a sum of money every year towards the 
 purchase or lease of land for he some day , that he might not feel 
 himself unduly slight . 

 " as far as worldly wealth go , " continue his father , " you will no 
 doubt stand far superior to your brother in a few year . " 

 this considerateness on old Mr Clare 's part lead Angel onward to the 
 other and dearer subject . he observe to his father that he be 
 then six - and - twenty , and that when he should start in the farming 
 business he would require eye in the back of his head to see to all 
 matter - some one would be necessary to superintend the domestic 
 labour of his establishment whilst he be afield . would it not be 
 well , therefore , for he to marry ? 

 his father seem to think this idea not unreasonable ; and then Angel 
 put the question - 

 " what kind of wife do you think would be good for I as a thrifty 
 hard - work farmer ? " 

 " a truly christian woman , who will be a help and a comfort to you in 
 your going - out and your coming - in . beyond that , it really matter 
 little . such an one can be find ; indeed , my earnest - minded friend 
 and neighbour , Dr Chant - " 

 " but ought she not primarily to be able to milk cow , churn good 
 butter , make immense cheese ; know how to sit hen and turkey and 
 rear chicken , to direct a field of labourer in an emergency , and 
 estimate the value of sheep and calf ? " 

 " yes ; a farmer 's wife ; yes , certainly . it would be desirable . " Mr 
 Clare , the elder , have plainly never think of these point before . 
 " I be go to add , " he say , " that for a pure and saintly woman you 
 will not find one more to your true advantage , and certainly not more 
 to your mother 's mind and my own , than your friend Mercy , whom you 
 use to show a certain interest in . it be true that my neighbour 
 Chant 's daughter have lately catch up the fashion of the young 
 clergy round about we for decorate the communion - table - altar , as I 
 be shock to hear she call it one day - with flower and other stuff 
 on festival occasion . but her father , who be quite as oppose to 
 such flummery as I , say that can be cure . it be a mere girlish 
 outbreak which , I be sure , will not be permanent . " 

 " yes , yes ; mercy be good and devout , I know . but , father , do not   you 
 think that a young woman equally pure and virtuous as Miss Chant , 
 but one who , in place of that lady 's ecclesiastical accomplishment , 
 understand the duty of farm life as well as a farmer himself , 
 would suit I infinitely well ? " 

 his father persist in his conviction that a knowledge of a farmer 's 
 wife 's duty come second to a Pauline view of humanity ; and the 
 impulsive Angel , wish to honour his father 's feeling and to 
 advance the cause of his heart at the same time , grow specious . 
 he say that fate or Providence have throw in his way a woman who 
 possess every qualification to be the helpmate of an agriculturist , 
 and be decidedly of a serious turn of mind . he would not say 
 whether or not she have attach herself to the sound Low Church 
 School of his father ; but she would probably be open to conviction 
 on that point ; she be a regular church - goer of simple faith ; 
 honest - hearted , receptive , intelligent , graceful to a degree , chaste 
 as a vestal , and , in personal appearance , exceptionally beautiful . 

 " be she of a family such as you would care to marry into - a lady , in 
 short ? " ask his startled mother , who have come softly into the study 
 during the conversation . 

 " she be not what in common parlance be call a lady , " say Angel , 
 unflinchingly , " for she be a cottager 's daughter , as I be proud to 
 say . but she be a lady , nevertheless - in feeling and nature . " 

 " Mercy Chant be of a very good family . " 

 " Pooh ! - what be the advantage of that , mother ? " say Angel quickly . 
 " how be family to avail the wife of a man who have to rough it as I 
 have , and shall have to do ? " 

 " mercy be accomplish . and accomplishment have their charm , " 
 return his mother , look at he through her silver spectacle . 

 " as to external accomplishment , what will be the use of they in the 
 life I be go to lead ? - while as to her reading , I can take that 
 in hand . she will be apt pupil enough , as you would say if you know 
 she . she 's brim full of poetry - actualize poetry , if I may use the 
 expression . she live what paper - poet only write ... and she be an 
 unimpeachable Christian , I be sure ; perhaps of the very tribe , genus , 
 and specie you desire to propagate . " 

 " o Angel , you be mock ! " 

 " Mother , I beg pardon . but as she really do attend Church almost 
 every Sunday morning , and be a good christian girl , I be sure you 
 will tolerate any social shortcoming for the sake of that quality , 
 and feel that I may do bad than choose she . " Angel wax quite 
 earnest on that rather automatic orthodoxy in his beloved Tess which 
  never dream that it might stand he in such good stead   he have 
 be prone to slight when observe it practise by she and the other 
 milkmaid , because of its obvious unreality amid belief essentially 
 naturalistic . 

 in their sad doubt as to whether their son have himself any right 
 whatever to the title he claim for the unknown young woman , Mr and 
 Mrs Clare begin to feel it as an advantage not to be overlook that 
 she at least be sound in her view ; especially as the conjunction of 
 the pair must have arise by an act of Providence ; for Angel never 
 would have make orthodoxy a condition of his choice . they say 
 finally that it be well not to act in a hurry , but that they would 
 not object to see she . 

 Angel therefore refrain from declare more particular now . 
 he feel that , single - minded and self - sacrifice as his parent 
 be , there yet exist certain latent prejudice of theirs , as 
 middle - class people , which it would require some tact to overcome . 
 for though legally at liberty to do as he choose , and though their 
 daughter - in - law 's qualification could make no practical difference 
 to their life , in the probability of she live far away from they , 
 he wish for affection 's sake not to wound their sentiment in the 
 most important decision of his life . 

 he observe his own inconsistency in dwell upon accident in 
 Tess 's life as if they be vital feature . it be for herself that 
 he love Tess ; her soul , her heart , her substance - not for her skill 
 in the dairy , her aptness as his scholar , and certainly not for 
 her simple formal faith - profession . her unsophisticated open - air 
 existence require no varnish of conventionality to make it palatable 
 to he . he hold that education have as yet but little affect the 
 beat of emotion and impulse on which domestic happiness depend . it 
 be probable that , in the lapse of age , improved system of moral 
 and intellectual training would appreciably , perhaps considerably , 
 elevate the involuntary and even the unconscious instinct of human 
 nature ; but up to the present day , culture , as far as he could see , 
 might be say to have affect only the mental epiderm of those 
 life which have be bring under its influence . this belief be 
 confirm by his experience of woman , which , have latterly be 
 extend from the cultivate middle - class into the rural community , 
 have teach he how much less be the intrinsic difference between the 
 good and wise woman of one social stratum and the good and wise woman 
 of another social stratum , than between the good and bad , the wise 
 and the foolish , of the same stratum or class . 

 it be the morning of his departure . his brother have already leave 
 the vicarage to proceed on a walk tour in the north , whence one 
 be to return to his college , and the other to his curacy . Angel 
 might have accompany they , but prefer to rejoin his sweetheart 
 at talbothay . he would have be an awkward member of the 
 party ; for , though the most appreciative humanist , the most ideal 
 religionist , even the well - verse Christologist of the three , there 
 be alienation in the stand consciousness that his squareness 
 would not fit the round hole that have be prepare for he . to 
 neither Felix nor Cuthbert have he venture to mention Tess . 

 his mother make he sandwich , and his father accompany he , 
 on his own mare , a little way along the road . have fairly well 
 advance his own affair , Angel listen in a willing silence , as 
 they jog on together through the shady lane , to his father 's 
 account of his parish difficulty , and the coldness of brother 
 clergyman whom he love , because of his strict interpretation of 
 the New Testament by the light of what they deem a pernicious 
 calvinistic doctrine . 

 " pernicious ! " say Mr Clare , with genial scorn ; and he proceed to 
 recount experience which would show the absurdity of that idea . 
 he tell of wondrous conversion of evil liver of which he have be 
 the instrument , not only amongst the poor , but amongst the rich and 
 well - to - do ; and he also candidly admit many failure . 

 as an instance of the latter , he mention the case of a young 
 upstart squire name d'Urberville , live some forty mile off , in 
 the neighbourhood of Trantridge . 

 " not one of the ancient d'Urbervilles of Kingsbere and other place ? " 
 ask his son . " that curiously historic wear - out family with its 
 ghostly legend of the coach - and - four ? " 

 " o no . the original d'Urbervilles decay and disappear sixty 
 or eighty year ago - at least , I believe so . this seem to be a 
 new family which have take the name ; for the credit of the former 
 knightly line I hope they be spurious , I be sure . but it be odd 
 to hear you express interest in old family . I think you set less 
 store by they even than i. " 

 " you misapprehend I , father ; you often do , " say Angel with a 
 little impatience . " politically I be sceptical as to the virtue of 
 their be old . some of the wise even among themselves ' exclaim 
 against their own succession , ' as Hamlet put it ; but lyrically , 
 dramatically , and even historically , I be tenderly attach to they . " 

 this distinction , though by no mean a subtle one , be yet too 
 subtle for Mr Clare the elder , and he go on with the story he have 
 be about to relate ; which be that after the death of the senior 
 so - call d'Urberville , the young man develop the most culpable 
 passion , though he have a blind mother , whose condition should have 
 make he know well . a knowledge of his career have come to 
 the ear of Mr Clare , when he be in that part of the country 
 preach missionary sermon , he boldly take occasion to speak to 
 the delinquent on his spiritual state . though he be a stranger , 
 occupy another 's pulpit , he have feel this to be his duty , and 
 take for his text the word from St Luke : " Thou fool , this night thy 
 soul shall be require of thee ! " the young man much resent this 
 directness of attack , and in the war of word which follow when 
 they meet he do not scruple publicly to insult Mr Clare , without 
 respect for his gray hair . 

 Angel flush with distress . 

 " dear father , " he say sadly , " I wish you would not expose yourself 
 to such gratuitous pain from scoundrel ! " 

 " pain ? " say his father , his rugged face shin in the ardour of 
 self - abnegation . " the only pain to I be pain on his account , poor , 
 foolish young man . do you suppose his incense word could give 
 I any pain , or even his blow ? ' be revile we bless ; be 
 persecute we suffer it ; be defame we entreat ; we be make as the 
 filth of the world , and as the offscouring of all thing unto this 
 day . ' those ancient and noble word to the Corinthians be strictly 
 true at this present hour . " 

 " not blow , father ? he do not proceed to blow ? " 

 " no , he do not . though I have bear blow from man in a mad state 
 of intoxication . " 

 " no ! " 

 " a dozen time , my boy . what then ? I have save they from the guilt 
 of murder their own flesh and blood thereby ; and they have live 
 to thank I , and praise God . " 

 " may this young man do the same ! " say Angel fervently . " but I fear 
 otherwise , from what you say . " 

 " we will hope , nevertheless , " say Mr Clare . " and I continue to pray 
 for he , though on this side of the grave we shall probably never 
 meet again . but , after all , one of those poor word of mine may 
 spring up in his heart as a good seed some day . " 

 now , as always , Clare 's father be sanguine as a child ; and though 
 the young could not accept his parent 's narrow dogma , he revere 
 his practice and recognize the hero under the pietist . perhaps he 
 revere his father 's practice even more now than ever , see that , 
 in the question of make Tessy his wife , his father have not once 
 thought of inquire whether she be well provide or penniless . 
 the same unworldliness be what have necessitate Angel 's get 
 a living as a farmer , and would probably keep his brother in the 
 position of poor parson for the term of their activity ; yet Angel 
 admire it none the less . indeed , despite his own heterodoxy , Angel 
 often feel that he be near to his father on the human side than 
 be either of his brother . 



 XXVII 


 an up - hill and down - hill ride of twenty - odd mile through a garish 
 mid - day atmosphere bring he in the afternoon to a detached knoll 
 a mile or two west of Talbothays , whence he again look into that 
 green trough of sappiness and humidity , the valley of the Var or 
 Froom . immediately he begin to descend from the upland to the fat 
 alluvial soil below , the atmosphere grow heavy ; the languid perfume 
 of the summer fruit , the mist , the hay , the flower , form therein 
 a vast pool of odour which at this hour seem to make the animal , 
 the very bee and butterfly drowsy . Clare be now so familiar with 
 the spot that he know the individual cow by their name when , a long 
 distance off , he see they dotted about the mead . it be with a 
 sense of luxury that he recognize his power of view life here 
 from its inner side , in a way that have be quite foreign to he in 
 his student - day ; and , much as he love his parent , he could not 
 help be aware that to come here , as now , after an experience of 
 home - life , affect he like throw off splint and bandage ; even 
 the one customary curb on the humour of english rural society 
 be absent in this place , talbothay have no resident landlord . 

 not a human being be out of door at the dairy . the denizen be 
 all enjoy the usual afternoon nap of an hour or so which the 
 exceedingly early hour keep in summer - time render a necessity . 
 at the door the wood - hoop pail , sodden and bleach by infinite 
 scrubbing , hang like hat on a stand upon the forked and peel limb 
 of an oak fix there for that purpose ; all of they ready and dry 
 for the evening milking . Angel enter , and go through the silent 
 passage of the house to the back quarter , where he listen for a 
 moment . sustained snore come from the cart - house , where some of 
 the man be lie down ; the grunt and squeal of swelter pig 
 arise from the still further distance . the large - leave rhubarb and 
 cabbage plant sleep too , their broad limp surface hang in the 
 sun like half - close umbrella . 

 he unbridle and feed his horse , and as he re - enter the house the 
 clock strike three . three be the afternoon skimming - hour ; and , with 
 the stroke , Clare hear the creaking of the floor - board above , and 
 then the touch of a descend foot on the stair . it be Tess 's , 
 who in another moment come down before his eye . 

 she have not hear he enter , and hardly realize his presence there . 
 she be yawn , and he see the red interior of her mouth as if it 
 have be a snake 's . she have stretch one arm so high above she 
 coil - up cable of hair that he could see its satin delicacy above 
 the sunburn ; her face be flush with sleep , and her eyelid hung 
 heavy over their pupil . the brim - fulness of her nature breathe 
 from she . it be a moment when a woman 's soul be more incarnate than 
 at any other time ; when the most spiritual beauty bespeak itself 
 flesh ; and sex take the outside place in the presentation . 

 then those eye flash brightly through their filmy heaviness , 
 before the remainder of her face be well awake . with an oddly 
 compound look of gladness , shyness , and surprise , she exclaim - " O 
 Mr Clare ! how you frighten I - i - " 

 there have not at first be time for she to think of the change 
 relation which his declaration have introduce ; but the full sense of 
 the matter rise up in her face when she encounter Clare 's tender 
 look as he step forward to the bottom stair . 

 " dear , darling Tessy ! " he whisper , put his arm round she , and 
 his face to her flushed cheek . " do not , for Heaven 's sake , Mister I 
 any more . I have hasten back so soon because of you ! " 

 Tess 's excitable heart beat against his by way of reply ; and there 
 they stand upon the red - brick floor of the entry , the sun slant in 
 by the window upon his back , as he hold she tightly to his breast ; 
 upon her incline face , upon the blue vein of her temple , upon she 
 naked arm , and her neck , and into the depth of her hair . have 
 be lie down in her clothe she be warm as a sunned cat . at 
 first she would not look straight up at he , but her eye soon 
 lift , and his plumb the deepness of the ever - vary pupil , with 
 their radiating fibril of blue , and black , and gray , and violet , 
 while she regard he as Eve at her second waking might have 
 regard Adam . 

 " I have   get to go a - skim , " she plead , " and I have on'y old Deb to 
 help I to - day . Mrs Crick be go to market with Mr Crick , and Retty 
 be not well , and the other be go out somewhere , and will not   be home 
 till milk . " 

 as they retreat to the milk - house Deborah Fyander appear on the 
 stair . 

 " I have come back , Deborah , " say Mr Clare , upwards . " so I can help 
 tess with the skimming ; and , as you be very tired , I be sure , you 
 need not   come down till milking - time . " 

 possibly the Talbothays milk be not very thoroughly skim that 
 afternoon . Tess be in a dream wherein familiar object appear 
 as have light and shade and position , but no particular outline . 
 every time she hold the skimmer under the pump to cool it for the 
 work her hand tremble , the ardour of his affection be so palpable 
 that she seem to flinch under it like a plant in too burn a sun . 

 then he press she again to his side , and when she have do run 
 her forefinger round the lead to cut off the cream - edge , he clean 
 it in nature 's way ; for the unconstrained manner of Talbothays dairy 
 come convenient now . 

 " I may as well say it now as later , dearest , " he resume gently . " I 
 wish to ask you something of a very practical nature , which I have 
 be think of ever since that day last week in the mead . I shall 
 soon want to marry , and , be a farmer , you see I shall require for 
 my wife a woman who know all about the management of farm . will 
 you be that woman , Tessy ? " 

 he put it that way that she might not think he have yield to an 
 impulse of which his head would disapprove . 

 she turn quite careworn . she have bow to the inevitable result of 
 proximity , the necessity of love he ; but she have not calculate 
 upon this sudden corollary , which , indeed , Clare have put before she 
 without quite mean himself to do it so soon . with pain that be 
 like the bitterness of dissolution she murmur the word of her 
 indispensable and swear answer as an honourable woman . 

 " o Mr Clare - I can not be your wife - I can not be ! " 

 the sound of her own decision seem to break Tess 's very heart , and 
 she bow her face in her grief . 

 " but , Tess ! " he say , amazed at her reply , and hold she still more 
 greedily close . " do you say no ? surely you love I ? " 

 " o yes , yes ! and I would rather be yours than anybody 's in the 
 world , " return the sweet and honest voice of the distressed girl . 
 " but I cannot marry you ! " 

 " Tess , " he say , hold she at arm 's length , " you be engage to 
 marry some one else ! " 

 " no , no ! " 

 " then why do you refuse I ? " 

 " I do not   want to marry ! I have not think of do it . I can not ! 
 I only want to love you . " 

 " but why ? " 

 drive to subterfuge , she stammer - 

 " your father be a parson , and your mother wouldn ' like you to marry 
 such as I . she will want you to marry a lady . " 

 " Nonsense - I have speak to they both . that be partly why I go 
 home . " 

 " I feel I can not - never , never ! " she echo . 

 " be it too sudden to be ask thus , my Pretty ? " 

 " yes - I do not expect it . " 

 " if you will let it pass , please , Tessy , I will give you time , " he 
 say . " it be very abrupt to come home and speak to you all at once . 
 I will not allude to it again for a while . " 

 she again take up the shin skimmer , hold it beneath the pump , and 
 begin anew . but she could not , as at other time , hit the exact 
 under - surface of the cream with the delicate dexterity require , try 
 as she might ; sometimes she be cut down into the milk , sometimes 
 in the air . she could hardly see , her eye have fill with two 
 blurring tear draw forth by a grief which , to this her good friend 
 and dear advocate , she could never explain . 

 " I can not   skim - I can not ! " she say , turn away from he . 

 not to agitate and hinder she long , the considerate Clare begin 
 talk in a more general way : 

 you quite misapprehend my parent . they be the most simple - mannered 
 people alive , and quite unambitious . they be two of the few 
 remain evangelical school . Tessy , be you an Evangelical ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " you go to church very regularly , and our parson here be not very 
 high , they tell I . " 

 Tess 's idea on the view of the parish clergyman , whom she hear 
 every week , seem to be rather more vague than Clare 's , who have 
 never hear he at all . 

 " I wish I could fix my mind on what I hear there more firmly than I 
 do , " she remark as a safe generality . " it be often a great sorrow 
 to I . " 

 she speak so unaffectedly that Angel be sure in his heart that his 
 father could not object to she on religious ground , even though she 
 do not know whether her principle be high , low or Broad . he 
 himself know that , in reality , the confused belief which she hold , 
 apparently imbibe in childhood , be , if anything , Tractarian as to 
 phraseology , and Pantheistic as to essence . confuse or otherwise , 
 to disturb they be his last desire : 


  leave thou thy sister , when she pray , 
  her early Heaven , her happy view ; 
  nor thou with shadow'd hint confuse 
  a life that lead melodious day . 


 he have occasionally think the counsel less honest than musical ; but 
 he gladly conform to it now . 

 he speak far of the incident of his visit , of his father 's mode 
 of life , of his zeal for his principle ; she grow serener , and the 
 undulation disappear from her skimming ; as she finish one lead 
 after another he follow she , and draw the plug for let down 
 the milk . 

 " I fancy you look a little downcast when you come in , " she 
 venture to observe , anxious to keep away from the subject of 
 herself . 

 " yes - well , my father have be talk a good deal to I of his 
 trouble and difficulty , and the subject always tend to depress 
 I . he be so zealous that he get many snub and buffeting from 
 people of a different way of thinking from himself , and I do not 
 like to hear of such humiliation to a man of his age , the more 
 particularly as I do not   think earnestness do any good when carry 
 so far . he have be tell I of a very unpleasant scene in 
 which he take part quite recently . he go as the deputy of some 
 missionary society to preach in the neighbourhood of Trantridge , a 
 place forty mile from here , and make it his business to expostulate 
 with a lax young cynic he meet with somewhere about there - son of some 
 landowner up that way - and who have a mother afflict with blindness . 
 my father address himself to the gentleman point - blank , and there 
 be quite a disturbance . it be very foolish of my father , I 
 must say , to intrude his conversation upon a stranger when the 
 probability be so obvious that it would be useless . but whatever 
 he think to be his duty , that he will do , in season or out of season ; 
 and , of course , he make many enemy , not only among the absolutely 
 vicious , but among the easy - going , who hate be bother . he say 
 he glory in what happen , and that good may be do indirectly ; 
 but I wish he would not wear himself out now he be get old , and 
 would leave such pig to their wallowing . " 

 Tess 's look have grow hard and worn , and her ripe mouth tragical ; but 
 she no long show any tremulousness . Clare 's revive thought of 
 his father prevent his noticing she particularly ; and so they go 
 on down the white row of liquid rectangle till they have finish 
 and drain they off , when the other maid return , and take their 
 pail , and Deb come to scald out the lead for the new milk . as 
 Tess withdraw to go afield to the cow he say to she softly - 

 " and my question , Tessy ? " 

 " o no - no ! " reply she with grave hopelessness , as one who have 
 hear anew the turmoil of her own past in the allusion to Alec 
 d'Urberville . " it can't be ! " 

 she go out towards the mead , join the other milkmaid with 
 a bound , as if try to make the open air drive away her sad 
 constraint . all the girl draw onward to the spot where the cow 
 be graze in the farth mead , the bevy advance with the bold 
 grace of wild animal - the reckless , unchastened motion of woman 
 accustom to unlimited space - in which they abandon themselves to 
 the air as a swimmer to the wave . it seem natural enough to he 
 now that Tess be again in sight to choose a mate from unconstrained 
 Nature , and not from the abode of Art . 



 XXVIII 


 her refusal , though unexpected , do not permanently daunt Clare . 
 his experience of woman be great enough for he to be aware that 
 the negative often mean nothing more than the preface to the 
 affirmative ; and it be little enough for he not to know that in 
 the manner of the present negative there lie a great exception to 
 the dallying of coyness . that she have already permit he to 
 make love to she he read as an additional assurance , not fully 
 trowe that in the field and pasture to ' sigh gratis " be by no 
 mean deem waste ; love - make being here more often accept 
 inconsiderately and for its own sweet sake than in the carking , 
 anxious home of the ambitious , where a girl 's craving for an 
 establishment paralyze her healthy thought of a passion as an end . 

 " Tess , why do you say ' no ' in such a positive way ? " he ask she in 
 the course of a few day . 

 she start . 

 " do not   ask I . I tell you why - partly . I be not good enough - not 
 worthy enough . " 

 " how ? not fine lady enough ? " 

 " yes - something like that , " murmur she . " your friend would scorn 
 I . " 

 " indeed , you mistake they - my father and mother . as for my brother , 
 I do not   care - " he clasp his finger behind her back to keep she 
 from slip away . " now - you do not mean it , sweet ? - I be sure you 
 do not ! you have make I so restless that I can not read , or play , 
 or do anything . I be in no hurry , Tess , but I want to know - to hear 
 from your own warm lip - that you will some day be mine - any time you 
 may choose ; but some day ? " 

 she could only shake her head and look away from he . 

 Clare regard she attentively , con the character of her face as 
 if they have be hieroglyphic . the denial seem real . 

 " then I ought not to hold you in this way - ought I ? I have no 
 right to you - no right to seek out where you be , or walk with you ! 
 honestly , Tess , do you love any other man ? " 

 " how can you ask ? " she say , with continued self - suppression . 

 " I almost know that you do not . but then , why do you repulse I ? " 

 " I do not   repulse you . I like you to - tell I you love I ; and you 
 may always tell I so as you go about with I - and never offend I . " 

 " but you will not accept I as a husband ? " 

 " ah - that be different - it be for your good , indeed , my dearest ! 
 O , believe I , it be only for your sake ! I do not   like to give 
 myself the great happiness o ' promise to be yours in that 
 way - because - because I be sure I ought not to do it . " 

 " but you will make I happy ! " 

 " ah - you think so , but you do not   know ! " 

 at such time as this , apprehend the ground of her refusal to be 
 her modest sense of incompetence in matter social and polite , he 
 would say that she be wonderfully well - inform and versatile - which 
 be certainly true , her natural quickness and her admiration for he 
 have lead she to pick up his vocabulary , his accent , and fragment 
 of his knowledge , to a surprising extent . after these tender 
 contest and her victory she would go away by herself under the 
 remotest cow , if at milking - time , or into the sedge or into her room , 
 if at a leisure interval , and mourn silently , not a minute after an 
 apparently phlegmatic negative . 

 the struggle be so fearful ; her own heart be so strongly on the 
 side of his - two ardent heart against one poor little conscience - 
 that she try to fortify her resolution by every mean in her power . 
 she have come to talbothay with a make - up mind . on no account could 
 she agree to a step which might afterwards cause bitter rue to her 
 husband for his blindness in wed she . and she hold that what her 
 conscience have decide for she when her mind be unbiassed ought not 
 to be overrule now . 

 " why do not   somebody tell he all about I ? " she say . " it be only 
 forty mile off - why have not   it reach here ? somebody must know ! " 

 yet nobody seem to know ; nobody tell he . 

 for two or three day no more be say . she guess from the sad 
 countenance of her chamber companion that they regard she not 
 only as the favourite , but as the choose ; but they could see for 
 themselves that she do not put herself in his way . 

 Tess have never before know a time in which the thread of her life 
 be so distinctly twisted of two strand , positive pleasure and 
 positive pain . at the next cheese - make the pair be again leave 
 alone together . the dairyman himself have be lend a hand ; but 
 Mr Crick , as well as his wife , seem latterly to have acquire a 
 suspicion of mutual interest between these two ; though they walk 
 so circumspectly that suspicion be but of the faint . anyhow , the 
 dairyman leave they to themselves . 

 they be break up the mass of curd before put they into 
 the vat . the operation resemble the act of crumble bread on a 
 large scale ; and amid the immaculate whiteness of the curd Tess 
 Durbeyfield 's hand show themselves of the pinkness of the rose . 
 Angel , who be fill the vat with his handful , suddenly cease , 
 and lay his hand flat upon her . her sleeve be roll far above 
 the elbow , and bend low he kiss the inside vein of her soft 
 arm . 

 although the early September weather be sultry , her arm , from 
 she dabbling in the curd , be as cold and damp to his mouth as a 
 new - gather mushroom , and taste of the whey . but she be such 
 a sheaf of susceptibility that her pulse be accelerate by the 
 touch , her blood drive to her finder - end , and the cool arm 
 flush hot . then , as though her heart have say , " be coyness long 
 necessary ? truth be truth between man and woman , as between man and 
 man , " she lift her eye and they beam devotedly into his , as she 
 lip rise in a tender half - smile . 

 " do you know why I do that , Tess ? " he say . 

 " because you love I very much ! " 

 " yes , and as a preliminary to a new entreaty . " 

 " not again ! " 

 she look a sudden fear that her resistance might break down under 
 her own desire . 

 " o , Tessy ! " he go on , " I cannot think why you be so tantalizing . 
 why do you disappoint I so ? you seem almost like a coquette , upon 
 my life you do - a coquette of the first urban water ! they blow 
 hot and blow cold , just as you do , and it be the very last sort of 
 thing to expect to find in a retreat like Talbothays . ... and yet , 
 dearest , " he quickly add , observe now the remark have cut she , " I 
 know you to be the most honest , spotless creature that ever live . 
 so how can I suppose you a flirt ? tess , why do not   you like the idea 
 of be my wife , if you love I as you seem to do ? " 

 " I have never say I do not   like the idea , and I never could say it ; 
 because - it be not   true ! " 

 the stress now get beyond endurance , her lip quiver , and she 
 be oblige to go away . Clare be so pained and perplex that he 
 run after and catch she in the passage . 

 " tell I , tell I ! " he say , passionately clasp she , in 
 forgetfulness of his curdy hand : " do tell I that you will not   belong 
 to anybody but I ! " 

 " I will , I will tell you ! " she exclaim . " and I will give you a 
 complete answer , if you will let I go now . I will tell you my 
 experience - all about myself - all ! " 

 " your experience , dear ; yes , certainly ; any number . " he express 
 assent in love satire , look into her face . " my Tess , no doubt , 
 almost as many experience as that wild convolvulus out there on the 
 garden hedge , that open itself this morning for the first time . 
 tell I anything , but do not   use that wretched expression any more 
 about not be worthy of I . " 

 " I will try - not ! and I will give you my reason to - morrow - next 
 week . " 

 " say on Sunday ? " 

 " yes , on Sunday . " 

 at last she get away , and do not stop in her retreat till she be in 
 the thicket of pollard willow at the low side of the barton , where 
 she could be quite unseen . here Tess fling herself down upon the 
 rustling undergrowth of spear - grass , as upon a bed , and remain 
 crouch in palpitating misery break by momentary shoot of joy , 
 which her fear about the ending could not altogether suppress . 

 in reality , she be drift into acquiescence . every see - saw of her 
 breath , every wave of her blood , every pulse singing in her ear , be 
 a voice that join with nature in revolt against her scrupulousness . 
 reckless , inconsiderate acceptance of he ; to close with he at the 
 altar , reveal nothing , and chance discovery ; to snatch ripe 
 pleasure before the iron tooth of pain could have time to shut upon 
 she : that be what love counsel ; and in almost a terror of ecstasy 
 Tess divine that , despite her many month of lonely self - chastisement , 
 wrestling , communing , scheme to lead a future of austere 
 isolation , love 's counsel would prevail . 

 the afternoon advance , and still she remain among the willow . 
 she hear the rattle of take down the pail from the forked stand ; 
 the " waow - waow ! " which accompany the getting together of the cow . 
 but she do not go to the milking . they would see her agitation ; 
 and the dairyman , think the cause to be love alone , would 
 good - naturedly tease she ; and that harassment could not be bear . 

 her lover must have guess her overwrought state , and invent some 
 excuse for her non - appearance , for no inquiry be make or call 
 give . at half - past six the sun settle down upon the level with 
 the aspect of a great forge in the heaven ; and presently a monstrous 
 pumpkin - like moon arise on the other hand . the pollard willow , 
 torture out of their natural shape by incessant chopping , become 
 spiny - haired monster as they stand up against it . she go in and 
 upstairs without a light . 

 it be now Wednesday . Thursday come , and Angel look thoughtfully 
 at she from a distance , but intrude in no way upon she . the indoor 
 milkmaid , Marian and the rest , seem to guess that something 
 definite be afoot , for they do not force any remark upon she in 
 the bedchamber . Friday pass ; Saturday . to - morrow be the day . 

 " I shall give way - I shall say yes - I shall let myself marry 
 he - I can not help it ! " she jealously pant , with her hot face to 
 the pillow that night , on hear one of the other girl sigh his 
 name in her sleep . " I can not   bear to let anybody have he but I ! 
 yet it be a wrong to he , and may kill he when he know ! o my 
 heart - o - o - o ! " 



 XXIX 


 " now , who mid ye think I have   hear news o ' this morning ? " say 
 Dairyman Crick , as he sit down to breakfast next day , with a riddle 
 gaze round upon the munch man and maid . " now , just who mid ye 
 think ? " 

 one guess , and another guess . Mrs Crick do not guess , because 
 she know already . 

 " well , " say the dairyman , " ' tis that slack - twist ' hore' - bird of a 
 feller , Jack Dollop . he be lately get married to a widow - woman . " 

 " not Jack Dollop ? a villain - to think o ' that ! " say a milker . 

 the name enter quickly into Tess Durbeyfield 's consciousness , for 
 it be the name of the lover who have wrong his sweetheart , and have 
 afterwards be so roughly use by the young woman 's mother in the 
 butter - churn . 

 " and have he marry the valiant matron 's daughter , as he promise ? " 
 ask Angel Clare absently , as he turn over the newspaper he be 
 read at the little table to which he be always banish by Mrs 
 Crick , in her sense of his gentility . 

 " not he , sir . never mean to , " reply the dairyman . " as I say , ' tis 
 a widow - woman , and she have money , it seem - fifty poun ' a year or so ; 
 and that be all he be after . they be marry in a great hurry ; 
 and then she tell he that by marry she have lose her fifty poun ' 
 a year . just fancy the state o ' my gentleman 's mind at that news ! 
 never such a cat - and - dog life as they have   be lead ever since ! 
 serve he well beright . but onluckily the poor woman get the bad 
 o't . " 

 " well , the silly body should have tell en soon that the ghost of 
 her first man would trouble he , " say Mrs Crick . 

 " ay , ay , " respond the dairyman indecisively . " still , you can see 
 exactly how ' twas . she want a home , and do not   like to run the 
 risk of lose he . do not   ye think that be something like it , 
 maiden ? " 

 he glance towards the row of girl . 

 " she ought to ha ' tell he just before they go to church , when he 
 could hardly have back out , " exclaim Marian . 

 " yes , she ought , " agree Izz . 

 " she must have see what he be after , and should ha ' refuse he , " 
 cry Retty spasmodically . 

 " and what do you say , my dear ? " ask the dairyman of Tess . 

 " I think she ought - to have tell he the true state of thing - or 
 else refuse he - I do not   know , " reply Tess , the bread - and - butter 
 choke she . 

 " be cust if I would have do either o't , " say Beck Knibbs , a married 
 helper from one of the cottage . " all be fair in love and war . I would 
 ha ' married en just as she do , and if he have say two word to I 
 about not tell he beforehand anything whatsomdever about my first 
 chap that I have not   choose to tell , I would ha ' knock he down wi ' the 
 roll - pin - a scram little feller like he ! any woman could do it . " 

 the laughter which follow this sally be supplement only by a 
 sorry smile , for form 's sake , from Tess . what be comedy to they be 
 tragedy to she ; and she could hardly bear their mirth . she soon rise 
 from table , and , with an impression that Clare would soon follow she , 
 go along a little wriggling path , now step to one side of the 
 irrigating channel , and now to the other , till she stand by the main 
 stream of the Var . man have be cut the water - weed high up 
 the river , and mass of they be float past she - move island 
 of green crow - foot , whereon she might almost have ride ; long lock 
 of which weed have lodge against the pile drive to keep the cow 
 from crossing . 

 yes , there be the pain of it . this question of a woman tell she 
 story - the heavy of cross to herself - seem but amusement to 
 other . it be as if people should laugh at martyrdom . 

 " Tessy ! " come from behind she , and Clare spring across the gully , 
 alight beside her foot . " my wife - soon ! " 

 " no , no ; I can not . for your sake , o Mr Clare ; for your sake , I say 
 no ! " 

 " Tess ! " 

 " still I say no ! " she repeat . 

 not expect this , he have put his arm lightly round her waist the 
 moment after speak , beneath her hang tail of hair .   the 
 young dairymaid , include Tess , breakfast with their hair loose 
 on Sunday morning before build it up extra high for attend 
 church , a style they could not adopt when milk with their head 
 against the cow .   if she have say " yes " instead of " no " he 
 would have kiss she ; it have evidently be his intention ; but 
 her determined negative deter his scrupulous heart . their 
 condition of domiciliary comradeship put she , as the woman , to such 
 disadvantage by its enforce intercourse , that he feel it unfair to 
 she to exercise any pressure of blandishment which he might have 
 honestly employ have she be well able to avoid he . he release 
 her momentarily - imprison waist , and withhold the kiss . 

 it all turn on that release . what have give her strength to refuse 
 he this time be solely the tale of the widow tell by the dairyman ; 
 and that would have be overcome in another moment . but Angel say 
 no more ; his face be perplexed ; he go away . 

 Day after day they meet - somewhat less constantly than before ; and 
 thus two or three week go by . the end of September draw near , and 
 she could see in his eye that he might ask she again . 

 his plan of procedure be different now - as though he have make up 
 his mind that her negative be , after all , only coyness and youth 
 startle by the novelty of the proposal . the fitful evasiveness of 
 her manner when the subject be under discussion countenance the 
 idea . so he play a more coaxing game ; and while never go beyond 
 word , or attempt the renewal of caress , he do his utmost 
 orally . 

 in this way Clare persistently woo she in undertone like that of 
 the purl milk - at the cow 's side , at skimming , at butter - making , 
 at cheese - making , among broody poultry , and among farrow pig - as 
 no milkmaid be ever woo before by such a man . 

 Tess know that she must break down . neither a religious sense of a 
 certain moral validity in the previous union nor a conscientious wish 
 for candour could hold out against it much long . she love he so 
 passionately , and he be so godlike in her eye ; and be , though 
 untrained , instinctively refined , her nature cry for his tutelary 
 guidance . and thus , though Tess keep repeat to herself , " I can 
 never be his wife , " the word be vain . a proof of her weakness lie 
 in the very utterance of what calm strength would not have take the 
 trouble to formulate . every sound of his voice begin on the old 
 subject stir she with a terrifying bliss , and she covet the 
 recantation she fear . 

 his manner be - what man 's be not ? - so much that of one who would 
 love and cherish and defend she under any condition , change , 
 charge , or revelation , that her gloom lessen as she bask in it . 
 the season meanwhile be draw onward to the equinox , and though 
 it be still fine , the day be much short . the dairy have again 
 work by morning candlelight for a long time ; and a fresh renewal 
 of Clare 's pleading occur one morning between three and four . 

 she have run up in her bedgown to his door to call he as usual ; 
 then have go back to dress and call the other ; and in ten minute 
 be walk to the head of the stair with the candle in her 
 hand . at the same moment he come down his step from above in his 
 shirt - sleeve and put his arm across the stairway . 

 " now , Miss Flirt , before you go down , " he say peremptorily . " it be a 
 fortnight since I speak , and this will not   do any long . you must tell 
 I what you mean , or I shall have to leave this house . my door be 
 ajar just now , and I see you . for your own safety I must go . you 
 do not   know . well ? be it to be yes at last ? " 

 " I be only just up , Mr Clare , and it be too early to take I to 
 task ! " she pout . " you need not call I Flirt . ' tis cruel and 
 untrue . wait till by and by . please wait till by and by ! I will 
 really think seriously about it between now and then . let I go 
 downstair ! " 

 she look a little like what he say she be as , hold the candle 
 sideway , she try to smile away the seriousness of her word . 

 " call I Angel , then , and not Mr Clare . " 

 " Angel . " 

 " angel dearest - why not ? " 

 " ' twould mean that I agree , would not   it ? " 

 " it would only mean that you love I , even if you can not marry I ; 
 and you be so good as to own that long ago . " 

 " very well , then , ' Angel dearest ' , if I must , " she murmur , look 
 at her candle , a roguish curl come upon her mouth , notwithstanding 
 her suspense . 

 Clare have resolve never to kiss she until he have obtain she 
 promise ; but somehow , as Tess stand there in her prettily tuck - up 
 milking gown , her hair carelessly heap upon her head till there 
 should be leisure to arrange it when skim and milking be do , 
 he break his resolve , and bring his lip to her cheek for one 
 moment . she pass downstairs very quickly , never look back at 
 he or say another word . the other maid be already down , 
 and the subject be not pursue . except Marian , they all look 
 wistfully and suspiciously at the pair , in the sad yellow ray which 
 the morning candle emit in contrast with the first cold signal 
 of the dawn without . 

 when skim be do - which , as the milk diminish with the 
 approach of autumn , be a lessening process day by day - retty and 
 the rest go out . the lover follow they . 

 " our tremulous life be so different from theirs , be they not ? " he 
 musingly observe to she , as he regard the three figure trip 
 before he through the frigid pallor of opening day . 

 " not so very different , I think , " she say . 

 " why do you think that ? " 

 " there be very few woman 's life that be not - tremulous , " Tess 
 reply , pause over the new word as if it impress she . " there be 
 more in those three than you think . " 

 " what be in they ? " 

 " almost either of them , " she begin , " would make - perhaps would 
 make - a properer wife than I. and perhaps they love you as well 
 as I - almost . " 

 " o , Tessy ! " 

 there be sign that it be an exquisite relief to she to hear the 
 impatient exclamation , though she have resolve so intrepidly to let 
 generosity make one bid against herself . that be now do , and she 
 have not the power to attempt self - immolation a second time then . 
 they be join by a milker from one of the cottage , and no more 
 be say on that which concern they so deeply . but Tess know that 
 this day would decide it . 

 in the afternoon several of the dairyman 's household and assistant 
 go down to the mead as usual , a long way from the dairy , where 
 many of the cow be milk without be drive home . the 
 supply be get less as the animal advance in calf , and the 
 supernumerary milker of the lush green season have be dismiss . 

 the work progress leisurely . each pailful be pour into tall 
 can that stand in a large spring - waggon which have be bring 
 upon the scene ; and when they be milk , the cow trail away . 
 Dairyman Crick , who be there with the rest , his wrapper gleaming 
 miraculously white against a leaden evening sky , suddenly look 
 at his heavy watch . 

 " why , ' tis later than I think , " he say . " Begad ! we shall not   be 
 soon enough with this milk at the station , if we do not   mind . there be 
 no time to - day to take it home and mix it with the bulk afore send 
 off . it must go to station straight from here . who will drive it 
 across ? " 

 Mr Clare volunteer to do so , though it be none of his business , 
 ask Tess to accompany he . the evening , though sunless , have 
 be warm and muggy for the season , and Tess have come out with 
 her milk - hood only , naked - armed and jacketless ; certainly not 
 dress for a drive . she therefore reply by glance over her 
 scant habiliment ; but Clare gently urge she . she assent by 
 relinquish her pail and stool to the dairyman to take home , and 
 mount the spring - waggon beside Clare . 



 XXX 


 in the diminishing daylight they go along the level roadway through 
 the mead , which stretch away into gray mile , and be back in 
 the extreme edge of distance by the swarthy and abrupt slope of 
 Egdon Heath . on its summit stand clump and stretch of fir - tree , 
 whose notched tip appear like battlemented tower crown 
 black - front castle of enchantment . 

 they be so absorb in the sense of be close to each other that 
 they do not begin talk for a long while , the silence be break 
 only by the clucking of the milk in the tall can behind they . 
 the lane they follow be so solitary that the hazel nut have 
 remain on the bough till they slip from their shell , and the 
 blackberry hang in heavy cluster . every now and then Angel would 
 fle the lash of his whip round one of these , pluck it off , and give 
 it to his companion . 

 the dull sky soon begin to tell its meaning by send down 
 herald - drop of rain , and the stagnant air of the day change into 
 a fitful breeze which play about their face . the quick - silvery 
 glaze on the river and pool vanish ; from broad mirror of light 
 they change to lustreless sheet of lead , with a surface like a 
 rasp . but that spectacle do not affect her preoccupation . her 
 countenance , a natural carnation slightly embrown by the season , 
 have deepen its tinge with the beating of the rain - drop ; and her 
 hair , which the pressure of the cow ' flank have , as usual , cause to 
 tumble down from its fastening and stray beyond the curtain of her 
 calico bonnet , be make clammy by the moisture , till it hardly be 
 well than seaweed . 

 " I ought not to have come , I suppose , " she murmur , look at the 
 sky . 

 " I be sorry for the rain , " say he . " but how glad I be to have you 
 here ! " 

 Remote Egdon disappear by degree behind the liquid gauze . the 
 evening grow dark , and the road be cross by gate , it be 
 not safe to drive fast than at a walking pace . the air be rather 
 chill . 

 " I be so afraid you will get cold , with nothing upon your arm and 
 shoulder , " he say . " Creep close to I , and perhaps the drizzle 
 will not   hurt you much . I should be sorrier still if I do not think 
 that the rain might be help I . " 

 she imperceptibly creep close , and he wrap round they both a 
 large piece of sail - cloth , which be sometimes use to keep the sun 
 off the milk - can . Tess hold it from slip off he as well as 
 herself , Clare 's hand be occupy . 

 " now we be all right again . ah - no we be not ! it run down into 
 my neck a little , and it must still more into your . that be well . 
 your arm be like wet marble , Tess . wipe they in the cloth . now , 
 if you stay quiet , you will not get another drop . well , dear - about 
 that question of mine - that long - stand question ? " 

 the only reply that he could hear for a little while be the smack of 
 the horse 's hoof on the moisten road , and the cluck of the milk 
 in the can behind they . 

 " do you remember what you say ? " 

 " I do , " she reply . 

 " before we get home , mind . " 

 " I will try . " 

 he say no more then . as they drive on , the fragment of an old manor 
 house of Caroline date rise against the sky , and be in due course 
 pass and leave behind . 

 " that , " he observe , to entertain she , " be an interesting old 
 place - one of the several seat which belong to an ancient Norman 
 family formerly of great influence in this county , the d'Urbervilles . 
 I never pass one of their residence without think of they . there 
 be something very sad in the extinction of a family of renown , even 
 if it be fierce , domineering , feudal renown . " 

 " yes , " say Tess . 

 they creep along towards a point in the expanse of shade just at hand 
 at which a feeble light be begin to assert its presence , a spot 
 where , by day , a fitful white streak of steam at interval upon the 
 dark green background denote intermittent moment of contact between 
 their secluded world and modern life . modern life stretch out its 
 steam feeler to this point three or four time a day , touch the 
 native existence , and quickly withdraw its feeler again , as if what 
 it touch have be uncongenial . 

 they reach the feeble light , which come from the smoky lamp of a 
 little railway station ; a poor enough terrestrial star , yet in one 
 sense of more importance to Talbothays Dairy and mankind than the 
 celestial one to which it stand in such humiliating contrast . the 
 can of new milk be unladen in the rain , Tess get a little 
 shelter from a neighbouring holly tree . 

 then there be the hissing of a train , which draw up almost silently 
 upon the wet rail , and the milk be rapidly swing can by can into 
 the truck . the light of the engine flash for a second upon Tess 
 Durbeyfield 's figure , motionless under the great holly tree . no 
 object could have look more foreign to the gleam crank and 
 wheel than this unsophisticated girl , with the round bare arm , the 
 rainy face and hair , the suspend attitude of a friendly leopard at 
 pause , the print gown of no date or fashion , and the cotton bonnet 
 droop on her brow . 

 she mount again beside her lover , with a mute obedience 
 characteristic of impassioned nature at time , and when they have 
 wrap themselves up over head and ear in the sailcloth again , they 
 plunge back into the now thick night . Tess be so receptive that 
 the few minute of contact with the whirl of material progress 
 linger in her thought . 

 " londoner will drink it at their breakfast to - morrow , will not   they ? " 
 she ask . " strange people that we have never see . " 

 " yes - I suppose they will . though not as we send it . when its 
 strength have be lower , so that it may not get up into their 
 head . " 

 " noble man and noble woman , ambassador and centurion , lady and 
 tradeswoman , and baby who have never see a cow . " 

 " well , yes ; perhaps ; particularly centurion . " 

 " who do not   know anything of we , and where it come from ; or think how 
 we two drive mile across the moor to - night in the rain that it might 
 reach them in time ? " 

 " we do not drive entirely on account of these precious londoner ; we 
 drive a little on our own - on account of that anxious matter which 
 you will , I be sure , set at rest , dear Tess . now , permit I to put 
 it in this way . you belong to I already , you know ; your heart , I 
 mean . do it not ? " 

 " you know as well as i. o yes - yes ! " 

 " then , if your heart do , why not your hand ? " 

 " my only reason be on account of you - on account of a question . I 
 have something to tell you - " 

 " but suppose it to be entirely for my happiness , and my worldly 
 convenience also ? " 

 " o yes ; if it be for your happiness and worldly convenience . but my 
 life before I come here - I want - " 

 " well , it be for my convenience as well as my happiness . if I have a 
 very large farm , either English or colonial , you will be invaluable 
 as a wife to I ; well than a woman out of the large mansion in 
 the country . so please - please , dear Tessy , disabuse your mind of 
 the feeling that you will stand in my way . " 

 " but my history . I want you to know it - you must let I tell 
 you - you will not like I so well ! " 

 " tell it if you wish to , dearest . this precious history then . yes , 
 I be bear at so and so , Anno Domini - " 

 " I be bear at Marlott , " she say , catch at his word as a help , 
 lightly as they be speak . " and I grow up there . and I be in the 
 Sixth Standard when I leave school , and they say I have great aptness , 
 and should make a good teacher , so it be settle that I should 
 be one . but there be trouble in my family ; father be not very 
 industrious , and he drink a little . " 

 " yes , yes . poor child ! nothing new . " he press she more closely 
 to his side . 

 " and then - there be something very unusual about it - about I . I - I 
 be - " 

 Tess 's breath quicken . 

 " yes , dearest . never mind . " 

 " I - I - be not a Durbeyfield , but a d'Urberville - a descendant of the 
 same family as those that own the old house we pass . and - we be 
 all go to nothing ! " 

 " a d'Urberville ! - indeed ! and be that all the trouble , dear Tess ? " 

 " yes , " she answer faintly . 

 " well - why should I love you less after know this ? " 

 " I be tell by the dairyman that you hat old family . " 

 he laugh . 

 " well , it be true , in one sense . I do hate the aristocratic 
 principle of blood before everything , and do think that as reasoner 
 the only pedigree we ought to respect be those spiritual one of 
 the wise and virtuous , without regard to corporal paternity . but 
 I be extremely interested in this news - you can have no idea how 
 interested I be ! be you not interested yourself in be one of 
 that well - know line ? " 

 " no . I have think it sad - especially since come here , and 
 know that many of the hill and field I see once belong to 
 my father 's people . but other hill and field belong to Retty 's 
 people , and perhaps other to Marian 's , so that I do not   value it 
 particularly . " 

 " yes - it be surprising how many of the present tiller of the soil 
 be once owner of it , and I sometimes wonder that a certain school 
 of politician do not   make capital of the circumstance ; but they do not 
 seem to know it ... I wonder that I do not see the resemblance of 
 your name to d'Urberville , and trace the manifest corruption . and 
 this be the cark secret ! " 

 she have not tell . at the last moment her courage have fail she ; 
 she fear his blame for not tell he soon ; and her instinct 
 of self - preservation be strong than her candour . 

 " of course , " continue the unwitting Clare , " I should have be glad 
 to know you to be descend exclusively from the long - suffering , 
 dumb , unrecorded rank and file of the english nation , and not from 
 the self - seek few who make themselves powerful at the expense of 
 the rest . but I be corrupt away from that by my affection for you , 
 tess   he laugh as he speak , and make selfish likewise . for your 
 own sake I rejoice in your descent . society be hopelessly snobbish , 
 and this fact of your extraction may make an appreciable difference 
 to its acceptance of you as my wife , after I have make you the 
 well - read woman that I mean to make you . my mother too , poor soul , 
 will think so much well of you on account of it . tess , you must 
 spell your name correctly - d'Urberville - from this very day . " 

 " I like the other way rather well . " 

 " but you must , dearest ! good heaven , why dozen of mushroom 
 millionaire would jump at such a possession ! by the bye , there be 
 one of that kidney who have take the name - where have I hear of 
 he ? - up in the neighbourhood of the Chase , I think . why , he be the 
 very man who have that rumpus with my father I tell you of . what an 
 odd coincidence ! " 

 " Angel , I think I would rather not take the name ! it be unlucky , 
 perhaps ! " 

 she be agitate . 

 " now then , Mistress Teresa d'Urberville , I have you . take my name , 
 and so you will escape your ! the secret be out , so why should you 
 any long refuse I ? " 

 " if it be sure to make you happy to have I as your wife , and you 
 feel that you do wish to marry I , very , very much - " 

 " I do , dearest , of course ! " 

 " I mean , that it be only your want I very much , and be hardly 
 able to keep alive without I , whatever my offence , that would make 
 I feel I ought to say I will . " 

 " you will - you do say it , I know ! you will be mine for ever and 
 ever . " 

 he clasp her close and kiss she . 

 " yes ! " 

 she have no soon say it than she burst into a dry hard sobbing , so 
 violent that it seem to rend she . Tess be not a hysterical girl 
 by any mean , and he be surprised . 

 " why do you cry , dearest ? " 

 " I can not   tell - quite ! - I be so glad to think - of be your , and 
 make you happy ! " 

 " but this do not seem very much like gladness , my Tessy ! " 

 " I mean - I cry because I have break down in my vow ! I say I would 
 die unmarried ! " 

 " but , if you love I you would like I to be your husband ? " 

 " yes , yes , yes ! but o , I sometimes wish I have never be bear ! " 

 " now , my dear Tess , if I do not know that you be very much excited , 
 and very inexperienced , I should say that remark be not very 
 complimentary . how come you to wish that if you care for I ? do you 
 care for I ? I wish you would prove it in some way . " 

 " how can I prove it more than I have do ? " she cry , in a 
 distraction of tenderness . " will this prove it more ? " 

 she clasp his neck , and for the first time Clare learn what an 
 impassioned woman 's kiss be like upon the lip of one whom she 
 love with all her heart and soul , as Tess love he . 

 " there - now do you believe ? " she ask , flushed , and wipe her eye . 

 " yes . I never really doubt - never , never ! " 

 so they drive on through the gloom , form one bundle inside the 
 sail - cloth , the horse go as he would , and the rain drive against 
 they . she have consent . she might as well have agree at first . 
 the " appetite for joy " which pervade all creation , that tremendous 
 force which sway humanity to its purpose , as the tide sway the 
 helpless weed , be not to be control by vague lucubration over 
 the social rubric . 

 " I must write to my mother , " she say . " you do not   mind my doing 
 that ? " 

 " of course not , dear child . you be a child to I , Tess , not to know 
 how very proper it be to write to your mother at such a time , and how 
 wrong it would be in I to object . where do she live ? " 

 " at the same place - marlott . on the further side of Blackmoor Vale . " 

 " ah , then I have see you before this summer - " 

 " yes ; at that dance on the green ; but you would not dance with I . 
 O , I hope that be of no ill - omen for we now ! " 



 XXXI 


 Tess write a most touching and urgent letter to her mother the very 
 next day , and by the end of the week a response to her communication 
 arrive in Joan Durbeyfield 's wandering last - century hand . 


  DEAR TESS , - 

  J write these few line hop they will find you well , 
  as they leave I at Present , thank God for it . dear 
  Tess , we be all glad to hear that you be go really 
  to be marry soon . but with respect to your question , 
  Tess , J say between ourselves , quite private but very 
  strong , that on no account do you say a word of your 
  Bygone Trouble to he . J do not tell everything 
  to your Father , he be so proud on account of his 
  Respectability , which , perhaps , your Intended be 
  the same . many a woman - some of the Highest in the 
  Land - have have a trouble in their time ; and why should 
  you trumpet yours when other do not   Trumpet theirs ? no 
  girl would be such a Fool , specially as it be so long 
  ago , and not your Fault at all . J shall answer the 
  same if you ask I fifty time . besides , you must bear 
  in mind that , know it to be your childish Nature to 
  tell all that be in your heart - so simple ! - J make you 
  promise I never to let it out by Word or Deed , have 
  your Welfare in my mind ; and you most solemnly do 
  promise it go from this Door . J have not name 
  either that question or your come marriage to your 
  Father , as he would blab it everywhere , poor Simple 
  Man . 

  Dear Tess , keep up your spirit , and we mean to send 
  you a hogshead of cyder for you wedding , know there 
  be not much in your part , and thin Sour stuff what 
  there be . so no more at present , and with kind love 
  to your Young Man . - from your affectte . mother , 

  J. DURBEYFIELD 


 " o mother , mother ! " murmur Tess . 

 she be recognize how light be the touch of event the most 
 oppressive upon Mrs Durbeyfield 's elastic spirit . her mother do not 
 see life as Tess see it . that haunt episode of bygone day be 
 to her mother but a pass accident . but perhaps her mother be 
 right as to the course to be follow , whatever she might be in her 
 reason . silence seem , on the face of it , well for she adore 
 one 's happiness : silence it should be . 

 thus steady by a command from the only person in the world who have 
 any shadow of right to control her action , Tess grow calm . the 
 responsibility be shift , and her heart be light than it have 
 be for week . the day of decline autumn which follow she 
 assent , begin with the month of October , form a season through 
 which she live in spiritual altitude more nearly approach 
 ecstasy than any other period of her life . 

 there be hardly a touch of earth in her love for Clare . to her 
 sublime trustfulness he be all that goodness could be - know all that 
 a guide , philosopher , and friend should know . she think every line 
 in the contour of his person the perfection of masculine beauty , his 
 soul the soul of a saint , his intellect that of a seer . the wisdom 
 of her love for he , as love , sustain her dignity ; she seem to be 
 wear a crown . the compassion of his love for she , as she see it , 
 make she lift up her heart to he in devotion . he would sometimes 
 catch her large , worshipful eye , that have no bottom to they look 
 at he from their depth , as if she see something immortal before 
 she . 

 she dismiss the past - trod upon it and put it out , as one tread on 
 a coal that be smoulder and dangerous . 

 she have not know that man could be so disinterested , chivalrous , 
 protective , in their love for woman as he . Angel Clare be far from 
 all that she think he in this respect ; absurdly far , indeed ; 
 but he be , in truth , more spiritual than animal ; he have himself 
 well in hand , and be singularly free from grossness . though not 
 cold - natured , he be rather bright than hot - less Byronic than 
 Shelleyan ; could love desperately , but with a love more especially 
 inclined to the imaginative and ethereal ; it be a fastidious emotion 
 which could jealously guard the love one against his very self . 
 this amazed and enraptured Tess , whose slight experience have be so 
 infelicitous till now ; and in her reaction from indignation against 
 the male sex she swerve to excess of honour for Clare . 

 they unaffectedly seek each other 's company ; in her honest faith 
 she do not disguise her desire to be with he . the sum of her 
 instinct on this matter , if clearly state , would have be that the 
 elusive quality of her sex which attract man in general might be 
 distasteful to so perfect a man after an avowal of love , since it 
 must in its very nature carry with it a suspicion of art . 

 the country custom of unreserved comradeship out of door during 
 betrothal be the only custom she know , and to she it have no 
 strangeness ; though it seem oddly anticipative to Clare till he 
 see how normal a thing she , in common with all the other dairy - folk , 
 regard it . thus , during this October month of wonderful afternoon 
 they rove along the mead by creep path which follow the 
 brink of trickle tributary brook , hop across by little wooden 
 bridge to the other side , and back again . they be never out of 
 the sound of some purl weir , whose buzz accompany their own 
 murmuring , while the beam of the sun , almost as horizontal as the 
 mead itself , form a pollen of radiance over the landscape . they 
 see tiny blue fog in the shadow of tree and hedge , all the time 
 that there be bright sunshine elsewhere . the sun be so near the 
 ground , and the sward so flat , that the shadow of Clare and Tess 
 would stretch a quarter of a mile ahead of they , like two long 
 finger point afar to where the green alluvial reach abut 
 against the slop side of the vale . 

 man be at work here and there - for it be the season for " take 
 up " the meadow , or dig the little waterway clear for the winter 
 irrigation , and mend their bank where trodden down by the cow . 
 the shovelful of loam , black as jet , bring there by the river 
 when it be as wide as the whole valley , be an essence of soil , 
 pound champaign of the past , steeped , refine , and subtilize to 
 extraordinary richness , out of which come all the fertility of the 
 mead , and of the cattle graze there . 

 Clare hardily keep his arm round her waist in sight of these 
 waterman , with the air of a man who be accustom to public 
 dalliance , though actually as shy as she who , with lip part and 
 eye askance on the labourer , wear the look of a wary animal the 
 while . 

 " you be not ashamed of own I as yours before they ! " she say 
 gladly . 

 " o no ! " 

 " but if it should reach the ear of your friend at Emminster that 
 you be walk about like this with I , a milkmaid - " 

 " the most bewitching milkmaid ever see . " 

 " they might feel it a hurt to their dignity . " 

 " my dear girl - a d'Urberville hurt the dignity of a Clare ! it be a 
 grand card to play - that of your belong to such a family , and I 
 be reserve it for a grand effect when we be married , and have 
 the proof of your descent from Parson Tringham . apart from that , 
 my future be to be totally foreign to my family - it will not affect 
 even the surface of their life . we shall leave this part of 
 England - perhaps England itself - and what do it matter how people 
 regard we here ? you will like go , will you not ? " 

 she could answer no more than a bare affirmative , so great be the 
 emotion arouse in she at the thought of go through the world with 
 he as his own familiar friend . her feeling almost fill her ear 
 like a babble of wave , and surge up to her eye . she put her hand 
 in his , and thus they go on , to a place where the reflect sun 
 glare up from the river , under a bridge , with a molten - metallic glow 
 that dazzle their eye , though the sun itself be hide by the 
 bridge . they stand still , whereupon little furred and feather 
 head pop up from the smooth surface of the water ; but , find 
 that the disturbing presence have pause , and not pass by , they 
 disappear again . upon this river - brink they linger till the fog 
 begin to close round they - which be very early in the evening at 
 this time of the year - settle on the lash of her eye , where it 
 rest like crystal , and on his brow and hair . 

 they walk later on Sundays , when it be quite dark . some of the 
 dairy - people , who be also out of door on the first Sunday evening 
 after their engagement , hear her impulsive speech , ecstasize to 
 fragment , though they be too far off to hear the word discourse ; 
 note the spasmodic catch in her remark , break into syllable by 
 the leaping of her heart , as she walk lean on his arm ; she 
 content pause , the occasional little laugh upon which her soul 
 seem to ride - the laugh of a woman in company with the man she 
 love and have win from all other woman - unlike anything else in 
 nature . they mark the buoyancy of her tread , like the skim of a 
 bird which have not quite alight . 

 her affection for he be now the breath and life of Tess 's being ; 
 it envelop she as a photosphere , irradiate she into forgetfulness 
 of her past sorrow , keep back the gloomy spectre that would 
 persist in their attempt to touch she - doubt , fear , moodiness , care , 
 shame . she know that they be wait like wolf just outside the 
 circumscribing light , but she have long spell of power to keep they 
 in hungry subjection there . 

 a spiritual forgetfulness co - exist with an intellectual 
 remembrance . she walk in brightness , but she know that in the 
 background those shape of darkness be always spread . they might 
 be recede , or they might be approach , one or the other , a little 
 every day . 


 one evening Tess and Clare be oblige to sit indoor keep house , 
 all the other occupant of the domicile be away . as they talk 
 she look thoughtfully up at he , and meet his two appreciative eye . 

 " I be not worthy of you - no , I be not ! " she burst out , jump up 
 from her low stool as though appal at his homage , and the fulness 
 of her own joy thereat . 

 Clare , deem the whole basis of her excitement to be that which be 
 only the small part of it , say - 

 " I will not   have you speak like it , dear Tess ! distinction do not 
 consist in the facile use of a contemptible set of convention , but 
 in be number among those who be true , and honest , and just , and 
 pure , and lovely , and of good report - as you be , my Tess . " 

 she struggle with the sob in her throat . how often have that string 
 of excellence make her young heart ache in church of late year , and 
 how strange that he should have cite they now . 

 " why do not   you stay and love I when I - be sixteen ; live with my 
 little sister and brother , and you dance on the green ? o , why 
 do not   you , why do not   you ! " she say , impetuously clasp her 
 hand . 

 Angel begin to comfort and reassure she , think to himself , truly 
 enough , what a creature of mood she be , and how careful he would 
 have to be of she when she depend for her happiness entirely on 
 he . 

 " ah - why do not   I stay ! " he say . " that be just what I feel . if I 
 have only know ! but you must not be so bitter in your regret - why 
 should you be ? " 

 with the woman 's instinct to hide she diverge hastily - 

 " I should have have four year more of your heart than I can ever have 
 now . then I should not have waste my time as I have do - I should 
 have have so much long happiness ! " 

 it be no mature woman with a long dark vista of intrigue behind she 
 who be torment thus , but a girl of simple life , not yet one - and 
 twenty , who have be catch during her day of immaturity like a bird 
 in a springe . to calm herself the more completely , she rise from her 
 little stool and leave the room , overturn the stool with her skirt 
 as she go . 

 he sit on by the cheerful firelight throw from a bundle of green 
 ash - stick lay across the dog ; the stick snap pleasantly , and 
 hiss out bubble of sap from their end . when she come back she 
 be herself again . 

 " do you not think you be just a wee bit capricious , fitful , Tess ? " 
 he say , good - humouredly , as he spread a cushion for she on the 
 stool , and seat himself in the settle beside she . " I want to 
 ask you something , and just then you run away . " 

 " yes , perhaps I be capricious , " she murmur . she suddenly 
 approach he , and put a hand upon each of his arm . " no , Angel , 
 I be not really so - by nature , I mean ! " the more particularly to 
 assure he that she be not , she place herself close to he in the 
 settle , and allow her head to find a resting - place against Clare 's 
 shoulder . " what do you want to ask I - I be sure I will answer it , " 
 she continue humbly . 

 " well , you love I , and have agree to marry I , and hence there 
 follow a thirdly , ' when shall the day be ? ' " 

 " I like live like this . " 

 " but I must think of start in business on my own hook with the 
 new year , or a little later . and before I get involve in the 
 multifarious detail of my new position , I should like to have 
 secure my partner . " 

 " but , " she timidly answer , " to talk quite practically , would not   it 
 be good not to marry till after all that ? - though I can not   bear the 
 think o ' your go away and leave I here ! " 

 " of course you can not - and it be not good in this case . I want you 
 to help I in many way in make my start . when shall it be ? why 
 not a fortnight from now ? " 

 " no , " she say , become grave : " I have so many thing to think of 
 first . " 

 " but - " 

 he draw she gently near to he . 

 the reality of marriage be startling when it loom so near . before 
 discussion of the question have proceed far there walk round 
 the corner of the settle into the full firelight of the apartment Mr 
 Dairyman Crick , Mrs Crick , and two of the milkmaid . 

 Tess spring like an elastic ball from his side to her foot , while she 
 face flush and her eye shine in the firelight . 

 " I know how it would be if I sit so close to he ! " she cry , with 
 vexation . " I say to myself , they be sure to come and catch we ! 
 but I be not   really sit on his knee , though it might ha ' seem 
 as if I be almost ! " 

 " well - if so be you have not   tell we , I be sure we should not   ha ' 
 notice that ye have be sit anywhere at all in this light , " 
 reply the dairyman . he continue to his wife , with the stolid 
 mien of a man who understand nothing of the emotion relate to 
 matrimony - " now , Christianer , that show that folk should never 
 fancy other folk be suppose thing when they bain't . o no , I 
 should never ha ' think a word of where she be a sit to , if 
 she have not   tell I - not I. " 

 " we be go to be marry soon , " say Clare , with improvise 
 phlegm . 

 " ah - and be ye ! well , I be truly glad to hear it , sir . I have 
 think you mid do such a thing for some time . she be too good for a 
 dairymaid - I say so the very first day I zid she - and a prize for 
 any man ; and what be more , a wonderful woman for a gentleman - farmer 's 
 wife ; he will not   be at the mercy of his baily wi ' she at his side . " 

 somehow Tess disappear . she have be even more strike with the 
 look of the girl who follow Crick than abash by Crick 's blunt 
 praise . 

 after supper , when she reach her bedroom , they be all present . a 
 light be burn , and each damsel be sit up whitely in her bed , 
 await Tess , the whole like a row of avenge ghost . 

 but she see in a few moment that there be no malice in their mood . 
 they could scarcely feel as a loss what they have never expect to 
 have . their condition be objective , contemplative . 

 " he be go to marry she ! " murmur Retty , never take eye off 
 Tess . " how her face do show it ! " 

 " you be go to marry he ? " ask Marian . 

 " yes , " say Tess . 

 " when ? " 

 " some day . " 

 they think that this be evasiveness only . 

 " yes - go to marry he - a gentleman ! " repeat Izz Huett . 

 and by a sort of fascination the three girl , one after another , 
 creep out of their bed , and come and stand barefoote round Tess . 
 Retty put her hand upon Tess 's shoulder , as if to realize her 
 friend 's corporeality after such a miracle , and the other two lay 
 their arm round her waist , all look into her face . 

 " how it do seem ! almost more than I can think of ! " say Izz Huett . 

 Marian kiss Tess . " yes , " she murmur as she withdraw her lip . 

 " be that because of love for she , or because other lip have touch 
 there by now ? " continue izz drily to Marian . 

 " I be not   think o ' that , " say Marian simply . " I be on'y feel 
 all the strangeness o't - that she be to be his wife , and nobody else . 
 I do not   say nay to it , nor either of we , because we do not think 
 of it - only love he . still , nobody else be to marry'n in the 
 world - no fine lady , nobody in silk and satin ; but she who do live 
 like we . " 

 " be you sure you do not   dislike I for it ? " say Tess in a low voice . 

 they hang about she in their white nightgown before reply , as if 
 they consider their answer might lie in her look . 

 " I do not   know - I do not   know , " murmur Retty Priddle . " I want to 
 hate ' ee ; but I can not ! " 

 " that be how I feel , " echo Izz and Marian . " I can not   hate she . 
 somehow she hinder I ! " 

 " he ought to marry one of you , " murmur Tess . 

 " why ? " 

 " you be all well than i. " 

 " we well than you ? " say the girl in a low , slow whisper . " no , 
 no , dear Tess ! " 

 " you be ! " she contradict impetuously . and suddenly tear away 
 from their cling arm she burst into a hysterical fit of tear , 
 bow herself on the chest of drawer and repeat incessantly , 
 " o yes , yes , yes ! " 

 have once give way she could not stop her weeping . 

 " he ought to have have one of you ! " she cry . " I think I ought to 
 make he even now ! you would be well for he than - I do not   know 
 what I be say ! o ! o ! " 

 they go up to she and clasp her round , but still her sob tear 
 she . 

 " get some water , " say Marian , " she be upset by we , poor thing , poor 
 thing ! " 

 they gently lead she back to the side of her bed , where they kiss 
 she warmly . 

 " you be good for'n , " say Marian . " More ladylike , and a well 
 scholar than we , especially since he have teach ' ee so much . but 
 even you ought to be proud . you be proud , I be sure ! " 

 " yes , I be , " she say ; " and I be ashamed at so break down . " 

 when they be all in bed , and the light be out , Marian whisper 
 across to she - 

 " you will think of we when you be his wife , Tess , and of how we tell 
 ' ee that we love he , and how we try not to hate you , and do not 
 hate you , and could not hate you , because you be his choice , and 
 we never hop to be choose by he . " 

 they be not aware that , at these word , salt , sting tear 
 trickle down upon Tess 's pillow anew , and how she resolve , with a 
 burst heart , to tell all her history to Angel Clare , despite her 
 mother 's command - to let he for whom she live and breathe despise 
 she if he would , and her mother regard she as a fool , rather then 
 preserve a silence which might be deem a treachery to he , and 
 which somehow seem a wrong to these . 



 XXXII 


 this penitential mood keep she from name the wedding - day . the 
 beginning of November find its date still in abeyance , though he 
 ask she at the most tempting time . but Tess 's desire seem to be 
 for a perpetual betrothal in which everything should remain as it be 
 then . 

 the mead be change now ; but it be still warm enough in early 
 afternoon before milk to idle there awhile , and the state of 
 dairy - work at this time of year allow a spare hour for idle . 
 look over the damp sod in the direction of the sun , a glistening 
 ripple of gossamer webs be visible to their eye under the luminary , 
 like the track of moonlight on the sea . gnat , know nothing 
 of their brief glorification , wander across the shimmer of this 
 pathway , irradiate as if they bear fire within they , then pass out 
 of its line , and be quite extinct . in the presence of these thing 
 he would remind she that the date be still the question . 

 or he would ask she at night , when he accompany she on some mission 
 invent by Mrs Crick to give he the opportunity . this be mostly a 
 journey to the farmhouse on the slope above the vale , to inquire how 
 the advanced cow be get on in the straw - barton to which they 
 be relegate . for it be a time of the year that bring great 
 change to the world of kine . batch of the animal be send away 
 daily to this lie - in hospital , where they live on straw till their 
 calf be bear , after which event , and as soon as the calf could 
 walk , mother and offspring be drive back to the dairy . in the 
 interval which elapse before the calf be sell there be , of 
 course , little milk to be do , but as soon as the calf have be 
 take away the milkmaid would have to set to work as usual . 

 return from one of these dark walk they reach a great 
 gravel - cliff immediately over the level , where they stand still and 
 listen . the water be now high in the stream , squirt through 
 the weir , and tinkle under culvert ; the small gully be all 
 full ; there be no take short cut anywhere , and foot - passenger 
 be compel to follow the permanent way . from the whole extent 
 of the invisible vale come a multitudinous intonation ; it force upon 
 their fancy that a great city lie below they , and that the murmur be 
 the vociferation of its populace . 

 " it seem like ten of thousand of they , " say Tess ; " hold 
 public - meeting in their market - place , argue , preach , 
 quarrelling , sobbing , groan , pray , and cursing . " 

 Clare be not particularly heed . 

 " do Crick speak to you to - day , dear , about his not want much 
 assistance during the winter month ? " 

 " no . " 

 " the cow be go dry rapidly . " 

 " yes . six or seven go to the straw - barton yesterday , and three the 
 day before , make nearly twenty in the straw already . ah - be it 
 that the farmer do not   want my help for the calving ? o , I be not 
 want here any more ! and I have try so hard to - " 

 " Crick do not   exactly say that he would no long require you . but , 
 know what our relation be , he say in the most good - natured 
 and respectful manner possible that he suppose on my leaving at 
 Christmas I should take you with I , and on my ask what he would 
 do without you he merely observe that , as a matter of fact , it be a 
 time of year when he could do with a very little female help . I be 
 afraid I be sinner enough to feel rather glad that he be in this 
 way force your hand . " 

 " I do not   think you ought to have feel glad , Angel . because ' tis 
 always mournful not to be want , even if at the same time ' tis 
 convenient . " 

 " well , it be convenient - you have admit that . " he put his finger 
 upon her cheek . " ah ! " he say . 

 " what ? " 

 " I feel the red rise up at she have be catch ! but why should 
 I trifle so ! we will not trifle - life be too serious . " 

 " it be . perhaps I see that before you do . " 

 she be see it then . to decline to marry he after all - in 
 obedience to her emotion of last night - and leave the dairy , mean 
 to go to some strange place , not a dairy ; for milkmaid be not in 
 request now calve - time be come on ; to go to some arable farm 
 where no divine be like Angel Clare be . she hat the thought , 
 and she hat more the thought of go home . 

 " so that , seriously , dear Tess , " he continue , ' since you will 
 probably have to leave at Christmas , it be in every way desirable and 
 convenient that I should carry you off then as my property . besides , 
 if you be not the most uncalculating girl in the world you would 
 know that we could not go on like this for ever . " 

 " I wish we could . that it would always be summer and autumn , and you 
 always court I , and always think as much of I as you have 
 do through the past summer - time ! " 

 " I always shall . " 

 " o , I know you will ! " she cry , with a sudden fervour of faith 
 in he . " Angel , I will fix the day when I will become yours for 
 always ! " 

 thus at last it be arrange between they , during that dark walk 
 home , amid the myriad of liquid voice on the right and left . 

 when they reach the dairy Mr and Mrs Crick be promptly tell - with 
 injunction of secrecy ; for each of the lover be desirous that the 
 marriage should be keep as private as possible . the dairyman , though 
 he have think of dismiss she soon , now make a great concern about 
 lose she . what should he do about his skimming ? who would make 
 the ornamental butter - pat for the Anglebury and Sandbourne lady ? 
 Mrs Crick congratulate Tess on the shilly - shallying have at last 
 come to an end , and say that directly she set eye on Tess she 
 divine that she be to be the choose one of somebody who be no 
 common outdoor man ; Tess have look so superior as she walk across 
 the barton on that afternoon of her arrival ; that she be of a good 
 family she could have swear . in point of fact Mrs Crick do remember 
 think that Tess be graceful and good - look as she approach ; 
 but the superiority might have be a growth of the imagination aid 
 by subsequent knowledge . 

 Tess be now carry along upon the wing of the hour , without the 
 sense of a will . the word have be give ; the number of the day 
 write down . her naturally bright intelligence have begin to admit 
 the fatalistic conviction common to field - folk and those who 
 associate more extensively with natural phenomenon than with their 
 fellow - creature ; and she accordingly drift into that passive 
 responsiveness to all thing her lover suggest , characteristic of 
 the frame of mind . 

 but she write anew to her mother , ostensibly to notify the 
 wedding - day ; really to again implore her advice . it be a gentleman 
 who have choose she , which perhaps her mother have not sufficiently 
 consider . a post - nuptial explanation , which might be accept with 
 a light heart by a rougher man , might not be receive with the same 
 feeling by he . but this communication bring no reply from Mrs 
 Durbeyfield . 

 despite Angel Clare 's plausible representation to himself and to Tess 
 of the practical need for their immediate marriage , there be in 
 truth an element of precipitancy in the step , as become apparent at a 
 later date . he love she dearly , though perhaps rather ideally and 
 fancifully than with the impassioned thoroughness of her feeling for 
 he . he have entertain no notion , when doom as he have think to 
 an unintellectual bucolic life , that such charm as he behold in this 
 idyllic creature would be find behind the scene . unsophistication 
 be a thing to talk of ; but he have not know how it really strike one 
 until he come here . yet he be very far from see his future track 
 clearly , and it might be a year or two before he would be able to 
 consider himself fairly start in life . the secret lie in the tinge 
 of recklessness impart to his career and character by the sense 
 that he have be make to miss his true destiny through the prejudice 
 of his family . 

 " do not   you think ' twould have be well for we to wait till you 
 be quite settle in your midland farm ? " she once ask timidly . 
  a midland farm be the idea just then . 

 " to tell the truth , my Tess , I do not   like you to be leave anywhere 
 away from my protection and sympathy . " 

 the reason be a good one , so far as it go . his influence over she 
 have be so marked that she have catch his manner and habit , his 
 speech and phrase , his liking and his aversion . and to leave she 
 in farmland would be to let she slip back again out of accord with 
 he . he wish to have she under his charge for another reason . 
 his parent have naturally desire to see she once at least before he 
 carry she off to a distant settlement , English or colonial ; and 
 as no opinion of theirs be to be allow to change his intention , 
 he judge that a couple of month ' life with he in lodging 
 whilst seek for an advantageous opening would be of some social 
 assistance to she at what she might feel to be a try ordeal - her 
 presentation to his mother at the vicarage . 

 next , he wish to see a little of the working of a flour - mill , 
 have an idea that he might combine the use of one with 
 corn - grow . the proprietor of a large old water - mill at 
 Wellbridge - once the mill of an Abbey - have offer he the inspection 
 of his time - honour mode of procedure , and a hand in the operation 
 for a few day , whenever he should choose to come . Clare pay a 
 visit to the place , some few mile distant , one day at this time , 
 to inquire particular , and return to talbothay in the evening . 
 she find he determined to spend a short time at the Wellbridge 
 flour - mill . and what have determine he ? Less the opportunity of an 
 insight into grind and bolt than the casual fact that lodging 
 be to be obtain in that very farmhouse which , before its 
 mutilation , have be the mansion of a branch of the d'Urberville 
 family . this be always how Clare settle practical question ; by 
 a sentiment which have nothing to do with they . they decide to go 
 immediately after the wedding , and remain for a fortnight , instead 
 of journey to town and inn . 

 " then we will start off to examine some farm on the other side of 
 London that I have hear of , " he say , " and by March or April we will 
 pay a visit to my father and mother . " 

 question of procedure such as these arise and pass , and the day , 
 the incredible day , on which she be to become his , loom large in 
 the near future . the thirty - first of December , New Year 's Eve , be 
 the date . his wife , she say to herself . could it ever be ? their 
 two self together , nothing to divide they , every incident share 
 by they ; why not ? and yet why ? 

 one Sunday morning Izz Huett return from church , and speak 
 privately to Tess . 

 " you be not call home this morning . " 

 " what ? " 

 " it should ha ' be the first time of ask to - day , " she answer , 
 look quietly at Tess . " you mean to be marry New Year 's Eve , 
 deary ? " 

 the other return a quick affirmative . 

 " and there must be three time of ask . and now there be only two 
 sunday leave between . " 

 Tess feel her cheek pal ; Izz be right ; of course there must be 
 three . perhaps he have forget ! if so , there must be a week 's 
 postponement , and that be unlucky . how could she remind her lover ? 
 she who have be so backward be suddenly fire with impatience and 
 alarm lest she should lose her dear prize . 

 a natural incident relieve her anxiety . Izz mention the omission 
 of the bann to Mrs Crick , and Mrs Crick assume a matron 's privilege 
 of speak to Angel on the point . 

 " have ye forget them , Mr Clare ? the bann , I mean . " 

 " no , I have not forget them , " say Clare . 

 as soon as he catch Tess alone he assure she : 

 " do not   let they tease you about the bann . a licence will be quieter 
 for we , and I have decide on a licence without consult you . 
 so if you go to church on Sunday morning you will not hear your own 
 name , if you wish to . " 

 " I do not   wish to hear it , dearest , " she say proudly . 

 but to know that thing be in train be an immense relief to Tess 
 notwithstanding , who have well - nigh fear that somebody would stand 
 up and forbid the bann on the ground of her history . how event 
 be favour she ! 

 " I do not   quite feel easy , " she say to herself . " all this good 
 fortune may be scourge out of I afterwards by a lot of ill . that be 
 how Heaven mostly do . I wish I could have have common bann ! " 

 but everything go smoothly . she wonder whether he would like she 
 to be marry in her present good white frock , or if she ought to 
 buy a new one . the question be set at rest by his forethought , 
 disclose by the arrival of some large package address to she . 
 inside they she find a whole stock of clothing , from bonnet to 
 shoe , include a perfect morning costume , such as would well suit 
 the simple wedding they plan . he enter the house shortly after 
 the arrival of the package , and hear she upstairs undo they . 

 a minute later she come down with a flush on her face and tear in 
 her eye . 

 " how thoughtful you have   be ! " she murmur , her cheek upon his 
 shoulder . " even to the glove and handkerchief ! my own love - how 
 good , how kind ! " 

 " no , no , Tess ; just an order to a tradeswoman in London - nothing 
 more . " 

 and to divert she from think too highly of he , he tell she to go 
 upstairs , and take her time , and see if it all fit ; and , if not , 
 to get the village sempstress to make a few alteration . 

 she do return upstairs , and put on the gown . alone , she stand for a 
 moment before the glass look at the effect of her silk attire ; and 
 then there come into her head her mother 's ballad of the mystic 
 robe - 


  that never would become that wife 
  that have once do amiss , 


 which Mrs Durbeyfield have use to sing to she as a child , so blithely 
 and so archly , her foot on the cradle , which she rock to the tune . 
 suppose this robe should betray she by change colour , as her robe 
 have betray Queen Guinevere . since she have be at the dairy she 
 have not once think of the line till now . 



 XXXIII 


 Angel feel that he would like to spend a day with she before the 
 wedding , somewhere away from the dairy , as a last jaunt in her 
 company while there be yet mere lover and mistress ; a romantic day , 
 in circumstance that would never be repeat ; with that other and 
 great day beam close ahead of they . during the precede week , 
 therefore , he suggest make a few purchase in the near town , 
 and they start together . 

 Clare 's life at the dairy have be that of a recluse in respect the 
 world of his own class . for month he have never go near a town , 
 and , require no vehicle , have never keep one , hire the dairyman 's 
 cob or gig if he ride or drive . they go in the gig that day . 

 and then for the first time in their life they shop as partner 
 in one concern . it be Christmas Eve , with its load a holly and 
 mistletoe , and the town be very full of stranger who have come in 
 from all part of the country on account of the day . Tess pay the 
 penalty of walk about with happiness superadde to beauty on her 
 countenance by be much star at as she move amid they on his 
 arm . 

 in the evening they return to the inn at which they have put up , and 
 Tess wait in the entry while Angel go to see the horse and gig 
 bring to the door . the general sitting - room be full of guest , 
 who be continually go in and out . as the door open and shut 
 each time for the passage of these , the light within the parlour fell 
 full upon Tess 's face . two man come out and pass by she among the 
 rest . one of they have star she up and down in surprise , and she 
 fancy he be a Trantridge man , though that village lie so many 
 mile off that trantridge folk be rarity here . 

 " a comely maid that , " say the other . 

 " true , comely enough . but unless I make a great mistake - " and he 
 negative the remainder of the definition forthwith . 

 Clare have just return from the stable - yard , and , confront the 
 man on the threshold , hear the word , and see the shrinking of 
 Tess . the insult to she sting he to the quick , and before he have 
 consider anything at all he strike the man on the chin with the 
 full force of his fist , send he staggering backwards into the 
 passage . 

 the man recover himself , and seem inclined to come on , and Clare , 
 step outside the door , put himself in a posture of defence . but 
 his opponent begin to think well of the matter . he look anew at 
 Tess as he pass she , and say to Clare - 

 " I beg pardon , sir ; ' twa a complete mistake . I think she be 
 another woman , forty mile from here . " 

 Clare , feel then that he have be too hasty , and that he be , 
 moreover , to blame for leave she standing in an inn - passage , do 
 what he usually do in such case , give the man five shilling to 
 plaster the blow ; and thus they part , bid each other a pacific 
 good night . as soon as Clare have take the rein from the ostler , 
 and the young couple have drive off , the two man go in the other 
 direction . 

 " and be it a mistake ? " say the second one . 

 " not a bit of it . but I do not   want to hurt the gentleman 's 
 feeling - not I. " 

 in the meantime the lover be drive onward . 

 " could we put off our wedding till a little later ? " Tess ask in a 
 dry dull voice . " I mean if we wish ? " 

 " no , my love . calm yourself . do you mean that the fellow may have 
 time to summon I for assault ? " he ask good - humouredly . 

 " no - I only mean - if it should have to be put off . " 

 what she mean be not very clear , and he direct she to dismiss 
 such fancy from her mind , which she obediently do as well as she 
 could . but she be grave , very grave , all the way home ; till she 
 think , " we shall go away , a very long distance , hundred of mile 
 from these part , and such as this can never happen again , and no 
 ghost of the past reach there . " 

 they part tenderly that night on the landing , and Clare ascend to 
 his attic . Tess sit up get on with some little requisite , lest 
 the few remain day should not afford sufficient time . while she 
 sit she hear a noise in Angel 's room overhead , a sound of thumping 
 and struggle . everybody else in the house be asleep , and in her 
 anxiety lest Clare should be ill she run up and knock at his door , 
 and ask he what be the matter . 

 " oh , nothing , dear , " he say from within . " I be so sorry I disturb 
 you ! but the reason be rather an amusing one : I fall asleep and 
 dream that I be fight that fellow again who insult you , 
 and the noise you hear be my pummelling away with my fist at 
 my portmanteau , which I pull out to - day for pack . I be 
 occasionally liable to these freak in my sleep . go to bed and 
 think of it no more . " 

 this be the last drachm require to turn the scale of her 
 indecision . declare the past to he by word of mouth she could not ; 
 but there be another way . she sit down and write on the four page 
 of a note - sheet a succinct narrative of those event of three or four 
 year ago , put it into an envelope , and direct it to Clare . then , 
 lest the flesh should again be weak , she creep upstairs without any 
 shoe and slip the note under his door . 

 her night be a broken one , as it well might be , and she listen for 
 the first faint noise overhead . it come , as usual ; he descend , as 
 usual . she descend . he meet she at the bottom of the stair and 
 kiss she . surely it be as warmly as ever ! 

 he look a little disturbed and worn , she think . but he say not 
 a word to she about her revelation , even when they be alone . could 
 he have have it ? unless he begin the subject she feel that she could 
 say nothing . so the day pass , and it be evident that whatever 
 he think he mean to keep to himself . yet he be frank and 
 affectionate as before . could it be that her doubt be childish ? 
 that he forgive she ; that he love she for what she be , just as she 
 be , and smile at her disquiet as at a foolish nightmare ? have he 
 really receive her note ? she glance into his room , and could see 
 nothing of it . it might be that he forgive she . but even if he have 
 not receive it she have a sudden enthusiastic trust that he surely 
 would forgive she . 

 every morning and night he be the same , and thus New Year 's Eve 
 break - the wedding day . 

 the lover do not rise at milking - time , have through the whole of 
 this last week of their sojourn at the dairy be accord something 
 of the position of guest , Tess be honour with a room of her 
 own . when they arrive downstairs at breakfast - time they be 
 surprised to see what effect have be produce in the large 
 kitchen for their glory since they have last beheld it . at some 
 unnatural hour of the morning the dairyman have cause the yawning 
 chimney - corner to be whiten , and the brick hearth redden , and a 
 blaze yellow damask blower to be hang across the arch in place of 
 the old grimy blue cotton one with a black sprig pattern which have 
 formerly do duty there . this renovated aspect of what be the 
 focus indeed of the room on a full winter morning throw a smile 
 demeanour over the whole apartment . 

 " I be determined to do summat in honour o't " , say the dairyman . 
 " and as you would not   hear of my giee a rattle good randy wi ' 
 fiddle and bass - viols complete , as we should ha ' do in old time , 
 this be all I could think o ' as a noiseless thing . " 

 Tess 's friend live so far off that none could conveniently have 
 be present at the ceremony , even have any be ask ; but as a fact 
 nobody be invite from Marlott . as for Angel 's family , he have 
 write and duly inform they of the time , and assure they that he 
 would be glad to see one at least of they there for the day if he 
 would like to come . his brother have not reply at all , seem 
 to be indignant with he ; while his father and mother have write 
 a rather sad letter , deplore his precipitancy in rush into 
 marriage , but make the good of the matter by say that , though 
 a dairywoman be the last daughter - in - law they could have expect , 
 their son have arrive at an age which he might be suppose to be the 
 good judge . 

 this coolness in his relation distress Clare less than it would 
 have do have he be without the grand card with which he mean to 
 surprise they ere long . to produce Tess , fresh from the dairy , as 
 a d'Urberville and a lady , he have feel to be temerarious and risky ; 
 hence he have conceal her lineage till such time as , familiarize 
 with worldly way by a few month ' travel and read with he , he 
 could take she on a visit to his parent and impart the knowledge 
 while triumphantly produce she as worthy of such an ancient line . 
 it be a pretty lover 's dream , if no more . perhaps Tess 's lineage 
 have more value for himself than for anybody in the world beside . 

 her perception that Angel 's bearing towards she still remain in no 
 whit alter by her own communication render Tess guiltily doubtful 
 if he could have receive it . she rise from breakfast before he have 
 finish , and hasten upstairs . it have occur to she to look once 
 more into the queer gaunt room which have be Clare 's den , or rather 
 eyrie , for so long , and climb the ladder she stand at the open 
 door of the apartment , regard and ponder . she stoop to the 
 threshold of the doorway , where she have push in the note two or 
 three day early in such excitement . the carpet reach close to 
 the sill , and under the edge of the carpet she discern the faint 
 white margin of the envelope contain her letter to he , which he 
 obviously have never see , owe to she have in her haste thrust it 
 beneath the carpet as well as beneath the door . 

 with a feeling of faintness she withdraw the letter . there it 
 be - seal up , just as it have leave her hand . the mountain have 
 not yet be remove . she could not let he read it now , the house 
 be in full bustle of preparation ; and descend to her own room 
 she destroy the letter there . 

 she be so pale when he see she again that he feel quite anxious . 
 the incident of the misplace letter she have jump at as if it 
 prevent a confession ; but she know in her conscience that it need 
 not ; there be still time . yet everything be in a stir ; there 
 be come and go ; all have to dress , the dairyman and Mrs Crick 
 have be ask to accompany they as witness ; and reflection or 
 deliberate talk be well - nigh impossible . the only minute Tess could 
 get to be alone with Clare be when they meet upon the landing . 

 " I be so anxious to talk to you - I want to confess all my fault and 
 blunder ! " she say with attempt lightness . 

 " no , no - we can not   have fault talk of - you must be deem perfect 
 to - day at least , my Sweet ! " he cry . " we shall have plenty of time , 
 hereafter , I hope , to talk over our failing . I will confess mine at 
 the same time . " 

 " but it would be well for I to do it now , I think , so that you 
 could not say - " 

 " well , my quixotic one , you shall tell I anything - say , as soon as 
 we be settle in our lodging ; not now . I , too , will tell you my 
 fault then . but do not let we spoil the day with they ; they will 
 be excellent matter for a dull time . " 

 " then you do not   wish I to , dearest ? " 

 " I do not , Tessy , really . " 

 the hurry of dress and start leave no time for more than this . 
 those word of his seem to reassure she on further reflection . 
 she be whirl onward through the next couple of critical hour by 
 the mastering tide of her devotion to he , which close up further 
 meditation . her one desire , so long resist , to make herself his , 
 to call he her lord , her own - then , if necessary , to die - have 
 at last lift she up from her plod reflective pathway . in 
 dressing , she move about in a mental cloud of many - colour 
 ideality , which eclipse all sinister contingency by its 
 brightness . 

 the church be a long way off , and they be oblige to drive , 
 particularly as it be winter . a closed carriage be order from 
 a roadside inn , a vehicle which have be keep there ever since the 
 old day of post - chaise travelling . it have stout wheel - spoke , and 
 heavy felloe a great curved bed , immense strap and spring , and a 
 pole like a battering - ram . the postilion be a venerable " boy " of 
 sixty - a martyr to rheumatic gout , the result of excessive exposure 
 in youth , counter - act by strong liquor - who have stand at inn - door 
 do nothing for the whole five - and - twenty year that have elapse 
 since he have no long be require to ride professionally , as if 
 expect the old time to come back again . he have a permanent 
 running wound on the outside of his right leg , originate by the 
 constant bruising of aristocratic carriage - pole during the many 
 year that he have be in regular employ at the King 's arm , 
 Casterbridge . 

 inside this cumbrous and creak structure , and behind this decayed 
 conductor , the partie carree take their seat - the bride and 
 bridegroom and Mr and Mrs Crick . Angel would have like one at least 
 of his brother to be present as groomsman , but their silence after 
 his gentle hint to that effect by letter have signify that they do 
 not care to come . they disapprove of the marriage , and could not be 
 expect to countenance it . perhaps it be as well that they could 
 not be present . they be not worldly young fellow , but fraternize 
 with dairy - folk would have strike unpleasantly upon their biased 
 niceness , apart from their view of the match . 

 uphold by the momentum of the time , Tess know nothing of this , do 
 not see anything , do not know the road they be take to the 
 church . she know that Angel be close to she ; all the rest be 
 a luminous mist . she be a sort of celestial person , who owe 
 she be to poetry - one of those classical divinity Clare be 
 accustomed to talk to she about when they take their walk together . 

 the marriage be by licence there be only a dozen or so of people 
 in the church ; have there be a thousand they would have produce 
 no more effect upon she . they be at stellar distance from her 
 present world . in the ecstatic solemnity with which she swear she 
 faith to he the ordinary sensibility of sex seem a flippancy . 
 at a pause in the service , while they be kneel together , she 
 unconsciously incline herself towards he , so that her shoulder 
 touch his arm ; she have be frighten by a pass thought , and 
 the movement have be automatic , to assure herself that he be really 
 there , and to fortify her belief that his fidelity would be proof 
 against all thing . 

 Clare know that she love he - every curve of her form show that - 
 but he do not know at that time the full depth of her devotion , its 
 single - mindedness , its meekness ; what long - suffer it guarantee , 
 what honesty , what endurance , what good faith . 

 as they come out of church the ringer swing the bell off their 
 rest , and a modest peal of three note break forth - that limit 
 amount of expression have be deem sufficient by the church 
 builder for the joy of such a small parish . pass by the tower 
 with her husband on the path to the gate she could feel the vibrant 
 air hum round they from the louvre belfry in the circle of 
 sound , and it match the highly - charge mental atmosphere in which 
 she be live . 

 this condition of mind , wherein she feel glorify by an irradiation 
 not her own , like the angel whom St John see in the sun , last till 
 the sound of the church bell have die away , and the emotion of the 
 wedding - service have calm down . her eye could dwell upon detail 
 more clearly now , and Mr and Mrs Crick have direct their own gig 
 to be send for they , to leave the carriage to the young couple , she 
 observe the build and character of that conveyance for the first 
 time . sit in silence she regard it long . 

 " I fancy you seem oppress , Tessy , " say Clare . 

 " yes , " she answer , put her hand to her brow . " I tremble at 
 many thing . it be all so serious , Angel . among other thing I seem 
 to have see this carriage before , to be very well acquainted with 
 it . it be very odd - I must have see it in a dream . " 

 " oh - you have hear the legend of the d'Urberville Coach - that 
 well - know superstition of this county about your family when they 
 be very popular here ; and this lumber old thing remind you of 
 it . " 

 " I have never hear of it to my knowledge , " say she . " what be the 
 legend - may I know it ? " 

 " well - I would rather not tell it in detail just now . a certain 
 d'Urberville of the sixteenth or seventeenth century commit a 
 dreadful crime in his family coach ; and since that time member of 
 the family see or hear the old coach whenever - but I will tell you 
 another day - it be rather gloomy . evidently some dim knowledge of 
 it have be bring back to your mind by the sight of this venerable 
 caravan . " 

 " I do not   remember hear it before , " she murmur . " be it when we 
 be go to die , Angel , that member of my family see it , or be it 
 when we have commit a crime ? " 

 " now , Tess ! " 

 he silence she by a kiss . 

 by the time they reach home she be contrite and spiritless . she 
 be Mrs Angel Clare , indeed , but have she any moral right to the name ? 
 be she not more truly Mrs Alexander d'Urberville ? could intensity 
 of love justify what might be consider in upright soul as culpable 
 reticence ? she know not what be expect of woman in such case ; 
 and she have no counsellor . 

 however , when she find herself alone in her room for a few 
 minute - the last day this on which she be ever to enter it - she 
 kneel down and pray . she try to pray to God , but it be her 
 husband who really have her supplication . her idolatry of this man 
 be such that she herself almost fear it to be ill - omened . she be 
 conscious of the notion express by Friar Laurence : " these violent 
 delight have violent end . " it might be too desperate for human 
 condition - too rank , to wild , too deadly . 

 " o my love , why do I love you so ! " she whisper there alone ; " for 
 she you love be not my real self , but one in my image ; the one I 
 might have be ! " 

 Afternoon come , and with it the hour for departure . they have decide 
 to fulfil the plan of go for a few day to the lodging in the old 
 farmhouse near Wellbridge Mill , at which he mean to reside during 
 his investigation of flour process . at two o'clock there be 
 nothing leave to do but to start . all the servantry of the dairy be 
 stand in the red - brick entry to see they go out , the dairyman and 
 his wife follow to the door . Tess see her three chamber - mate 
 in a row against the wall , pensively incline their head . she 
 have much question if they would appear at the parting moment ; but 
 there they be , stoical and staunch to the last . she know why the 
 delicate Retty look so fragile , and Izz so tragically sorrowful , 
 and Marian so blank ; and she forget her own dog shadow for a 
 moment in contemplate theirs . 

 she impulsively whisper to he - 

 " will you kiss them all , once , poor thing , for the first and last 
 time ? " 

 Clare have not the least objection to such a farewell formality - which 
 be all that it be to he - and as he pass they he kiss they in 
 succession where they stand , say " Goodbye " to each as he do so . 
 when they reach the door Tess femininely glance back to discern 
 the effect of that kiss of charity ; there be no triumph in her 
 glance , as there might have be . if there have it would have 
 disappear when she see how move the girl all be . the kiss have 
 obviously do harm by awakening feeling they be try to subdue . 

 of all this Clare be unconscious . pass on to the wicket - gate he 
 shake hand with the dairyman and his wife , and express his last 
 thank to they for their attention ; after which there be a moment 
 of silence before they have move off . it be interrupt by the 
 crowing of a cock . the white one with the rose comb have come and 
 settle on the paling in front of the house , within a few yard of 
 they , and his note thrill their ear through , dwindle away like 
 echo down a valley of rock . 

 " oh ? " say Mrs Crick . " an afternoon crow ! " 

 two man be stand by the yard gate , hold it open . 

 " that be bad , " one murmur to the other , not think that the word 
 could be hear by the group at the door - wicket . 

 the cock crew again - straight towards Clare . 

 " well ! " say the dairyman . 

 " I do not   like to hear he ! " say Tess to her husband . " tell the man 
 to drive on . goodbye , goodbye ! " 

 the cock crew again . 

 " Hoosh ! just you be off , sir , or I will twist your neck ! " say the 
 dairyman with some irritation , turn to the bird and drive he 
 away . and to his wife as they go indoor : " now , to think o ' that 
 just to - day ! I have   not hear his crow of an afternoon all the year 
 afore . " 

 " it only mean a change in the weather , " say she ; " not what you 
 think : ' tis impossible ! " 



 XXXIV 


 they drive by the level road along the valley to a distance of a few 
 mile , and , reach Wellbridge , turn away from the village to the 
 left , and over the great Elizabethan bridge which give the place 
 half its name . immediately behind it stand the house wherein they 
 have engage lodging , whose exterior feature be so well known to 
 all traveller through the Froom Valley ; once portion of a fine 
 manorial residence , and the property and seat of a d'Urberville , but 
 since its partial demolition a farmhouse . 

 " welcome to one of your ancestral mansion ! " say Clare as he hand 
 she down . but he regret the pleasantry ; it be too near a satire . 

 on enter they find that , though they have only engage a couple 
 of room , the farmer have take advantage of their propose presence 
 during the come day to pay a New Year 's visit to some friend , 
 leave a woman from a neighbouring cottage to minister to their 
 few want . the absoluteness of possession please they , and they 
 realize it as the first moment of their experience under their own 
 exclusive roof - tree . 

 but he find that the mouldy old habitation somewhat depress his 
 bride . when the carriage be go they ascend the stair to wash 
 their hand , the charwoman show the way . on the landing Tess 
 stop and start . 

 " what be the matter ? " say he . 

 " those horrid woman ! " she answer with a smile . " how they 
 frighten I . " 

 he look up , and perceive two life - size portrait on panel build 
 into the masonry . as all visitor to the mansion be aware , these 
 painting represent woman of middle age , of a date some two hundred 
 year ago , whose lineament once see can never be forget . 
 the long pointed feature , narrow eye , and smirk of the one , so 
 suggestive of merciless treachery ; the bill - hook nose , large 
 tooth , and bold eye of the other suggest arrogance to the point 
 of ferocity , haunt the beholder afterwards in his dream . 

 " whose portrait be those ? " ask Clare of the charwoman . 

 " I have be tell by old folk that they be lady of the 
 d'Urberville family , the ancient lord of this manor , " she say , 
 " owe to their be build into the wall they can not   be move 
 away . " 

 the unpleasantness of the matter be that , in addition to their 
 effect upon Tess , her fine feature be unquestionably traceable 
 in these exaggerated form . he say nothing of this , however , and , 
 regret that he have go out of his way to choose the house for 
 their bridal time , go on into the adjoining room . the place have 
 be rather hastily prepare for they , they wash their hand in one 
 basin . Clare touch her under the water . 

 " which be my finger and which be your ? " he say , look up . 
 " they be very much mixed . " 

 " they be all your , " say she , very prettily , and endeavour 
 to be gayer than she be . he have not be displeased with her 
 thoughtfulness on such an occasion ; it be what every sensible woman 
 would show : but Tess know that she have be thoughtful to excess , 
 and struggle against it . 

 the sun be so low on that short last afternoon of the year that it 
 shine in through a small opening and form a golden staff which 
 stretch across to her skirt , where it make a spot like a paint - mark 
 set upon she . they go into the ancient parlour to tea , and 
 here they share their first common meal alone . such be their 
 childishness , or rather his , that he find it interesting to use the 
 same bread - and - butter plate as herself , and to brush crumb from her 
 lip with his own . he wonder a little that she do not enter into 
 these frivolity with his own zest . 

 look at her silently for a long time ; " she be a dear dear Tess , " 
 he think to himself , as one decide on the true construction of 
 a difficult passage . " do I realize solemnly enough how utterly and 
 irretrievably this little womanly thing be the creature of my good 
 or bad faith and fortune ? I think not . I think I could not , unless 
 I be a woman myself . what I be in worldly estate , she be . what I 
 become , she must become . what I can not be , she can not be . and shall 
 I ever neglect she , or hurt she , or even forget to consider she ? God 
 forbid such a crime ! " 

 they sit on over the tea - table wait for their luggage , which the 
 dairyman have promise to send before it grow dark . but evening begin 
 to close in , and the luggage do not arrive , and they have bring 
 nothing more than they stand in . with the departure of the sun the 
 calm mood of the winter day change . out of door there begin noise 
 as of silk smartly rub ; the restful dead leaf of the precede 
 autumn be stir to irritated resurrection , and whirl about 
 unwillingly , and tap against the shutter . it soon begin to rain . 

 " that cock know the weather be go to change , " say Clare . 

 the woman who have attend upon they have go home for the night , but 
 she have place candle upon the table , and now they light they . each 
 candle - flame draw towards the fireplace . 

 " these old house be so draughty , " continue Angel , look at the 
 flame , and at the grease gutter down the side . " I wonder where 
 that luggage be . we have not   even a brush and comb . " 

 " I do not   know , " she answer , absent - minded . 

 " Tess , you be not a bit cheerful this evening - not at all as you 
 use to be . those harridan on the panel upstairs have unsettle 
 you . I be sorry I bring you here . I wonder if you really love I , 
 after all ? " 

 he know that she do , and the word have no serious intent ; but she 
 be surcharge with emotion , and wince like a wound animal . 
 though she try not to shed tear , she could not help show one 
 or two . 

 " I do not mean it ! " say he , sorry . " you be worried at not have 
 your thing , I know . I can not think why old Jonathan have not come 
 with they . why , it be seven o'clock ? ah , there he be ! " 

 a knock have come to the door , and , there be nobody else to answer 
 it , Clare go out . he return to the room with a small package in 
 his hand . 

 " it be not Jonathan , after all , " he say . 

 " how vexing ! " say Tess . 

 the packet have be bring by a special messenger , who have arrive 
 at talbothay from emminster vicarage immediately after the departure 
 of the married couple , and have follow they hither , be under 
 injunction to deliver it into nobody 's hand but theirs . Clare 
 bring it to the light . it be less than a foot long , sew up in 
 canvas , seal in red wax with his father 's seal , and direct in his 
 father 's hand to " Mrs Angel Clare . " 

 " it be a little wedding - present for you , Tess , " say he , hand it 
 to she . " how thoughtful they be ! " 

 Tess look a little flustered as she take it . 

 " I think I would rather have you open it , dearest , " say she , turn 
 over the parcel . " I do not   like to break those great seal ; they look 
 so serious . please open it for I ! " 

 he undo the parcel . inside be a case of morocco leather , on the 
 top of which lie a note and a key . 

 the note be for Clare , in the follow word : 


  MY DEAR son - 

  possibly you have forget that on the death of your 
  godmother , Mrs Pitney , when you be a lad , she - vain , 
  kind woman that she be - leave to I a portion of the 
  content of her jewel - case in trust for your wife , if 
  you should ever have one , as a mark of her affection 
  for you and whomsoever you should choose . this trust 
  I have fulfil , and the diamond have be lock up 
  at my banker 's ever since . though I feel it to be a 
  somewhat incongruous act in the circumstance , I be , as 
  you will see , bind to hand over the article to the 
  woman to whom the use of they for her lifetime will now 
  rightly belong , and they be therefore promptly send . 
  they become , I believe , heirloom , strictly speak , 
  accord to the term of your godmother 's will . the 
  precise word of the clause that refer to this matter 
  be enclose . 


 " I do remember , " say Clare ; " but I have quite forget . " 

 unlock the case , they find it to contain a necklace , with 
 pendant , bracelet , and ear - ring ; and also some other small 
 ornament . 

 Tess seem afraid to touch they at first , but her eye sparkle for 
 a moment as much as the stone when Clare spread out the set . 

 " be they mine ? " she ask incredulously . 

 " they be , certainly , " say he . 

 he look into the fire . he remember how , when he be a lad of 
 fifteen , his godmother , the squire 's wife - the only rich person 
 with whom he have ever come in contact - have pin her faith to his 
 success ; have prophesy a wondrous career for he . there have seem 
 nothing at all out of keep with such a conjectured career in the 
 storing up of these showy ornament for his wife and the wife of 
 her descendant . they gleam somewhat ironically now . " yet why ? " 
 he ask himself . it be but a question of vanity throughout ; and 
 if that be admit into one side of the equation it should be 
 admit into the other . his wife be a d'Urberville : whom could 
 they become well than she ? 

 suddenly he say with enthusiasm - 

 " Tess , put they on - put they on ! " and he turn from the fire to 
 help she . 

 but as if by magic she have already don they - necklace , ear - ring , 
 bracelet , and all . 

 " but the gown be not   right , Tess , " say Clare . " it ought to be a low 
 one for a set of brilliant like that . " 

 " ought it ? " say Tess . 

 " yes , " say he . 

 he suggest to she how to tuck in the upper edge of her bodice , so 
 as to make it roughly approximate to the cut for evening wear ; and 
 when she have do this , and the pendant to the necklace hung isolate 
 amid the whiteness of her throat , as it be design to do , he 
 step back to survey she . 

 " my heaven , " say Clare , " how beautiful you be ! " 

 as everybody know , fine feather make fine bird ; a peasant girl but 
 very moderately prepossess to the casual observer in her simple 
 condition and attire will bloom as an amazing beauty if clothe as a 
 woman of fashion with the aid that art can render ; while the beauty 
 of the midnight crush would often cut but a sorry figure if place 
 inside the field - woman 's wrapper upon a monotonous acreage of 
 turnip on a dull day . he have never till now estimate the artistic 
 excellence of Tess 's limb and feature . 

 " if you be only to appear in a ball - room ! " he say . " but 
 no - no , dearest ; I think I love you well in the wing - bonnet and 
 cotton - frock - yes , well than in this , well as you support these 
 dignity . " 

 Tess 's sense of her strike appearance have give she a flush of 
 excitement , which be yet not happiness . 

 " I will take they off , " she say , " in case Jonathan should see I . 
 they be not fit for I , be they ? they must be sell , I suppose ? " 

 " let they stay a few minute long . sell they ? never . it would be 
 a breach of faith . " 

 influence by a second thought she readily obey . she have something 
 to tell , and there might be help in these . she sit down with the 
 jewel upon she ; and they again indulge in conjecture as to where 
 Jonathan could possibly be with their baggage . the ale they have 
 pour out for his consumption when he come have go flat with long 
 standing . 

 shortly after this they begin supper , which be already lay on 
 a side - table . Ere they have finish there be a jerk in the 
 fire - smoke , the rise skein of which bulge out into the room , as if 
 some giant have lay his hand on the chimney - top for a moment . it have 
 be cause by the opening of the outer door . a heavy step be now 
 hear in the passage , and Angel go out . 

 " I couldn ' make nobody hear at all by knock , " apologize Jonathan 
 Kail , for it be he at last ; " and as't be rain out I open the 
 door . I have   bring the thing , sir . " 

 " I be very glad to see they . but you be very late . " 

 " well , yes , sir . " 

 there be something subdue in Jonathan Kail 's tone which have not 
 be there in the day , and line of concern be plough upon his 
 forehead in addition to the line of year . he continue - 

 " we have   all be gallie at the dairy at what might ha ' be a most 
 terrible affliction since you and your Mis'ess - so to name she 
 now - leave we this a'ternoon . perhaps you ha'nt forget the cock 's 
 afternoon crow ? " 

 " dear I ; - what - " 

 " well , some say it do mane one thing , and some another ; but what be 
 happen be that poor little Retty Priddle hev try to drown 
 herself . " 

 " no ! really ! why , she bid us goodbye with the rest - " 

 " yes . well , sir , when you and your mis'ess - so to name what she 
 lawful be - when you two drive away , as I say , Retty and Marian put on 
 their bonnet and go out ; and as there be not much do now , be 
 New Year 's Eve , and folk mop and broom from what be inside them , 
 nobody take much notice . they go on to Lew - Everard , where they 
 have summut to drink , and then on they vamp to Dree - armed Cross , 
 and there they seem to have part , Retty strike across the 
 water - mead as if for home , and Marian go on to the next village , 
 where there be another public - house . nothing more be zeed or hear 
 o ' Retty till the waterman , on his way home , notice something by the 
 Great Pool ; ' twa her bonnet and shawl pack up . in the water he 
 find she . he and another man bring her home , think a ' be 
 dead ; but she fetch round by degree . " 

 Angel , suddenly recollect that Tess be overhear this gloomy 
 tale , go to shut the door between the passage and the ante - room 
 to the inner parlour where she be ; but his wife , fling a shawl 
 round she , have come to the outer room and be listen to the man 's 
 narrative , her eye rest absently on the luggage and the drop of 
 rain glisten upon it . 

 " and , more than this , there be Marian ; she be be find dead drunk 
 by the withy - bed - a girl who hev never be know to touch anything 
 before except shill ale ; though , to be sure , ' a be always a good 
 trencher - woman , as her face show . it seem as if the maid have 
 all go out o ' their mind ! " 

 " and Izz ? " ask Tess . 

 " Izz be about house as usual ; but ' a do say ' a can guess how it 
 happen ; and she seem to be very low in mind about it , poor maid , 
 as well she mid be . and so you see , sir , as all this happen just 
 when we be pack your few trap and your Mis'ess 's night - rail and 
 dress thing into the cart , why , it belate I . " 

 " yes . well , Jonathan , will you get the trunk upstairs , and drink a 
 cup of ale , and hasten back as soon as you can , in case you should be 
 want ? " 

 Tess have go back to the inner parlour , and sit down by the fire , 
 look wistfully into it . she hear Jonathan Kail 's heavy footstep 
 up and down the stair till he have do place the luggage , and 
 hear he express his thank for the ale her husband take out to he , 
 and for the gratuity he receive . Jonathan 's footstep then die 
 from the door , and his cart creak away . 

 Angel slide forward the massive oak bar which secure the door , and 
 come in to where she sit over the hearth , press her cheek 
 between his hand from behind . he expect she to jump up gaily and 
 unpack the toilet - gear that she have be so anxious about , but as she 
 do not rise he sit down with she in the firelight , the candle on 
 the supper - table be too thin and glimmer to interfere with its 
 glow . 

 " I be so sorry you should have hear this sad story about the girl , " 
 he say . " still , do not   let it depress you . Retty be naturally 
 morbid , you know . " 

 " without the least cause , " say Tess . " while they who have cause to 
 be , hide it , and pretend they be not . " 

 this incident have turn the scale for she . they be simple and 
 innocent girl on whom the unhappiness of unrequited love have fall ; 
 they have deserve well at the hand of Fate . she have deserve 
 bad - yet she be the choose one . it be wicked of she to take all 
 without pay . she would pay to the uttermost farthing ; she would 
 tell , there and then . this final determination she come to when she 
 look into the fire , he hold her hand . 

 a steady glare from the now flameless ember paint the side 
 and back of the fireplace with its colour , and the well - polish 
 andiron , and the old brass tong that would not meet . the underside 
 of the mantel - shelf be flush with the high - colour light , and 
 the leg of the table nearest the fire . Tess 's face and neck 
 reflect the same warmth , which each gem turn into an Aldebaran 
 or a Sirius - a constellation of white , red , and green flash , that 
 interchange their hue with she every pulsation . 

 " do you remember what we say to each other this morning about 
 tell our fault ? " he ask abruptly , find that she still 
 remain immovable . " we speak lightly perhaps , and you may well 
 have do so . but for I it be no light promise . I want to make 
 a confession to you , Love . " 

 this , from he , so unexpectedly apposite , have the effect upon she of 
 a Providential interposition . 

 " you have to confess something ? " she say quickly , and even with 
 gladness and relief . 

 " you do not expect it ? ah - you think too highly of I . now 
 listen . put your head there , because I want you to forgive I , and 
 not to be indignant with I for not tell you before , as perhaps 
 I ought to have do . " 

 how strange it be ! he seem to be her double . she do not speak , 
 and Clare go on - 

 " I do not mention it because I be afraid of endanger my chance 
 of you , darling , the great prize of my life - my Fellowship I call 
 you . my brother 's Fellowship be win at his college , mine at 
 Talbothays Dairy . well , I would not risk it . I be go to tell 
 you a month ago - at the time you agree to be mine , but I could not ; 
 I think it might frighten you away from I . I put it off ; then I 
 think I would tell you yesterday , to give you a chance at least of 
 escape I . but I do not . and I do not this morning , when you 
 propose our confess our fault on the landing - the sinner that I 
 be ! but I must , now I see you sit there so solemnly . I wonder 
 if you will forgive I ? " 

 " o yes ! I be sure that - " 

 " well , I hope so . but wait a minute . you do not   know . to begin at 
 the beginning . though I imagine my poor father fear that I be one 
 of the eternally lose for my doctrine , I be of course , a believer in 
 good moral , Tess , as much as you . I use to wish to be a teacher of 
 man , and it be a great disappointment to I when I find I could not 
 enter the Church . I admire spotlessness , even though I could lay no 
 claim to it , and hat impurity , as I hope I do now . whatever one 
 may think of plenary inspiration , one must heartily subscribe to 
 these word of Paul : ' be thou an example - in word , in conversation , 
 in charity , in spirit , in faith , in purity . ' it be the only 
 safeguard for we poor human being . ' Integer vitae , ' say a roman 
 poet , who be strange company for St Paul - 


  " the man of upright life , from frailty free , 
  stand not in need of moorish spear or bow . 


 " well , a certain place be pave with good intention , and have feel 
 all that so strongly , you will see what a terrible remorse it breed 
 in I when , in the midst of my fine aim for other people , I myself 
 fall . " 

 he then tell she of that time of his life to which allusion have be 
 make when , toss about by doubt and difficulty in London , like a 
 cork on the wave , he plunge into eight - and - forty hour ' dissipation 
 with a stranger . 

 " happily I awake almost immediately to a sense of my folly , " he 
 continue . " I would have no more to say to she , and I come home . I 
 have never repeat the offence . but I feel I should like to treat 
 you with perfect frankness and honour , and I could not do so without 
 tell this . do you forgive I ? " 

 she press his hand tightly for an answer . 

 " then we will dismiss it at once and for ever ! - too painful as it be 
 for the occasion - and talk of something light . " 

 " O , Angel - I be almost glad - because now you can forgive I ! I have 
 not make my confession . I have a confession , too - remember , I say 
 so . " 

 " ah , to be sure ! now then for it , wicke little one . " 

 " perhaps , although you smile , it be as serious as your , or more so . " 

 " it can hardly be more serious , dearest . " 

 " it can not - o no , it can not ! " she jump up joyfully at the hope . 
 " no , it can not be more serious , certainly , " she cry , " because ' tis 
 just the same ! I will tell you now . " 

 she sit down again . 

 their hand be still join . the ash under the grate be light 
 by the fire vertically , like a torrid waste . imagination might have 
 behold a last Day luridness in this red - coal glow , which fall on 
 his face and hand , and on her , peer into the loose hair about she 
 brow , and fire the delicate skin underneath . a large shadow of her 
 shape rise upon the wall and ceiling . she bent forward , at which 
 each diamond on her neck give a sinister wink like a toad 's ; and 
 press her forehead against his temple she enter on her story of 
 her acquaintance with Alec d'Urberville and its result , murmur 
 the word without flinching , and with her eyelid droop down . 


 END of PHASE the fourth 





 Phase the Fifth : the woman pay 



 XXXV 


 her narrative end ; even its re - assertion and secondary 
 explanation be do . Tess 's voice throughout have hardly rise 
 high than its opening tone ; there have be no exculpatory phrase of 
 any kind , and she have not weep . 

 but the complexion even of external thing seem to suffer 
 transmutation as her announcement progress . the fire in the grate 
 look impish - demoniacally funny , as if it do not care in the least 
 about her strait . the fender grin idly , as if it too do not 
 care . the light from the water - bottle be merely engage in a 
 chromatic problem . all material object around announce their 
 irresponsibility with terrible iteration . and yet nothing have 
 change since the moment when he have be kiss she ; or rather , 
 nothing in the substance of thing . but the essence of thing have 
 change . 

 when she cease , the auricular impression from their previous 
 endearment seem to hustle away into the corner of their brain , 
 repeat themselves as echo from a time of supremely purblind 
 foolishness . 

 Clare perform the irrelevant act of stir the fire ; the 
 intelligence have not even yet get to the bottom of he . after 
 stir the ember he rise to his foot ; all the force of her 
 disclosure have impart itself now . his face have wither . in the 
 strenuousness of his concentration he treadle fitfully on the floor . 
 he could not , by any contrivance , think closely enough ; that be the 
 meaning of his vague movement . when he speak it be in the most 
 inadequate , commonplace voice of the many varied tone she have hear 
 from he . 

 " Tess ! " 

 " yes , dearest . " 

 " be I to believe this ? from your manner I be to take it as true . 
 o you can not be out of your mind ! you ought to be ! yet you be 
 not ... my wife , my Tess - nothing in you warrant such a supposition 
 as that ? " 

 " I be not out of my mind , " she say . 

 " and yet - " he look vacantly at she , to resume with daze sens : 
 " why do not   you tell I before ? ah , yes , you would have tell I , in a 
 way - but I hinder you , I remember ! " 

 these and other of his word be nothing but the perfunctory babble 
 of the surface while the depth remain paralyzed . he turn away , 
 and bent over a chair . Tess follow he to the middle of the room , 
 where he be , and stand there star at he with eye that do not 
 weep . presently she slide down upon her knee beside his foot , and 
 from this position she crouch in a heap . 

 " in the name of our love , forgive I ! " she whisper with a dry 
 mouth . " I have forgive you for the same ! " 

 and , as he do not answer , she say again - 

 " forgive I as you be forgive ! I forgive you , Angel . " 

 " you - yes , you do . " 

 " but you do not forgive I ? " 

 " o Tess , forgiveness do not apply to the case ! you be one 
 person ; now you be another . my God - how can forgiveness meet such 
 a grotesque - prestidigitation as that ! " 

 he pause , contemplate this definition ; then suddenly break into 
 horrible laughter - as unnatural and ghastly as a laugh in hell . 

 " do not   - do not ! it kill I quite , that ! " she shriek . " o have 
 mercy upon I - have mercy ! " 

 he do not answer ; and , sickly white , she jump up . 

 " Angel , Angel ! what do you mean by that laugh ? " she cry out . " do 
 you know what this be to I ? " 

 he shake his head . 

 " I have be hop , long , pray , to make you happy ! I have 
 think what joy it will be to do it , what an unworthy wife I shall 
 be if I do not ! that be what I have feel , Angel ! " 

 " I know that . " 

 " I think , Angel , that you love I - I , my very self ! if it be 
 I you do love , o how can it be that you look and speak so ? it 
 frighten I ! have begin to love you , I love you for ever - in all 
 change , in all disgrace , because you be yourself . I ask no more . 
 then how can you , o my own husband , stop love I ? " 

 " I repeat , the woman I have be love be not you . " 

 " but who ? " 

 " another woman in your shape . " 

 she perceive in his word the realization of her own apprehensive 
 foreboding in former time . he look upon she as a species of 
 impost ; a guilty woman in the guise of an innocent one . Terror be 
 upon her white face as she see it ; her cheek be flaccid , and her 
 mouth have almost the aspect of a round little hole . the horrible 
 sense of his view of she so deaden she that she stagger , and he 
 step forward , think she be go to fall . 

 " sit down , sit down , " he say gently . " you be ill ; and it be 
 natural that you should be . " 

 she do sit down , without know where she be , that strained look 
 still upon her face , and her eye such as to make his flesh creep . 

 " I do not   belong to you any more , then ; do I , Angel ? " she ask 
 helplessly . " it be not I , but another woman like I that he love , 
 he say . " 

 the image raise cause she to take pity upon herself as one who be 
 ill - use . her eye fill as she regard her position far ; she 
 turn round and burst into a flood of self - sympathetic tear . 

 Clare be relieve at this change , for the effect on she of what have 
 happen be begin to be a trouble to he only less than the 
 woe of the disclosure itself . he wait patiently , apathetically , 
 till the violence of her grief have wear itself out , and her rush of 
 weeping have lessen to a catch gasp at interval . 

 " Angel , " she say suddenly , in her natural tone , the insane , dry 
 voice of terror have leave she now . " Angel , be I too wicked for 
 you and I to live together ? " 

 " I have not be able to think what we can do . " 

 " I shall not   ask you to let I live with you , Angel , because I have 
 no right to ! I shall not write to mother and sister to say we be 
 marry , as I say I would do ; and I shall not   finish the good - hussif ' 
 I cut out and mean to make while we be in lodging . " 

 " shall not   you ? " 

 " no , I shall not   do anything , unless you order I to ; and if you go away 
 from I I shall not follow ' ee ; and if you never speak to I any more 
 I shall not ask why , unless you tell I I may . " 

 " and if I order you to do anything ? " 

 " I will obey you like your wretched slave , even if it be to lie down 
 and die . " 

 " you be very good . but it strike I that there be a want of 
 harmony between your present mood of self - sacrifice and your past 
 mood of self - preservation . " 

 these be the first word of antagonism . to fle elaborate 
 sarcasm at Tess , however , be much like fling they at a dog or 
 cat . the charm of their subtlety pass by her unappreciated , and 
 she only receive they as inimical sound which mean that anger 
 rule . she remain mute , not know that he be smother his 
 affection for she . she hardly observe that a tear descend slowly 
 upon his cheek , a tear so large that it magnify the pore of the 
 skin over which it roll , like the object lens of a microscope . 
 meanwhile reillumination as to the terrible and total change that her 
 confession have work in his life , in his universe , return to he , 
 and he try desperately to advance among the new condition in which 
 he stand . some consequent action be necessary ; yet what ? 

 " Tess , " he say , as gently as he could speak , " I can not stay - in this 
 room - just now . I will walk out a little way . " 

 he quietly leave the room , and the two glass of wine that he have 
 pour out for their supper - one for she , one for he - remain on 
 the table untasted . this be what their agape have come to . at 
 tea , two or three hour early , they have , in the freakishness of 
 affection , drunk from one cup . 

 the closing of the door behind he , gently as it have be pull 
 to , rouse Tess from her stupor . he be go ; she could not stay . 
 hastily fling her cloak around she she open the door and 
 follow , put out the candle as if she be never come back . 
 the rain be over and the night be now clear . 

 she be soon close at his heel , for Clare walk slowly and without 
 purpose . his form beside her light gray figure look black , 
 sinister , and forbidding , and she feel as sarcasm the touch of the 
 jewel of which she have be momentarily so proud . Clare turn at 
 hear her footstep , but his recognition of her presence seem 
 to make no difference to he , and he go on over the five yawning 
 arch of the great bridge in front of the house . 

 the cow and horse track in the road be full of water , the rain 
 have be enough to charge they , but not enough to wash they away . 
 across these minute pool the reflect star flit in a quick 
 transit as she pass ; she would not have know they be shin 
 overhead if she have not see they there - the vast thing of the 
 universe image in object so mean . 

 the place to which they have travel to - day be in the same 
 valley as talbothay , but some mile lower down the river ; and the 
 surrounding be open , she keep easily in sight of he . away from 
 the house the road wind through the mead , and along these she 
 follow Clare without any attempt to come up with he or to attract 
 he , but with dumb and vacant fidelity . 

 at last , however , her listless walk bring she up alongside he , and 
 still he say nothing . the cruelty of fool honesty be often great 
 after enlightenment , and it be mighty in Clare now . the outdoor air 
 have apparently take away from he all tendency to act on impulse ; 
 she know that he see she without irradiation - in all her bareness ; 
 that Time be chant his satiric psalm at she then - 


  Behold , when thy face be make bare , he that love thee 
  shall hate ; 
  Thy face shall be no more fair at the fall of thy fate . 
  for thy life shall fall as a leaf and be shed as the rain ; 
  and the veil of thine head shall be grief , and the crown 
  shall be pain . 


 he be still intently think , and her companionship have now 
 insufficient power to break or divert the strain of thought . what a 
 weak thing her presence must have become to he ! she could not help 
 address Clare . 

 " what have I do - what have I do ! I have not tell of anything 
 that interfere with or belie my love for you . you do not   think I 
 plan it , do you ? it be in your own mind what you be angry at , 
 Angel ; it be not in I . o , it be not in I , and I be not that 
 deceitful woman you think I ! " 

 " H'm - well . not deceitful , my wife ; but not the same . no , not the 
 same . but do not make I reproach you . I have swear that I will 
 not ; and I will do everything to avoid it . " 

 but she go on plead in her distraction ; and perhaps say thing 
 that would have be well leave to silence . 

 " Angel ! - Angel ! I be a child - a child when it happen ! I know 
 nothing of man . " 

 " you be more sin against than sin , that I admit . " 

 " then will you not forgive I ? " 

 " I do forgive you , but forgiveness be not all . " 

 " and love I ? " 

 to this question he do not answer . 

 " o Angel - my mother say that it sometimes happen so ! - she know 
 several case where they be bad than I , and the husband have not 
 mind it much - have get over it at least . and yet the woman have not 
 love he as I do you ! " 

 " do not , Tess ; do not   argue . different society , different manner . 
 you almost make I say you be an unapprehending peasant woman , who 
 have never be initiate into the proportion of social thing . 
 you do not   know what you say . " 

 " I be only a peasant by position , not by nature ! " 

 she speak with an impulse to anger , but it go as it come . 

 " so much the bad for you . I think that parson who unearth your 
 pedigree would have do well if he have hold his tongue . I can not 
 help associate your decline as a family with this other fact - of 
 your want of firmness . decrepit family imply decrepit will , 
 decrepit conduct . Heaven , why do you give I a handle for despise 
 you more by inform I of your descent ! here be I think you a 
 new - sprung child of nature ; there be you , the belate seedling of 
 an effete aristocracy ! " 

 " lot of family be as bad as mine in that ! Retty 's family be 
 once large landowner , and so be Dairyman Billett 's . and the 
 Debbyhouses , who now be carter , be once the De Bayeux family . 
 you find such as I everywhere ; ' tis a feature of our county , and I 
 can not   help it . " 

 " so much the bad for the county . " 

 she take these reproach in their bulk simply , not in their 
 particular ; he do not love she as he have love her hitherto , and 
 to all else she be indifferent . 

 they wander on again in silence . it be say afterwards that a 
 cottager of Wellbridge , who go out late that night for a doctor , 
 meet two lover in the pasture , walk very slowly , without 
 converse , one behind the other , as in a funeral procession , and the 
 glimpse that he obtain of their face seem to denote that they 
 be anxious and sad . return later , he pass they again in the 
 same field , progress just as slowly , and as regardless of the hour 
 and of the cheerless night as before . it be only on account of his 
 preoccupation with his own affair , and the illness in his house , 
 that he do not bear in mind the curious incident , which , however , he 
 recall a long while after . 

 during the interval of the cottager 's go and come , she have say 
 to her husband - 

 " I do not   see how I can help be the cause of much misery to you all 
 your life . the river be down there . I can put an end to myself in 
 it . I be not afraid . " 

 " I do not   wish to add murder to my other folly , " he say . 

 " I will leave something to show that I do it myself - on account of 
 my shame . they will not blame you then . " 

 " do not   speak so absurdly - I wish not to hear it . it be nonsense 
 to have such thought in this kind of case , which be rather one 
 for satirical laughter than for tragedy . you do not   in the least 
 understand the quality of the mishap . it would be view in the 
 light of a joke by nine - tenth of the world if it be know . please 
 oblige I by return to the house , and go to bed . " 

 " I will , " say she dutifully . 

 they have ramble round by a road which lead to the well - know ruin of 
 the cistercian abbey behind the mill , the latter have , in century 
 past , be attach to the monastic establishment . the mill still 
 work on , food be a perennial necessity ; the abbey have perish , 
 creed be transient . one continually see the ministration of the 
 temporary outlasting the ministration of the eternal . their walk 
 have be circuitous , they be still not far from the house , and 
 in obey his direction she only have to reach the large stone bridge 
 across the main river and follow the road for a few yard . when she 
 get back , everything remain as she have leave it , the fire be 
 still burn . she do not stay downstairs for more than a minute , 
 but proceed to her chamber , whither the luggage have be take . 
 here she sit down on the edge of the bed , look blankly around , 
 and presently begin to undress . in remove the light towards the 
 bedstead its ray fall upon the tester of white dimity ; something be 
 hang beneath it , and she lift the candle to see what it be . 
 a bough of mistletoe . Angel have put it there ; she know that in an 
 instant . this be the explanation of that mysterious parcel which it 
 have be so difficult to pack and bring ; whose content he would not 
 explain to she , say that time would soon show she the purpose 
 thereof . in his zest and his gaiety he have hang it there . how 
 foolish and inopportune that mistletoe look now . 

 have nothing more to fear , have scarce anything to hope , for that 
 he would relent there seem no promise whatever , she lie down dully . 
 when sorrow cease to be speculative , sleep see her opportunity . 
 among so many happy mood which forbid repose this be a mood which 
 welcome it , and in a few minute the lonely Tess forget existence , 
 surround by the aromatic stillness of the chamber that have once , 
 possibly , be the bride - chamber of her own ancestry . 

 later on that night Clare also retrace his step to the house . 
 enter softly to the sitting - room he obtain a light , and with the 
 manner of one who have consider his course he spread his rug upon 
 the old horse - hair sofa which stand there , and roughly shape it to 
 a sleep - couch . before lie down he creep shoeless upstairs , and 
 listen at the door of her apartment . her measured breathing tell 
 that she be sleep profoundly . 

 " thank God ! " murmur Clare ; and yet he be conscious of a pang of 
 bitterness at the thought - approximately true , though not wholly 
 so - that have shift the burden of her life to his shoulder , she 
 be now repose without care . 

 he turn away to descend ; then , irresolute , face round to her 
 door again . in the act he catch sight of one of the d'Urberville 
 dame , whose portrait be immediately over the entrance to Tess 's 
 bedchamber . in the candlelight the painting be more than 
 unpleasant . sinister design lurk in the woman 's feature , a 
 concentrated purpose of revenge on the other sex - so it seem to 
 he then . the Caroline bodice of the portrait be low - precisely as 
 Tess 's have be when he tuck it in to show the necklace ; and again 
 he experience the distressing sensation of a resemblance between 
 they . 

 the check be sufficient . he resume his retreat and descend . 

 his air remain calm and cold , his small compress mouth indexing 
 his power of self - control ; his face wear still that terrible 
 sterile expression which have spread thereon since her disclosure . 
 it be the face of a man who be no long passion 's slave , yet who 
 find no advantage in his enfranchisement . he be simply regard 
 the harrowing contingency of human experience , the unexpectedness 
 of thing . nothing so pure , so sweet , so virginal as Tess have seem 
 possible all the long while that he have adore she , up to an hour 
 ago ; but 


  the little less , and what world away ! 


 he argue erroneously when he say to himself that her heart be not 
 index in the honest freshness of her face ; but Tess have no advocate 
 to set he right . could it be possible , he continue , that eye 
 which as they gaze never express any divergence from what the 
 tongue be tell , be yet ever see another world behind her 
 ostensible one , discordant and contrasting ? 

 he recline on his couch in the sitting - room , and extinguish the 
 light . the night come in , and take up its place there , unconcerned 
 and indifferent ; the night which have already swallow up his 
 happiness , and be now digest it listlessly ; and be ready to 
 swallow up the happiness of a thousand other people with as little 
 disturbance or change of mien . 



 XXXVI 


 Clare arise in the light of a dawn that be ashy and furtive , as 
 though associate with crime . the fireplace confront he with its 
 extinct ember ; the spread supper - table , whereon stand the two full 
 glass of untasted wine , now flat and filmy ; her vacate seat and 
 his own ; the other article of furniture , with their eternal look of 
 not be able to help it , their intolerable inquiry what be to be 
 do ? from above there be no sound ; but in a few minute there come 
 a knock at the door . he remember that it would be the neighbouring 
 cottager 's wife , who be to minister to their want while they 
 remain here . 

 the presence of a third person in the house would be extremely 
 awkward just now , and , be already dress , he open the window 
 and inform she that they could manage to shift for themselves that 
 morning . she have a milk - can in her hand , which he tell she to leave 
 at the door . when the dame have go away he search in the back 
 quarter of the house for fuel , and speedily light a fire . there be 
 plenty of egg , butter , bread , and so on in the larder , and Clare 
 soon have breakfast lay , his experience at the dairy have render 
 he facile in domestic preparation . the smoke of the kindle wood 
 rise from the chimney without like a lotus - head column ; local 
 people who be pass by see it , and think of the newly - marry 
 couple , and envy their happiness . 

 Angel cast a final glance round , and then go to the foot of the 
 stair , call in a conventional voice - 

 " breakfast be ready ! " 

 he open the front door , and take a few step in the morning air . 
 when , after a short space , he come back she be already in the 
 sitting - room mechanically readjust the breakfast thing . as she 
 be fully attire , and the interval since his call she have be 
 but two or three minute , she must have be dress or nearly so 
 before he go to summon she . her hair be twist up in a large 
 round mass at the back of her head , and she have put on one of the 
 new frock - a pale blue woollen garment with neck - frilling of 
 white . her hand and face appear to be cold , and she have possibly 
 be sit dress in the bedroom a long time without any fire . 
 the marked civility of Clare 's tone in call she seem to have 
 inspire she , for the moment , with a new glimmer of hope . but it 
 soon die when she look at he . 

 the pair be , in truth , but the ash of their former fire . to the 
 hot sorrow of the previous night have succeed heaviness ; it seem 
 as if nothing could kindle either of they to fervour of sensation any 
 more . 

 he speak gently to she , and she reply with a like 
 undemonstrativeness . at last she come up to he , look in his 
 sharply - define face as one who have no consciousness that her own 
 form a visible object also . 

 " Angel ! " she say , and pause , touch he with her finger lightly 
 as a breeze , as though she could hardly believe to be there in the 
 flesh the man who be once her lover . her eye be bright , her pale 
 cheek still show its wonte roundness , though half - dry tear have 
 leave glisten trace thereon ; and the usually ripe red mouth be 
 almost as pale as her cheek . throbbingly alive as she be still , 
 under the stress of her mental grief the life beat so brokenly that 
 a little further pull upon it would cause real illness , dull her 
 characteristic eye , and make her mouth thin . 

 she look absolutely pure . nature , in her fantastic trickery , have 
 set such a seal of maidenhood upon Tess 's countenance that he gaze 
 at she with a stupefied air . 

 " Tess ! say it be not true ! no , it be not true ! " 

 " it be true . " 

 " every word ? " 

 " every word . " 

 he look at she imploringly , as if he would willingly have take a 
 lie from her lip , know it to be one , and have make of it , by some 
 sort of sophistry , a valid denial . however , she only repeat - 

 " it be true . " 

 " be he live ? " Angel then ask . 

 " the baby die . " 

 " but the man ? " 

 " he be alive . " 

 a last despair pass over Clare 's face . 

 " be he in England ? " 

 " yes . " 

 he take a few vague step . 

 " my position - be this , " he say abruptly . " I think - any man would 
 have think - that by give up all ambition to win a wife with 
 social standing , with fortune , with knowledge of the world , I should 
 secure rustic innocence as surely as I should secure pink cheek ; 
 but - however , I be no man to reproach you , and I will not . " 

 Tess feel his position so entirely that the remainder have not be 
 need . therein lay just the distress of it ; she see that he have 
 lose all round . 

 " Angel - I should not have let it go on to marriage with you if I have 
 not know that , after all , there be a last way out of it for you ; 
 though I hop you would never - " 

 her voice grow husky . 

 " a last way ? " 

 " I mean , to get rid of I . you can get rid of I . " 

 " how ? " 

 " by divorce I . " 

 " Good heaven - how can you be so simple ! how can I divorce you ? " 

 " can not   you - now I have tell you ? I think my confession would give 
 you ground for that . " 

 " o tess - you be too , too - childish - unformed - crude , I suppose ! I 
 do not   know what you be . you do not   understand the law - you do not 
 understand ! " 

 " what - you can not ? " 

 " indeed I can not . " 

 a quick shame mix with the misery upon his listener 's face . 

 " I think - I think , " she whisper . " o , now I see how wicked I 
 seem to you ! believe I - believe I , on my soul , I never think but 
 that you could ! I hop you would not ; yet I believe , without a 
 doubt , that you could cast I off if you be determine , and do not 
 love I at - at - all ! " 

 " you be mistaken , " he say . 

 " o , then I ought to have do it , to have do it last night ! but I 
 have not   the courage . that be just like I ! " 

 " the courage to do what ? " 

 as she do not answer he take she by the hand . 

 " what be you think of do ? " he inquire . 

 " of put an end to myself . " 

 " when ? " 

 she writhe under this inquisitorial manner of his . " last night , " 
 she answer . 

 " where ? " 

 " under your mistletoe . " 

 " my good - ! how ? " he ask sternly . 

 " I will tell you , if you will not   be angry with I ! " she say , shrink . 
 " it be with the cord of my box . but I could not - do the last thing ! 
 I be afraid that it might cause a scandal to your name . " 

 the unexpected quality of this confession , wring from she , and not 
 volunteer , shake he perceptibly . but he still hold she , and , 
 let his glance fall from her face downward , he say , " now , 
 listen to this . you must not dare to think of such a horrible thing ! 
 how could you ! you will promise I as your husband to attempt that 
 no more . " 

 " I be ready to promise . I see how wicked it be . " 

 " wicked ! the idea be unworthy of you beyond description . " 

 " but , Angel , " she plead , enlarge her eye in calm unconcern upon 
 he , " it be think of entirely on your account - to set you free 
 without the scandal of the divorce that I think you would have to 
 get . I should never have dream of do it on mine . however , to 
 do it with my own hand be too good for I , after all . it be you , my 
 ruin husband , who ought to strike the blow . I think I should love 
 you more , if that be possible , if you could bring yourself to do 
 it , since there be no other way of escape for ' ee . I feel I be so 
 utterly worthless ! so very greatly in the way ! " 

 " Ssh ! " 

 " well , since you say no , I will not . I have no wish oppose to yours . " 

 he know this to be true enough . since the desperation of the night 
 her activity have drop to zero , and there be no further rashness 
 to be fear . 

 Tess try to busy herself again over the breakfast - table with more 
 or less success , and they sit down both on the same side , so that 
 their glance do not meet . there be at first something awkward 
 in hear each other eat and drink , but this could not be escape ; 
 moreover , the amount of eat do be small on both side . 
 breakfast over , he rise , and tell she the hour at which he might 
 be expect to dinner , go off to the miller 's in a mechanical 
 pursuance of the plan of study that business , which have be his 
 only practical reason for come here . 

 when he be go Tess stand at the window , and presently see his form 
 cross the great stone bridge which conduct to the mill premise . 
 he sink behind it , cross the railway beyond , and disappear . 
 then , without a sigh , she turn her attention to the room , and begin 
 clear the table and set it in order . 

 the charwoman soon come . her presence be at first a strain upon 
 Tess , but afterwards an alleviation . at half - past twelve she 
 leave her assistant alone in the kitchen , and , return to the 
 sitting - room , wait for the reappearance of Angel 's form behind the 
 bridge . 

 about one he show himself . her face flush , although he be a 
 quarter of a mile off . she run to the kitchen to get the dinner 
 serve by the time he should enter . he go first to the room where 
 they have wash their hand together the day before , and as he 
 enter the sitting - room the dish - cover rise from the dish as if 
 by his own motion . 

 " how punctual ! " he say . 

 " yes . I see you come over the bridge , " say she . 

 the meal be pass in commonplace talk of what he have be do 
 during the morning at the Abbey Mill , of the method of bolt and 
 the old - fashioned machinery , which he fear would not enlighten he 
 greatly on modern improved method , some of it seem to have be 
 in use ever since the day it ground for the monk in the adjoining 
 conventual building - now a heap of ruin . he leave the house again 
 in the course of an hour , come home at dusk , and occupy himself 
 through the evening with his paper . she fear she be in the way 
 and , when the old woman be go , retire to the kitchen , where she 
 make herself busy as well as she could for more than an hour . 

 Clare 's shape appear at the door . " you must not work like this , " he 
 say . " you be not my servant ; you be my wife . " 

 she raise her eye , and brighten somewhat . " I may think myself 
 that - indeed ? " she murmur , in piteous raillery . " you mean in name ! 
 well , I do not   want to be anything more . " 

 " you may think so , Tess ! you be . what do you mean ? " 

 " I do not   know , " she say hastily , with tear in her accent . " I 
 think I - because I be not respectable , I mean . I tell you I 
 think I be not respectable enough long ago - and on that account 
 I do not   want to marry you , only - only you urge I ! " 

 she break into sob , and turn she back to he . it would almost 
 have win round any man but Angel Clare . within the remote depth of 
 his constitution , so gentle and affectionate as he be in general , 
 there lie hide a hard logical deposit , like a vein of metal in a 
 soft loam , which turn the edge of everything that attempt to 
 traverse it . it have block his acceptance of the Church ; it block 
 his acceptance of Tess . moreover , his affection itself be less fire 
 than radiance , and , with regard to the other sex , when he cease 
 to believe he cease to follow : contrast in this with many 
 impressionable nature , who remain sensuously infatuate with what 
 they intellectually despise . he wait till her sobbing cease . 

 " I wish half the woman in England be as respectable as you , " he 
 say , in an ebullition of bitterness against womankind in general . 
 " it be not   a question of respectability , but one of principle ! " 

 he speak such thing as these and more of a kindre sort to she , 
 be still sway by the antipathetic wave which warps direct soul 
 with such persistence when once their vision find itself mock by 
 appearance . there be , it be true , underneath , a back current of 
 sympathy through which a woman of the world might have conquer he . 
 but Tess do not think of this ; she take everything as her desert , 
 and hardly open her mouth . the firmness of her devotion to he be 
 indeed almost pitiful ; quick - temper as she naturally be , nothing 
 that he could say make she unseemly ; she seek not her own ; be not 
 provoke ; think no evil of his treatment of she . she might just 
 now have be Apostolic Charity herself return to a self - seek 
 modern world . 

 this evening , night , and morning be pass precisely as the 
 precede one have be pass . on one , and only one , occasion do 
 she - the formerly free and independent Tess - venture to make any 
 advance . it be on the third occasion of his starting after a meal 
 to go out to the flour - mill . as he be leave the table he say 
 " Goodbye , " and she reply in the same word , at the same time 
 incline her mouth in the way of his . he do not avail himself of 
 the invitation , say , as he turn hastily aside - 

 " I shall be home punctually . " 

 Tess shrink into herself as if she have be strike . often enough have 
 he try to reach those lip against her consent - often have he say 
 gaily that her mouth and breath taste of the butter and egg and 
 milk and honey on which she mainly live , that he draw sustenance 
 from they , and other folly of that sort . but he do not care for 
 they now . he observe she sudden shrinking , and say gently - 

 " you know , I have to think of a course . it be imperative that we 
 should stay together a little while , to avoid the scandal to you that 
 would have result from our immediate parting . but you must see it 
 be only for form 's sake . " 

 " yes , " say Tess absently . 

 he go out , and on his way to the mill stand still , and wish for a 
 moment that he have respond yet more kindly , and kiss she once at 
 least . 

 thus they live through this despairing day or two ; in the same 
 house , truly ; but more widely apart than before they be lover . it 
 be evident to she that he be , as he have say , live with paralyzed 
 activity in his endeavour to think of a plan of procedure . she 
 be awe - stricken to discover such determination under such apparent 
 flexibility . his consistency be , indeed , too cruel . she no long 
 expect forgiveness now . More than once she think of go away 
 from he during his absence at the mill ; but she fear that this , 
 instead of benefit he , might be the mean of hampering and 
 humiliate he yet more if it should become know . 

 Meanwhile Clare be meditate , verily . his thought have be 
 unsuspende ; he be become ill with thinking ; eat out with 
 thinking , wither by think ; scourge out of all his former 
 pulsating , flexuous domesticity . he walk about say to himself , 
 " what be to be do - what be to be do ? " and by chance she overhear 
 he . it cause she to break the reserve about their future which have 
 hitherto prevail . 

 " I suppose - you be not go to live with I - long , be you , Angel ? " 
 she ask , the sunk corner of her mouth betray how purely 
 mechanical be the mean by which she retain that expression of 
 chasten calm upon her face . 

 " I can not " he say , " without despise myself , and what be bad , 
 perhaps , despise you . I mean , of course , can not live with you 
 in the ordinary sense . at present , whatever I feel , I do not 
 despise you . and , let I speak plainly , or you may not see all my 
 difficulty . how can we live together while that man live ? - he 
 be your husband in nature , and not i. if he be dead it might 
 be different ... besides , that be not all the difficulty ; it lie in 
 another consideration - one bearing upon the future of other people 
 than ourselves . think of year to come , and child be bear to 
 we , and this past matter get know - for it must get know . there 
 be not an uttermost part of the earth but somebody come from it or 
 go to it from elsewhere . well , think of wretch of our flesh and 
 blood grow up under a taunt which they will gradually get to feel 
 the full force of with their expand year . what an awakening 
 for they ! what a prospect ! can you honestly say ' remain ' after 
 contemplate this contingency ? do not   you think we have well 
 endure the ill we have than fly to other ? " 

 her eyelid , weight with trouble , continue droop as before . 

 " I can not say ' remain , ' " she answer , " I can not ; I have not think 
 so far . " 

 Tess 's feminine hope - shall we confess it ? - have be so obstinately 
 recuperative as to revive in her surreptitious vision of a 
 domiciliary intimacy continue long enough to break down his coldness 
 even against his judgement . though unsophisticate in the usual 
 sense , she be not incomplete ; and it would have denote deficiency 
 of womanhood if she have not instinctively know what an argument lie 
 in propinquity . nothing else would serve she , she know , if this 
 fail . it be wrong to hope in what be of the nature of strategy , 
 she say to herself : yet that sort of hope she could not extinguish . 
 his last representation have now be make , and it be , as she say , 
 a new view . she have truly never think so far as that , and his 
 lucid picture of possible offspring who would scorn she be one that 
 bring deadly conviction to an honest heart which be humanitarian 
 to its centre . sheer experience have already teach she that in some 
 circumstance there be one thing well than to lead a good life , 
 and that be to be save from lead any life whatever . like all 
 who have be previsione by suffer , she could , in the word of 
 M. Sully - Prudhomme , hear a penal sentence in the fiat , " you shall be 
 bear , " particularly if address to potential issue of her . 

 yet such be the vulpine slyness of Dame Nature , that , till now , Tess 
 have be hoodwink by her love for Clare into forget it might 
 result in vitalization that would inflict upon other what she have 
 bewail as misfortune to herself . 

 she therefore could not withstand his argument . but with the 
 self - combat proclivity of the supersensitive , an answer thereto 
 arise in Clare 's own mind , and he almost fear it . it be base 
 on her exceptional physical nature ; and she might have use it 
 promisingly . she might have add besides : " on an australian upland 
 or Texan plain , who be to know or care about my misfortune , or to 
 reproach I or you ? " yet , like the majority of woman , she accept 
 the momentary presentment as if it be the inevitable . and she 
 may have be right . the intuitive heart of woman knoweth not only 
 its own bitterness , but its husband 's , and even if these assume 
 reproach be not likely to be address to he or to his by 
 stranger , they might have reach his ear from his own fastidious 
 brain . 

 it be the third day of the estrangement . some might risk the odd 
 paradox that with more animalism he would have be the nobler man . 
 we do not say it . yet Clare 's love be doubtless ethereal to a 
 fault , imaginative to impracticability . with these nature , corporal 
 presence be something less appealing than corporal absence ; the 
 latter create an ideal presence that conveniently drop the defect 
 of the real . she find that her personality do not plead her cause 
 so forcibly as she have anticipate . the figurative phrase be true : 
 she be another woman than the one who have excite his desire . 

 " I have think over what you say , " she remark to he , move she 
 forefinger over the tablecloth , her other hand , which bear the ring 
 that mock they both , support her forehead . " it be quite true , 
 all of it ; it must be . you must go away from I . " 

 " but what can you do ? " 

 " I can go home . " 

 Clare have not think of that . 

 " be you sure ? " he inquire . 

 " quite sure . we ought to part , and we may as well get it past and 
 do . you once say that I be apt to win man against their well 
 judgement ; and if I be constantly before your eye I may cause you 
 to change your plan in opposition to your reason and wish ; and 
 afterwards your repentance and my sorrow will be terrible . " 

 " and you would like to go home ? " he ask . 

 " I want to leave you , and go home . " 

 " then it shall be so . " 

 though she do not look up at he , she start . there be a 
 difference between the proposition and the covenant , which she have 
 feel only too quickly . 

 " I fear it would come to this , " she murmur , her countenance 
 meekly fix . " I do not   complain , Angel , I - I think it well . what 
 you say have quite convince I . yes , though nobody else should 
 reproach I if we should stay together , yet somewhen , year hence , 
 you might get angry with I for any ordinary matter , and know what 
 you do of my bygone , you yourself might be tempt to say word , and 
 they might be overhear , perhaps by my own child . o , what only 
 hurt I now would torture and kill I then ! I will go - to - morrow . " 

 " and I shall not stay here . though I do not   like to initiate it , I 
 have see that it be advisable we should part - at least for a while , 
 till I can well see the shape that thing have take , and can write 
 to you . " 

 Tess steal a glance at her husband . he be pale , even tremulous ; 
 but , as before , she be appal by the determination reveal in the 
 depth of this gentle be she have marry - the will to subdue the 
 gross to the subtler emotion , the substance to the conception , the 
 flesh to the spirit . propensity , tendency , habit , be as dead 
 leaf upon the tyrannous wind of his imaginative ascendency . 

 he may have observe her look , for he explain - 

 " I think of people more kindly when I be away from they " ; add 
 cynically , " God know ; perhaps we will shake down together some day , 
 for weariness ; thousand have do it ! " 

 that day he begin to pack up , and she go upstairs and begin to pack 
 also . both know that it be in their two mind that they might part 
 the next morning for ever , despite the gloss of assuaging conjecture 
 throw over their proceeding because they be of the sort to whom 
 any parting which have an air of finality be a torture . he know , 
 and she know , that , though the fascination which each have exercise 
 over the other - on her part independently of accomplishment - would 
 probably in the first day of their separation be even more potent 
 than ever , time must attenuate that effect ; the practical argument 
 against accept she as a housemate might pronounce themselves more 
 strongly in the boreal light of a remoter view . moreover , when two 
 people be once part - have abandon a common domicile and a common 
 environment - new growth insensibly bud upward to fill each vacate 
 place ; unforeseen accident hinder intention , and old plan be 
 forget . 



 XXXVII 


 Midnight come and pass silently , for there be nothing to announce 
 it in the Valley of the Froom . 

 not long after one o'clock there be a slight creak in the darken 
 farmhouse once the mansion of the d'Urbervilles . Tess , who use the 
 upper chamber , hear it and awake . it have come from the corner step 
 of the staircase , which , as usual , be loosely nail . she see the 
 door of her bedroom open , and the figure of her husband cross the 
 stream of moonlight with a curiously careful tread . he be in his 
 shirt and trouser only , and her first flush of joy die when she 
 perceive that his eye be fix in an unnatural stare on vacancy . 
 when he reach the middle of the room he stand still and murmur in 
 tone of indescribable sadness - 

 " dead ! dead ! dead ! " 

 under the influence of any strongly - disturbing force , Clare would 
 occasionally walk in his sleep , and even perform strange feat , such 
 as he have do on the night of their return from market just before 
 their marriage , when he re - enact in his bedroom his combat with the 
 man who have insult she . Tess see that continue mental distress 
 have work he into that somnambulistic state now . 

 her loyal confidence in he lie so deep down in her heart , that , 
 awake or asleep , he inspire she with no sort of personal fear . if 
 he have enter with a pistol in his hand he would scarcely have 
 disturb her trust in his protectiveness . 

 Clare come close , and bent over she . " dead , dead , dead ! " he murmur . 

 after fixedly regard she for some moment with the same gaze of 
 unmeasurable woe , he bend lower , enclose she in his arm , and roll 
 she in the sheet as in a shroud . then lift she from the bed with 
 as much respect as one would show to a dead body , he carry she 
 across the room , murmur - 

 " my poor , poor Tess - my dearest , darle Tess ! so sweet , so good , so 
 true ! " 

 the word of endearment , withhold so severely in his wake hour , 
 be inexpressibly sweet to her forlorn and hungry heart . if it have 
 be to save her weary life she would not , by move or struggle , 
 have put an end to the position she find herself in . thus she lie 
 in absolute stillness , scarcely venture to breathe , and , wonder 
 what he be go to do with she , suffer herself to be bear out 
 upon the landing . 

 " my wife - dead , dead ! " he say . 

 he pause in his labour for a moment to lean with she against the 
 banister . be he go to throw she down ? self - solicitude be near 
 extinction in she , and in the knowledge that he have plan to depart 
 on the morrow , possibly for always , she lie in his arm in this 
 precarious position with a sense rather of luxury than of terror . if 
 they could only fall together , and both be dash to piece , how fit , 
 how desirable . 

 however , he do not let she fall , but take advantage of the support 
 of the handrail to imprint a kiss upon her lip - lip in the day - time 
 scorn . then he clasp she with a renew firmness of hold , and 
 descend the staircase . the creak of the loose stair do not awaken 
 he , and they reach the ground - floor safely . free one of his 
 hand from his grasp of she for a moment , he slide back the door - bar 
 and pass out , slightly strike his stockinged toe against the edge 
 of the door . but this he seem not to mind , and , have room for 
 extension in the open air , he lift she against his shoulder , so 
 that he could carry she with ease , the absence of clothe take much 
 from his burden . thus he bear she off the premise in the direction 
 of the river a few yard distant . 

 his ultimate intention , if he have any , she have not yet divine ; and 
 she find herself conjecture on the matter as a third person might 
 have do . so easefully have she deliver her whole be up to he 
 that it please she to think he be regard she as his absolute 
 possession , to dispose of as he should choose . it be console , 
 under the hover terror of to - morrow 's separation , to feel that he 
 really recognize she now as his wife Tess , and do not cast she off , 
 even if in that recognition he go so far as to arrogate to himself 
 the right of harm she . 

 ah ! now she know what he be dream of - that Sunday morning when he 
 have bear she along through the water with the other dairymaid , who 
 have love he nearly as much as she , if that be possible , which 
 Tess could hardly admit . Clare do not cross the bridge with she , 
 but proceed several pace on the same side towards the adjoining 
 mill , at length stand still on the brink of the river . 

 its water , in creep down these mile of meadowland , frequently 
 divide , serpentine in purposeless curve , loop themselves 
 around little island that have no name , return and re - embody 
 themselves as a broad main stream far on . opposite the spot to 
 which he have bring she be such a general confluence , and the river 
 be proportionately voluminous and deep . across it be a narrow 
 foot - bridge ; but now the autumn flood have wash the handrail away , 
 leave the bare plank only , which , lie a few inch above the 
 speeding current , form a giddy pathway for even steady head ; and 
 Tess have notice from the window of the house in the day - time young 
 man walk across upon it as a feat in balance . her husband have 
 possibly observe the same performance ; anyhow , he now mount the 
 plank , and , slide one foot forward , advance along it . 

 be he go to drown she ? probably he be . the spot be lonely , 
 the river deep and wide enough to make such a purpose easy of 
 accomplishment . he might drown she if he would ; it would be well 
 than part to - morrow to lead sever life . 

 the swift stream race and gyrate under they , toss , distort , 
 and split the moon 's reflect face . spot of froth travel 
 past , and intercept weed wave behind the pile . if they could 
 both fall together into the current now , their arm would be so 
 tightly clasped together that they could not be save ; they would 
 go out of the world almost painlessly , and there would be no more 
 reproach to she , or to he for marry she . his last half - hour with 
 she would have be a love one , while if they live till he awake , 
 his day - time aversion would return , and this hour would remain to be 
 contemplate only as a transient dream . 

 the impulse stir in she , yet she dare not indulge it , to make a 
 movement that would have precipitate they both into the gulf . how 
 she value her own life have be prove ; but his - she have no right to 
 tamper with it . he reach the other side with she in safety . 

 here they be within a plantation which form the Abbey ground , 
 and take a new hold of she he go onward a few step till they 
 reach the ruin choir of the Abbey - church . against the north wall 
 be the empty stone coffin of an abbot , in which every tourist with 
 a turn for grim humour be accustom to stretch himself . in this 
 Clare carefully lay Tess . have kiss her lip a second time he 
 breathe deeply , as if a greatly desire end be attain . Clare 
 then lie down on the ground alongside , when he immediately fall into 
 the deep dead slumber of exhaustion , and remain motionless as a 
 log . the spurt of mental excitement which have produce the effort 
 be now over . 

 Tess sit up in the coffin . the night , though dry and mild for the 
 season , be more than sufficiently cold to make it dangerous for he 
 to remain here long , in his half - clothe state . if he be leave to 
 himself he would in all probability stay there till the morning , and 
 be chill to certain death . she have hear of such death after 
 sleep - walking . but how could she dare to awaken he , and let he 
 know what he have be do , when it would mortify he to discover 
 his folly in respect of she ? tess , however , step out of her 
 stone confine , shake he slightly , but be unable to arouse he 
 without be violent . it be indispensable to do something , for she 
 be begin to shiver , the sheet being but a poor protection . her 
 excitement have in a measure keep she warm during the few minute ' 
 adventure ; but that beatific interval be over . 

 it suddenly occur to she to try persuasion ; and accordingly she 
 whisper in his ear , with as much firmness and decision as she could 
 summon - 

 " let we walk on , darling , " at the same time take he suggestively 
 by the arm . to her relief , he unresistingly acquiesce ; her word 
 have apparently throw he back into his dream , which thenceforward 
 seem to enter on a new phase , wherein he fancy she have rise as a 
 spirit , and be lead he to Heaven . thus she conduct he by the 
 arm to the stone bridge in front of their residence , cross which 
 they stand at the manor - house door . Tess 's foot be quite bare , and 
 the stone hurt she , and chill she to the bone ; but Clare be in 
 his woollen stocking , and appear to feel no discomfort . 

 there be no further difficulty . she induce he to lie down on his 
 own sofa bed , and cover he up warmly , light a temporary fire of 
 wood , to dry any dampness out of he . the noise of these attention 
 she think might awaken he , and secretly wish that they might . 
 but the exhaustion of his mind and body be such that he remain 
 undisturbed . 

 as soon as they meet the next morning Tess divine that Angel know 
 little or nothing of how far she have be concern in the night 's 
 excursion , though , as regard himself , he may have be aware that 
 he have not lain still . in truth , he have awaken that morning from 
 a sleep deep as annihilation ; and during those first few moment 
 in which the brain , like a Samson shake himself , be try its 
 strength , he have some dim notion of an unusual nocturnal proceeding . 
 but the reality of his situation soon displace conjecture on the 
 other subject . 

 he wait in expectancy to discern some mental pointing ; he know that 
 if any intention of his , conclude over - night , do not vanish in the 
 light of morning , it stand on a basis approximate to one of pure 
 reason , even if initiate by impulse of feeling ; that it be so 
 far , therefore , to be trust . he thus behold in the pale morning 
 light the resolve to separate from she ; not as a hot and indignant 
 instinct , but denude of the passionateness which have make it scorch 
 and burn ; stand in its bone ; nothing but a skeleton , but none the 
 less there . Clare no long hesitate . 

 at breakfast , and while they be pack the few remain article , 
 he show his weariness from the night 's effort so unmistakeably that 
 Tess be on the point of reveal all that have happen ; but the 
 reflection that it would anger he , grieve he , stultify he , to know 
 that he have instinctively manifest a fondness for she of which his 
 common - sense do not approve , that his inclination have compromise 
 his dignity when reason sleep , again deter she . it be too much 
 like laugh at a man when sober for his erratic deed during 
 intoxication . 

 it just cross her mind , too , that he might have a faint 
 recollection of his tender vagary , and be disinclined to allude to 
 it from a conviction that she would take amatory advantage of the 
 opportunity it give she of appeal to he anew not to go . 

 he have order by letter a vehicle from the near town , and 
 soon after breakfast it arrive . she see in it the beginning of 
 the end - the temporary end , at least , for the revelation of his 
 tenderness by the incident of the night raise dream of a possible 
 future with he . the luggage be put on the top , and the man drive 
 they off , the miller and the old waiting - woman express some 
 surprise at their precipitate departure , which Clare attribute to 
 his discovery that the mill - work be not of the modern kind which he 
 wish to investigate , a statement that be true so far as it go . 
 beyond this there be nothing in the manner of their leave to 
 suggest a fiasco , or that they be not go together to visit 
 friend . 

 their route lie near the dairy from which they have start with such 
 solemn joy in each other a few day back , and as Clare wish to wind 
 up his business with Mr Crick , Tess could hardly avoid pay Mrs 
 Crick a call at the same time , unless she would excite suspicion of 
 their unhappy state . 

 to make the call as unobtrusive as possible , they leave the carriage 
 by the wicket lead down from the high road to the dairy - house , and 
 descend the track on foot , side by side . the withy - bed have be 
 cut , and they could see over the stump the spot to which Clare have 
 follow she when he press she to be his wife ; to the left the 
 enclosure in which she have be fascinate by his harp ; and far away 
 behind the cow - stall the mead which have be the scene of their 
 first embrace . the gold of the summer picture be now gray , the 
 colour mean , the rich soil mud , and the river cold . 

 over the barton - gate the dairyman see they , and come forward , 
 throw into his face the kind of jocularity deem appropriate 
 in talbothay and its vicinity on the re - appearance of the 
 newly - married . then Mrs Crick emerge from the house , and several 
 other of their old acquaintance , though Marian and Retty do not 
 seem to be there . 

 Tess valiantly bear their sly attack and friendly humour , which 
 affect she far otherwise than they suppose . in the tacit 
 agreement of husband and wife to keep their estrangement a secret 
 they behave as would have be ordinary . and then , although she 
 would rather there have be no word speak on the subject , Tess have 
 to hear in detail the story of Marian and Retty . the later have go 
 home to her father 's , and Marian have leave to look for employment 
 elsewhere . they fear she would come to no good . 

 to dissipate the sadness of this recital Tess go and bid all her 
 favourite cow goodbye , touch each of they with her hand , and as 
 she and Clare stand side by side at leave , as if united body and 
 soul , there would have be something peculiarly sorry in their 
 aspect to one who should have see it truly ; two limb of one life , 
 as they outwardly be , his arm touch her , her skirt touch 
 he , face one way , as against all the dairy face the other , 
 speak in their adieux as " we " , and yet sunder like the pole . 
 perhaps something unusually stiff and embarrassed in their attitude , 
 some awkwardness in act up to their profession of unity , different 
 from the natural shyness of young couple , may have be apparent , 
 for when they be go Mrs Crick say to her husband - 

 " how onnatural the brightness of her eye do seem , and how they 
 stand like waxen image and talk as if they be in a dream ! 
 do not   it strike ' ee that ' twa so ? Tess have always sommat strange 
 in she , and she be not now quite like the proud young bride of a 
 well - be - do man . " 

 they re - enter the vehicle , and be drive along the road towards 
 Weatherbury and Stagfoot Lane , till they reach the Lane inn , where 
 Clare dismiss the fly and man . they rest here a while , and 
 enter the Vale be next drive onward towards her home by a 
 stranger who do not know their relation . at a midway point , when 
 Nuttlebury have be pass , and where there be cross - road , Clare 
 stop the conveyance and say to Tess that if she mean to return 
 to her mother 's house it be here that he would leave she . as they 
 could not talk with freedom in the driver 's presence he ask she to 
 accompany he for a few step on foot along one of the branch road ; 
 she assent , and direct the man to wait a few minute they 
 stroll away . 

 " now , let we understand each other , " he say gently . " there be no 
 anger between we , though there be that which I can not endure at 
 present . I will try to bring myself to endure it . I will let you 
 know where I go to as soon as I know myself . and if I can bring 
 myself to bear it - if it be desirable , possible - I will come to you . 
 but until I come to you it will be well that you should not try to 
 come to I . " 

 the severity of the decree seem deadly to Tess ; she see his view of 
 she clearly enough ; he could regard she in no other light than that 
 of one who have practise gross deceit upon he . yet could a woman 
 who have do even what she have do deserve all this ? but she could 
 contest the point with he no far . she simply repeat after he 
 his own word . 

 " until you come to I I must not try to come to you ? " 

 " just so . " 

 " may I write to you ? " 

 " o yes - if you be ill , or want anything at all . I hope that will 
 not be the case ; so that it may happen that I write first to you . " 

 " I agree to the condition , Angel ; because you know well what my 
 punishment ought to be ; only - only - do not   make it more than I can 
 bear ! " 

 that be all she say on the matter . if Tess have be artful , have 
 she make a scene , faint , weep hysterically , in that lonely lane , 
 notwithstanding the fury of fastidiousness with which he be 
 possess , he would probably not have withstand she . but her mood 
 of long - suffering make his way easy for he , and she herself be 
 his good advocate . Pride , too , enter into her submission - which 
 perhaps be a symptom of that reckless acquiescence in chance too 
 apparent in the whole d'Urberville family - and the many effective 
 chord which she could have stir by an appeal be leave untouched . 

 the remainder of their discourse be on practical matter only . he 
 now hand she a packet contain a fairly good sum of money , which 
 he have obtain from his banker for the purpose . the brilliant , 
 the interest in which seem to be Tess 's for her life only   if he 
 understand the wording of the will , he advise she to let he send 
 to a bank for safety ; and to this she readily agree . 

 these thing arrange , he walk with Tess back to the carriage , 
 and hand she in . the coachman be pay and tell where to drive 
 she . take next his own bag and umbrella - the sole article he have 
 bring with he hitherward - he bid her goodbye ; and they part 
 there and then . 

 the fly move creepingly up a hill , and Clare watch it go with an 
 unpremeditated hope that Tess would look out of the window for one 
 moment . but that she never think of do , would not have venture 
 to do , lie in a half - dead faint inside . thus he behold her recede , 
 and in the anguish of his heart quote a line from a poet , with 
 peculiar emendation of his own - 


  God be not in his heaven : 
  All be wrong with the world ! 


 when Tess have pass over the crest of the hill he turn to go his 
 own way , and hardly know that he love she still . 



 XXXVIII 


 as she drive on through Blackmoor Vale , and the landscape of her 
 youth begin to open around she , Tess arouse herself from her stupor . 
 her first thought be how would she be able to face her parent ? 

 she reach a turnpike - gate which stand upon the highway to the 
 village . it be throw open by a stranger , not by the old man who 
 have keep it for many year , and to whom she have be know ; he have 
 probably leave on New Year 's day , the date when such change be 
 make . have receive no intelligence lately from her home , she 
 ask the turnpike - keeper for news . 

 " oh - nothing , miss , " he answer . " Marlott be Marlott still . folk 
 have die and that . John Durbeyfield , too , hev have a daughter 
 marry this week to a gentleman - farmer ; not from John 's own house , 
 you know ; they be married elsewhere ; the gentleman be of that 
 high standing that John 's own folk be not consider well - be - do 
 enough to have any part in it , the bridegroom seem not to know 
 how't have be discover that John be a old and ancient nobleman 
 himself by blood , with family skillenton in their own vault to 
 this day , but do out of his property in the time o ' the Romans . 
 however , Sir John , as we call ' n now , keep up the wedding - day as well 
 as he could , and stand treat to everybody in the parish ; and John 's 
 wife sing song at the Pure Drop till past eleven o'clock . " 

 hear this , Tess feel so sick at heart that she could not decide 
 to go home publicly in the fly with her luggage and belonging . she 
 ask the turnpike - keeper if she might deposit her thing at his 
 house for a while , and , on his offering no objection , she dismiss 
 her carriage , and go on to the village alone by a back lane . 

 at sight of her father 's chimney she ask herself how she could 
 possibly enter the house ? inside that cottage her relation be 
 calmly suppose she far away on a wedding - tour with a comparatively 
 rich man , who be to conduct she to bounce prosperity ; while here 
 she be , friendless , creep up to the old door quite by herself , 
 with no well place to go to in the world . 

 she do not reach the house unobserve . just by the garden - hedge she 
 be meet by a girl who know she - one of the two or three with whom she 
 have be intimate at school . after make a few inquiry as to how 
 Tess come there , her friend , unheede her tragic look , interrupt 
 with - 

 " but where be thy gentleman , Tess ? " 

 Tess hastily explain that he have be call away on business , and , 
 leave her interlocutor , clamber over the garden - hedge , and thus 
 make her way to the house . 

 as she go up the garden - path she hear her mother sing by the 
 back door , come in sight of which she perceive Mrs Durbeyfield on 
 the doorstep in the act of wring a sheet . have perform this 
 without observe Tess , she go indoor , and her daughter follow 
 she . 

 the washing - tub stand in the same old place on the same old 
 quarter - hogshead , and her mother , have throw the sheet aside , be 
 about to plunge her arm in anew . 

 " why - Tess ! - my chil ' - I think you be marry ! - marry really and 
 truly this time - we send the cider - " 

 " yes , mother ; so I be . " 

 " go to be ? " 

 " no - I be married . " 

 " married ! then where be thy husband ? " 

 " oh , he be go away for a time . " 

 " gone away ! when be you married , then ? the day you say ? " 

 " yes , Tuesday , mother . " 

 " and now ' tis on'y Saturday , and he go away ? " 

 " yes , he be go . " 

 " what be the meaning o ' that ? ' nation seize such husband as you seem 
 to get , say I ! " 

 " Mother ! " Tess go across to Joan Durbeyfield , lay her face upon 
 the matron 's bosom , and burst into sob . " I do not   know how to tell 
 ' ee , mother ! you say to I , and write to I , that I be not to tell 
 he . but I do tell he - I could not   help it - and he go away ! " 

 " o you little fool - you little fool ! " burst out Mrs Durbeyfield , 
 splash Tess and herself in her agitation . " my good God ! that ever 
 I should ha ' live to say it , but I say it again , you little fool ! " 

 Tess be convulse with weeping , the tension of so many day have 
 relax at last . 

 " I know it - I know - I know ! " she gasp through her sob . " but , 
 o my mother , I could not help it ! he be so good - and I feel 
 the wickedness of try to blind he as to what have happen ! 
 if - if - it be to be do again - I should do the same . I could 
 not - I dare not - so sin - against he ! " 

 " but you sin enough to marry he first ! " 

 " yes , yes ; that be where my misery do lie ! but I think he could get 
 rid o ' I by law if he be determine not to overlook it . and o , if 
 you know - if you could only half know how I love he - how anxious I 
 be to have he - and how wring I be between care so much for he 
 and my wish to be fair to he ! " 

 Tess be so shake that she could get no far , and sink , a 
 helpless thing , into a chair . 

 " well , well ; what be do can not   be undo ! I be sure I do not   know why 
 child o ' my bring forth should all be big simpleton than 
 other people 's - not to know well than to blab such a thing as 
 that , when he could not   ha ' find it out till too late ! " here Mrs 
 Durbeyfield begin shed tear on her own account as a mother to 
 be pity . " what your father will say I do not   know , " she continue ; 
 " for he be be talk about the wedding up at Rolliver 's and the 
 Pure drop every day since , and about his family get back to their 
 rightful position through you - poor silly man ! - and now you have   make 
 this mess of it ! the Lord - a - Lord ! " 

 as if to bring matter to a focus , Tess 's father be hear 
 approach at that moment . he do not , however , enter immediately , 
 and Mrs Durbeyfield say that she would break the bad news to he 
 herself , Tess keep out of sight for the present . after her first 
 burst of disappointment Joan begin to take the mishap as she have 
 take Tess 's original trouble , as she would have take a wet holiday 
 or failure in the potato - crop ; as a thing which have come upon they 
 irrespective of desert or folly ; a chance external impingement to be 
 bear with ; not a lesson . 

 Tess retreat upstairs and beheld casually that the bed have be 
 shift , and new arrangement make . her old bed have be adapt for 
 two young child . there be no place here for she now . 

 the room below be unceiled she could hear most of what go on 
 there . presently her father enter , apparently carry in a live 
 hen . he be a foot - haggler now , have be oblige to sell his 
 second horse , and he travel with his basket on his arm . the hen 
 have be carry about this morning as it be often carry , to show 
 people that he be in his work , though it have lain , with its leg 
 tie , under the table at Rolliver 's for more than an hour . 

 " we have   just have up a story about - " Durbeyfield begin , and thereupon 
 relate in detail to his wife a discussion which have arise at the 
 inn about the clergy , originate by the fact of his daughter have 
 marry into a clerical family . " they be formerly style ' sir ' , 
 like my own ancestry , " he say , " though nowadays their true style , 
 strictly speak , be ' clerk ' only . " as Tess have wish that no 
 great publicity should be give to the event , he have mention no 
 particular . he hop she would remove that prohibition soon . he 
 propose that the couple should take Tess 's own name , d'Urberville , 
 as uncorrupted . it be well than her husband 's . he ask if any 
 letter have come from she that day . 

 then Mrs Durbeyfield inform he that no letter have come , but tess 
 unfortunately have come herself . 

 when at length the collapse be explain to he , a sullen 
 mortification , not usual with Durbeyfield , overpower the influence 
 of the cheer glass . yet the intrinsic quality of the event move 
 his touchy sensitiveness less than its conjecture effect upon the 
 mind of other . 

 " to think , now , that this be to be the end o't ! " say Sir John . 
 " and I with a family vault under that there church of Kingsbere as 
 big as Squire Jollard 's ale - cellar , and my folk lie there in six 
 and seven , as genuine county bone and marrow as any record in 
 history . and now to be sure what they feller at Rolliver 's and the 
 Pure drop will say to I ! how they will squint and glane , and say , 
 ' this be yer mighty match be it ; this be yer get back to the true 
 level of yer forefather in King Norman 's time ! ' I feel this be too 
 much , Joan ; I shall put an end to myself , title and all - I can bear 
 it no long ! ... but she can make he keep she if he be marry 
 she ? " 

 " why , yes . but she will not   think o ' do that . " 

 " D'ye think he really have marry she ? - or be it like the first - " 

 Poor Tess , who have hear as far as this , could not bear to hear more . 
 the perception that her word could be doubt even here , in her own 
 parental house , set her mind against the spot as nothing else could 
 have do . how unexpected be the attack of destiny ! and if her 
 father doubt she a little , would not neighbour and acquaintance 
 doubt her much ? o , she could not live long at home ! 

 a few day , accordingly , be all that she allow herself here , at 
 the end of which time she receive a short note from Clare , inform 
 she that he have go to the North of England to look at a farm . in 
 her craving for the lustre of her true position as his wife , and to 
 hide from her parent the vast extent of the division between they , 
 she make use of this letter as her reason for again depart , 
 leave they under the impression that she be set out to join 
 he . still far to screen her husband from any imputation of 
 unkindness to she , she take twenty - five of the fifty pound Clare 
 have give she , and hand the sum over to her mother , as if the wife 
 of a man like Angel Clare could well afford it , say that it be a 
 slight return for the trouble and humiliation she have bring upon 
 they in year past . with this assertion of her dignity she bid they 
 farewell ; and after that there be lively doing in the Durbeyfield 
 household for some time on the strength of Tess 's bounty , her mother 
 say , and , indeed , believe , that the rupture which have arise 
 between the young husband and wife have adjust itself under their 
 strong feeling that they could not live apart from each other . 



 XXXIX 


 it be three week after the marriage that Clare find himself 
 descend the hill which lead to the well - know parsonage of his 
 father . with his downward course the tower of the church rise into 
 the evening sky in a manner of inquiry as to why he have come ; and no 
 live person in the twilighte town seem to notice he , still less 
 to expect he . he be arrive like a ghost , and the sound of his 
 own footstep be almost an encumbrance to be get rid of . 

 the picture of life have change for he . before this time he have 
 know it but speculatively ; now he think he know it as a practical 
 man ; though perhaps he do not , even yet . nevertheless humanity 
 stand before he no long in the pensive sweetness of italian art , 
 but in the star and ghastly attitude of a Wiertz Museum , and with 
 the leer of a study by Van Beers . 

 his conduct during these first week have be desultory beyond 
 description . after mechanically attempt to pursue his 
 agricultural plan as though nothing unusual have happen , in 
 the manner recommend by the great and wise man of all age , he 
 conclude that very few of those great and wise man have ever go so 
 far outside themselves as to test the feasibility of their counsel . 
 " this be the chief thing : be not perturb , " say the Pagan moralist . 
 that be just Clare 's own opinion . but he be perturb . " let not 
 your heart be trouble , neither let it be afraid , " say the Nazarene . 
 Clare chime in cordially ; but his heart be trouble all the same . 
 how he would have like to confront those two great thinker , and 
 earnestly appeal to they as fellow - man to fellow - man , and ask they 
 to tell he their method ! 

 his mood transmute itself into a dogged indifference till at length 
 he fancy he be look on his own existence with the passive 
 interest of an outsider . 

 he be embitter by the conviction that all this desolation have be 
 bring about by the accident of she be a d'Urberville . when he 
 find that Tess come of that exhausted ancient line , and be not of 
 the new tribe from below , as he have fondly dream , why have he not 
 stoically abandon she in fidelity to his principle ? this be what 
 he have get by apostasy , and his punishment be deserve . 

 then he become weary and anxious , and his anxiety increase . he 
 wonder if he have treat she unfairly . he eat without know that 
 he eat , and drink without taste . as the hour drop past , as the 
 motive of each act in the long series of bygone day present itself 
 to his view , he perceive how intimately the notion of have Tess as 
 a dear possession be mix up with all his scheme and word and 
 way . 

 in go hither and thither he observe in the outskirt of a small 
 town a red - and - blue placard set forth the great advantage of 
 the Empire of Brazil as a field for the emigrate agriculturist . 
 Land be offer there on exceptionally advantageous term . Brazil 
 somewhat attract he as a new idea . Tess could eventually join he 
 there , and perhaps in that country of contrast scene and notion 
 and habit the convention would not be so operative which make life 
 with she seem impracticable to he here . in brief he be strongly 
 inclined to try Brazil , especially as the season for go thither 
 be just at hand . 

 with this view he be return to Emminster to disclose his plan 
 to his parent , and to make the good explanation he could make of 
 arrive without Tess , short of reveal what have actually separate 
 they . as he reach the door the new moon shine upon his face , just 
 as the old one have do in the small hour of that morning when he 
 have carry his wife in his arm across the river to the graveyard 
 of the monk ; but his face be thin now . 

 Clare have give his parent no warning of his visit , and his arrival 
 stir the atmosphere of the vicarage as the dive of the kingfisher 
 stir a quiet pool . his father and mother be both in the 
 drawing - room , but neither of his brother be now at home . Angel 
 enter , and close the door quietly behind he . 

 " but - where be your wife , dear Angel ? " cry his mother . " how you 
 surprise we ! " 

 " she be at her mother 's - temporarily . I have come home rather in a 
 hurry because I have   decide to go to Brazil . " 

 " Brazil ! why they be all Roman Catholics there surely ! " 

 " be they ? I have not   think of that . " 

 but even the novelty and painfulness of his go to a papistical 
 land could not displace for long Mr and Mrs Clare 's natural interest 
 in their son 's marriage . 

 " we have your brief note three week ago announce that it have take 
 place , " say Mrs Clare , " and your father send your godmother 's gift 
 to she , as you know . of course it be good that none of we should be 
 present , especially as you prefer to marry she from the dairy , and 
 not at her home , wherever that may be . it would have embarrass 
 you , and give we no pleasure . your bother feel that very strongly . 
 now it be do we do not complain , particularly if she suit you for 
 the business you have choose to follow instead of the ministry of the 
 Gospel . ... yet I wish I could have see she first , Angel , or have 
 know a little more about she . we send she no present of our own , 
 not know what would well give her pleasure , but you must suppose 
 it only delay . Angel , there be no irritation in my mind or your 
 father 's against you for this marriage ; but we have think it much 
 well to reserve our liking for your wife till we could see she . 
 and now you have not bring she . it seem strange . what have 
 happen ? " 

 he reply that it have be think well by they that she should to 
 go her parent ' home for the present , whilst he come there . 

 " I do not   mind tell you , dear mother , " he say , " that I always 
 mean to keep she away from this house till I should feel she could 
 some with credit to you . but this idea of Brazil be quite a recent 
 one . if I do go it will be unadvisable for I to take she on this my 
 first journey . she will remain at her mother 's till I come back . " 

 " and I shall not see she before you start ? " 

 he be afraid they would not . his original plan have be , as he have 
 say , to refrain from bring she there for some little while - not 
 to wound their prejudice - feeling - in any way ; and for other 
 reason he have adhere to it . he would have to visit home in the 
 course of a year , if he go out at once ; and it would be possible 
 for they to see she before he start a second time - with she . 

 a hastily prepare supper be bring in , and Clare make further 
 exposition of his plan . his mother 's disappointment at not see 
 the bride still remain with she . Clare 's late enthusiasm for Tess 
 have infect she through her maternal sympathy , till she have almost 
 fancy that a good thing could come out of Nazareth - a charming 
 woman out of Talbothays Dairy . she watch her son as he eat . 

 " can not you describe she ? I be sure she be very pretty , Angel . " 

 " of that there can be no question ! " he say , with a zest which 
 cover its bitterness . 

 " and that she be pure and virtuous go without question ? " 

 " pure and virtuous , of course , she be . " 

 " I can see she quite distinctly . you say the other day that she be 
 fine in figure ; roundly build ; have deep red lip like Cupid 's bow ; 
 dark eyelash and brow , an immense rope of hair like a ship 's 
 cable ; and large eye violety - bluey - blackish . " 

 " I do , mother . " 

 " I quite see she . and live in such seclusion she naturally have 
 scarce ever see any young man from the world without till she see 
 you . " 

 " Scarcely . " 

 " you be her first love ? " 

 " of course . " 

 " there be bad wife than these simple , rosy - mouthed , robust girl 
 of the farm . certainly I could have wish - well , since my son be to 
 be an agriculturist , it be perhaps but proper that his wife should 
 have be accustom to an outdoor life . " 

 his father be less inquisitive ; but when the time come for the 
 chapter from the Bible which be always read before evening prayer , 
 the Vicar observe to Mrs Clare - 

 " I think , since Angel have come , that it will be more appropriate to 
 read the thirty - first of Proverbs than the chapter which we should 
 have have in the usual course of our reading ? " 

 " yes , certainly , " say Mrs Clare . " the word of King Lemuel "   she 
 could cite chapter and verse as well as her husband . " my dear son , 
 your father have decide to read we the chapter in Proverbs in praise 
 of a virtuous wife . we shall not need to be remind to apply the 
 word to the absent one . may Heaven shield she in all her way ! " 

 a lump rise in Clare 's throat . the portable lectern be take out 
 from the corner and set in the middle of the fireplace , the two old 
 servant come in , and Angel 's father begin to read at the tenth verse 
 of the aforesaid chapter - 


  " who can find a virtuous woman ? for her price be far 
  above ruby . she riseth while it be yet night , and 
  giveth meat to her household . she girdeth her loin 
  with strength and strengtheneth her arm . she 
  perceiveth that her merchandise be good ; her candle 
  goeth not out by night . she looketh well to the way 
  of her household , and eateth not the bread of idleness . 
  her child arise up and call she blessed ; her husband 
  also , and he praiseth she . many daughter have do 
  virtuously , but thou excellest they all . " 


 when prayer be over , his mother say - 

 " I could not help think how very aptly that chapter your dear 
 father read apply , in some of its particular , to the woman you 
 have choose . the perfect woman , you see , be a work woman ; not an 
 idler ; not a fine lady ; but one who use her hand and her head and 
 her heart for the good of other . ' her child arise up and call 
 she bless ; her husband also , and he praiseth she . many daughter 
 have do virtuously , but she excelleth they all . ' well , I wish I 
 could have see she , Angel . since she be pure and chaste , she would 
 have be refine enough for I . " 

 Clare could bear this no long . his eye be full of tear , which 
 seem like drop of molten lead . he bid a quick good night to 
 these sincere and simple soul whom he love so well ; who know 
 neither the world , the flesh , nor the devil in their own heart , only 
 as something vague and external to themselves . he go to his own 
 chamber . 

 his mother follow he , and tap at his door . Clare open it to 
 discover she stand without , with anxious eye . 

 " Angel , " she ask , " be there something wrong that you go away so 
 soon ? I be quite sure you be not yourself . " 

 " I be not , quite , mother , " say he . 

 " about she ? now , my son , I know it be that - I know it be about she ! 
 have you quarrel in these three week ? " 

 " we have not exactly quarrel , " he say . " but we have have a 
 difference - " 

 " Angel - be she a young woman whose history will bear investigation ? " 

 with a mother 's instinct Mrs Clare have put her finger on the kind of 
 trouble that would cause such a disquiet as seem to agitate her 
 son . 

 " she be spotless ! " he reply ; and feel that if it have send he to 
 eternal hell there and then he would have tell that lie . 

 " then never mind the rest . after all , there be few purer thing in 
 nature then an unsullied country maid . any crudeness of manner which 
 may offend your more educate sense at first , will , I be sure , 
 disappear under the influence or your companionship and tuition . " 

 such terrible sarcasm of blind magnanimity bring home to clare the 
 secondary perception that he have utterly wreck his career by this 
 marriage , which have not be among his early thought after the 
 disclosure . true , on his own account he care very little about his 
 career ; but he have wish to make it at least a respectable one on 
 account of his parent and brother . and now as he look into the 
 candle its flame dumbly express to he that it be make to shine on 
 sensible people , and that it abhor light the face of a dupe and 
 a failure . 

 when his agitation have cool he would be at moment incense with 
 his poor wife for cause a situation in which he be oblige to 
 practise deception on his parent . he almost talk to she in his 
 anger , as if she have be in the room . and then her coo voice , 
 plaintive in expostulation , disturb the darkness , the velvet touch 
 of her lip pass over his brow , and he could distinguish in the air 
 the warmth of her breath . 

 this night the woman of his belittling deprecation be think how 
 great and good her husband be . but over they both there hang a 
 deep shade than the shade which Angel Clare perceive , namely , the 
 shade of his own limitation . with all his attempt independence of 
 judgement this advanced and well - mean young man , a sample product 
 of the last five - and - twenty year , be yet the slave to custom and 
 conventionality when surprise back into his early teaching . no 
 prophet have tell he , and he be not prophet enough to tell himself , 
 that essentially this young wife of his be as deserve of the 
 praise of King Lemuel as any other woman endow with the same 
 dislike of evil , her moral value have to be reckon not by 
 achievement but by tendency . moreover , the figure near at hand 
 suffer on such occasion , because it show up its sorriness without 
 shade ; while vague figure afar off be honour , in that their 
 distance make artistic virtue of their stain . in consider 
 what Tess be not , he overlook what she be , and forget that the 
 defective can be more than the entire . 



 XL 


 at breakfast Brazil be the topic , and all endeavour to take a 
 hopeful view of Clare 's propose experiment with that country 's soil , 
 notwithstanding the discourage report of some farm - labourer who 
 have emigrate thither and return home within the twelve month . 
 after breakfast Clare go into the little town to wind up such 
 trifling matter as he be concern with there , and to get from 
 the local bank all the money he possess . on his way back he 
 encounter Miss Mercy Chant by the church , from whose wall she 
 seem to be a sort of emanation . she be carry an armful of 
 bible for her class , and such be her view of life that event which 
 produce heartache in other work beatific smile upon she - an 
 enviable result , although , in the opinion of Angel , it be obtain 
 by a curiously unnatural sacrifice of humanity to mysticism . 

 she have learn that he be about to leave England , and observe what 
 an excellent and promising scheme it seem to be . 

 " yes ; it be a likely scheme enough in a commercial sense , no doubt , " 
 he reply . " but , my dear mercy , it snap the continuity of 
 existence . perhaps a cloister would be preferable . " 

 " a cloister ! o , Angel Clare ! " 

 " well ? " 

 " why , you wicked man , a cloister imply a monk , and a monk Roman 
 Catholicism . " 

 " and roman Catholicism sin , and sin damnation . thou art in a parlous 
 state , Angel Clare . " 

 " I glory in my Protestantism ! " she say severely . 

 then Clare , throw by sheer misery into one of the demoniacal mood 
 in which a man do despite to his true principle , call she close 
 to he , and fiendishly whisper in her ear the most heterodox idea 
 he could think of . his momentary laughter at the horror which 
 appear on her fair face cease when it merge in pain and anxiety 
 for his welfare . 

 " Dear Mercy , " he say , " you must forgive I . I think I be go 
 crazy ! " 

 she think that he be ; and thus the interview end , and Clare 
 re - enter the vicarage . with the local banker he deposit the 
 jewel till happy day should arise . he also pay into the bank 
 thirty pound - to be send to Tess in a few month , as she might 
 require ; and write to she at her parent ' home in Blackmoor Vale to 
 inform she of what he have do . this amount , with the sum he have 
 already place in her hand - about fifty pound - he hop would be 
 amply sufficient for she want just at present , particularly as in 
 an emergency she have be direct to apply to his father . 

 he deem it well not to put his parent into communication with she 
 by inform they of her address ; and , be unaware of what have 
 really happen to estrange the two , neither his father nor his 
 mother suggest that he should do so . during the day he leave the 
 parsonage , for what he have to complete he wish to get do quickly . 

 as the last duty before leave this part of England it be necessary 
 for he to call at the Wellbridge farmhouse , in which he have spend 
 with Tess the first three day of their marriage , the trifle of rent 
 have to be pay , the key give up of the room they have occupy , 
 and two or three small article fetch away that they have leave 
 behind . it be under this roof that the deep shadow ever throw 
 upon his life have stretch its gloom over he . yet when he have 
 unlock the door of the sitting - room and look into it , the memory 
 which return first upon he be that of their happy arrival on a 
 similar afternoon , the first fresh sense of share a habitation 
 conjointly , the first meal together , the chatting by the fire with 
 join hand . 

 the farmer and his wife be in the field at the moment of his visit , 
 and Clare be in the room alone for some time . inwardly swell 
 with a renewal of sentiment that he have not quite reckon with , he 
 go upstairs to her chamber , which have never be his . the bed 
 be smooth as she have make it with her own hand on the morning of 
 leave . the mistletoe hang under the tester just as he have place 
 it . have be there three or four week it be turn colour , and 
 the leaf and berry be wrinkle . Angel take it down and crush 
 it into the grate . stand there , he for the first time doubt 
 whether his course in this conjecture have be a wise , much less 
 a generous , one . but have he not be cruelly blind ? in the 
 incoherent multitude of his emotion he kneel down at the bedside 
 wet - eyed . " o Tess ! if you have only tell I soon , I would have 
 forgive you ! " he mourn . 

 hear a footstep below , he rise and go to the top of the stair . 
 at the bottom of the flight he see a woman stand , and on she 
 turn up her face recognize the pale , dark - eyed Izz Huett . 

 " Mr Clare , " she say , " I have   call to see you and Mrs Clare , and to 
 inquire if ye be well . I think you might be back here again . " 

 this be a girl whose secret he have guess , but who have not yet 
 guess his ; an honest girl who love he - one who would have make as 
 good , or nearly as good , a practical farmer 's wife as Tess . 

 " I be here alone , " he say ; " we be not live here now . " explain 
 why he have come , he ask , " which way be you go home , Izz ? " 

 " I have no home at Talbothays Dairy now , sir , " she say . 

 " why be that ? " 

 Izz look down . 

 " it be so dismal there that I leave ! I be stay out this way . " 
 she point in a contrary direction , the direction in which he be 
 journey . 

 " well - be you go there now ? I can take you if you 
 wish for a lift . " 

 her olive complexion grow rich in hue . 

 " thank ' ee , Mr Clare , " she say . 

 he soon find the farmer , and settle the account for his rent and 
 the few other item which have to be consider by reason of the 
 sudden abandonment of the lodging . on Clare 's return to his horse 
 and gig , Izz jump up beside he . 

 " I be go to leave England , Izz , " he say , as they drive on . 
 " go to Brazil . " 

 " and do Mrs Clare like the notion of such a journey ? " she ask . 

 " she be not go at present - say for a year or so . I be go out 
 to reconnoitre - to see what life there be like . " 

 they speed along eastward for some considerable distance , Izz make 
 no observation . 

 " how be the other ? " he inquire . " how be Retty ? " 

 " she be in a sort of nervous state when I zid she last ; and so thin 
 and hollow - cheeked that ' a do seem in a decline . nobody will ever 
 fall in love wi ' she any more , " say Izz absently . 

 " and Marian ? " 

 Izz lower her voice . 

 " marian drink . " 

 " indeed ! " 

 " yes . the dairyman have get rid of she . " 

 " and you ! " 

 " I do not   drink , and I bain't   in a decline . but - I be no great thing 
 at sing afore breakfast now ! " 

 " how be that ? do you remember how neatly you use to turn " Twas 
 down in Cupid 's Gardens ' and ' the Tailor 's Breeches ' at morning 
 milking ? " 

 " ah , yes ! when you first come , sir , that be . not when you have be 
 there a bit . " 

 " why be that fall - off ? " 

 her black eye flash up to his face for one moment by way of 
 answer . 

 " Izz ! - how weak of you - for such as I ! " he say , and fall into 
 reverie . " then - suppose I have ask you to marry I ? " 

 " if you have I should have say ' yes ' , and you would have marry a 
 woman who love ' ee ! " 

 " really ! " 

 " down to the ground ! " she whisper vehemently . " o my God ! do you 
 never guess it till now ! " 

 by - and - by they reach a branch road to a village . 

 " I must get down . I live out there , " say Izz abruptly , never have 
 speak since her avowal . 

 Clare slow the horse . he be incense against his fate , bitterly 
 dispose towards social ordinance ; for they have coope he up in a 
 corner , out of which there be no legitimate pathway . why not be 
 revenge on society by shape his future domesticity loosely , 
 instead of kiss the pedagogic rod of convention in this ensnare 
 manner ? 

 " I be go to Brazil alone , Izz , " say he . " I have separate from 
 my wife for personal , not voyaging , reason . I may never live with 
 she again . I may not be able to love you ; but - will you go with I 
 instead of she ? " 

 " you truly wish I to go ? " 

 " I do . I have be badly use enough to wish for relief . and you at 
 least love I disinterestedly . " 

 " yes - I will go , " say Izz , after a pause . 

 " you will ? you know what it mean , Izz ? " 

 " it mean that I shall live with you for the time you be over 
 there - that be good enough for I . " 

 " remember , you be not to trust I in moral now . but I ought 
 to remind you that it will be wrong - do in the eye of 
 civilization - western civilization , that be to say . " 

 " I do not   mind that ; no woman do when it come to agony - point , and 
 there be no other way ! " 

 " then do not   get down , but sit where you be . " 

 he drive past the cross - road , one mile , two mile , without show 
 any sign of affection . 

 " you love I very , very much , Izz ? " he suddenly ask . 

 " I do - I have say I do ! I love you all the time we be at the 
 dairy together ! " 

 " More than Tess ? " 

 she shake her head . 

 " no , " she murmur , " not more than she . " 

 " how be that ? " 

 " because nobody could love ' ee more than Tess do ! ... she would 
 have lay down her life for ' ee . I could do no more . " 

 like the prophet on the top of Peor , Izz Huett would fain have speak 
 perversely at such a moment , but the fascination exercise over her 
 rougher nature by Tess 's character compel she to grace . 

 Clare be silent ; his heart have rise at these straightforward word 
 from such an unexpected unimpeachable quarter . in his throat be 
 something as if a sob have solidify there . his ear repeat , " SHE 
 would have lay down her life for ' EE . I could do no MORE ! " 

 " forget our idle talk , Izz , " he say , turn the horse 's head 
 suddenly . " I do not   know what I have   be say ! I will now drive 
 you back to where your lane branch off . " 

 " so much for honesty towards ' ee ! o - how can I bear it - how can 
 I - how can I ! " 

 izz Huett burst into wild tear , and beat her forehead as she see 
 what she have do . 

 " do you regret that poor little act of justice to an absent one ? 
 O , Izz , do not   spoil it by regret ! " 

 she still herself by degree . 

 " very well , sir . perhaps I do not   know what I be say , either , 
 wh - when I agree to go ! I wish - what can not be ! " 

 " because I have a love wife already . " 

 " yes , yes ! you have ! " 

 they reach the corner of the lane which they have pass half an 
 hour early , and she hop down . 

 " izz - please , please forget my momentary levity ! " he cry . " it be 
 so ill - consider , so ill - advise ! " 

 " forget it ? never , never ! o , it be no levity to I ! " 

 he feel how richly he deserve the reproach that the wound cry 
 convey , and , in a sorrow that be inexpressible , leapt down and 
 take her hand . 

 " well , but , Izz , we will part friend , anyhow ? you do not   know what 
 I have   have to bear ! " 

 she be a really generous girl , and allow no further bitterness to 
 mar their adieux . 

 " I forgive ' ee , sir ! " she say . 

 " now , Izz , " he say , while she stand beside he there , force 
 himself to the mentor 's part he be far from feel ; " I want you to 
 tell Marian when you see she that she be to be a good woman , and not 
 to give way to folly . promise that , and tell Retty that there be 
 more worthy man than I in the world , that for my sake she be to act 
 wisely and well - remember the word - wisely and well - for my sake . 
 I send this message to they as a die man to the dying ; for I shall 
 never see they again . and you , Izzy , you have save I by your 
 honest word about my wife from an incredible impulse towards folly 
 and treachery . woman may be bad , but they be not so bad as man in 
 these thing ! on that one account I can never forget you . be always 
 the good and sincere girl you have hitherto be ; and think of I as 
 a worthless lover , but a faithful friend . promise . " 

 she give the promise . 

 " Heaven bless and keep you , sir . goodbye ! " 

 he drive on ; but no soon have Izz turn into the lane , and Clare 
 be out of sight , than she fling herself down on the bank in a fit of 
 rack anguish ; and it be with a strained unnatural face that she 
 enter her mother 's cottage late that night . nobody ever be tell 
 how Izz spend the dark hour that intervene between Angel Clare 's 
 parting from she and her arrival home . 

 Clare , too , after bid the girl farewell , be work to ache 
 thought and quivering lip . but his sorrow be not for Izz . that 
 evening he be within a feather - weight 's turn of abandon his road 
 to the near station , and drive across that elevated dorsal line 
 of South Wessex which divide he from his Tess 's home . it be 
 neither a contempt for her nature , nor the probable state of her 
 heart , which deter he . 

 no ; it be a sense that , despite her love , as corroborate by Izz 's 
 admission , the fact have not change . if he be right at first , 
 he be right now . and the momentum of the course on which he 
 have embark tend to keep he go in it , unless divert by 
 a strong , more sustained force than have play upon he this 
 afternoon . he could soon come back to she . he take the train that 
 night for London , and five day after shake hand in farewell of his 
 brother at the port of embarkation . 



 xli 


 from the forego event of the winter - time let we press on to 
 an October day , more than eight month subsequent to the parting 
 of Clare and Tess . we discover the latter in change condition ; 
 instead of a bride with box and trunk which other bore , we see 
 her a lonely woman with a basket and a bundle in her own porterage , 
 as at an early time when she be no bride ; instead of the ample 
 mean that be project by her husband for her comfort through 
 this probationary period , she can produce only a flattened purse . 

 after again leave Marlott , her home , she have get through the 
 spring and summer without any great stress upon her physical power , 
 the time be mainly spend in render light irregular service 
 at dairy - work near Port - Bredy to the west of the Blackmoor Valley , 
 equally remote from her native place and from talbothay . she 
 prefer this to live on his allowance . mentally she remain in 
 utter stagnation , a condition which the mechanical occupation rather 
 foster than check . her consciousness be at that other dairy , 
 at that other season , in the presence of the tender lover who have 
 confront she there - he who , the moment she have grasp he to keep 
 for her own , have disappear like a shape in a vision . 

 the dairy - work last only till the milk begin to lessen , for she 
 have not meet with a second regular engagement as at talbothay , but 
 have do duty as a supernumerary only . however , as harvest be now 
 begin , she have simply to remove from the pasture to the stubble 
 to find plenty of further occupation , and this continue till harvest 
 be do . 

 of the five - and - twenty pound which have remain to she of Clare 's 
 allowance , after deduct the other half of the fifty as a 
 contribution to her parent for the trouble and expense to which 
 she have put they , she have as yet spend but little . but there now 
 follow an unfortunate interval of wet weather , during which she be 
 oblige to fall back upon her sovereign . 

 she could not bear to let they go . Angel have put they into her hand , 
 have obtain they bright and new from his bank for she ; his touch have 
 consecrate they to souvenir of himself - they appear to have have 
 as yet no other history than such as be create by his and her own 
 experience - and to disperse they be like give away relic . but 
 she have to do it , and one by one they leave her hand . 

 she have be compel to send her mother her address from time to 
 time , but she conceal her circumstance . when her money have almost 
 go a letter from her mother reach she . Joan state that they 
 be in dreadful difficulty ; the autumn rain have go through the 
 thatch of the house , which require entire renewal ; but this could 
 not be do because the previous thatching have never be pay for . 
 new rafter and a new ceiling upstairs also be require , which , 
 with the previous bill , would amount to a sum of twenty pound . as 
 her husband be a man of mean , and have doubtless return by this 
 time , could she not send they the money ? 

 Tess have thirty pound come to she almost immediately from Angel 's 
 banker , and , the case be so deplorable , as soon as the sum be 
 receive she send the twenty as request . part of the remainder 
 she be oblige to expend in winter clothing , leave only a nominal 
 sum for the whole inclement season at hand . when the last pound 
 have go , a remark of Angel 's that whenever she require far 
 resource she be to apply to his father , remain to be consider . 

 but the more Tess thought of the step , the more reluctant be she to 
 take it . the same delicacy , pride , false shame , whatever it may be 
 call , on Clare 's account , which have lead she to hide from her own 
 parent the prolongation of the estrangement , hinder she own to 
 his that she be in want after the fair allowance he have leave she . 
 they probably despise she already ; how much more they would despise 
 she in the character of a mendicant ! the consequence be that by no 
 effort could the parson 's daughter - in - law bring herself to let he 
 know her state . 

 her reluctance to communicate with her husband 's parent might , 
 she think , lessen with the lapse of time ; but with her own the 
 reverse obtain . on she leave their house after the short visit 
 subsequent to her marriage they be under the impression that she 
 be ultimately go to join her husband ; and from that time to the 
 present she have do nothing to disturb their belief that she be 
 await his return in comfort , hop against hope that his journey 
 to Brazil would result in a short stay only , after which he would 
 come to fetch she , or that he would write for she to join he ; in any 
 case that they would soon present a united front to their family 
 and the world . this hope she still foster . to let her parent 
 know that she be a deserted wife , dependent , now that she have 
 relieve their necessity , on her own hand for a living , after the 
  eclat of a marriage which be to nullify the collapse of the first 
 attempt , would be too much indeed . 

 the set of brilliant return to her mind . where Clare have 
 deposit they she do not know , and it matter little , if it be 
 true that she could only use and not sell they . even be they 
 absolutely her it would be pass mean to enrich herself by a legal 
 title to they which be not essentially her at all . 

 meanwhile her husband 's day have be by no mean free from trial . 
 at this moment he be lie ill of fever in the clay land near 
 Curitiba in Brazil , have be drench with thunder - storm and 
 persecute by other hardship , in common with all the english farmer 
 and farm - labourer who , just at this time , be delude into go 
 thither by the promise of the brazilian Government , and by the 
 baseless assumption that those frame which , plough and sow on 
 english upland , have resist all the weather to whose mood they 
 have be bear , could resist equally well all the weather by which 
 they be surprised on brazilian plain . 

 to return . thus it happen that when the last of Tess 's sovereign 
 have be spend she be unprovide with other to take their place , 
 while on account of the season she find it increasingly difficult 
 to get employment . not be aware of the rarity of intelligence , 
 energy , health , and willingness in any sphere of life , she refrain 
 from seek an indoor occupation ; fear town , large house , 
 people of mean and social sophistication , and of manner other 
 than rural . from that direction of gentility Black Care have come . 
 Society might be well than she suppose from her slight experience 
 of it . but she have no proof of this , and her instinct in the 
 circumstance be to avoid its purlieus . 

 the small dairy to the west , beyond Port - Bredy , in which she 
 have serve as supernumerary milkmaid during the spring and summer 
 require no further aid . room would probably have be make for she 
 at talbothay , if only out of sheer compassion ; but comfortable as 
 her life have be there , she could not go back . the anti - climax 
 would be too intolerable ; and her return might bring reproach upon 
 her idolize husband . she could not have bear their pity , and their 
 whisper remark to one another upon her strange situation ; though 
 she would almost have face a knowledge of her circumstance by every 
 individual there , so long as her story have remain isolated in the 
 mind of each . it be the interchange of idea about she that make 
 her sensitiveness wince . Tess could not account for this 
 distinction ; she simply know that she feel it . 

 she be now on her way to an upland farm in the centre of the county , 
 to which she have be recommend by a wandering letter which have 
 reach she from Marian . Marian have somehow hear that Tess be 
 separate from her husband - probably through Izz Huett - and the 
 good - natured and now tipple girl , deem Tess in trouble , have 
 hasten to notify to her former friend that she herself have go to 
 this upland spot after leave the dairy , and would like to see she 
 there , where there be room for other hand , if it be really true 
 that she work again as of old . 

 with the shortening of the day all hope of obtain her husband 's 
 forgiveness begin to leave she ; and there be something of the 
 habitude of the wild animal in the unreflecting instinct with which 
 she ramble on - disconnect herself by little from her eventful 
 past at every step , obliterate her identity , give no thought to 
 accident or contingency which might make a quick discovery of she 
 whereabout by other of importance to her own happiness , if not to 
 theirs . 

 among the difficulty of her lonely position not the least be 
 the attention she excite by her appearance , a certain bearing of 
 distinction , which she have catch from Clare , be superadde to her 
 natural attractiveness . whilst the clothe last which have be 
 prepared for her marriage , these casual glance of interest cause 
 she no inconvenience , but as soon as she be compel to don the 
 wrapper of a fieldwoman , rude word be address to she more than 
 once ; but nothing occur to cause she bodily fear till a particular 
 November afternoon . 

 she have prefer the country west of the River Brit to the upland 
 farm for which she be now bind , because , for one thing , it be 
 near to the home of her husband 's father ; and to hover about that 
 region unrecognize , with the notion that she might decide to call at 
 the vicarage some day , give her pleasure . but have once decide to 
 try the high and dry level , she press back eastward , march 
 afoot towards the village of Chalk - Newton , where she mean to pass 
 the night . 

 the lane be long and unvaried , and , owe to the rapid shortening of 
 the day , dusk come upon she before she be aware . she have reach 
 the top of a hill down which the lane stretch its serpentine length 
 in glimpse , when she hear footstep behind her back , and in a few 
 moment she be overtake by a man . he step up alongside Tess and 
 say - 

 " good night , my pretty maid " : to which she civilly reply . 

 the light still remain in the sky light up her face , though the 
 landscape be nearly dark . the man turn and star hard at she . 

 " why , surely , it be the young wench who be at Trantridge awhile - 
 young Squire d'Urberville 's friend ? I be there at that time , though 
 I do not   live there now . " 

 she recognize in he the well - to - do boor whom Angel have knock down 
 at the inn for address she coarsely . a spasm of anguish shoot 
 through she , and she return he no answer . 

 " be honest enough to own it , and that what I say in the town be 
 true , though your fancy - man be so up about it - hey , my sly one ? you 
 ought to beg my pardon for that blow of his , consider . " 

 still no answer come from Tess . there seem only one escape for she 
 hunt soul . she suddenly take to her heel with the speed of the 
 wind , and , without look behind she , run along the road till she 
 come to a gate which open directly into a plantation . into this 
 she plunge , and do not pause till she be deep enough in its shade 
 to be safe against any possibility of discovery . 

 under foot the leaf be dry , and the foliage of some holly bush 
 which grow among the deciduous tree be dense enough to keep off 
 draught . she scrap together the dead leaf till she have form 
 they into a large heap , make a sort of nest in the middle . into 
 this Tess crept . 

 such sleep as she get be naturally fitful ; she fancy she hear 
 strange noise , but persuade herself that they be cause by the 
 breeze . she think of her husband in some vague warm clime on the 
 other side of the globe , while she be here in the cold . be there 
 another such a wretched being as she in the world ? Tess ask 
 herself ; and , think of her waste life , say , " all be vanity . " 
 she repeat the word mechanically , till she reflect that this 
 be a most inadequate thought for modern day . Solomon have think 
 as far as that more than two thousand year ago ; she herself , 
 though not in the van of thinker , have get much far . if all 
 be only vanity , who would mind it ? all be , alas , bad than 
 vanity - injustice , punishment , exaction , death . the wife of Angel 
 Clare put her hand to her brow , and feel its curve , and the edge of 
 her eye - socket perceptible under the soft skin , and think as she 
 do so that a time would come when that bone would be bare . " I wish 
 it be now , " she say . 

 in the midst of these whimsical fancy she hear a new strange sound 
 among the leaf . it might be the wind ; yet there be scarcely any 
 wind . sometimes it be a palpitation , sometimes a flutter ; sometimes 
 it be a sort of gasp or gurgle . soon she be certain that the 
 noise come from wild creature of some kind , the more so when , 
 originate in the bough overhead , they be follow by the fall 
 of a heavy body upon the ground . have she be ensconce here under 
 other and more pleasant condition she would have become alarmed ; 
 but , outside humanity , she have at present no fear . 

 day at length break in the sky . when it have be day aloft for some 
 little while it become day in the wood . 

 directly the assuring and prosaic light of the world 's active hour 
 have grow strong , she creep from under her hillock of leaf , and 
 look around boldly . then she perceive what have be go on to 
 disturb she . the plantation wherein she have take shelter run down 
 at this spot into a peak , which end it hitherward , outside the 
 hedge be arable ground . under the tree several pheasant lay 
 about , their rich plumage dabble with blood ; some be dead , some 
 feebly twitch a wing , some star up at the sky , some pulsate 
 quickly , some contort , some stretch out - all of they writhe in 
 agony , except the fortunate one whose torture have end during the 
 night by the inability of nature to bear more . 

 Tess guess at once the meaning of this . the bird have be drive 
 down into this corner the day before by some shooting - party ; and 
 while those that have drop dead under the shot , or have die before 
 nightfall , have be search for and carry off , many badly wound 
 bird have escape and hide themselves away , or rise among the 
 thick bough , where they have maintain their position till they grow 
 weak with loss of blood in the night - time , when they have fall one 
 by one as she have hear they . 

 she have occasionally catch glimpse of these man in girlhood , 
 look over hedge , or peep through bush , and point their 
 gun , strangely accoutre , a bloodthirsty light in their eye . she 
 have be tell that , rough and brutal as they seem just then , they 
 be not like this all the year round , but be , in fact , quite civil 
 person save during certain week of autumn and winter , when , like 
 the inhabitant of the Malay Peninsula , they run amuck , and make 
 it their purpose to destroy life - in this case harmless feather 
 creature , bring into be by artificial mean solely to gratify 
 these propensity - at once so unmannerly and so unchivalrous towards 
 their weak fellow in Nature 's teem family . 

 with the impulse of a soul who could feel for kindre sufferer as 
 much as for herself , Tess 's first thought be to put the still live 
 bird out of their torture , and to this end with her own hand she 
 break the neck of as many as she could find , leave they to lie 
 where she have find they till the game - keeper should come - as they 
 probably would come - to look for they a second time . 

 " poor darling - to suppose myself the most miserable be on earth 
 in the sight o ' such misery as yours ! " she exclaim , her tear 
 run down as she kill the bird tenderly . " and not a twinge of 
 bodily pain about I ! I be not mangle , and I be not bleed , and 
 I have two hand to feed and clothe I . " she be ashamed of herself 
 for her gloom of the night , base on nothing more tangible than a 
 sense of condemnation under an arbitrary law of society which have no 
 foundation in Nature . 



 XLII 


 it be now broad day , and she start again , emerge cautiously upon 
 the highway . but there be no need for caution ; not a soul be at 
 hand , and Tess go onward with fortitude , her recollection of the 
 bird ' silent endurance of their night of agony impress upon she 
 the relativity of sorrow and the tolerable nature of her own , if she 
 could once rise high enough to despise opinion . but that she could 
 not do so long as it be hold by Clare . 

 she reach Chalk - Newton , and breakfast at an inn , where several 
 young man be troublesomely complimentary to her good look . 
 somehow she feel hopeful , for be it not possible that her husband 
 also might say these same thing to she even yet ? she be bind to 
 take care of herself on the chance of it , and keep off these casual 
 lover . to this end Tess resolve to run no further risk from her 
 appearance . as soon as she get out of the village she enter a 
 thicket and take from her basket one of the old field - gown , which 
 she have never put on even at the dairy - never since she have work 
 among the stubble at Marlott . she also , by a felicitous thought , 
 take a handkerchief from her bundle and tie it round her face under 
 her bonnet , cover her chin and half her cheek and temple , as if 
 she be suffer from toothache . then with her little scissor , 
 by the aid of a pocket look - glass , she mercilessly nip she 
 eyebrow off , and thus insure against aggressive admiration , she 
 go on her uneven way . 

 " what a mommet of a maid ! " say the next man who meet she to a 
 companion . 

 tear come into her eye for very pity of herself as she hear he . 

 " but I do not   care ! " she say . " o no - I do not   care ! I will always be 
 ugly now , because Angel be not here , and I have nobody to take care 
 of I . my husband that be be go away , and never will love I any 
 more ; but I love he just the same , and hate all other man , and like 
 to make them think scornfully of I ! " 

 thus Tess walk on ; a figure which be part of the landscape ; a 
 fieldwoman pure and simple , in winter guise ; a gray serge cape , a 
 red woollen cravat , a stuff skirt cover by a whitey - brown rough 
 wrapper , and buff - leather glove . every thread of that old attire 
 have become fade and thin under the stroke of raindrop , the burn of 
 sunbeam , and the stress of wind . there be no sign of young passion 
 in her now - 


  the maiden 's mouth be cold 
  . . . 
  fold over simple fold 
  bind her head . 


 inside this exterior , over which the eye might have rove as over a 
 thing scarcely percipient , almost inorganic , there be the record of 
 a pulse life which have learn too well , for its year , of the dust 
 and ash of thing , of the cruelty of lust and the fragility of 
 love . 

 next day the weather be bad , but she trudge on , the honesty , 
 directness , and impartiality of elemental enmity disconcert she 
 but little . her object be a winter 's occupation and a winter 's 
 home , there be no time to lose . her experience of short hiring 
 have be such that she be determined to accept no more . 

 thus she go forward from farm to farm in the direction of the place 
 whence Marian have write to she , which she determine to make use of 
 as a last shift only , its rumour stringency be the reverse of 
 tempting . first she inquire for the light kind of employment , 
 and , as acceptance in any variety of these grow hopeless , apply 
 next for the less light , till , begin with the dairy and poultry 
 tendance that she like well , she end with the heavy and course 
 pursuit which she like least - work on arable land : work of such 
 roughness , indeed , as she would never have deliberately voluteere 
 for . 

 towards the second evening she reach the irregular chalk table - land 
 or plateau , bosom with semi - globular tumuli - as if Cybele the 
 many - breasted be supinely extend there - which stretch between 
 the valley of her birth and the valley of her love . 

 here the air be dry and cold , and the long cart - road be blow 
 white and dusty within a few hour after rain . there be few tree , 
 or none , those that would have grow in the hedge be mercilessly 
 plash down with the quickset by the tenant - farmer , the natural 
 enemy of tree , bush , and brake . in the middle distance ahead of 
 she she could see the summit of Bulbarrow and of Nettlecombe Tout , 
 and they seem friendly . they have a low and unassuming aspect from 
 this upland , though as approach on the other side from Blackmoor 
 in her childhood they be as lofty bastion against the sky . 
 southerly , at many mile ' distance , and over the hill and ridge 
 coastward , she could discern a surface like polished steel : it be 
 the English Channel at a point far out towards France . 

 before she , in a slight depression , be the remain of a village . 
 she have , in fact , reach Flintcomb - Ash , the place of Marian 's 
 sojourn . there seem to be no help for it ; hither she be doom to 
 come . the stubborn soil around she show plainly enough that the 
 kind of labour in demand here be of the rough kind ; but it be 
 time to rest from search , and she resolve to stay , particularly 
 as it begin to rain . at the entrance to the village be a cottage 
 whose gable jut into the road , and before apply for a lodging 
 she stand under its shelter , and watch the evening close in . 

 " who would think I be Mrs Angel Clare ! " she say . 

 the wall feel warm to her back and shoulder , and she find that 
 immediately within the gable be the cottage fireplace , the heat of 
 which come through the brick . she warm her hand upon they , and 
 also put her cheek - red and moist with the drizzle - against their 
 comfort surface . the wall seem to be the only friend she have . 
 she have so little wish to leave it that she could have stay there 
 all night . 

 Tess could hear the occupant of the cottage - gather together after 
 their day 's labour - talk to each other within , and the rattle of 
 their supper - plate be also audible . but in the village - street she 
 have see no soul as yet . the solitude be at last break by the 
 approach of one feminine figure , who , though the evening be cold , 
 wear the print gown and the tilt - bonnet of summer time . tess 
 instinctively think it might be marian , and when she come near 
 enough to be distinguishable in the gloom , surely enough it be 
 she . Marian be even stout and red in the face than formerly , 
 and decidedly shabby in attire . at any previous period of her 
 existence Tess would hardly have care to renew the acquaintance in 
 such condition ; but her loneliness be excessive , and she respond 
 readily to Marian 's greeting . 

 Marian be quite respectful in her inquiry , but seem much move 
 by the fact that Tess should still continue in no well condition 
 than at first ; though she have dimly hear of the separation . 

 " Tess - Mrs Clare - the dear wife of dear he ! and be it really so bad 
 as this , my child ? why be your cwomely face tie up in such a way ? 
 anybody be beat ' ee ? not he ? " 

 " no , no , no ! I merely do it not to be clipse or colle , Marian . " 

 she pull off in disgust a bandage which could suggest such wild 
 thought . 

 " and you have   get no collar on "   Tess have be accustom to wear a 
 little white collar at the dairy . 

 " I know it , Marian . " 

 " you have   lose it travel . " 

 " I have   not lose it . the truth be , I do not   care anything about my 
 look ; and so I do not   put it on . " 

 " and you do not   wear your wedding - ring ? " 

 " yes , I do ; but not in public . I wear it round my neck on a ribbon . 
 I do not   wish people to think who I be by marriage , or that I be 
 marry at all ; it would be so awkward while I lead my present life . " 

 Marian pause . 

 " but you be a gentleman 's wife ; and it seem hardly fair that you 
 should live like this ! " 

 " o yes it be , quite fair ; though I be very unhappy . " 

 " well , well . he marry you - and you can be unhappy ! " 

 " wife be unhappy sometimes ; from no fault of their husband - from 
 their own . " 

 " you have   no fault , deary ; that I be sure of . and he be none . so it 
 must be something outside ye both . " 

 " marian , dear Marian , will you do I a good turn without ask 
 question ? my husband have go abroad , and somehow I have overrun my 
 allowance , so that I have to fall back upon my old work for a time . 
 do not call I Mrs Clare , but Tess , as before . do they want a hand 
 here ? " 

 " o yes ; they will take one always , because few care to come . ' tis a 
 starve - acre place . corn and swede be all they grow . though I be 
 here myself , I feel ' tis a pity for such as you to come . " 

 " but you use to be as good a dairywoman as I. " 

 " yes ; but I have   get out o ' that since I take to drink . Lord , that be 
 the only comfort I have   get now ! if you engage , you will be set 
 swede - hacking . that be what I be do ; but you will not   like it . " 

 " o - anything ! will you speak for I ? " 

 " you will do well by speak for yourself . " 

 " very well . now , Marian , remember - nothing about HIM if I get the 
 place . I do not   wish to bring his name down to the dirt . " 

 Marian , who be really a trustworthy girl though of coarser grain 
 than Tess , promise anything she ask . 

 " this be pay - night , " she say , " and if you be to come with I you 
 would know at once . I be real sorry that you be not happy ; but ' tis 
 because he be away , I know . you could not   be unhappy if he be here , 
 even if he gie'd ye no money - even if he use you like a drudge . " 

 " that be true ; I could not ! " 

 they walk on together and soon reach the farmhouse , which be 
 almost sublime in its dreariness . there be not a tree within sight ; 
 there be not , at this season , a green pasture - nothing but fallow 
 and turnip everywhere , in large field divide by hedge plash to 
 unrelieved level . 

 Tess wait outside the door of the farmhouse till the group of 
 workfolk have receive their wage , and then Marian introduce she . 
 the farmer himself , it appear , be not at home , but his wife , who 
 represent he this evening , make no objection to hire Tess , on 
 she agree to remain till Old Lady - Day . female field - labour be 
 seldom offer now , and its cheapness make it profitable for task 
 which woman could perform as readily as man . 

 have sign the agreement , there be nothing more for Tess to do 
 at present than to get a lodging , and she find one in the house at 
 whose gable - wall she have warm herself . it be a poor subsistence 
 that she have ensure , but it would afford a shelter for the winter 
 at any rate . 

 that night she write to inform her parent of her new address , in 
 case a letter should arrive at Marlott from her husband . but she 
 do not tell they of the sorriness of her situation : it might have 
 bring reproach upon he . 



 XLIII 


 there be no exaggeration in Marian 's definition of Flintcomb - Ash 
 farm as a starve - acre place . the single fat thing on the soil be 
 marian herself ; and she be an importation . of the three class of 
 village , the village care for by its lord , the village care for by 
 itself , and the village uncare for either by itself or by its lord 
  in other word , the village of a resident squire 's tenantry , the 
 village of free- or copy - holder , and the absentee - owner 's village , 
 farm with the land   this place , Flintcomb - Ash , be the third . 

 but Tess set to work . Patience , that blending of moral courage with 
 physical timidity , be now no long a minor feature in Mrs Angel 
 Clare ; and it sustain she . 

 the swede - field in which she and her companion be set hack be 
 a stretch of a hundred odd acre in one patch , on the high ground 
 of the farm , rise above stony lanchet or lynchet - the outcrop of 
 siliceous vein in the chalk formation , compose of myriad of loose 
 white flint in bulbous , cuspe , and phallic shape . the upper half 
 of each turnip have be eat off by the live - stock , and it be the 
 business of the two woman to grub up the low or earthy half of the 
 root with a hooked fork call a hacker , that it might be eat also . 
 every leaf of the vegetable have already be consume , the whole 
 field be in colour a desolate drab ; it be a complexion without 
 feature , as if a face , from chin to brow , should be only an expanse 
 of skin . the sky wear , in another colour , the same likeness ; a white 
 vacuity of countenance with the lineament go . so these two upper 
 and nether visage confront each other all day long , the white face 
 look down on the brown face , and the brown face look up at the 
 white face , without anything stand between they but the two girl 
 crawl over the surface of the former like fly . 

 nobody come near they , and their movement show a mechanical 
 regularity ; their form stand enshroud in Hessian " wropper " - 
 sleeve brown pinafore , tie behind to the bottom , to keep their 
 gown from blow about - scant skirt reveal boot that reach 
 high up the ankle , and yellow sheepskin glove with gauntlet . the 
 pensive character which the curtain hood lend to their bent head 
 would have remind the observer of some early italian conception of 
 the two Marys . 

 they work on hour after hour , unconscious of the forlorn aspect 
 they bear in the landscape , not think of the justice or injustice 
 of their lot . even in such a position as theirs it be possible 
 to exist in a dream . in the afternoon the rain come on again , and 
 Marian say that they need not work any more . but if they do not 
 work they would not be pay ; so they work on . it be so high a 
 situation , this field , that the rain have no occasion to fall , but 
 race along horizontally upon the yell wind , stick into they 
 like glass splinter till they be wet through . Tess have not 
 know till now what be really mean by that . there be degree of 
 dampness , and a very little be call be wet through in common 
 talk . but to stand work slowly in a field , and feel the creep of 
 rain - water , first in leg and shoulder , then on hip and head , then 
 at back , front , and side , and yet to work on till the leaden light 
 diminishe and mark that the sun be down , demand a distinct modicum 
 of stoicism , even of valour . 

 yet they do not feel the wetness so much as might be suppose . they 
 be both young , and they be talk of the time when they live 
 and love together at Talbothays Dairy , that happy green tract of 
 land where summer have be liberal in her gift ; in substance to 
 all , emotionally to these . Tess would fain not have converse with 
 Marian of the man who be legally , if not actually , her husband ; 
 but the irresistible fascination of the subject betray she into 
 reciprocate Marian 's remark . and thus , as have be say , though 
 the damp curtain of their bonnet flap smartly into their face , 
 and their wrapper clung about they to wearisomeness , they live all 
 this afternoon in memory of green , sunny , romantic talbothay . 

 " you can see a gleam of a hill within a few mile o ' Froom Valley 
 from here when ' tis fine , " say Marian . 

 " ah ! can you ? " say Tess , awake to the new value of this locality . 

 so the two force be at work here as everywhere , the inherent will 
 to enjoy , and the circumstantial will against enjoyment . Marian 's 
 will have a method of assist itself by take from her pocket as 
 the afternoon wear on a pint bottle cork with white rag , from which 
 she invite Tess to drink . Tess 's unassisted power of dream , 
 however , be enough for her sublimation at present , she decline 
 except the mere sip , and then Marian take a pull from the spirit . 

 " I have   get use to it , " she say , " and can not   leave it off now . ' tis 
 my only comfort - you see I lose he : you do not ; and you can do 
 without it perhaps . " 

 Tess think her loss as great as Marian 's , but uphold by the dignity 
 of be Angel 's wife , in the letter at least , she accept Marian 's 
 differentiation . 

 amid this scene Tess slave in the morning frost and in 
 the afternoon rain . when it be not swede - grub it be 
 swede - trimming , in which process they slice off the earth and the 
 fibre with a bill - hook before store the root for future use . at 
 this occupation they could shelter themselves by a thatched hurdle if 
 it rain ; but if it be frosty even their thick leather glove could 
 not prevent the frozen mass they handle from bite their finger . 
 still Tess hop . she have a conviction that soon or later the 
 magnanimity which she persist in reckon as a chief ingredient 
 of Clare 's character would lead he to rejoin she . 

 Marian , prim to a humorous mood , would discover the queer - shape 
 flint aforesaid , and shriek with laughter , Tess remain severely 
 obtuse . they often look across the country to where the Var or 
 Froom be know to stretch , even though they might not be able to see 
 it ; and , fix their eye on the cloaking gray mist , imagine the 
 old time they have spend out there . 

 " ah , " say Marian , " how I should like another or two of our old set 
 to come here ! then we could bring up talbothay every day here 
 afield , and talk of he , and of what nice time we have there , and o ' 
 the old thing we use to know , and make it all come back a'most , in 
 seem ! " Marian 's eye soften , and her voice grow vague as the 
 vision return . " I will write to Izz Huett , " she say . " she be 
 biding at home do nothing now , I know , and I will tell she we be 
 here , and ask she to come ; and perhaps Retty be well enough now . " 

 Tess have nothing to say against the proposal , and the next she hear 
 of this plan for import old Talbothays ' joy be two or three day 
 later , when Marian inform she that Izz have reply to her inquiry , 
 and have promise to come if she could . 

 there have not be such a winter for year . it come on in stealthy 
 and measured glide , like the move of a chess - player . one morning 
 the few lonely tree and the thorn of the hedgerow appear as if 
 they have put off a vegetable for an animal integument . every twig 
 be cover with a white nap as of fur grow from the rind during the 
 night , give it four time its usual stoutness ; the whole bush or 
 tree form a star sketch in white line on the mournful gray 
 of the sky and horizon . Cobwebs reveal their presence on shed 
 and wall where none have ever be observe till bring out into 
 visibility by the crystallize atmosphere , hang like loop of 
 white worst from salient point of the out - house , post , and 
 gate . 

 after this season of congeal dampness come a spell of dry frost , 
 when strange bird from behind the North Pole begin to arrive 
 silently on the upland of Flintcomb - Ash ; gaunt spectral creature 
 with tragical eye - eye which have witness scene of cataclysmal 
 horror in inaccessible polar region of a magnitude such as no human 
 being have ever conceive , in curdle temperature that no man could 
 endure ; which have behold the crash of iceberg and the slide of 
 snow - hill by the shoot light of the Aurora ; be half blind 
 by the whirl of colossal storm and terraqueous distortion ; and 
 retain the expression of feature that such scene have engender . 
 these nameless bird come quite near to Tess and Marian , but of 
 all they have see which humanity would never see , they bring no 
 account . the traveller 's ambition to tell be not theirs , and , with 
 dumb impassivity , they dismiss experience which they do not 
 value for the immediate incident of this homely upland - the trivial 
 movement of the two girl in disturb the clod with their hacker 
 so as to uncover something or other that these visitant relish as 
 food . 

 then one day a peculiar quality invade the air of this open country . 
 there come a moisture which be not of rain , and a cold which be not 
 of frost . it chill the eyeball of the twain , make their brow 
 ache , penetrate to their skeleton , affect the surface of the 
 body less than its core . they know that it mean snow , and in the 
 night the snow come . Tess , who continue to live at the cottage with 
 the warm gable that cheer any lonely pedestrian who pause beside 
 it , awake in the night , and hear above the thatch noise which 
 seem to signify that the roof have turn itself into a gymnasium 
 of all the wind . when she light her lamp to get up in the morning 
 she find that the snow have blow through a chink in the casement , 
 form a white cone of the fine powder against the inside , and have 
 also come down the chimney , so that it lie sole - deep upon the floor , 
 on which her shoe leave track when she move about . without , the 
 storm drive so fast as to create a snow - mist in the kitchen ; but as 
 yet it be too dark out - of - door to see anything . 

 Tess know that it be impossible to go on with the swede ; and by 
 the time she have finish breakfast beside the solitary little lamp , 
 Marian arrive to tell she that they be to join the rest of the 
 woman at reed - drawing in the barn till the weather change . as soon , 
 therefore , as the uniform cloak of darkness without begin to turn 
 to a disorder medley of gray , they blow out the lamp , wrap 
 themselves up in their thick pinner , tie their woollen cravat 
 round their neck and across their chest , and start for the barn . 
 the snow have follow the bird from the polar basin as a white 
 pillar of a cloud , and individual flake could not be see . the 
 blast smell of iceberg , arctic sea , whale , and white bear , 
 carry the snow so that it lick the land but do not deepen on 
 it . they trudge onwards with slant body through the flossy 
 field , keep as well as they could in the shelter of hedge , 
 which , however , act as strainer rather than screen . the air , 
 afflict to pallor with the hoary multitude that infest it , 
 twist and spin they eccentrically , suggest an achromatic chaos 
 of thing . but both the young woman be fairly cheerful ; such 
 weather on a dry upland be not in itself dispirit . 

 " ha - ha ! the cunning northern bird know this be come , " say 
 Marian . " depend upon't , they keep just in front o't all the way from 
 the North Star . your husband , my dear , be , I make no doubt , have 
 scorch weather all this time . Lord , if he could only see his 
 pretty wife now ! not that this weather hurt your beauty at all - in 
 fact , it rather do it good . " 

 " you must not   talk about he to I , Marian , " say Tess severely . 

 " well , but - surely you care for'n ! do you ? " 

 instead of answer , Tess , with tear in her eye , impulsively face 
 in the direction in which she imagine South America to lie , and , 
 put up her lip , blow out a passionate kiss upon the snowy wind . 

 " well , well , I know you do . but ' pon my body , it be a rum life for 
 a married couple ! there - I will not   say another word ! well , as for 
 the weather , it will not   hurt we in the wheat - barn ; but reed - drawing be 
 fearful hard work - bad than swede - hack . I can stand it because 
 I be stout ; but you be slim than I. I can not   think why maister 
 should have set ' ee at it . " 

 they reach the wheat - barn and enter it . one end of the long 
 structure be full of corn ; the middle be where the reed - drawing be 
 carry on , and there have already be place in the reed - press the 
 evening before as many sheaf of wheat as would be sufficient for 
 the woman to draw from during the day . 

 " why , here 's Izz ! " say Marian . 

 izz it be , and she come forward . she have walk all the way from 
 her mother 's home on the previous afternoon , and , not deem the 
 distance so great , have be belate , arrive , however , just before 
 the snow begin , and sleep at the alehouse . the farmer have agree 
 with her mother at market to take she on if she come to - day , and she 
 have be afraid to disappoint he by delay . 

 in addition to Tess , Marian , and Izz , there be two woman from a 
 neighbouring village ; two amazonian sister , whom tess with a start 
 remember as Dark Car , the Queen of Spades , and her junior , the 
 Queen of Diamonds - those who have try to fight with she in the 
 midnight quarrel at Trantridge . they show no recognition of she , 
 and possibly have none , for they have be under the influence of 
 liquor on that occasion , and be only temporary sojourner there 
 as here . they do all kind of man 's work by preference , include 
 well - sink , hedging , ditching , and excavating , without any sense of 
 fatigue . noted reed - drawer be they too , and look round upon the 
 other three with some superciliousness . 

 put on their glove , all set to work in a row in front of the 
 press , an erection form of two post connect by a cross - beam , 
 under which the sheaf to be draw from be lay ear outward , the 
 beam be peg down by pin in the upright , and lower as the 
 sheaf diminish . 

 the day harden in colour , the light come in at the barndoor 
 upwards from the snow instead of downward from the sky . the girl 
 pull handful after handful from the press ; but by reason of the 
 presence of the strange woman , who be recount scandal , Marian 
 and Izz could not at first talk of old time as they wish to do . 
 presently they hear the muffled tread of a horse , and the farmer 
 ride up to the barndoor . when he have dismount he come close to 
 Tess , and remain look musingly at the side of her face . she have 
 not turn at first , but his fix attitude lead she to look round , 
 when she perceive that her employer be the native of Trantridge 
 from whom she have take flight on the high - road because of his 
 allusion to her history . 

 he wait till she have carry the draw bundle to the pile outside , 
 when he say , " so you be the young woman who take my civility in such 
 ill part ? be drown if I do not   think you might be as soon as I 
 hear of your be hire ! well , you think you have get the well 
 of I the first time at the inn with your fancy - man , and the second 
 time on the road , when you bolt ; but now I think I have   get the 
 well you . " he conclude with a hard laugh . 

 Tess , between the Amazons and the farmer , like a bird catch in a 
 clap - net , return no answer , continue to pull the straw . she 
 could read character sufficiently well to know by this time that she 
 have nothing to fear from her employer 's gallantry ; it be rather the 
 tyranny induce by his mortification at Clare 's treatment of he . 
 upon the whole she prefer that sentiment in man and feel brave 
 enough to endure it . 

 " you think I be in love with ' ee I suppose ? some woman be such 
 fool , to take every look as serious earnest . but there be nothing 
 like a winter afield for take that nonsense out o ' young wench ' 
 head ; and you have   sign and agree till Lady - Day . now , be you 
 go to beg my pardon ? " 

 " I think you ought to beg mine . " 

 " very well - as you like . but we will see which be master here . be 
 they all the sheaf you have   do to - day ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " ' tis a very poor show . just see what they have   do over there " 
  pointing to the two stalwart woman . " the rest , too , have do 
 well than you . " 

 " they have   all practise it before , and I have not . and I think it 
 make no difference to you as it be task work , and we be only pay 
 for what we do . " 

 " oh , but it do . I want the barn clear . " 

 " I be go to work all the afternoon instead of leave at two as 
 the other will do . " 

 he look sullenly at she and go away . Tess feel that she could 
 not have come to a much bad place ; but anything be well than 
 gallantry . when two o'clock arrive the professional reed - drawer 
 toss off the last half - pint in their flagon , put down their hook , 
 tie their last sheaf , and go away . Marian and Izz would have 
 do likewise , but on hear that Tess mean to stay , to make up 
 by long hour for her lack of skill , they would not leave she . 
 look out at the snow , which still fall , Marian exclaim , " now , 
 we have   get it all to ourselves . " and so at last the conversation 
 turn to their old experience at the dairy ; and , of course , the 
 incident of their affection for Angel Clare . 

 " Izz and Marian , " say Mrs Angel Clare , with a dignity which be 
 extremely touching , see how very little of a wife she be : " I 
 can not   join in talk with you now , as I use to do , about Mr Clare ; you 
 will see that I can not ; because , although he be go away from I for 
 the present , he be my husband . " 

 Izz be by nature the saucy and most caustic of all the four girl 
 who have love Clare . " he be a very splendid lover , no doubt , " she 
 say ; " but I do not   think he be a too fond husband to go away from you 
 so soon . " 

 " he have to go - he be oblige to go , to see about the land over 
 there ! " plead Tess . 

 " he might have tide ' ee over the winter . " 

 " ah - that be owe to an accident - a misunderstanding ; and we will not 
 argue it , " Tess answer , with tearfulness in her word . " perhaps 
 there be a good deal to be say for he ! he do not go away , like 
 some husband , without tell I ; and I can always find out where 
 he be . " 

 after this they continue for some long time in a reverie , as they 
 go on seize the ear of corn , draw out the straw , gather 
 it under their arm , and cut off the ear with their bill - hook , 
 nothing sound in the barn but the swish of the straw and the 
 crunch of the hook . then Tess suddenly flag , and sink down upon 
 the heap of wheat - ear at her foot . 

 " I know you would not   be able to stand it ! " cry Marian . " it want 
 hard flesh than yours for this work . " 

 just then the farmer enter . " oh , that be how you get on when I be 
 away , " he say to she . 

 " but it be my own loss , " she plead . " not your . " 

 " I want it finish , " he say doggedly , as he cross the barn and 
 go out at the other door . 

 " do not   ' ee mind he , there be a dear , " say Marian . " I have   work here 
 before . now you go and lie down there , and Izz and I will make up 
 your number . " 

 " I do not   like to let you do that . I be tall than you , too . " 

 however , she be so overcome that she consent to lie down awhile , 
 and recline on a heap of pull - tail - the refuse after the straight 
 straw have be draw - throw up at the further side of the barn . she 
 succumbing have be as largely own to agitation at the re - open 
 the subject of her separation from her husband as to the hard work . 
 she lie in a state of percipience without volition , and the rustle of 
 the straw and the cutting of the ear by the other have the weight of 
 bodily touch . 

 she could hear from her corner , in addition to these noise , the 
 murmur of their voice . she feel certain that they be continue 
 the subject already broach , but their voice be so low that she 
 could not catch the word . at last Tess grow more and more anxious 
 to know what they be say , and , persuade herself that she feel 
 well , she get up and resume work . 

 then Izz Huett break down . she have walk more than a dozen mile 
 the previous evening , have go to bed at midnight , and have rise 
 again at five o'clock . marian alone , thank to her bottle of liquor 
 and her stoutness of build , stand the strain upon back and arm 
 without suffer . Tess urge Izz to leave off , agree , as she 
 feel well , to finish the day without she , and make equal division 
 of the number of sheaf . 

 Izz accept the offer gratefully , and disappear through the great 
 door into the snowy track to her lodge . Marian , as be the case 
 every afternoon at this time on account of the bottle , begin to feel 
 in a romantic vein . 

 " I should not have think it of he - never ! " she say in a dreamy 
 tone . " and I love he so ! I do not   mind his have you . but this 
 about Izz be too bad ! " 

 Tess , in her start at the word , narrowly miss cut off a finger 
 with the bill - hook . 

 " be it about my husband ? " she stammer . 

 " well , yes . Izz say , ' do not   ' ee tell she ' ; but I be sure I can not 
 help it ! it be what he want Izz to do . he want she to go off 
 to Brazil with he . " 

 Tess 's face fade as white as the scene without , and its curve 
 straighten . " and do Izz refuse to go ? " she ask . 

 " I do not   know . anyhow he change his mind . " 

 " Pooh - then he do not   mean it ! ' twas just a man 's jest ! " 

 " yes he do ; for he drive she a good - way towards the station . " 

 " he do not   take she ! " 

 they pull on in silence till Tess , without any premonitory 
 symptom , burst out cry . 

 " there ! " say Marian . " now I wish I have not   tell ' ee ! " 

 " no . it be a very good thing that you have do ! I have be live 
 on in a thirtover , lackaday way , and have not see what it may lead 
 to ! I ought to have send he a letter oftener . he say I could not 
 go to he , but he do not   say I be not to write as often as I like . 
 I will not   dally like this any long ! I have be very wrong and 
 neglectful in leave everything to be do by he ! " 

 the dim light in the barn grow dimmer , and they could see to work no 
 long . when Tess have reach home that evening , and have enter 
 into the privacy of her little white - wash chamber , she begin 
 impetuously write a letter to Clare . but fall into doubt , she 
 could not finish it . afterwards she take the ring from the ribbon on 
 which she wear it next her heart , and retain it on her finger all 
 night , as if to fortify herself in the sensation that she be really 
 the wife of this elusive lover of her , who could propose that Izz 
 should go with he abroad , so shortly after he have leave she . know 
 that , how could she write entreaty to he , or show that she care 
 for he any more ? 



 XLIV 


 by the disclosure in the barn her thought be lead anew in the 
 direction which they have take more than once of late - to the distant 
 Emminster vicarage . it be through her husband 's parent that she 
 have be charge to send a letter to Clare if she desire ; and to 
 write to they direct if in difficulty . but that sense of she have 
 morally no claim upon he have always lead Tess to suspend her impulse 
 to send these note ; and to the family at the vicarage , therefore , 
 as to her own parent since her marriage , she be virtually 
 non - existent . this self - effacement in both direction have be quite 
 in consonance with her independent character of desire nothing 
 by way of favour or pity to which she be not entitle on a fair 
 consideration of her desert . she have set herself to stand or fall 
 by her quality , and to waive such merely technical claim upon a 
 strange family as have be establish for she by the flimsy fact of 
 a member of that family , in a season of impulse , write his name in 
 a church - book beside her . 

 but now that she be sting to a fever by Izz 's tale , there be a 
 limit to her power of renunciation . why have her husband not write 
 to she ? he have distinctly imply that he would at least let she 
 know of the locality to which he have journey ; but he have not send a 
 line to notify his address . be he really indifferent ? but be he 
 ill ? be it for she to make some advance ? surely she might summon 
 the courage of solicitude , call at the Vicarage for intelligence , and 
 express her grief at his silence . if Angel 's father be the good 
 man she have hear he represent to be , he would be able to enter 
 into her heart - starve situation . her social hardship she could 
 conceal . 

 to leave the farm on a week - day be not in her power ; Sunday be 
 the only possible opportunity . Flintcomb - Ash be in the middle 
 of the cretaceous tableland over which no railway have climb as 
 yet , it would be necessary to walk . and the distance be fifteen 
 mile each way she would have to allow herself a long day for the 
 undertaking by rise early . 

 a fortnight later , when the snow have go , and have be follow by 
 a hard black frost , she take advantage of the state of the road to 
 try the experiment . at four o'clock that Sunday morning she come 
 downstairs and step out into the starlight . the weather be still 
 favourable , the ground ring under her foot like an anvil . 

 Marian and Izz be much interested in her excursion , know that 
 the journey concern her husband . their lodging be in a cottage 
 a little far along the lane , but they come and assist Tess 
 in her departure , and argue that she should dress up in her very 
 prettiest guise to captivate the heart of her parent - in - law ; though 
 she , know of the austere and calvinistic tenet of old Mr Clare , 
 be indifferent , and even doubtful . a year have now elapse since 
 her sad marriage , but she have preserve sufficient drapery from 
 the wreck of she then full wardrobe to clothe she very charmingly as 
 a simple country girl with no pretension to recent fashion ; a soft 
 gray woollen gown , with white crape quille against the pink skin of 
 her face and neck , and a black velvet jacket and hat . 

 " ' tis a thousand pity your husband can not   see ' ee now - you do look 
 a real beauty ! " say Izz Huett , regard Tess as she stand on 
 the threshold between the steely starlight without and the yellow 
 candlelight within . Izz speak with a magnanimous abandonment of 
 herself to the situation ; she could not be - no woman with a heart 
 big than a hazel - nut could be - antagonistic to Tess in her 
 presence , the influence which she exercise over those of her own sex 
 being of a warmth and strength quite unusual , curiously overpower 
 the less worthy feminine feeling of spite and rivalry . 

 with a final tug and touch here , and a slight brush there , they let 
 she go ; and she be absorb into the pearly air of the fore - dawn . 
 they hear her footstep tap along the hard road as she step out 
 to her full pace . even Izz hop she would win , and , though without 
 any particular respect for her own virtue , feel glad that she have 
 be prevent wrong her friend when momentarily tempt by Clare . 

 it be a year ago , all but a day , that Clare have marry Tess , and 
 only a few day less than a year that he have be absent from she . 
 still , to start on a brisk walk , and on such an errand as her , on a 
 dry clear wintry morning , through the rarefied air of these chalky 
 hogs'-backs , be not depressing ; and there be no doubt that her dream 
 at start be to win the heart of her mother - in - law , tell her whole 
 history to that lady , enlist she on her side , and so gain back the 
 truant . 

 in time she reach the edge of the vast escarpment below which 
 stretch the loamy Vale of Blackmoor , now lie misty and still 
 in the dawn . instead of the colourless air of the upland , the 
 atmosphere down there be a deep blue . instead of the great 
 enclosure of a hundred acre in which she be now accustomed to 
 toil , there be little field below she of less than half - a - dozen 
 acre , so numerous that they look from this height like the mesh 
 of a net . here the landscape be whitey - brown ; down there , as in 
 Froom Valley , it be always green . yet it be in that vale that her 
 sorrow have take shape , and she do not love it as formerly . beauty 
 to she , as to all who have feel , lie not in the thing , but in what 
 the thing symbolize . 

 keep the Vale on her right , she steer steadily westward ; pass 
 above the Hintocks , cross at right - angle the high - road from 
 Sherton - Abbas to Casterbridge , and skirt Dogbury Hill and 
 High - Stoy , with the dell between they call " The Devil 's kitchen " . 
 still follow the elevated way she reach Cross - in - Hand , where 
 the stone pillar stand desolate and silent , to mark the site of a 
 miracle , or murder , or both . three mile far she cut across the 
 straight and deserted roman road call Long - Ash Lane ; leave which 
 as soon as she reach it she dip down a hill by a transverse lane 
 into the small town or village of Evershead , be now about halfway 
 over the distance . she make a halt here , and breakfast a second 
 time , heartily enough - not at the Sow - and - Acorn , for she avoid 
 inn , but at a cottage by the church . 

 the second half of her journey be through a more gentle country , by 
 way of Benvill Lane . but as the mileage lessen between she and the 
 spot of her pilgrimage , so do Tess 's confidence decrease , and her 
 enterprise loom out more formidably . she see her purpose in such 
 star line , and the landscape so faintly , that she be sometimes 
 in danger of lose her way . however , about noon she pause by a 
 gate on the edge of the basin in which emminster and its vicarage 
 lay . 

 the square tower , beneath which she know that at that moment the 
 Vicar and his congregation be gather , have a severe look in 
 her eye . she wish that she have somehow contrive to come on a 
 week - day . such a good man might be prejudice against a woman who 
 have choose Sunday , never realize the necessity of her case . 
 but it be incumbent upon she to go on now . she take off the thick 
 boot in which she have walk thus far , put on her pretty thin one 
 of patent leather , and , stuff the former into the hedge by the 
 gatepost where she might readily find they again , descend the hill ; 
 the freshness of colour she have derive from the keen air thin 
 away in spite of she as she draw near the parsonage . 

 Tess hop for some accident that might favour she , but nothing 
 favour she . the shrub on the Vicarage lawn rustle uncomfortably 
 in the frosty breeze ; she could not feel by any stretch of 
 imagination , dress to her high as she be , that the house be 
 the residence of near relation ; and yet nothing essential , in nature 
 or emotion , divide she from they : in pain , pleasure , thought , 
 birth , death , and after - death , they be the same . 

 she nerve herself by an effort , enter the swing - gate , and rang 
 the door - bell . the thing be do ; there could be no retreat . no ; 
 the thing be not do . nobody answer to her ringing . the effort 
 have to be rise to and make again . she ring a second time , and the 
 agitation of the act , couple with her weariness after the fifteen 
 mile ' walk , lead her support herself while she wait by rest she 
 hand on her hip , and her elbow against the wall of the porch . the 
 wind be so nipping that the ivy - leaf have become wizene and gray , 
 each tap incessantly upon its neighbour with a disquieting stir 
 of her nerve . a piece of blood - stain paper , catch up from some 
 meat - buyer 's dust - heap , beat up and down the road without the gate ; 
 too flimsy to rest , too heavy to fly away ; and a few straw keep it 
 company . 

 the second peal have be loud , and still nobody come . then she 
 walk out of the porch , open the gate , and pass through . and 
 though she look dubiously at the house - front as if incline to 
 return , it be with a breath of rely that she close the gate . a 
 feeling haunt she that she might have be recognize   though how 
 she could not tell , and order been give not to admit she . 

 Tess go as far as the corner . she have do all she could do ; but 
 determine not to escape present trepidation at the expense of future 
 distress , she walk back again quite past the house , look up at 
 all the window . 

 ah - the explanation be that they be all at church , every one . she 
 remember her husband say that his father always insist upon 
 the household , servant include , go to morning - service , and , 
 as a consequence , eat cold food when they come home . it be , 
 therefore , only necessary to wait till the service be over . she 
 would not make herself conspicuous by wait on the spot , and she 
 start to get past the church into the lane . but as she reach the 
 churchyard - gate the people begin pour out , and Tess find herself 
 in the midst of they . 

 the Emminster congregation look at she as only a congregation of 
 small country - townsfolk walk home at its leisure can look at a 
 woman out of the common whom it perceive to be a stranger . she 
 quicken her pace , and ascend the the road by which she have come , 
 to find a retreat between its hedge till the Vicar 's family should 
 have lunch , and it might be convenient for they to receive she . 
 she soon distance the churchgoer , except two youngish man , who , 
 link arm - in - arm , be beat up behind she at a quick step . 

 as they draw near she could hear their voice engage in earnest 
 discourse , and , with the natural quickness of a woman in her 
 situation , do not fail to recognize in those noise the quality 
 of her husband 's tone . the pedestrian be his two brother . 
 forget all her plan , Tess 's one dread be lest they should 
 overtake she now , in her disorganized condition , before she be 
 prepared to confront they ; for though she feel that they could not 
 identify she , she instinctively dread their scrutiny . the more 
 briskly they walk , the more briskly walk she . they be plainly 
 bent upon take a short quick stroll before go indoor to lunch 
 or dinner , to restore warmth to limb chill with sit through a 
 long service . 

 only one person have precede Tess up the hill - a ladylike young 
 woman , somewhat interesting , though , perhaps , a trifle guindee 
 and prudish . Tess have nearly overtake she when the speed of her 
 brother - in - law bring they so nearly behind she back that she could 
 hear every word of their conversation . they say nothing , however , 
 which particularly interested she till , observe the young lady 
 still far in front , one of they remark , " there be Mercy Chant . 
 let we overtake she . " 

 Tess know the name . it be the woman who have be destine for 
 Angel 's life - companion by his and her parent , and whom he probably 
 would have marry but for her intrusive self . she would have know 
 as much without previous information if she have wait a moment , for 
 one of the brother proceed to say : " ah ! poor Angel , poor Angel ! 
 I never see that nice girl without more and more regret his 
 precipitancy in throw himself away upon a dairymaid , or whatever 
 she may be . it be a queer business , apparently . whether she have 
 join he yet or not I do not   know ; but she have not do so some 
 month ago when I hear from he . " 

 " I can not   say . he never tell I anything nowadays . his 
 ill - consider marriage seem to have complete that estrangement 
 from I which be begin by his extraordinary opinion . " 

 Tess beat up the long hill still fast ; but she could not outwalk 
 they without exciting notice . at last they outspe she altogether , 
 and pass she by . the young lady still far ahead hear their 
 footstep and turn . then there be a greeting and a shaking of 
 hand , and the three go on together . 

 they soon reach the summit of the hill , and , evidently intend 
 this point to be the limit of their promenade , slacken pace and 
 turn all three aside to the gate whereat Tess have pause an hour 
 before that time to reconnoitre the town before descend into it . 
 during their discourse one of the clerical brother probe the hedge 
 carefully with his umbrella , and drag something to light . 

 " here be a pair of old boot , " he say . " throw away , I suppose , by 
 some tramp or other . " 

 " some imposter who wish to come into the town barefoot , perhaps , 
 and so excite our sympathy , " say Miss Chant . " yes , it must have 
 be , for they be excellent walking - boots - by no mean wear out . 
 what a wicked thing to do ! I will carry they home for some poor 
 person . " 

 Cuthbert Clare , who have be the one to find they , pick they up for 
 she with the crook of his stick ; and Tess 's boot be appropriate . 

 she , who have hear this , walk past under the screen of her woollen 
 veil till , presently look back , she perceive that the church 
 party have leave the gate with her boot and retreat down the hill . 

 thereupon our heroine resume her walk . tear , blind tear , be 
 run down her face . she know that it be all sentiment , all 
 baseless impressibility , which have cause she to read the scene as 
 her own condemnation ; nevertheless she could not get over it ; she 
 could not contravene in her own defenceless person all those untoward 
 omen . it be impossible to think of return to the vicarage . 
 Angel 's wife feel almost as if she have be hound up that hill like 
 a scorn thing by those - to her - superfine cleric . innocently 
 as the slight have be inflict , it be somewhat unfortunate that 
 she have encounter the son and not the father , who , despite his 
 narrowness , be far less starched and iron than they , and have to 
 the full the gift of charity . as she again think of her dusty 
 boot she almost pity those habiliment for the quizzing to which 
 they have be subject , and feel how hopeless life be for their 
 owner . 

 " ah ! " she say , still sigh in pity of herself , " they do not   know 
 that I wear those over the roughest part of the road to save these 
 pretty one he buy for I - no - they do not know it ! and they 
 do not   think that he choose the colour o ' my pretty frock - no - how 
 could they ? if they have know perhaps they would not have care , 
 for they do not   care much for he , poor thing ! " 

 then she grieve for the beloved man whose conventional standard of 
 judgement have cause she all these latter sorrow ; and she go she 
 way without know that the great misfortune of her life be this 
 feminine loss of courage at the last and critical moment through she 
 estimate her father - in - law by his son . her present condition be 
 precisely one which would have enlist the sympathy of old Mr and 
 Mrs Clare . their heart go out of they at a bind towards extreme 
 case , when the subtle mental trouble of the less desperate among 
 mankind fail to win their interest or regard . in jump at 
 Publicans and sinner they would forget that a word might be say for 
 the worry of Scribes and Pharisees ; and this defect or limitation 
 might have recommend their own daughter - in - law to they at this 
 moment as a fairly choice sort of lose person for their love . 

 thereupon she begin to plod back along the road by which she have come 
 not altogether full of hope , but full of a conviction that a crisis 
 in her life be approach . no crisis , apparently , have supervene ; 
 and there be nothing leave for she to do but to continue upon that 
 starve - acre farm till she could again summon courage to face the 
 vicarage . she do , indeed , take sufficient interest in herself to 
 throw up her veil on this return journey , as if to let the world see 
 that she could at least exhibit a face such as Mercy Chant could 
 not show . but it be do with a sorry shake of the head . " it be 
 nothing - it be nothing ! " she say . " nobody love it ; nobody see it . 
 who care about the look of a castaway like I ! " 

 her journey back be rather a meander than a march . it have no 
 sprightliness , no purpose ; only a tendency . along the tedious length 
 of Benvill Lane she begin to grow tired , and she leant upon gate and 
 pause by milestone . 

 she do not enter any house till , at the seventh or eighth mile , she 
 descend the steep long hill below which lie the village or townlet 
 of Evershead , where in the morning she have breakfast with such 
 contrast expectation . the cottage by the church , in which she 
 again sit down , be almost the first at that end of the village , and 
 while the woman fetch she some milk from the pantry , Tess , look 
 down the street , perceive that the place seem quite deserted . 

 " the people be go to afternoon service , I suppose ? " she say . 

 " no , my dear , " say the old woman . " ' tis too soon for that ; the 
 bell hain't   strook out yet . they be all go to hear the preaching 
 in yonder barn . a ranter preache there between the service - an 
 excellent , fiery , christian man , they say . but , Lord , I do not   go to 
 hear'n ! what come in the regular way over the pulpit be hot enough 
 for I. " 

 Tess soon go onward into the village , her footstep echo against 
 the house as though it be a place of the dead . near the 
 central part , her echo be intrude on by other sound ; and see 
 the barn not far off the road , she guess these to be the utterance 
 of the preacher . 

 his voice become so distinct in the still clear air that she could 
 soon catch his sentence , though she be on the closed side of 
 the barn . the sermon , as might be expect , be of the extreme 
 antinomian type ; on justification by faith , as expound in the 
 theology of St Paul . this fix idea of the rhapsodist be deliver 
 with animated enthusiasm , in a manner entirely declamatory , for he 
 have plainly no skill as a dialectician . although Tess have not hear 
 the beginning of the address , she learn what the text have be from 
 its constant iteration - 


  " o foolish galatian , who hath bewitch you , that ye 
  should not obey the truth , before whose eye Jesus Christ 
  hath be evidently set forth , crucify among you ? " 


 Tess be all the more interested , as she stand listen behind , in 
 find that the preacher 's doctrine be a vehement form of the view 
 of Angel 's father , and her interest intensify when the speaker 
 begin to detail his own spiritual experience of how he have come by 
 those view . he have , he say , be the great of sinner . he have 
 scoff ; he have wantonly associate with the reckless and the lewd . 
 but a day of awakening have come , and , in a human sense , it have be 
 bring about mainly by the influence of a certain clergyman , whom he 
 have at first grossly insult ; but whose parting word have sink into 
 his heart , and have remain there , till by the grace of Heaven they 
 have work this change in he , and make he what they see he . 

 but more startling to Tess than the doctrine have be the voice , 
 which , impossible as it seem , be precisely that of Alec 
 d'Urberville . her face fix in painful suspense , she come round 
 to the front of the barn , and pass before it . the low winter sun 
 beam directly upon the great double - doore entrance on this side ; 
 one of the door be open , so that the ray stretch far in over 
 the threshing - floor to the preacher and his audience , all snugly 
 shelter from the northern breeze . the listener be entirely 
 villager , among they be the man whom she have see carry the 
 red paint - pot on a former memorable occasion . but her attention 
 be give to the central figure , who stand upon some sack of corn , 
 face the people and the door . the three o'clock sun shine full 
 upon he , and the strange enervating conviction that her seducer 
 confront she , which have be gain ground in Tess ever since she 
 have hear his word distinctly , be at last establish as a fact 
 indeed . 


 END of PHASE the FIFTH 





 phase the Sixth : the Convert 



 XLV 


 till this moment she have never see or hear from d'Urberville since 
 her departure from Trantridge . 

 the rencounter come at a heavy moment , one of all moment calculate 
 to permit its impact with the least emotional shock . but such be 
 unreasone memory that , though he stand there openly and palpably a 
 convert man , who be sorrow for his past irregularity , a fear 
 overcome she , paralyze her movement so that she neither retreat 
 nor advanced . 

 to think of what emanate from that countenance when she see it last , 
 and to behold it now ! ... there be the same handsome unpleasantness 
 of mien , but now he wear neatly trim , old - fashioned whisker , the 
 sable moustache have disappear ; and his dress be half - clerical , 
 a modification which have change his expression sufficiently to 
 abstract the dandyism from his feature , and to hinder for a second 
 her belief in his identity . 

 to Tess 's sense there be , just at first , a ghastly bizarrerie , 
 a grim incongruity , in the march of these solemn word of scripture 
 out of such a mouth . this too familiar intonation , less than four 
 year early , have bring to her ear expression of such divergent 
 purpose that her heart become quite sick at the irony of the 
 contrast . 

 it be less a reform than a transfiguration . the former curve of 
 sensuousness be now modulate to line of devotional passion . 
 the lip - shape that have mean seductiveness be now make to 
 express supplication ; the glow on the cheek that yesterday could be 
 translate as riotousness be evangelize to - day into the splendour 
 of pious rhetoric ; animalism have become fanaticism ; paganism , 
 Paulinism ; the bold rolling eye that have flash upon her form in 
 the old time with such mastery now beam with the rude energy of a 
 theolatry that be almost ferocious . those black angularity which 
 his face have use to put on when his wish be thwart now do 
 duty in picture the incorrigible backslider who would insist upon 
 turn again to his wallowing in the mire . 

 the lineament , as such , seem to complain . they have be divert 
 from their hereditary connotation to signify impression for which 
 nature do not intend they . strange that their very elevation be a 
 misapplication , that to raise seem to falsify . 

 yet could it be so ? she would admit the ungenerous sentiment no 
 long . D'Urberville be not the first wicked man who have turn 
 away from his wickedness to save his soul alive , and why should she 
 deem it unnatural in he ? it be but the usage of thought which have 
 be jarred in she at hear good new word in bad old note . the 
 great the sinner , the great the saint ; it be not necessary to 
 dive far into christian history to discover that . 

 such impression as these move she vaguely , and without strict 
 definiteness . as soon as the nerveless pause of her surprise would 
 allow she to stir , her impulse be to pass on out of his sight . he 
 have obviously not discern she yet in her position against the sun . 

 but the moment that she move again he recognize she . the effect 
 upon her old lover be electric , far strong than the effect of his 
 presence upon she . his fire , the tumultuous ring of his eloquence , 
 seem to go out of he . his lip struggle and tremble under the 
 word that lie upon it ; but deliver they it could not as long as she 
 face he . his eye , after their first glance upon her face , hung 
 confusedly in every other direction but her , but come back in a 
 desperate leap every few second . this paralysis last , however , 
 but a short time ; for Tess 's energy return with the atrophy of 
 his , and she walk as fast as she be able past the barn and onward . 

 as soon as she could reflect , it appal she , this change in their 
 relative platform . he who have work her undoing be now on the 
 side of the Spirit , while she remain unregenerate . and , as in the 
 legend , it have result that her cyprian image have suddenly appear 
 upon his altar , whereby the fire of the priest have be well nigh 
 extinguish . 

 she go on without turn her head . her back seem to be endow 
 with a sensitiveness to ocular beam - even her clothing - so alive 
 be she to a fancied gaze which might be rest upon she from the 
 outside of that barn . all the way along to this point her heart 
 have be heavy with an inactive sorrow ; now there be a change in 
 the quality of its trouble . that hunger for affection too long 
 withhold be for the time displace by an almost physical sense 
 of an implacable past which still engirdle she . it intensify 
 her consciousness of error to a practical despair ; the break of 
 continuity between she early and present existence , which she have 
 hop for , have not , after all , take place . bygone would never be 
 complete bygone till she be a bygone herself . 

 thus absorb , she recrosse the northern part of Long - Ash Lane at 
 right angle , and presently see before she the road ascend whitely 
 to the upland along whose margin the remainder of her journey lie . 
 its dry pale surface stretch severely onward , unbroken by a single 
 figure , vehicle , or mark , save some occasional brown horse - dropping 
 which dot its cold aridity here and there . while slowly breast 
 this ascent Tess become conscious of footstep behind she , and 
 turn she see approach that well - know form - so strangely 
 accoutre as the Methodist - the one personage in all the world she 
 wish not to encounter alone on this side of the grave . 

 there be not much time , however , for thought or elusion , and she 
 yield as calmly as she could to the necessity of let he 
 overtake she . she see that he be excited , less by the speed of his 
 walk than by the feeling within he . 

 " Tess ! " he say . 

 she slacken speed without look round . 

 " Tess ! " he repeat . " it be I - Alec d'Urberville . " 

 she then look back at he , and he come up . 

 " I see it be , " she answer coldly . 

 " well - be that all ? yet I deserve no more ! of course , " he add , 
 with a slight laugh , " there be something of the ridiculous to your 
 eye in see I like this . but - I must put up with that . ... I 
 hear you have go away ; nobody know where . Tess , you wonder why I 
 have follow you ? " 

 " I do , rather ; and I would that you have not , with all my heart ! " 

 " yes - you may well say it , " he return grimly , as they move onward 
 together , she with unwilling tread . " but do not   mistake I ; I beg 
 this because you may have be lead to do so in noticing - if you do 
 notice it - how your sudden appearance unnerve I down there . it be 
 but a momentary faltering ; and consider what you have be to I , 
 it be natural enough . but will help I through it - though perhaps 
 you think I a humbug for say it - and immediately afterwards I 
 feel that of all person in the world whom it be my duty and desire 
 to save from the wrath to come - sneer if you like - the woman whom I 
 have so grievously wrong be that person . I have come with that 
 sole purpose in view - nothing more . " 

 there be the small vein of scorn in her word of rejoinder : " have 
 you save yourself ? charity begin at home , they say . " 

 " I have do nothing ! " say he indifferently . " Heaven , as I have 
 be tell my hearer , have do all . no amount of contempt that 
 you can pour upon I , Tess , will equal what I have pour upon 
 myself - the old Adam of my former year ! well , it be a strange 
 story ; believe it or not ; but I can tell you the mean by which my 
 conversion be bring about , and I hope you will be interested 
 enough at least to listen . have you ever hear the name of the 
 parson of emminster - you must have do do ? - old Mr Clare ; one of the 
 most earnest of his school ; one of the few intense man leave in the 
 Church ; not so intense as the extreme wing of Christian believer 
 with which I have throw in my lot , but quite an exception among the 
 Established clergy , the young of whom be gradually attenuate the 
 true doctrine by their sophistry , till they be but the shadow of 
 what they be . I only differ from he on the question of Church and 
 State - the interpretation of the text , ' come out from among they and 
 be ye separate , saith the Lord ' - that be all . he be one who , I firmly 
 believe , have be the humble mean of save more soul in this 
 country than any other man you can name . you have hear of he ? " 

 " I have , " she say . 

 " he come to Trantridge two or three year ago to preach on behalf of 
 some missionary society ; and I , wretche fellow that I be , insult 
 he when , in his disinterestedness , he try to reason with I and 
 show I the way . he do not resent my conduct , he simply say that 
 some day I should receive the first - fruit of the Spirit - that those 
 who come to scoff sometimes remain to pray . there be a strange 
 magic in his word . they sink into my mind . but the loss of my 
 mother hit I most ; and by degree I be bring to see daylight . 
 since then my one desire have be to hand on the true view to other , 
 and that be what I be try to do to - day ; though it be only lately 
 that I have preach hereabout . the first month of my ministry have 
 be spend in the North of England among stranger , where I prefer 
 to make my early clumsy attempt , so as to acquire courage before 
 undergo that severest of all test of one 's sincerity , address 
 those who have know one , and have be one 's companion in the day 
 of darkness . if you could only know , Tess , the pleasure of have a 
 good slap at yourself , I be sure - " 

 " do not   go on with it ! " she cry passionately , as she turn away 
 from he to a stile by the wayside , on which she bend herself . " I 
 can not   believe in such sudden thing ! I feel indignant with you for 
 talk to I like this , when you know - when you know what harm 
 you have   do I ! you , and those like you , take your fill of pleasure 
 on earth by make the life of such as I bitter and black with 
 sorrow ; and then it be a fine thing , when you have have enough of 
 that , to think of secure your pleasure in heaven by become 
 convert ! out upon such - I do not   believe in you - I hate it ! " 

 " Tess , " he insist ; " do not   speak so ! it come to I like a jolly new 
 idea ! and you do not   believe I ? what do not   you believe ? " 

 " your conversion . your scheme of religion . " 

 " why ? " 

 she drop her voice . " because a well man than you do not 
 believe in such . " 

 " what a woman 's reason ! who be this well man ? " 

 " I can not tell you . " 

 " well , " he declare , a resentment beneath his word seem ready to 
 spring out at a moment 's notice , " God forbid that I should say I be 
 a good man - and you know I do not   say any such thing . I be new to 
 goodness , truly ; but newcomer see furth sometimes . " 

 " yes , " she reply sadly . " but I can not believe in your conversion 
 to a new spirit . such flash as you feel , Alec , I fear do not   last ! " 

 thus speak she turn from the stile over which she have be 
 lean , and face he ; whereupon his eye , fall casually upon 
 the familiar countenance and form , remain contemplate she . the 
 inferior man be quiet in he now ; but it be surely not extract , 
 nor even entirely subdue . 

 " do not   look at I like that ! " he say abruptly . 

 Tess , who have be quite unconscious of her action and mien , 
 instantly withdraw the large dark gaze of her eye , stammer with 
 a flush , " I beg your pardon ! " and there be revive in her the 
 wretched sentiment which have often come to she before , that in 
 inhabit the fleshly tabernacle with which Nature have endow she 
 she be somehow do wrong . 

 " no , no ! do not   beg my pardon . but since you wear a veil to hide 
 your good look , why do not   you keep it down ? " 

 she pull down the veil , say hastily , " it be mostly to keep off 
 the wind . " 

 " it may seem harsh of I to dictate like this , " he go on ; " but 
 it be well that I should not look too often on you . it might be 
 dangerous . " 

 " Ssh ! " say Tess . 

 " well , woman 's face have have too much power over I already for I 
 not to fear they ! an evangelist have nothing to do with such as they ; 
 and it remind I of the old time that I would forget ! " 

 after this their conversation dwindle to a casual remark now and 
 then as they ramble onward , Tess inwardly wonder how far he be 
 go with she , and not like to send he back by positive mandate . 
 frequently when they come to a gate or stile they find paint 
 thereon in red or blue letter some text of scripture , and she 
 ask he if he know who have be at the pain to blazon these 
 announcement . he tell she that the man be employ by himself and 
 other who be work with he in that district , to paint these 
 reminder that no mean might be leave untried which might move the 
 heart of a wicked generation . 

 at length the road touch the spot call " Cross - in - hand . " of all 
 spot on the bleached and desolate upland this be the most forlorn . 
 it be so far remove from the charm which be seek in landscape by 
 artist and view - lover as to reach a new kind of beauty , a negative 
 beauty of tragic tone . the place take its name from a stone pillar 
 which stand there , a strange rude monolith , from a stratum unknown 
 in any local quarry , on which be roughly carve a human hand . 
 differ account be give of its history and purport . some 
 authority state that a devotional cross have once form the 
 complete erection thereon , of which the present relic be but the 
 stump ; other that the stone as it stand be entire , and that it have 
 be fix there to mark a boundary or place of meeting . anyhow , 
 whatever the origin of the relic , there be and be something 
 sinister , or solemn , accord to mood , in the scene amid which it 
 stand ; something tend to impress the most phlegmatic passer - by . 

 " I think I must leave you now , " he remark , as they draw near to 
 this spot . " I have to preach at Abbot's - Cernel at six this evening , 
 and my way lie across to the right from here . and you upset I 
 somewhat too , Tessy - I can not , will not , say why . I must go away and 
 get strength . ... how be it that you speak so fluently now ? who have 
 teach you such good English ? " 

 " I have learn thing in my trouble , " she say evasively . 

 " what trouble have you have ? " 

 she tell he of the first one - the only one that relate to he . 

 D'Urberville be strike mute . " I know nothing of this till now ! " 
 he next murmur . " why do not   you write to I when you feel your 
 trouble come on ? " 

 she do not reply ; and he break the silence by add : " well - you 
 will see I again . " 

 " no , " she answer . " do not again come near I ! " 

 " I will think . but before we part come here . " he step up to the 
 pillar . " this be once a Holy Cross . relic be not in my creed ; but 
 I fear you at moment - far more than you need fear I at present ; and 
 to lessen my fear , put your hand upon that stone hand , and swear that 
 you will never tempt I - by your charm or way . " 

 " good God - how can you ask what be so unnecessary ! all that be 
 furth from my thought ! " 

 " yes - but swear it . " 

 Tess , half frighten , give way to his importunity ; place her hand 
 upon the stone and swore . 

 " I be sorry you be not a believer , " he continue ; " that some 
 unbeliever should have get hold of you and unsettle your mind . but 
 no more now . at home at least I can pray for you ; and I will ; and 
 who know what may not happen ? I be off . goodbye ! " 

 he turn to a hunting - gate in the hedge and , without let his 
 eye again rest upon she , leapt over and strike out across the down 
 in the direction of Abbot's - Cernel . as he walk his pace show 
 perturbation , and by - and - by , as if instigate by a former thought , 
 he draw from his pocket a small book , between the leaf of which 
 be fold a letter , wear and soil , as from much re - reading . 
 D'Urberville open the letter . it be date several month before 
 this time , and be sign by Parson Clare . 

 the letter begin by express the writer 's unfeigned joy at 
 d'Urberville 's conversion , and thank he for his kindness in 
 communicating with the parson on the subject . it express Mr 
 Clare 's warm assurance of forgiveness for d'Urberville 's former 
 conduct and his interest in the young man 's plan for the future . 
 he , Mr Clare , would much have like to see d'Urberville in the Church 
 to whose ministry he have devote so many year of his own life , and 
 would have help he to enter a theological college to that end ; but 
 since his correspondent have possibly not care to do this on account 
 of the delay it would have entail , he be not the man to insist 
 upon its paramount importance . every man must work as he could good 
 work , and in the method towards which he feel impel by the Spirit . 

 D'Urberville read and re - read this letter , and seem to quiz himself 
 cynically . he also read some passage from memoranda as he walk 
 till his face assume a calm , and apparently the image of Tess no 
 long trouble his mind . 

 she meanwhile have keep along the edge of the hill by which lay she 
 near way home . within the distance of a mile she meet a solitary 
 shepherd . 

 " what be the meaning of that old stone I have pass ? " she ask of 
 he . " be it ever a Holy Cross ? " 

 " Cross - no ; ' twer not a cross ! ' tis a thing of ill - oman , Miss. it 
 be put up in wuld time by the relation of a malefactor who be 
 torture there by nail his hand to a post and afterwards hung . 
 the bone lie underneath . they say he sell his soul to the devil , 
 and that he walk at time . " 

 she feel the petite mort at this unexpectedly gruesome information , 
 and leave the solitary man behind she . it be dusk when she draw near 
 to Flintcomb - Ash , and in the lane at the entrance to the hamlet she 
 approach a girl and her lover without their observe she . they 
 be talk no secret , and the clear unconcerned voice of the young 
 woman , in response to the warm accent of the man , spread into the 
 chilly air as the one soothe thing within the dusky horizon , full 
 of a stagnant obscurity upon which nothing else intrude . for a 
 moment the voice cheer the heart of Tess , till she reason that 
 this interview have its origin , on one side or the other , in the same 
 attraction which have be the prelude to her own tribulation . when 
 she come close , the girl turn serenely and recognize she , the 
 young man walk off in embarrassment . the woman be Izz Huett , 
 whose interest in Tess 's excursion immediately supersede her own 
 proceeding . Tess do not explain very clearly its result , and Izz , 
 who be a girl of tact , begin to speak of her own little affair , a 
 phase of which Tess have just witness . 

 " he be Amby Seedling , the chap who use to sometimes come and help at 
 talbothay , " she explain indifferently . " he actually inquire and 
 find out that I have come here , and have follow I . he say he be 
 be in love wi ' I these two year . but I have   hardly answer he . " 



 XLVI 


 several day have pass since her futile journey , and Tess be 
 afield . the dry winter wind still blow , but a screen of thatch 
 hurdle erect in the eye of the blast keep its force away from she . 
 on the sheltered side be a turnip - slicing machine , whose bright blue 
 hue of new paint seem almost vocal in the otherwise subdue scene . 
 opposite its front be a long mound or " grave " , in which the root 
 have be preserve since early winter . Tess be stand at the 
 uncovered end , chop off with a bill - hook the fibre and earth 
 from each root , and throw it after the operation into the slicer . 
 a man be turn the handle of the machine , and from its trough 
 come the newly - cut swede , the fresh smell of whose yellow chip 
 be accompany by the sound of the snuffle wind , the smart swish 
 of the slicing - blade , and the chopping of the hook in Tess 's 
 leather - glove hand . 

 the wide acreage of blank agricultural brownness , apparent where 
 the swede have be pull , be begin to be strip in wale of 
 dark brown , gradually broaden to riband . along the edge of 
 each of these something creep upon ten leg , move without haste 
 and without rest up and down the whole length of the field ; it be 
 two horse and a man , the plough go between they , turn up the 
 clear ground for a spring sowing . 

 for hour nothing relieve the joyless monotony of thing . then , far 
 beyond the ploughing - team , a black speck be see . it have come from 
 the corner of a fence , where there be a gap , and its tendency be 
 up the incline , towards the swede - cutter . from the proportion of 
 a mere point it advance to the shape of a ninepin , and be soon 
 perceive to be a man in black , arrive from the direction of 
 Flintcomb - Ash . the man at the slicer , have nothing else to do with 
 his eye , continually observe the comer , but Tess , who be occupy , 
 do not perceive he till her companion direct her attention to his 
 approach . 

 it be not her hard taskmaster , Farmer Groby ; it be one in a 
 semi - clerical costume , who now represent what have once be the 
 free - and - easy Alec d'Urberville . not be hot at his preaching 
 there be less enthusiasm about he now , and the presence of the 
 grinder seem to embarrass he . a pale distress be already on 
 Tess 's face , and she pull she curtain hood far over it . 

 D'Urberville come up and say quietly - 

 " I want to speak to you , Tess . " 

 " you have refuse my last request , not to come near I ! " say she . 

 " yes , but I have a good reason . " 

 " well , tell it . " 

 " it be more serious than you may think . " 

 he glance round to see if he be overhear . they be at some 
 distance from the man who turn the slicer , and the movement of the 
 machine , too , sufficiently prevent Alec 's word reach other 
 ear . D'Urberville place himself so as to screen Tess from the 
 labourer , turn his back to the latter . 

 " it be this , " he continue , with capricious compunction . " in 
 thinking of your soul and mine when we last meet , I neglect to 
 inquire as to your worldly condition . you be well dressed , and I 
 do not think of it . but I see now that it be hard - hard than it 
 use to be when I - know you - hard than you deserve . perhaps a good 
 deal of it be own to I ! " 

 she do not answer , and he watch she inquiringly , as , with bent 
 head , her face completely screen by the hood , she resume she 
 trimming of the swede . by go on with her work she feel well 
 able to keep he outside her emotion . 

 " Tess , " he add , with a sigh of discontent , - " yours be the very 
 bad case I ever be concern in ! I have no idea of what have 
 result till you tell I . scamp that I be to foul that innocent 
 life ! the whole blame be mine - the whole unconventional business 
 of our time at Trantridge . you , too , the real blood of which I be 
 but the base imitation , what a blind young thing you be as to 
 possibility ! I say in all earnestness that it be a shame for 
 parent to bring up their girl in such dangerous ignorance of the 
 gin and net that the wicked may set for they , whether their motive 
 be a good one or the result of simple indifference . " 

 Tess still do no more than listen , throw down one globular root 
 and take up another with automatic regularity , the pensive contour 
 of the mere fieldwoman alone mark she . 

 " but it be not that I come to say , " d'Urberville go on . " my 
 circumstance be these . I have lose my mother since you be at 
 Trantridge , and the place be my own . but I intend to sell it , and 
 devote myself to missionary work in Africa . a devil of a poor hand 
 I shall make at the trade , no doubt . however , what I want to ask 
 you be , will you put it in my power to do my duty - to make the only 
 reparation I can make for the trick play you : that is , will you be 
 my wife , and go with I ? ... I have already obtain this precious 
 document . it be my old mother 's die wish . " 

 he draw a piece of parchment from his pocket , with a slight fumbling 
 of embarrassment . 

 " what be it ? " say she . 

 " a marriage licence . " 

 " o no , sir - no ! " she say quickly , start back . 

 " you will not ? why be that ? " 

 and as he ask the question a disappointment which be not entirely 
 the disappointment of thwart duty cross d'Urberville 's face . it 
 be unmistakably a symptom that something of his old passion for she 
 have be revive ; duty and desire run hand - in - hand . 

 " surely , " he begin again , in more impetuous tone , and then look 
 round at the labourer who turn the slicer . 

 Tess , too , feel that the argument could not be end there . 
 inform the man that a gentleman have come to see she , with whom she 
 wish to walk a little way , she move off with d'Urberville across 
 the zebra - strip field . when they reach the first newly - plough 
 section he hold out his hand to help she over it ; but she step 
 forward on the summit of the earth - roll as if she do not see he . 

 " you will not marry I , Tess , and make I a self - respect man ? " he 
 repeat , as soon as they be over the furrow . 

 " I can not . " 

 " but why ? " 

 " you know I have no affection for you . " 

 " but you would get to feel that in time , perhaps - as soon as you 
 really could forgive I ? " 

 " never ! " 

 " why so positive ? " 

 " I love somebody else . " 

 the word seem to astonish he . 

 " you do ? " he cry . " somebody else ? but have not a sense of what be 
 morally right and proper any weight with you ? " 

 " no , no , no - do not   say that ! " 

 " anyhow , then , your love for this other man may be only a passing 
 feeling which you will overcome - " 

 " no - no . " 

 " yes , yes ! why not ? " 

 " I can not tell you . " 

 " you must in honour ! " 

 " well then ... I have marry he . " 

 " ah ! " he exclaim ; and he stop dead and gaze at 
 she . 

 " I do not wish to tell - I do not mean to ! " she plead . " it be a 
 secret here , or at any rate but dimly know . so will you , PLEASE 
 will you , keep from question I ? you must remember that we be 
 now stranger . " 

 " stranger - be we ? stranger ! " 

 for a moment a flash of his old irony mark his face ; but he 
 determinedly chasten it down . 

 " be that man your husband ? " he ask mechanically , denote by a sign 
 the labourer who turn the machine . 

 " that man ! " she say proudly . " I should think not ! " 

 " who , then ? " 

 " do not ask what I do not wish to tell ! " she beg , and flash she 
 appeal to he from her upturned face and lash - shadow eye . 

 D'Urberville be disturb . 

 " but I only ask for your sake ! " he retort hotly . " angel of 
 heaven ! - God forgive I for such an expression - I come here , I swear , 
 as I think for your good . tess - do not   look at I so - I can not 
 stand your look ! there never be such eye , surely , before 
 Christianity or since ! there - I will not   lose my head ; I dare not . 
 I own that the sight of you have wake up my love for you , which , I 
 believe , be extinguish with all such feeling . but I think 
 that our marriage might be a sanctification for we both . ' the 
 unbelieve husband be sanctify by the wife , and the unbelieving 
 wife be sanctify by the husband , ' I say to myself . but my plan 
 be dash from I ; and I must bear the disappointment ! " 

 he moodily reflect with his eye on the ground . 

 " Married . married ! ... well , that be so , " he add , quite 
 calmly , tear the licence slowly into half and put they in 
 his pocket ; " that be prevent , I should like to do some good to 
 you and your husband , whoever he may be . there be many question 
 that I be tempt to ask , but I will not do so , of course , in 
 opposition to your wish . though , if I could know your husband , I 
 might more easily benefit he and you . be he on this farm ? " 

 " no , " she murmur . " he be far away . " 

 " far away ? from you ? what sort of husband can he be ? " 

 " o , do not speak against he ! it be through you ! he find out - " 

 " ah , be it so ! ... that be sad , Tess ! " 

 " yes . " 

 " but to stay away from you - to leave you to work like this ! " 

 " he do not leave I to work ! " she cry , spring to the defence 
 of the absent one with all her fervour . " he do not   know it ! it be by 
 my own arrangement . " 

 " then , do he write ? " 

 " I - I can not tell you . there be thing which be private to 
 ourselves . " 

 " of course that mean that he do not . you be a deserted wife , my 
 fair tess - " 

 in an impulse he turn suddenly to take her hand ; the buff - glove be 
 on it , and he seize only the rough leather finger which do not 
 express the life or shape of those within . 

 " you must not - you must not ! " she cry fearfully , slip her hand 
 from the glove as from a pocket , and leave it in his grasp . " o , 
 will you go away - for the sake of I and my husband - go , in the name 
 of your own christianity ! " 

 " yes , yes ; I will , " he say abruptly , and thrust the glove back to 
 she he turn to leave . face round , however , he say , " Tess , as 
 God be my judge , I mean no humbug in take your hand ! " 

 a pattering of hoof on the soil of the field , which they have not 
 notice in their preoccupation , cease close behind they ; and a voice 
 reach her ear : 

 " what the devil be you do away from your work at this time o ' 
 day ? " 

 Farmer Groby have espy the two figure from the distance , and have 
 inquisitively ride across , to learn what be their business in his 
 field . 

 " do not   speak like that to she ! " say d'Urberville , his face 
 blacken with something that be not Christianity . 

 " indeed , Mister ! and what mid Methodist pa'son have to do with 
 she ? " 

 " who be the fellow ? " ask d'Urberville , turn to Tess . 

 she go close up to he . 

 " go - I do beg you ! " she say . 

 " what ! and leave you to that tyrant ? I can see in his face what a 
 churl he be . " 

 " he will not   hurt I . he be not in love with I . I can leave at 
 Lady - Day . " 

 " well , I have no right but to obey , I suppose . but - well , goodbye ! " 

 her defender , whom she dread more than her assailant , have 
 reluctantly disappear , the farmer continue his reprimand , which 
 Tess take with the great coolness , that sort of attack be 
 independent of sex . to have as a master this man of stone , who would 
 have cuff she if he have dare , be almost a relief after her former 
 experience . she silently walk back towards the summit of the 
 field that be the scene of her labour , so absorb in the interview 
 which have just take place that she be hardly aware that the nose of 
 Groby 's horse almost touch her shoulder . 

 " if so be you make an agreement to work for I till Lady - Day , I will 
 see that you carry it out , " he growl . " ' od rot the woman - now 
 ' tis one thing , and then ' tis another . but I will put up with it no 
 long ! " 

 know very well that he do not harass the other woman of the 
 farm as he harass she out of spite for the flooring he have once 
 receive , she do for one moment picture what might have be the 
 result if she have be free to accept the offer just make she of 
 be the monied Alec 's wife . it would have lift she completely 
 out of subjection , not only to her present oppressive employer , but 
 to a whole world who seem to despise she . " but no , no ! " she say 
 breathlessly ; " I could not have marry he now ! he be so unpleasant 
 to I . " 

 that very night she begin an appealing letter to Clare , conceal 
 from he her hardship , and assure he of her undying affection . 
 any one who have be in a position to read between the line would 
 have see that at the back of her great love be some monstrous 
 fear - almost a desperation - as to some secret contingency which 
 be not disclose . but again she do not finish her effusion ; he 
 have ask Izz to go with he , and perhaps he do not care for she at 
 all . she put the letter in her box , and wonder if it would ever 
 reach Angel 's hand . 

 after this her daily task be go through heavily enough , and 
 bring on the day which be of great import to agriculturist - the 
 day of the Candlemas Fair . it be at this fair that new engagement 
 be enter into for the twelve month follow the ensue 
 Lady - Day , and those of the farming population who think of change 
 their place duly attend at the county - town where the fair be 
 hold . nearly all the labourer on Flintcomb - Ash farm intend 
 flight , and early in the morning there be a general exodus in the 
 direction of the town , which lie at a distance of from ten to a dozen 
 mile over hilly country . though Tess also mean to leave at the 
 quarter - day , she be one of the few who do not go to the fair , 
 have a vaguely - shaped hope that something would happen to render 
 another outdoor engagement unnecessary . 

 it be a peaceful February day , of wonderful softness for the time , 
 and one would almost have think that winter be over . she have 
 hardly finish her dinner when d'Urberville 's figure darken the 
 window of the cottage wherein she be a lodger , which she have all to 
 herself to - day . 

 Tess jump up , but her visitor have knock at the door , and she 
 could hardly in reason run away . D'Urberville 's knock , his walk up 
 to the door , have some indescribable quality of difference from his 
 air when she last see he . they seem to be act of which the doer 
 be ashamed . she think that she would not open the door ; but , as 
 there be no sense in that either , she arise , and have lift the 
 latch step back quickly . he come in , see she , and fling himself 
 down into a chair before speak . 

 " Tess - I could not   help it ! " he begin desperately , as he wipe his 
 heated face , which have also a superimpose flush of excitement . " I 
 feel that I must call at least to ask how you be . I assure you I 
 have not be think of you at all till I see you that Sunday ; now I 
 can not get rid of your image , try how I may ! it be hard that a good 
 woman should do harm to a bad man ; yet so it be . if you would only 
 pray for I , Tess ! " 

 the suppress discontent of his manner be almost pitiable , and yet 
 Tess do not pity he . 

 " how can I pray for you , " she say , " when I be forbid to believe 
 that the great Power who move the world would alter his plan on my 
 account ? " 

 " you really think that ? " 

 " yes . I have be cure of the presumption of think otherwise . " 

 " Cured ? by whom ? " 

 " by my husband , if I must tell . " 

 " ah - your husband - your husband ! how strange it seem ! I remember 
 you hint something of the sort the other day . what do you really 
 believe in these matter , Tess ? " he ask . " you seem to have no 
 religion - perhaps owe to I . " 

 " but I have . though I do not   believe in anything supernatural . " 

 D'Urberville look at she with misgiving . 

 " then do you think that the line I take be all wrong ? " 

 " a good deal of it . " 

 " H'm - and yet I have   feel so sure about it , " he say uneasily . 

 " I believe in the SPIRIT of the Sermon on the Mount , and so do my 
 dear husband ... but I do not   believe - " 

 here she give her negation . 

 " the fact be , " say d'Urberville drily , " whatever your dear husband 
 believe you accept , and whatever he reject you reject , without the 
 least inquiry or reasoning on your own part . that be just like you 
 woman . your mind be enslave to his . " 

 " ah , because he know everything ! " say she , with a triumphant 
 simplicity of faith in Angel Clare that the most perfect man could 
 hardly have deserve , much less her husband . 

 " yes , but you should not take negative opinion wholesale from 
 another person like that . a pretty fellow he must be to teach you 
 such scepticism ! " 

 " he never force my judgement ! he would never argue on the subject 
 with I ! but I look at it in this way ; what he believe , after 
 inquire deep into doctrine , be much more likely to be right than 
 what I might believe , who have not   look into doctrine at all . " 

 " what use he to say ? he must have say something ? " 

 she reflect ; and with her acute memory for the letter of Angel 
 Clare 's remark , even when she do not comprehend their spirit , she 
 recall a merciless polemical syllogism that she have hear he 
 use when , as it occasionally happen , he indulge in a species of 
 think aloud with she at his side . in deliver it she give also 
 Clare 's accent and manner with reverential faithfulness . 

 " say that again , " ask d'Urberville , who have listen with the 
 great attention . 

 she repeat the argument , and d'Urberville thoughtfully murmur the 
 word after she . 

 " anything else ? " he presently ask . 

 " he say at another time something like this " ; and she give another , 
 which might possibly have be parallel in many a work of the 
 pedigree range from the Dictionnaire Philosophique to Huxley 's 
  essay . 

 " ah - ha ! how do you remember they ? " 

 " I want to believe what he believe , though he do not   wish I to ; 
 and I manage to coax he to tell I a few of his thought . I can not 
 say I quite understand that one ; but I know it be right . " 

 " H'm . Fancy your be able to teach I what you do not   know 
 yourself ! " 

 he fall into thought . 

 " and so I throw in my spiritual lot with his , " she resume . " I 
 do not   wish it to be different . what be good enough for he be good 
 enough for I . " 

 " do he know that you be as big an infidel as he ? " 

 " no - I never tell he - if I be an infidel . " 

 " well - you be well off to - day that I be , Tess , after all ! you 
 do not   believe that you ought to preach my doctrine , and , therefore , 
 do no despite to your conscience in abstain . I do believe I ought 
 to preach it , but , like the devil , I believe and tremble , for I 
 suddenly leave off preach it , and give way to my passion for you . " 

 " how ? " 

 " why , " he say aridly ; " I have come all the way here to see you 
 to - day ! but I start from home to go to Casterbridge Fair , where 
 I have undertake to preach the Word from a waggon at half - past two 
 this afternoon , and where all the brother be expect I this 
 minute . here be the announcement . " 

 he draw from his breast - pocket a poster whereon be print the day , 
 hour , and place of meeting , at which he , d'Urberville , would preach 
 the Gospel as aforesaid . 

 " but how can you get there ? " say Tess , look at the clock . 

 " I can not get there ! I have come here . " 

 " what , you have really arrange to preach , and - " 

 " I have arrange to preach , and I shall not be there - by reason of my 
 burn desire to see a woman whom I once despise ! - no , by my word 
 and truth , I never despise you ; if I have I should not love you now ! 
 why I do not despise you be on account of your be unsmirche in 
 spite of all ; you withdraw yourself from I so quickly and resolutely 
 when you see the situation ; you do not remain at my pleasure ; so 
 there be one petticoat in the world for whom I have no contempt , 
 and you be she . but you may well despise I now ! I think I 
 worship on the mountain , but I find I still serve in the grove ! 
 ha ! ha ! " 

 " o Alec d'Urberville ! what do this mean ? what have I do ! " 

 " do ? " he say , with a soulless sneer in the word . " nothing 
 intentionally . but you have be the means - the innocent mean - of 
 my backsliding , as they call it . I ask myself , be I , indeed , one of 
 those ' servant of corruption ' who , ' after they have escape the 
 pollution of the world , be again entangle therein and overcome ' - 
 whose latter end be bad than their beginning ? " he lay his hand on 
 her shoulder . " Tess , my girl , I be on the way to , at least , social 
 salvation till I see you again ! " he say freakishly shake she , as 
 if she be a child . " and why then have you tempt I ? I be firm 
 as a man could be till I see those eye and that mouth again - surely 
 there never be such a madden mouth since Eve 's ! " his voice sink , 
 and a hot archness shot from his own black eye . " you temptress , 
 Tess ; you dear damned witch of Babylon - I could not resist you as 
 soon as I meet you again ! " 

 " I could not   help your see I again ! " say Tess , recoil . 

 " I know it - I repeat that I do not blame you . but the fact remain . 
 when I see you ill - use on the farm that day I be nearly mad to 
 think that I have no legal right to protect you - that I could not have 
 it ; whilst he who have it seem to neglect you utterly ! " 

 " do not   speak against he - he be absent ! " she cry in much 
 excitement . " treat he honourably - he have never wrong you ! o 
 leave his wife before any scandal spread that may do harm to his 
 honest name ! " 

 " I will - I will , " he say , like a man awakening from a luring dream . 
 " I have break my engagement to preach to those poor drunken booby 
 at the fair - it be the first time I have play such a practical 
 joke . a month ago I should have be horrify at such a 
 possibility . I will go away - to swear - and - ah , can I ! to keep away . " 
 then , suddenly : " one clasp , Tessy - one ! only for old friendship - " 

 " I be without defence . alec ! a good man 's honour be in my keeping - 
 think - be ashamed ! " 

 " Pooh ! well , yes - yes ! " 

 he clench his lip , mortify with himself for his weakness . his 
 eye be equally barren of worldly and religious faith . the corps 
 of those old fitful passion which have lie inanimate amid the line 
 of his face ever since his reformation seem to wake and come 
 together as in a resurrection . he go out indeterminately . 

 though d'Urberville have declare that this breach of his engagement 
 to - day be the simple backsliding of a believer , Tess 's word , as 
 echo from Angel Clare , have make a deep impression upon he , and 
 continue to do so after he have leave she . he move on in silence , as 
 if his energy be benumb by the hitherto undreamt - of possibility 
 that his position be untenable . Reason have have nothing to do with 
 his whimsical conversion , which be perhaps the mere freak of a 
 careless man in search of a new sensation , and temporarily impress 
 by his mother 's death . 

 the drop of logic Tess have let fall into the sea of his enthusiasm 
 serve to chill its effervescence to stagnation . he say to himself , 
 as he ponder again and again over the crystallized phrase that she 
 have hand on to he , " that clever fellow little thought that , by 
 tell she those thing , he might be pave my way back to she ! " 



 XLVII 


 it be the threshing of the last wheat - rick at Flintcomb - Ash farm . the 
 dawn of the March morning be singularly inexpressive , and there be 
 nothing to show where the eastern horizon lie . against the twilight 
 rise the trapezoidal top of the stack , which have stand forlornly 
 here through the washing and bleaching of the wintry weather . 

 when Izz Huett and Tess arrive at the scene of operation only a 
 rustling denote that other have precede they ; to which , as the 
 light increase , there be presently add the silhouette of two 
 man on the summit . they be busily " unhale " the rick , that 
 be , strip off the thatch before begin to throw down the 
 sheaf ; and while this be in progress Izz and Tess , with the 
 other woman - worker , in their whitey - brown pinner , stand wait 
 and shivering , Farmer Groby have insist upon their be on 
 the spot thus early to get the job over if possible by the end of 
 the day . close under the eave of the stack , and as yet barely 
 visible , be the red tyrant that the woman have come to serve - a 
 timber - frame construction , with strap and wheel appertaining - 
 the threshing - machine which , whilst it be go , keep up a 
 despotic demand upon the endurance of their muscle and nerve . 

 a little way off there be another indistinct figure ; this one black , 
 with a sustained hiss that speak of strength very much in reserve . 
 the long chimney run up beside an ash - tree , and the warmth which 
 radiate from the spot , explain without the necessity of much 
 daylight that here be the engine which be to act as the primum 
 mobile of this little world . by the engine stand a dark , motionless 
 being , a sooty and grimy embodiment of tallness , in a sort of trance , 
 with a heap of coal by his side : it be the engine - man . the 
 isolation of his manner and colour lend he the appearance of a 
 creature from Tophet , who have stray into the pellucid smokelessness 
 of this region of yellow grain and pale soil , with which he have 
 nothing in common , to amaze and to discompose its aborigine . 

 what he look he feel . he be in the agricultural world , but not of 
 it . he serve fire and smoke ; these denizen of the field serve 
 vegetation , weather , frost , and sun . he travel with his engine 
 from farm to farm , from county to county , for as yet the steam 
 threshing - machine be itinerant in this part of Wessex . he speak in 
 a strange northern accent ; his thought be turn inward upon 
 himself , his eye on his iron charge , hardly perceive the scene 
 around he , and care for they not at all : hold only strictly 
 necessary intercourse with the native , as if some ancient doom 
 compel he to wander here against his will in the service of his 
 Plutonic master . the long strap which run from the driving - wheel of 
 his engine to the red thresher under the rick be the sole tie - line 
 between agriculture and he . 

 while they uncover the sheaf he stand apathetic beside his 
 portable repository of force , round whose hot blackness the morning 
 air quiver . he have nothing to do with preparatory labour . his 
 fire be wait incandescent , his steam be at high pressure , in 
 a few second he could make the long strap move at an invisible 
 velocity . beyond its extent the environment might be corn , straw , 
 or chaos ; it be all the same to he . if any of the autochthonous 
 idler ask he what he call himself , he reply shortly , " an 
 engineer . " 

 the rick be unhale by full daylight ; the man then take their 
 place , the woman mount , and the work begin . Farmer Groby - or , as 
 they call he , " he " - have arrive ere this , and by his order Tess 
 be place on the platform of the machine , close to the man who feed 
 it , her business be to untie every sheaf of corn hand on to she 
 by Izz Huett , who stand next , but on the rick ; so that the feeder 
 could seize it and spread it over the revolve drum , which whisk 
 out every grain in one moment . 

 they be soon in full progress , after a preparatory hitch or two , 
 which rejoice the heart of those who hat machinery . the work 
 speed on till breakfast time , when the thresher be stop for half 
 an hour ; and on start again after the meal the whole supplementary 
 strength of the farm be throw into the labour of construct the 
 straw - rick , which begin to grow beside the stack of corn . a hasty 
 lunch be eat as they stand , without leave their position , and 
 then another couple of hour bring they near to dinner - time ; the 
 inexorable wheel continue to spin , and the penetrate hum of the 
 thresher to thrill to the very marrow all who be near the revolving 
 wire - cage . 

 the old man on the rise straw - rick talk of the past day 
 when they have be accustom to thresh with flail on the oaken 
 barn - floor ; when everything , even to winnowing , be effect by 
 hand - labour , which , to their thinking , though slow , produce well 
 result . those , too , on the corn - rick talk a little ; but the 
 perspiring one at the machine , include tess , could not lighten 
 their duty by the exchange of many word . it be the ceaselessness 
 of the work which try she so severely , and begin to make she 
 wish that she have never some to Flintcomb - Ash . the woman on the 
 corn - rick - Marian , who be one of they , in particular - could stop to 
 drink ale or cold tea from the flagon now and then , or to exchange 
 a few gossiping remark while they wipe their face or clear the 
 fragment of straw and husk from their clothing ; but for Tess there 
 be no respite ; for , as the drum never stop , the man who feed 
 it could not stop , and she , who have to supply the man with untied 
 sheaf , could not stop either , unless Marian change place with 
 she , which she sometimes do for half an hour in spite of Groby 's 
 objection that she be too slow - handed for a feed . 

 for some probably economical reason it be usually a woman who be 
 choose for this particular duty , and Groby give as his motive in 
 select Tess that she be one of those who well combine strength 
 with quickness in untie , and both with staying power , and this may 
 have be true . the hum of the thresher , which prevent speech , 
 increase to a raving whenever the supply of corn fall short of the 
 regular quantity . as Tess and the man who feed could never turn their 
 head she do not know that just before the dinner - hour a person have 
 come silently into the field by the gate , and have be stand under 
 a second rick watch the scene and Tess in particular . he be 
 dress in a tweed suit of fashionable pattern , and he twirl a gay 
 walking - cane . 

 " who be that ? " say Izz Huett to Marian . she have at first address 
 the inquiry to Tess , but the latter could not hear it . 

 " somebody 's fancy - man , I s'pose , " say Marian laconically . 

 " I will lay a guinea he be after Tess . " 

 " o no . ' tis a ranter pa'son who be be sniff after she lately ; 
 not a dandy like this . " 

 " well - this be the same man . " 

 " the same man as the preacher ? but he be quite different ! " 

 " he hev leave off his black coat and white neckercher , and hev cut off 
 his whisker ; but he be the same man for all that . " 

 " d'ye really think so ? then I will tell she , " say Marian . 

 " do not . she will see he soon enough , good - now . " 

 " well , I do not   think it at all right for he to join his preaching to 
 court a married woman , even though her husband mid be abroad , and 
 she , in a sense , a widow . " 

 " oh - he can do she no harm , " say Izz drily . " her mind can no more 
 be heave from that one place where it do bide than a stoode waggon 
 from the hole he be in . Lord love ' ee , neither court - pay , nor 
 preaching , nor the seven thunder themselves , can wean a woman when 
 ' twould be well for she that she should be wean . " 

 Dinner - time come , and the whirling cease ; whereupon Tess leave she 
 post , her knee tremble so wretchedly with the shaking of the 
 machine that she could scarcely walk . 

 " you ought to het a quart o ' drink into ' ee , as I have   do , " say 
 Marian . " you would not   look so white then . why , soul above we , 
 your face be as if you have be hagrode ! " 

 it occur to the good - natured Marian that , as Tess be so tired , 
 her discovery of her visitor 's presence might have the bad effect of 
 take away her appetite ; and Marian be think of induce Tess 
 to descend by a ladder on the further side of the stack when the 
 gentleman come forward and look up . 

 Tess utter a short little " oh ! " and a moment after she say , 
 quickly , " I shall eat my dinner here - right on the rick . " 

 sometimes , when they be so far from their cottage , they all do 
 this ; but as there be rather a keen wind go to - day , Marian and 
 the rest descend , and sit under the straw - stack . 

 the newcomer be , indeed , Alec d'Urberville , the late evangelist , 
 despite his change attire and aspect . it be obvious at a glance 
 that the original Weltlust have come back ; that he have restore 
 himself , as nearly as a man could do who have grow three or four 
 year old , to the old jaunty , slapdash guise under which Tess 
 have first know her admirer , and cousin so - call . have decide 
 to remain where she be , Tess sit down among the bundle , out of 
 sight of the ground , and begin her meal ; till , by - and - by , she hear 
 footstep on the ladder , and immediately after Alec appear upon the 
 stack - now an oblong and level platform of sheaf . he stride across 
 they , and sit down opposite of she without a word . 

 Tess continue to eat her modest dinner , a slice of thick pancake 
 which she have bring with she . the other workfolk be by this 
 time all gather under the rick , where the loose straw form a 
 comfortable retreat . 

 " I be here again , as you see , " say d'Urberville . 

 " why do you trouble I so ! " she cry , reproach flash from she 
 very finger - end . 

 " I trouble you ? I think I may ask , why do you trouble I ? " 

 " sure , I do not   trouble you any - when ! " 

 " you say you do not ? but you do ! you haunt I . those very eye that 
 you turn upon my with such a bitter flash a moment ago , they come 
 to I just as you show they then , in the night and in the day ! 
 Tess , ever since you tell I of that child of ours , it be just as if 
 my feeling , which have be flow in a strong puritanical stream , 
 have suddenly find a way open in the direction of you , and have all at 
 once gush through . the religious channel be leave dry forthwith ; 
 and it be you who have do it ! " 

 she gaze in silence . 

 " what - you have give up your preaching entirely ? " she ask . she 
 have gather from Angel sufficient of the incredulity of modern 
 thought to despise flash enthusiasm ; but , as a woman , she be 
 somewhat appalled . 

 in affected severity d'Urberville continue - 

 " Entirely . I have break every engagement since that afternoon I be 
 to address the drunkard at Casterbridge Fair . the deuce only know 
 what I be think of by the brother . ah - ha ! the brother ! no 
 doubt they pray for I - weep for I ; for they be kind people in 
 their way . but what do I care ? how could I go on with the thing 
 when I have lose my faith in it ? - it would have be hypocrisy of 
 the base kind ! among they I should have stand like Hymenaeus and 
 Alexander , who be deliver over to Satan that they might learn 
 not to blaspheme . what a grand revenge you have take ! I see you 
 innocent , and I deceive you . four year after , you find I a 
 christian enthusiast ; you then work upon I , perhaps to my complete 
 perdition ! but Tess , my coz , as I use to call you , this be only 
 my way of talk , and you must not look so horribly concerned . 
 of course you have do nothing except retain your pretty face and 
 shapely figure . I see it on the rick before you see I - that tight 
 pinafore - thing set it off , and that wing - bonnet - you field - girl 
 should never wear those bonnet if you wish to keep out of danger . " 
 he regard she silently for a few moment , and with a short cynical 
 laugh resume : " I believe that if the bachelor - apostle , whose deputy 
 I think I be , have be tempt by such a pretty face , he would 
 have let go the plough for her sake as I do ! " 

 Tess attempt to expostulate , but at this juncture all her fluency 
 fail she , and without heed he add : 

 " well , this paradise that you supply be perhaps as good as any other , 
 after all . but to speak seriously , Tess . " D'Urberville rise and 
 come nearer , recline sideway amid the sheaf , and rest upon 
 his elbow . " since I last see you , I have be think of what 
 you say that he say . I have come to the conclusion that there 
 do seem rather a want of common - sense in these threadbare old 
 proposition ; how I could have be so fire by poor Parson Clare 's 
 enthusiasm , and have go so madly to work , transcend even he , I 
 can not make out ! as for what you say last time , on the strength of 
 your wonderful husband 's intelligence - whose name you have never tell 
 I - about have what they call an ethical system without any dogma , 
 I do not   see my way to that at all . " 

 " why , you can have the religion of love - kindness and purity at 
 least , if you can not   have - what do you call it - dogma . " 

 " o no ! I be a different sort of fellow from that ! if there be nobody 
 to say , ' do this , and it will be a good thing for you after you be 
 dead ; do that , and if will be a bad thing for you , ' I can not   warm up . 
 hang it , I be not go to feel responsible for my deed and passion 
 if there be nobody to be responsible to ; and if I be you , my dear , 
 I would not   either ! " 

 she try to argue , and tell he that he have mix in his dull 
 brain two matter , theology and moral , which in the primitive day 
 of mankind have be quite distinct . but owe to Angel Clare 's 
 reticence , to her absolute want of training , and to she be a 
 vessel of emotion rather than reason , she could not get on . 

 " well , never mind , " he resume . " here I be , my love , as in the old 
 time ! " 

 " not as then - never as then - ' tis different ! " she entreat . " and 
 there be never warmth with I ! o why do not   you keep your faith , 
 if the loss of it have bring you to speak to I like this ! " 

 " because you have   knock it out of I ; so the evil be upon your sweet 
 head ! your husband little think how his teaching would recoil upon 
 he ! ha - ha - I be awfully glad you have make an apostate of I all the 
 same ! tess , I be more take with you than ever , and I pity you too . 
 for all your closeness , I see you be in a bad way - neglect by one 
 who ought to cherish you . " 

 she could not get her morsel of food down her throat ; her lip 
 be dry , and she be ready to choke . the voice and laugh of the 
 workfolk eat and drink under the rick come to she as if they 
 be a quarter of a mile off . 

 " it be cruelty to I ! " she say . " how - how can you treat I to this 
 talk , if you care ever so little for I ? " 

 " true , true , " he say , wince a little . " I do not come to reproach 
 you for my deed . I come Tess , to say that I do not   like you to be 
 work like this , and I have come on purpose for you . you say you 
 have a husband who be not I. Well , perhaps you have ; but I have   never 
 see he , and you have   not tell I his name ; and altogether he seem 
 rather a mythological personage . however , even if you have one , I 
 think I be near to you than he be . I , at any rate , try to help you 
 out of trouble , but he do not , bless his invisible face ! the word 
 of the stern prophet Hosea that I use to read come back to I . 
 do not   you know they , Tess ? - ' and she shall follow after her lover , 
 but she shall not overtake he ; and she shall seek he , but shall 
 not find he ; then shall she say , I will go and return to my first 
 husband ; for then be it well with I than now ! ' ... Tess , my trap 
 be wait just under the hill , and - darling mine , not his ! - you know 
 the rest . " 

 her face have be rise to a dull crimson fire while he speak ; but 
 she do not answer . 

 " you have be the cause of my backsliding , " he continue , stretch 
 his arm towards her waist ; " you should be willing to share it , and 
 leave that mule you call husband for ever . " 

 one of her leather glove , which she have take off to eat her 
 skimmer - cake , lie in her lap , and without the slight warning she 
 passionately swing the glove by the gauntlet directly in his face . 
 it be heavy and thick as a warrior 's , and it strike he flat on the 
 mouth . Fancy might have regard the act as the recrudescence of 
 a trick in which her armed progenitor be not unpractised . alec 
 fiercely start up from his reclining position . a scarlet oozing 
 appear where her blow have alight , and in a moment the blood begin 
 drop from his mouth upon the straw . but he soon control 
 himself , calmly draw his handkerchief from his pocket , and mop 
 his bleed lip . 

 she too have spring up , but she sink down again . " now , punish I ! " she 
 say , turn up her eye to he with the hopeless defiance of the 
 sparrow 's gaze before its captor twist its neck . " whip I , crush 
 I ; you need not mind those people under the rick ! I shall not cry 
 out . once victim , always victim - that be the law ! " 

 " o no , no , Tess , " he say blandly . " I can make full allowance for 
 this . yet you most unjustly forget one thing , that I would have 
 marry you if you have not put it out of my power to do so . do I 
 not ask you flatly to be my wife - hey ? answer I . " 

 " you do . " 

 " and you can not be . but remember one thing ! " his voice harden 
 as his temper get the well of he with the recollection of his 
 sincerity in ask she and her present ingratitude , and he step 
 across to her side and hold she by the shoulder , so that she shake 
 under his grasp . " remember , my lady , I be your master once ! I will 
 be your master again . if you be any man 's wife you be mine ! " 

 the thresher now begin to stir below . 

 " so much for our quarrel , " he say , let she go . " now I shall 
 leave you , and shall come again for your answer during the afternoon . 
 you do not   know I yet ! but I know you . " 

 she have not speak again , remain as if stun . D'Urberville 
 retreat over the sheaf , and descend the ladder , while the 
 worker below rise and stretch their arm , and shake down the beer 
 they have drunk . then the threshing - machine start afresh ; and amid 
 the renew rustle of the straw Tess resume her position by the 
 buzz drum as one in a dream , untie sheaf after sheaf in endless 
 succession . 



 xlviii 


 in the afternoon the farmer make it know that the rick be to be 
 finish that night , since there be a moon by which they could see 
 to work , and the man with the engine be engage for another farm on 
 the morrow . hence the twanging and hum and rustle proceed 
 with even less intermission than usual . 

 it be not till " nammet"-time , about three o - clock , that Tess raise 
 her eye and give a momentary glance round . she feel but little 
 surprise at see that Alec d'Urberville have come back , and be 
 stand under the hedge by the gate . he have see she lift her 
 eye , and wave his hand urbanely to she , while he blow she a kiss . 
 it mean that their quarrel be over . Tess look down again , and 
 carefully abstain from gaze in that direction . 

 thus the afternoon drag on . the wheat - rick shrank lower , and the 
 straw - rick grow high , and the corn - sack be cart away . at six 
 o'clock the wheat - rick be about shoulder - high from the ground . but 
 the unthreshed sheaf remain untouched seem countless still , 
 notwithstanding the enormous number that have be gulp down by 
 the insatiable swallower , feed by the man and Tess , through whose two 
 young hand the great part of they have pass . and the immense 
 stack of straw where in the morning there have be nothing , appear 
 as the faece of the same buzzing red glutton . from the west sky 
 a wrathful shine - all that wild March could afford in the way of 
 sunset - have burst forth after the cloudy day , flood the tired and 
 sticky face of the thresher , and dye they with a coppery light , 
 as also the flap garment of the woman , which clung to they like 
 dull flame . 

 a pant ache run through the rick . the man who feed be weary , and 
 Tess could see that the red nape of his neck be encrust with dirt 
 and husk . she still stand at her post , her flushed and perspire 
 face coat with the corndust , and her white bonnet embrown by it . 
 she be the only woman whose place be upon the machine so as to be 
 shake bodily by its spinning , and the decrease of the stack now 
 separate she from Marian and Izz , and prevent their change 
 duty with she as they have do . the incessant quivering , in 
 which every fibre of her frame participate , have throw she into a 
 stupefy reverie in which her arm work on independently of her 
 consciousness . she hardly know where she be , and do not hear Izz 
 Huett tell she from below that her hair be tumble down . 

 by degree the fresh among they begin to grow cadaverous and 
 saucer - eye . whenever Tess lift her head she behold always the 
 great upgrown straw - stack , with the man in shirt - sleeve upon it , 
 against the gray north sky ; in front of it the long red elevator 
 like a Jacob 's ladder , on which a perpetual stream of thresh straw 
 ascend , a yellow river run uphill , and spout out on the top 
 of the rick . 

 she know that Alec d'Urberville be still on the scene , observe 
 she from some point or other , though she could not say where . there 
 be an excuse for his remain , for when the thresh rick draw 
 near its final sheaf a little ratting be always do , and man 
 unconnected with the threshing sometimes drop in for that 
 performance - sport character of all description , gent with 
 terrier and facetious pipe , rough with stick and stone . 

 but there be another hour 's work before the layer of live rat at 
 the base of the stack would be reach ; and as the evening light in 
 the direction of the Giant 's Hill by Abbot's - Cernel dissolve away , 
 the white - faced moon of the season arise from the horizon that lay 
 towards Middleton Abbey and Shottsford on the other side . for the 
 last hour or two Marian have feel uneasy about Tess , whom she could 
 not get near enough to speak to , the other woman have keep up their 
 strength by drink ale , and Tess have do without it through 
 traditionary dread , owe to its result at her home in childhood . 
 but Tess still keep go : if she could not fill her part she would 
 have to leave ; and this contingency , which she would have regard 
 with equanimity and even with relief a month or two early , have 
 become a terror since d'Urberville have begin to hover round she . 

 the sheaf - pitcher and feeder have now work the rick so low that 
 people on the ground could talk to they . to Tess 's surprise Farmer 
 Groby come up on the machine to she , and say that if she desire to 
 join her friend he do not wish she to keep on any long , and would 
 send somebody else to take her place . the " friend " be d'Urberville , 
 she know , and also that this concession have be grant in obedience 
 to the request of that friend , or enemy . she shake her head and 
 toil on . 

 the time for the rat - catch arrive at last , and the hunt begin . 
 the creature have creep downwards with the subsidence of the rick 
 till they be all together at the bottom , and be now uncover 
 from their last refuge , they run across the open ground in all 
 direction , a loud shriek from the by - this - time half - tipsy Marian 
 inform her companion that one of the rat have invade her 
 person - a terror which the rest of the woman have guard against by 
 various scheme of skirt - tucking and self - elevation . the rat be 
 at last dislodge , and , amid the barking of dog , masculine shout , 
 feminine scream , oath , stamping , and confusion as of Pandemonium , 
 Tess untie her last sheaf ; the drum slow , the whizzing cease , 
 and she step from the machine to the ground . 

 her lover , who have only look on at the rat - catch , be promptly 
 at her side . 

 " what - after all - my insulting slap , too ! " say she in an 
 underbreath . she be so utterly exhausted that she have not strength 
 to speak louder . 

 " I should indeed be foolish to feel offended at anything you say or 
 do , " he answer , in the seductive voice of the Trantridge time . 
 " how the little limbs tremble ! you be as weak as a bleed calf , you 
 know you be ; and yet you need have do nothing since I arrive . 
 how could you be so obstinate ? however , I have tell the farmer that 
 he have no right to employ woman at steam - threshing . it be not proper 
 work for they ; and on all the well class of farm it have be give 
 up , as he know very well . I will walk with you as far as your 
 home . " 

 " o yes , " she answer with a jade gait . " Walk wi ' I if you will ! 
 I do bear in mind that you come to marry I before you know o ' my 
 state . perhaps - perhaps you be a little well and kind than I 
 have be think you be . whatever be mean as kindness I be 
 grateful for ; whatever be mean in any other way I be anger at . 
 I can not sense your meaning sometimes . " 

 " if I can not legitimize our former relation at least I can assist 
 you . and I will do it with much more regard for your feeling than 
 I formerly show . my religious mania , or whatever it be , be over . 
 but I retain a little good nature ; I hope I do . now , Tess , by 
 all that be tender and strong between man and woman , trust I ! I 
 have enough and more than enough to put you out of anxiety , both 
 for yourself and your parent and sister . I can make they all 
 comfortable if you will only show confidence in I . " 

 " have you see them lately ? " she quickly inquire . 

 " yes . they do not   know where you be . it be only by chance that I 
 find you here . " 

 the cold moon look aslant upon Tess 's fagged face between the twig 
 of the garden - hedge as she pause outside the cottage which be her 
 temporary home , d'Urberville pause beside she . 

 " do not   mention my little brother and sister - do not   make I break 
 down quite ! " she say . " if you want to help they - God know they 
 need it - do it without tell I . but no , no ! " she cry . " I will 
 take nothing from you , either for they or for I ! " 

 he do not accompany she far , since , as she live with the 
 household , all be public indoor . no soon have she herself 
 enter , lave herself in a washing - tub , and share supper with the 
 family than she fall into thought , and withdraw to the table under 
 the wall , by the light of her own little lamp write in a passionate 
 mood - 


  my OWN HUSBAND , - 

  let I call you so - I must - even if it make you angry to 
  think of such an unworthy wife as I. I must cry to you 
  in my trouble - I have no one else ! I be so expose to 
  temptation , Angel . I fear to say who it be , and I do not 
  like to write about it at all . but I cling to you in a way 
  you can not think ! can you not come to I now , at once , 
  before anything terrible happen ? o , I know you can not , 
  because you be so far away ! I think I must die if you do 
  not come soon , or tell I to come to you . the punishment 
  you have measure out to I be deserve - I do know that - 
  well deserve - and you be right and just to be angry with 
  I . but , Angel , please , please , not to be just - only a 
  little kind to I , even if I do not deserve it , and come to 
  I ! if you would come , I could die in your arm ! I would 
  be well content to do that if so be you have forgive I ! 

  Angel , I live entirely for you . I love you too much to 
  blame you for go away , and I know it be necessary you 
  should find a farm . do not think I shall say a word of 
  sting or bitterness . only come back to I . I be desolate 
  without you , my darling , o , so desolate ! I do not mind 
  have to work : but if you will send I one little line , 
  and say , " I be come soon , " I will bide on , Angel - O , so 
  cheerfully ! 

  it have be so much my religion ever since we be marry 
  to be faithful to you in every thought and look , that even 
  when a man speak a compliment to I before I be aware , it 
  seem wrong you . have you never feel one little bit of 
  what you use to feel when we be at the dairy ? if you 
  have , how can you keep away from I ? I be the same woman , 
  Angel , as you fall in love with ; yes , the very same ! - not 
  the one you dislike but never see . what be the past to I 
  as soon as I meet you ? it be a dead thing altogether . I 
  become another woman , fill full of new life from you . how 
  could I be the early one ? why do you not see this ? dear , 
  if you would only be a little more conceited , and believe 
  in yourself so far as to see that you be strong enough to 
  work this change in I , you would perhaps be in a mind to 
  come to I , your poor wife . 

  how silly I be in my happiness when I think I could trust 
  you always to love I ! I ought to have know that such as 
  that be not for poor I . but I be sick at heart , not only 
  for old time , but for the present . think - think how it do 
  hurt my heart not to see you ever - ever ! ah , if I could 
  only make your dear heart ache one little minute of each day 
  as mine do every day and all day long , it might lead you 
  to show pity to your poor lonely one . 

  People still say that I be rather pretty , Angel   handsome be 
  the word they use , since I wish to be truthful . perhaps I 
  be what they say . but I do not value my good look ; I only 
  like to have they because they belong to you , my dear , and 
  that there may be at least one thing about I worth your 
  have . so much have I feel this , that when I meet with 
  annoyance on account of the same , I tie up my face in a 
  bandage as long as people would believe in it . o Angel , I 
  tell you all this not from vanity - you will certainly know 
  I do not - but only that you may come to I ! 

  if you really can not come to I , will you let I come to 
  you ? I be , as I say , worried , press to do what I will 
  not do . it can not be that I shall yield one inch , yet I be 
  in terror as to what an accident might lead to , and I so 
  defenceless on account of my first error . I can not say more 
  about this - it make I too miserable . but if I break down 
  by fall into some fearful snare , my last state will be 
  bad than my first . o God , I can not think of it ! let I 
  come at once , or at once come to I ! 

  I would be content , ay , glad , to live with you as your 
  servant , if I may not as your wife ; so that I could only be 
  near you , and get glimpse of you , and think of you as mine . 

  the daylight have nothing to show I , since you be not here , 
  and I do not   like to see the rook and starling in the 
  field , because I grieve and grieve to miss you who use to 
  see they with I . I long for only one thing in heaven or 
  earth or under the earth , to meet you , my own dear ! come 
  to I - come to I , and save I from what threaten I ! - 

  your faithful heartbroken 

  TESS 



 XLIX 


 the appeal duly find its way to the breakfast - table of the quiet 
 Vicarage to the westward , in that valley where the air be so soft and 
 the soil so rich that the effort of growth require but superficial 
 aid by comparison with the tillage at Flintcomb - Ash , and where to 
 Tess the human world seem so different   though it be much the 
 same . it be purely for security that she have be request by 
 Angel to send her communication through his father , whom he keep 
 pretty well informed of his change address in the country he 
 have go to exploit for himself with a heavy heart . 

 " now , " say old Mr Clare to his wife , when he have read the envelope , 
 " if Angel propose leave Rio for a visit home at the end of next 
 month , as he tell we that he hop to do , I think this may hasten his 
 plan ; for I believe it to be from his wife . " he breathe deeply at 
 the thought of she ; and the letter be redirect to be promptly send 
 on to Angel . 

 " dear fellow , I hope he will get home safely , " murmur Mrs Clare . 
 " to my die day I shall feel that he have be ill - used . you should 
 have send he to Cambridge in spite of his want of faith and give 
 he the same chance as the other boy have . he would have grow out 
 of it under proper influence , and perhaps would have take order 
 after all . church or no Church , it would have be fair to he . " 

 this be the only wail with which Mrs Clare ever disturb her 
 husband 's peace in respect to their son . and she do not vent this 
 often ; for she be as considerate as she be devout , and know that 
 his mind too be trouble by doubt as to his justice in this matter . 
 only too often have she hear he lie awake at night , stifle sigh 
 for Angel with prayer . but the uncompromising Evangelical do not 
 even now hold that he would have be justify in give his son , 
 an unbeliever , the same academic advantage that he have give to the 
 two other , when it be possible , if not probable , that those very 
 advantage might have be use to decry the doctrine which he have 
 make it his life 's mission and desire to propagate , and the mission 
 of his ordain son likewise . to put with one hand a pedestal 
 under the foot of the two faithful one , and with the other to exalt 
 the unfaithful by the same artificial mean , he deem to be alike 
 inconsistent with his conviction , his position , and his hope . 
 nevertheless , he love his misnamed Angel , and in secret mourn 
 over this treatment of he as Abraham might have mourn over the 
 doom Isaac while they go up the hill together . his silent 
 self - generate regret be far bitter than the reproach which 
 his wife render audible . 

 they blame themselves for this unlucky marriage . if Angel have never 
 be destine for a farmer he would never have be throw with 
 agricultural girl . they do not distinctly know what have separate 
 he and his wife , nor the date on which the separation have take 
 place . at first they have suppose it must be something of the nature 
 of a serious aversion . but in his later letter he occasionally 
 allude to the intention of come home to fetch she ; from which 
 expression they hop the division might not owe its origin to 
 anything so hopelessly permanent as that . he have tell they that she 
 be with her relative , and in their doubt they have decide not to 
 intrude into a situation which they know no way of better . 

 the eye for which Tess 's letter be intend be gaze at this 
 time on a limitless expanse of country from the back of a mule which 
 be bear he from the interior of the south - American Continent 
 towards the coast . his experience of this strange land have be 
 sad . the severe illness from which he have suffer shortly after 
 his arrival have never wholly leave he , and he have by degree almost 
 decide to relinquish his hope of farming here , though , as long as 
 the bare possibility exist of his remain , he keep this change 
 of view a secret from his parent . 

 the crowd of agricultural labourer who have come out to the country 
 in his wake , dazzle by representation of easy independence , have 
 suffer , die , and waste away . he would see mother from english 
 farm trudge along with their infant in their arm , when the child 
 would be stricken with fever and would die ; the mother would pause 
 to dig a hole in the loose earth with her bare hand , would bury the 
 babe therein with the same natural grave - tool , shed one tear , and 
 again trudge on . 

 Angel 's original intention have not be emigration to Brazil but a 
 northern or eastern farm in his own country . he have come to this 
 place in a fit of desperation , the Brazil movement among the English 
 agriculturist have by chance coincide with his desire to escape 
 from his past existence . 

 during this time of absence he have mentally age a dozen year . 
 what arrest he now as of value in life be less its beauty than 
 its pathos . have long discredit the old system of mysticism , 
 he now begin to discredit the old appraisement of morality . he 
 think they want readjust . who be the moral man ? still more 
 pertinently , who be the moral woman ? the beauty or ugliness of 
 a character lie not only in its achievement , but in its aim and 
 impulse ; its true history lay , not among thing do , but among 
 thing willed . 

 how , then , about Tess ? 

 view she in these light , a regret for his hasty judgement begin 
 to oppress he . do he reject she eternally , or do he not ? he 
 could no long say that he would always reject she , and not to say 
 that be in spirit to accept she now . 

 this grow fondness for her memory coincide in point of time 
 with her residence at Flintcomb - Ash , but it be before she have feel 
 herself at liberty to trouble he with a word about her circumstance 
 or her feeling . he be greatly perplexed ; and in his perplexity as 
 to her motif in withholding intelligence , he do not inquire . thus 
 her silence of docility be misinterpret . how much it really say 
 if he have understand ! - that she adhere with literal exactness to 
 order which he have give and forget ; that despite her natural 
 fearlessness she assert no right , admit his judgement to be in 
 every respect the true one , and bent her head dumbly thereto . 

 in the before - mention journey by mule through the interior of the 
 country , another man ride beside he . Angel 's companion be also an 
 Englishman , bent on the same errand , though he come from another part 
 of the island . they be both in a state of mental depression , and 
 they speak of home affair . confidence begat confidence . with that 
 curious tendency evince by man , more especially when in distant 
 land , to entrust to stranger detail of their life which they 
 would on no account mention to friend , Angel admit to this man 
 as they ride along the sorrowful fact of his marriage . 

 the stranger have sojourn in many more land and among many more 
 people than Angel ; to his cosmopolitan mind such deviation from the 
 social norm , so immense to domesticity , be no more than be the 
 irregularity of vale and mountain - chain to the whole terrestrial 
 curve . he view the matter in quite a different light from Angel ; 
 think that what Tess have be be of no importance beside what she 
 would be , and plainly tell Clare that he be wrong in come away 
 from she . 

 the next day they be drench in a thunder - storm . Angel 's companion 
 be strike down with fever , and die by the week 's end . Clare wait 
 a few hour to bury he , and then go on his way . 

 the cursory remark of the large - minded stranger , of whom he know 
 absolutely nothing beyond a commonplace name , be sublime by his 
 death , and influence Clare more than all the reasoned ethic of the 
 philosopher . his own parochialism make he ashamed by its contrast . 
 his inconsistency rush upon he in a flood . he have persistently 
 elevated hellenic paganism at the expense of Christianity ; yet in 
 that civilization an illegal surrender be not certain disesteem . 
 surely then he might have regard that abhorrence of the un - intact 
 state , which he have inherit with the creed of mysticism , as at 
 least open to correction when the result be due to treachery . a 
 remorse strike into he . the word of Izz Huett , never quite still 
 in his memory , come back to he . he have ask Izz if she love he , 
 and she have reply in the affirmative . do she love he more than 
 Tess do ? no , she have reply ; Tess would lay down her life for he , 
 and she herself could do no more . 

 he think of Tess as she have appear on the day of the wedding . 
 how her eye have linger upon he ; how she have hang upon his word 
 as if they be a god 's ! and during the terrible evening over the 
 hearth , when her simple soul uncover itself to his , how pitiful she 
 face have look by the ray of the fire , in her inability to realize 
 that his love and protection could possibly be withdraw . 

 thus from be her critic he grow to be her advocate . cynical 
 thing he have utter to himself about she ; but no man can be always 
 a cynic and live ; and he withdraw they . the mistake of express 
 they have arise from his allow himself to be influence by general 
 principle to the disregard of the particular instance . 

 but the reasoning be somewhat musty ; lover and husband have go 
 over the ground before to - day . Clare have be harsh towards she ; 
 there be no doubt of it . man be too often harsh with woman they 
 love or have love ; woman with man . and yet these harshness be 
 tenderness itself when compare with the universal harshness out 
 of which they grow ; the harshness of the position towards the 
 temperament , of the mean towards the aim , of to - day towards 
 yesterday , of hereafter towards to - day . 

 the historic interest of her family - that masterful line of 
 d'Urbervilles - whom he have despise as a spend force , touch his 
 sentiment now . why have he not know the difference between the 
 political value and the imaginative value of these thing ? in 
 the latter aspect her d'Urberville descent be a fact of great 
 dimension ; worthless to economic , it be a most useful ingredient 
 to the dreamer , to the moralizer on decline and fall . it be a 
 fact that would soon be forget - that bit of distinction in poor 
 Tess 's blood and name , and oblivion would fall upon her hereditary 
 link with the marble monument and leaded skeleton at Kingsbere . so 
 do Time ruthlessly destroy his own romance . in recall her face 
 again and again , he think now that he could see therein a flash of 
 the dignity which must have grace her grand - dame ; and the vision 
 send that aura through his vein which he have formerly feel , and 
 which leave behind it a sense of sickness . 

 despite her not - inviolate past , what still abode in such a woman as 
 Tess outvalue the freshness of her fellow . be not the gleaning 
 of the grape of Ephraim well than the vintage of Abiezer ? 

 so speak love renascent , prepare the way for Tess 's devoted 
 outpouring , which be then just be forward to he by his father ; 
 though owe to his distance inland it be to be a long time in 
 reach he . 

 meanwhile the writer 's expectation that Angel would come in response 
 to the entreaty be alternately great and small . what lessen it 
 be that the fact of her life which have lead to the parting have 
 not change - could never change ; and that , if her presence have not 
 attenuate they , her absence could not . nevertheless she address 
 her mind to the tender question of what she could do to please he 
 good if he should arrive . sigh be expend on the wish that she 
 have take more notice of the tune he play on his harp , that she 
 have inquire more curiously of he which be his favourite ballad 
 among those the country - girl sing . she indirectly inquire of Amby 
 Seedling , who have follow Izz from Talbothays , and by chance Amby 
 remember that , amongst the snatch of melody in which they have 
 indulge at the dairyman 's , to induce the cow to let down their 
 milk , Clare have seem to like " Cupid 's Gardens " , " I have park , I 
 have hound " , and " the break o ' the day " ; and have seem not to care 
 for " the Tailor 's Breeches " and " such a beauty I do grow " , excellent 
 ditty as they be . 

 to perfect the ballad be now her whimsical desire . she practise 
 they privately at odd moment , especially " the break o ' the day " : 


  Arise , arise , arise ! 
  and pick your love a posy , 
  all o ' the sweetest flower 
  that in the garden grow . 
  the turtle dove and sma ' bird 
  in every bough a - building , 
  so early in the May - time 
  at the break o ' the day ! 


 it would have melt the heart of a stone to hear she sing these 
 ditty whenever she work apart from the rest of the girl in this 
 cold dry time ; the tear run down her cheek all the while at the 
 thought that perhaps he would not , after all , come to hear she , and 
 the simple silly word of the song resound in painful mockery of 
 the aching heart of the singer . 

 Tess be so wrapt up in this fanciful dream that she seem not to 
 know how the season be advance ; that the day have lengthen , that 
 Lady - Day be at hand , and would soon be follow by Old Lady - Day , the 
 end of her term here . 

 but before the quarter - day have quite come , something happen which 
 make Tess think of far different matter . she be at she lodge as 
 usual one evening , sit in the downstairs room with the rest of 
 the family , when somebody knock at the door and inquire for Tess . 
 through the doorway she see against the decline light a figure 
 with the height of a woman and the breadth of a child , a tall , thin , 
 girlish creature whom she do not recognize in the twilight till the 
 girl say " Tess ! " 

 " what - be it ' Liza - Lu ? " ask Tess , in startled accent . her sister , 
 whom a little over a year ago she have leave at home as a child , have 
 spring up by a sudden shoot to a form of this presentation , of which 
 as yet Lu seem herself scarce able to understand the meaning . 
 her thin leg , visible below her once - long frock , now short by she 
 grow , and her uncomfortable hand and arm reveal her youth and 
 inexperience . 

 " yes , I have be traipse about all day , Tess , " say Lu , with 
 unemotional gravity , " a - try to find ' ee ; and I be very tired . " 

 " what be the matter at home ? " 

 " mother be take very bad , and the doctor say she be die , and as 
 father be not very well neither , and say ' tis wrong for a man of 
 such a high family as his to slave and drave at common labour 
 work , we do not   know what to do . " 

 Tess stand in reverie a long time before she think of ask 
 ' Liza - Lu to come in and sit down . when she have do so , and ' Liza - Lu 
 be have some tea , she come to a decision . it be imperative that 
 she should go home . her agreement do not end till Old Lady - Day , the 
 sixth of April , but as the interval thereto be not a long one she 
 resolve to run the risk of start at once . 

 to go that night would be a gain of twelve - hour ; but her sister 
 be too tired to undertake such a distance till the morrow . tess 
 run down to where Marian and Izz live , inform they of what have 
 happen , and beg they to make the good of her case to the farmer . 
 return , she get Lu a supper , and after that , have tuck the 
 young into her own bed , pack up as many of her belonging as 
 would go into a withy basket , and start , direct Lu to follow 
 she next morning . 



 L 


 she plunge into the chilly equinoctial darkness as the clock strike 
 ten , for her fifteen mile ' walk under the steely star . in lonely 
 district night be a protection rather than a danger to a noiseless 
 pedestrian , and know this , Tess pursue the near course along 
 by - lane that she would almost have fear in the day - time ; but 
 marauder be want now , and spectral fear be drive out of 
 her mind by thought of her mother . thus she proceed mile after 
 mile , ascend and descending till she come to Bulbarrow , and about 
 midnight look from that height into the abyss of chaotic shade 
 which be all that reveal itself of the vale on whose further side 
 she be bear . have already traverse about five mile on the 
 upland , she have now some ten or eleven in the lowland before her 
 journey would be finish . the wind road downward become just 
 visible to she under the wan starlight as she follow it , and 
 soon she pace a soil so contrast with that above it that the 
 difference be perceptible to the tread and to the smell . it be the 
 heavy clay land of Blackmoor Vale , and a part of the Vale to which 
 turnpike - road have never penetrate . superstition linger long on 
 these heavy soil . have once be forest , at this shadowy time it 
 seem to assert something of its old character , the far and the near 
 be blend , and every tree and tall hedge make the most of its 
 presence . the hart that have be hunt here , the witch that have 
 be prick and duck , the green - spangled fairy that " whickered " 
 at you as you pass ; - the place teem with belief in they still , 
 and they form an impish multitude now . 

 at Nuttlebury she pass the village inn , whose sign creak in 
 response to the greeting of her footstep , which not a human soul 
 hear but herself . under the thatched roof her mind 's eye beheld 
 relaxed tendon and flaccid muscle , spread out in the darkness 
 beneath coverlet make of little purple patchwork square , and 
 undergo a bracing process at the hand of sleep for renew labour 
 on the morrow , as soon as a hint of pink nebulosity appear on 
 Hambledon Hill . 

 at three she turn the last corner of the maze of lane she have 
 thread , and enter Marlott , pass the field in which as a 
 club - girl she have first see Angel Clare , when he have not dance 
 with she ; the sense of disappointment remain with she yet . in the 
 direction of her mother 's house she see a light . it come from the 
 bedroom window , and a branch wave in front of it and make it wink at 
 she . as soon as she could discern the outline of the house - newly 
 thatch with her money - it have all its old effect upon Tess 's 
 imagination . part of her body and life it ever seem to be ; the 
 slope of its dormer , the finish of its gable , the broken course of 
 brick which top the chimney , all have something in common with her 
 personal character . a stupefaction have come into these feature , to 
 her regard ; it mean the illness of her mother . 

 she open the door so softly as to disturb nobody ; the low room 
 be vacant , but the neighbour who be sit up with her mother come 
 to the top of the stair , and whisper that Mrs Durbeyfield be no 
 well , though she be sleep just then . Tess prepare herself a 
 breakfast , and then take her place as nurse in her mother 's chamber . 

 in the morning , when she contemplate the child , they have all a 
 curiously elongate look ; although she have be away little more than 
 a year , their growth be astounding ; and the necessity of apply 
 herself heart and soul to their need take she out of her own care . 

 her father 's ill - health be the same indefinite kind , and he sit in 
 his chair as usual . but the day after her arrival he be unusually 
 bright . he have a rational scheme for living , and Tess ask he what 
 it be . 

 " I be think of send round to all the old antiqueerian in this 
 part of England , " he say , " ask they to subscribe to a fund to 
 maintain I . I be sure they would see it as a romantical , artistical , 
 and proper thing to do . they spend lot o ' money in keep up old 
 ruin , and find the bone o ' thing , and such like ; and living 
 remain must be more interesting to them still , if they only know 
 of I . would that somebody would go round and tell them what there 
 be live among them , and they think nothing of he ! if Pa'son 
 Tringham , who discover I , have live , he would ha ' do it , I be sure . " 

 Tess postpone her argument on this high project till she have 
 grapple with press matter in hand , which seem little improve 
 by her remittance . when indoor necessity have be ease , she 
 turn her attention to external thing . it be now the season for 
 planting and sow ; many garden and allotment of the villager 
 have already receive their spring tillage ; but the garden and the 
 allotment of the Durbeyfields be behindhand . she find , to she 
 dismay , that this be owe to their have eat all the seed 
 potato , - that last lapse of the improvident . at the early 
 moment she obtain what other she could procure , and in a few 
 day her father be well enough to see to the garden , under Tess 's 
 persuasive effort : while she herself undertake the allotment - plot 
 which they rent in a field a couple of hundred yard out of the 
 village . 

 she like do it after the confinement of the sick chamber , where 
 she be not now require by reason of her mother 's improvement . 
 violent motion relieve thought . the plot of ground be in a high , 
 dry , open enclosure , where there be forty or fifty such piece , 
 and where labour be at its briskest when the hire labour of the 
 day have end . dig begin usually at six o'clock and extend 
 indefinitely into the dusk or moonlight . just now heap of dead 
 weed and refuse be burn on many of the plot , the dry weather 
 favour their combustion . 

 one fine day tess and ' Liza - Lu work on here with their neighbour 
 till the last ray of the sun smite flat upon the white peg that 
 divide the plot . as soon as twilight succeed to sunset the flare 
 of the couch - grass and cabbage - stalk fire begin to light up the 
 allotment fitfully , their outline appear and disappear under 
 the dense smoke as waft by the wind . when a fire glow , bank 
 of smoke , blow level along the ground , would themselves become 
 illuminate to an opaque lustre , screen the workpeople from one 
 another ; and the meaning of the " pillar of a cloud " , which be a wall 
 by day and a light by night , could be understand . 

 as evening thicken , some of the garden man and woman give over 
 for the night , but the great number remain to get their planting 
 do , Tess be among they , though she send her sister home . it be 
 on one of the couch - burn plot that she labour with her fork , 
 its four shin prong resound against the stone and dry clod 
 in little click . sometimes she be completely involve in the smoke 
 of her fire ; then it would leave her figure free , irradiate by the 
 brassy glare from the heap . she be oddly dress to - night , and 
 present a somewhat star aspect , her attire be a gown bleach 
 by many washing , with a short black jacket over it , the effect of 
 the whole be that of a wedding and funeral guest in one . the 
 woman far back wear white apron , which , with their pale face , 
 be all that could be see of they in the gloom , except when at 
 moment they catch a flash from the flame . 

 Westward , the wiry bough of the bare thorn hedge which form the 
 boundary of the field rise against the pale opalescence of the low 
 sky . above , Jupiter hang like a full - blow jonquil , so bright 
 as almost to throw a shade . a few small nondescript star be 
 appear elsewhere . in the distance a dog bark , and wheel 
 occasionally rattle along the dry road . 

 still the prong continue to click assiduously , for it be not late ; 
 and though the air be fresh and keen there be a whisper of spring 
 in it that cheer the worker on . something in the place , the 
 hour , the crackling fire , the fantastic mystery of light and 
 shade , make other as well as Tess enjoy be there . nightfall , 
 which in the frost of winter come as a fiend and in the warmth of 
 summer as a lover , come as a tranquillizer on this March day . 

 nobody look at his or her companion . the eye of all be on the 
 soil as its turn surface be reveal by the fire . hence as Tess 
 stir the clod and sing her foolish little song with scarce 
 now a hope that Clare would ever hear they , she do not for a long 
 time notice the person who work near to her - a man in a long 
 smockfrock who , she find , be fork the same plot as herself , and 
 whom she suppose her father have send there to advance the work . 
 she become more conscious of he when the direction of his digging 
 bring he close . sometimes the smoke divide they ; then it 
 swerve , and the two be visible to each other but divide from all 
 the rest . 

 Tess do not speak to her fellow - worker , nor do he speak to she . 
 nor do she think of he far than to recollect that he have not 
 be there when it be broad daylight , and that she do not know 
 he as any one of the Marlott labourer , which be no wonder , her 
 absence have be so long and frequent of late year . by - and - by 
 he dig so close to she that the fire - beam be reflect as 
 distinctly from the steel prong of his fork as from her own . on 
 go up to the fire to throw a pitch of dead weed upon it , she 
 find that he do the same on the other side . the fire flare up , 
 and she behold the face of d'Urberville . 

 the unexpectedness of his presence , the grotesqueness of his 
 appearance in a gather smockfrock , such as be now wear only by the 
 most old - fashioned of the labourer , have a ghastly comicality that 
 chill she as to its bearing . D'Urberville emit a low , long 
 laugh . 

 " if I be incline to joke , I should say , how much this seem like 
 Paradise ! " he remark whimsically , look at she with an inclined 
 head . 

 " what do you say ? " she weakly ask . 

 " a jester might say this be just like Paradise . you be Eve , and I 
 be the old other one come to tempt you in the disguise of an inferior 
 animal . I use to be quite up in that scene of Milton 's when I be 
 theological . some of it go - 


  " ' Empress , the way be ready , and not long , 
  beyond a row of myrtle ... 
  ... if thou accept 
  my conduct , I can bring thee thither soon . ' 
  ' lead then , ' say Eve . 


 " and so on . my dear Tess , I be only put this to you as a thing 
 that you might have suppose or say quite untruly , because you think 
 so badly of I . " 

 " I never say you be Satan , or think it . I do not   think of you in 
 that way at all . my thought of you be quite cold , except when you 
 affront I . what , do you come dig here entirely because of I ? " 

 " entirely . to see you ; nothing more . the smockfrock , which I 
 see hang for sale as I come along , be an afterthought , that I 
 might not   be notice . I come to protest against your work like 
 this . " 

 " but I like do it - it be for my father . " 

 " your engagement at the other place be end ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " where be you go to next ? to join your dear husband ? " 

 she could not bear the humiliating reminder . 

 " o - I do not   know ! " she say bitterly . " I have no husband ! " 

 " it be quite true - in the sense you mean . but you have a friend , and 
 I have determine that you shall be comfortable in spite of yourself . 
 when you get down to your house you will see what I have send there 
 for you . " 

 " o , Alec , I wish you would not   give I anything at all ! I can not take 
 it from you ! I do not   like - it be not right ! " 

 " it be right ! " he cry lightly . " I be not go to see a woman whom 
 I feel so tenderly for as I do for you in trouble without try to 
 help she . " 

 " but I be very well off ! I be only in trouble about - about - not 
 about live at all ! " 

 she turn , and desperately resume her digging , tear dripping upon 
 the fork - handle and upon the clod . 

 " about the child - your brother and sister , " he resume . " I have 
 be think of they . " 

 Tess 's heart quiver - he be touch she in a weak place . he have 
 divine her chief anxiety . since return home her soul have go 
 out to those child with an affection that be passionate . 

 " if your mother do not recover , somebody ought to do something for 
 they ; since your father will not be able to do much , I suppose ? " 

 " he can with my assistance . he must ! " 

 " and with mine . " 

 " no , sir ! " 

 " how damned foolish this be ! " burst out d'Urberville . " why , he 
 think we be the same family ; and will be quite satisfied ! " 

 " he do not . I have   undeceive he . " 

 " the more fool you ! " 

 D'Urberville in anger retreat from she to the hedge , where he 
 pull off the long smockfrock which have disguise he ; and roll 
 it up and push it into the couch - fire , go away . 

 Tess could not get on with her digging after this ; she feel restless ; 
 she wonder if he have go back to her father 's house ; and take 
 the fork in her hand proceed homeward . 

 some twenty yard from the house she be meet by one of her sister . 

 " O , Tessy - what do you think ! ' Liza - Lu be a - crying , and there be a 
 lot of folk in the house , and mother be a good deal well , but they 
 think father be dead ! " 

 the child realize the grandeur of the news ; but not as yet its 
 sadness , and stand look at Tess with round - eyed importance till , 
 behold the effect produce upon she , she say - 

 " what , Tess , shall not   we talk to father never no more ? " 

 " but father be only a little bit ill ! " exclaim Tess distractedly . 

 ' Liza - Lu come up . 

 " he drop down just now , and the doctor who be there for mother 
 say there be no chance for he , because his heart be grow in . " 

 yes ; the Durbeyfield couple have change place ; the die one be 
 out of danger , and the indisposed one be dead . the news mean even 
 more than it sound . her father 's life have a value apart from his 
 personal achievement , or perhaps it would not have have much . it 
 be the last of the three life for whose duration the house and 
 premise be hold under a lease ; and it have long be covet by the 
 tenant - farmer for his regular labourer , who be stint in cottage 
 accommodation . moreover , " livier " be disapprove of in village 
 almost as much as little freeholder , because of their independence 
 of manner , and when a lease determine it be never renew . 

 thus the Durbeyfields , once d'Urbervilles , see descend upon they 
 the destiny which , no doubt , when they be among the Olympians of 
 the county , they have cause to descend many a time , and severely 
 enough , upon the head of such landless one as they themselves be 
 now . so do flux and reflux - the rhythm of change - alternate and 
 persist in everything under the sky . 



 LI 


 at length it be the eve of Old Lady - Day , and the agricultural world 
 be in a fever of mobility such as only occur at that particular 
 date of the year . it be a day of fulfilment ; agreement for outdoor 
 service during the ensue year , enter into at Candlemas , be to 
 be now carry out . the labourer - or " work - folk " , as they use to 
 call themselves immemorially till the other word be introduce from 
 without - who wish to remain no long in old place be remove to 
 the new farm . 

 these annual migration from farm to farm be on the increase here . 
 when Tess 's mother be a child the majority of the field - folk about 
 Marlott have remain all their life on one farm , which have be the 
 home also of their father and grandfather ; but latterly the desire 
 for yearly removal have rise to a high pitch . with the young 
 family it be a pleasant excitement which might possibly be an 
 advantage . the Egypt of one family be the Land of Promise to the 
 family who see it from a distance , till by residence there it become 
 it turn their Egypt also ; and so they change and change . 

 however , all the mutation so increasingly discernible in village 
 life do not originate entirely in the agricultural unrest . a 
 depopulation be also go on . the village have formerly contain , 
 side by side with the argicultural labourer , an interesting and 
 well - inform class , rank distinctly above the former - the class 
 to which Tess 's father and mother have belong - and include the 
 carpenter , the smith , the shoemaker , the huckster , together with 
 nondescript worker other than farm - labourer ; a set of people 
 who owe a certain stability of aim and conduct to the fact of 
 their being lifeholder like Tess 's father , or copyholder , or 
 occasionally , small freeholder . but as the long holding fall 
 in , they be seldom again let to similar tenant , and be mostly 
 pull down , if not absolutely require by the farmer for his hand . 
 cottager who be not directly employ on the land be look 
 upon with disfavour , and the banishment of some starve the trade of 
 other , who be thus oblige to follow . these family , who have 
 form the backbone of the village life in the past , who be the 
 depositary of the village tradition , have to seek refuge in the 
 large centre ; the process , humorously designate by statistician as 
 " the tendency of the rural population towards the large town " , be 
 really the tendency of water to flow uphill when force by machinery . 

 the cottage accommodation at Marlott have be in this manner 
 considerably curtail by demolition , every house which remain 
 standing be require by the agriculturist for his work - people . ever 
 since the occurrence of the event which have cast such a shadow over 
 Tess 's life , the Durbeyfield family   whose descent be not credit 
 have be tacitly look on as one which would have to go when their 
 lease end , if only in the interest of morality . it be , indeed , 
 quite true that the household have not be shin example either of 
 temperance , soberness , or chastity . the father , and even the mother , 
 have get drunk at time , the young child seldom have go to 
 church , and the eld daughter have make queer union . by some mean 
 the village have to be keep pure . so on this , the first Lady - Day 
 on which the Durbeyfields be expellable , the house , be roomy , 
 be require for a carter with a large family ; and Widow Joan , 
 her daughter Tess and ' Liza - Lu , the boy Abraham , and the young 
 child have to go elsewhere . 

 on the evening precede their removal it be get dark betime by 
 reason of a drizzle rain which blur the sky . as it be the last 
 night they would spend in the village which have be their home and 
 birthplace , Mrs Durbeyfield , ' Liza - Lu , and Abraham have go out to 
 bid some friend goodbye , and Tess be keep house till they should 
 return . 

 she be kneel in the window - bench , her face close to the casement , 
 where an outer pane of rain - water be slide down the inner pane of 
 glass . her eye rest on the web of a spider , probably starve long 
 ago , which have be mistakenly place in a corner where no fly 
 ever come , and shiver in the slight draught through the casement . 
 Tess be reflect on the position of the household , in which she 
 perceive her own evil influence . have she not come home , her mother 
 and the child might probably have be allow to stay on as 
 weekly tenant . but she have be observe almost immediately on her 
 return by some people of scrupulous character and great influence : 
 they have see she idle in the churchyard , restore as well as she 
 could with a little trowel a baby 's obliterate grave . by this mean 
 they have find that she be live here again ; her mother be scold 
 for " harbour " her ; sharp retort have ensue from Joan , who have 
 independently offer to leave at once ; she have be take at her 
 word ; and here be the result . 

 " I ought never to have come home , " say Tess to herself , bitterly . 

 she be so intent upon these thought that she hardly at first take 
 note of a man in a white mackintosh whom she see rid down the 
 street . possibly it be owe to her face be near to the pane 
 that he see she so quickly , and direct his horse so close to the 
 cottage - front that his hoof be almost upon the narrow border for 
 plant grow under the wall . it be not till he touch the window 
 with his riding - crop that she observe he . the rain have nearly 
 cease , and she open the casement in obedience to his gesture . 

 " do not   you see I ? " ask d'Urberville . 

 " I be not attend , " she say . " I hear you , I believe , though I 
 fancy it be a carriage and horse . I be in a sort of dream . " 

 " ah ! you hear the d'Urberville Coach , perhaps . you know the legend , 
 I suppose ? " 

 " no . my - somebody be go to tell it I once , but do not . " 

 " if you be a genuine d'Urberville I ought not to tell you either , 
 I suppose . as for I , I be a sham one , so it do not   matter . it be 
 rather dismal . it be that this sound of a non - existent coach can 
 only be hear by one of d'Urberville blood , and it be hold to be 
 of ill - omen to the one who hear it . it have to do with a murder , 
 commit by one of the family , century ago . " 

 " now you have begin it , finish it . " 

 " very well . one of the family be say to have abduct some 
 beautiful woman , who try to escape from the coach in which he be 
 carry she off , and in the struggle he kill she - or she kill 
 he - I forget which . such be one version of the tale ... I see that 
 your tub and bucket be pack . go away , be not   you ? " 

 " yes , to - morrow - Old Lady Day . " 

 " I hear you be , but could hardly believe it ; it seem so sudden . 
 why be it ? " 

 " Father 's be the last life on the property , and when that drop we 
 have no further right to stay . though we might , perhaps , have stay 
 as weekly tenant - if it have not be for I . " 

 " what about you ? " 

 " I be not a - proper woman . " 

 D'Urberville 's face flush . 

 " what a blasted shame ! miserable snob ! may their dirty soul 
 be burn to cinder ! " he exclaim in tone of ironic resentment . 
 " that be why you be go , be it ? turn out ? " 

 " we be not turn out exactly ; but as they say we should have to go 
 soon , it be good to go now everybody be move , because there be 
 well chance . " 

 " where be you go to ? " 

 " Kingsbere . we have take room there . mother be so foolish about 
 father 's people that she will go there . " 

 " but your mother 's family be not fit for lodging , and in a little 
 hole of a town like that . now why not come to my garden - house at 
 Trantridge ? there be hardly any poultry now , since my mother 's 
 death ; but there be the house , as you know it , and the garden . it 
 can be whitewash in a day , and your mother can live there quite 
 comfortably ; and I will put the child to a good school . really 
 I ought to do something for you ! " 

 " but we have already take the room at Kingsbere ! " she declare . 
 " and we can wait there - " 

 " wait - what for ? for that nice husband , no doubt . now look here , 
 Tess , I know what man be , and , bear in mind the ground of 
 your separation , I be quite positive he will never make it up with 
 you . now , though I have be your enemy , I be your friend , even 
 if you will not   believe it . come to this cottage of mine . we will get 
 up a regular colony of fowl , and your mother can attend to they 
 excellently ; and the child can go to school . " 

 Tess breathe more and more quickly , and at length she say - 

 " how do I know that you would do all this ? your view may 
 change - and then - we should be - my mother would be - homeless 
 again . " 

 " o no - no . I would guarantee you against such as that in writing , if 
 necessary . think it over . " 

 Tess shake her head . but d'Urberville persist ; she have seldom see 
 he so determined ; he would not take a negative . 

 " please just tell your mother , " he say , in emphatic tone . " it be 
 her business to judge - not your . I shall get the house sweep out 
 and whiten to - morrow morning , and fire light ; and it will be dry by 
 the evening , so that you can come straight there . now mind , I shall 
 expect you . " 

 Tess again shake her head , her throat swell with complicated 
 emotion . she could not look up at d'Urberville . 

 " I owe you something for the past , you know , " he resume . " and you 
 cure I , too , of that craze ; so I be glad - " 

 " I would rather you have keep the craze , so that you have keep the 
 practice which go with it ! " 

 " I be glad of this opportunity of repay you a little . to - morrow I 
 shall expect to hear your mother 's good unloading ... give I your 
 hand on it now - dear , beautiful Tess ! " 

 with the last sentence he have drop his voice to a murmur , and put 
 his hand in at the half - open casement . with stormy eye she pull 
 the stay - bar quickly , and , in do so , catch his arm between the 
 casement and the stone mullion . 

 " damnation - you be very cruel ! " he say , snatch out his arm . 
 " no , no ! - I know you do not   do it on purpose . well I shall expect 
 you , or your mother and child at least . " 

 " I shall not come - I have plenty of money ! " she cry . 

 " where ? " 

 " at my father - in - law 's , if I ask for it . " 

 " if you ask for it . but you will not , Tess ; I know you ; you will never 
 ask for it - you will starve first ! " 

 with these word he ride off . just at the corner of the street he 
 meet the man with the paint - pot , who ask he if he have desert the 
 brother . 

 " you go to the devil ! " say d'Urberville . 

 Tess remain where she be a long while , till a sudden rebellious 
 sense of injustice cause the region of her eye to swell with the 
 rush of hot tear thither . her husband , Angel Clare himself , have , 
 like other , deal out hard measure to she ; surely he have ! she have 
 never before admit such a thought ; but he have surely ! never 
 in her life - she could swear it from the bottom of her soul - have 
 she ever intend to do wrong ; yet these hard judgement have 
 come . whatever her sin , they be not sin of intention , but of 
 inadvertence , and why should she have be punish so persistently ? 

 she passionately seize the first piece of paper that come to hand , 
 and scribble the following line : 


  o why have you treat I so monstrously , Angel ! I do 
  not deserve it . I have think it all over carefully , 
  and I can never , never forgive you ! you know that I 
  do not intend to wrong you - why have you so wrong 
  I ? you be cruel , cruel indeed ! I will try to forget 
  you . it be all injustice I have receive at your 
  hand ! 
  T. 

 she watch till the postman pass by , run out to he with 
 her epistle , and then again take her listless place inside the 
 window - pane . 

 it be just as well to write like that as to write tenderly . how 
 could he give way to entreaty ? the fact have not change : there be 
 no new event to alter his opinion . 

 it grow dark , the fire - light shin over the room . the two 
 big of the young child have go out with their mother ; the 
 four small , their age range from three - and - a - half year to 
 eleven , all in black frock , be gather round the hearth babble 
 their own little subject . tess at length join they , without 
 light a candle . 

 " this be the last night that we shall sleep here , dear , in the house 
 where we be bear , " she say quickly . " we ought to think of it , 
 ought not   we ? " 

 they all become silent ; with the impressibility of their age they 
 be ready to burst into tear at the picture of finality she have 
 conjure up , though all the day hitherto they have be rejoice in 
 the idea of a new place . Tess change the subject . 

 " sing to I , dear , " she say . 

 " what shall we sing ? " 

 " anything you know ; I do not   mind . " 

 there be a momentary pause ; it be break , first , in one little 
 tentative note ; then a second voice strengthen it , and a third 
 and a fourth chime in unison , with word they have learn at the 
 Sunday - school - 


  here we suffer grief and pain , 
  here we meet to part again ; 
  in Heaven we part no more . 


 the four sing on with the phlegmatic passivity of person who have 
 long ago settle the question , and there be no mistake about it , 
 feel that further thought be not require . with feature strained 
 hard to enunciate the syllable they continue to regard the centre 
 of the flickering fire , the note of the young straying over into 
 the pause of the rest . 

 Tess turn from they , and go to the window again . darkness have 
 now fall without , but she put her face to the pane as though to 
 peer into the gloom . it be really to hide her tear . if she could 
 only believe what the child be sing ; if she be only sure , 
 how different all would now be ; how confidently she would leave they 
 to Providence and their future kingdom ! but , in default of that , it 
 behove she to do something ; to be their providence ; for to Tess , 
 as to not a few million of other , there be ghastly satire in the 
 poet 's line - 


  not in utter nakedness 
  but trail cloud of glory do we come . 


 to she and her like , birth itself be an ordeal of degrade personal 
 compulsion , whose gratuitousness nothing in the result seem to 
 justify , and at well could only palliate . 

 in the shade of the wet road she soon discern her mother with tall 
 ' Liza - Lu and Abraham . Mrs Durbeyfield 's patten click up to the 
 door , and Tess open it . 

 " I see the track of a horse outside the window , " say Joan . " Hev 
 somebody call ? " 

 " no , " say Tess . 

 the child by the fire look gravely at she , and one murmur - 

 " why , Tess , the gentleman a - horseback ! " 

 " he do not   call , " say Tess . " he speak to I in pass . " 

 " who be the gentleman ? " ask the mother . " your husband ? " 

 " no . he will never , never come , " answer Tess in stony hopelessness . 

 " then who be it ? " 

 " oh , you need not   ask . you have   see he before , and so have i. " 

 " ah ! what do he say ? " say Joan curiously . 

 " I will tell you when we be settle in our lodging at Kingsbere 
 to - morrow - every word . " 

 it be not her husband , she have say . yet a consciousness that in a 
 physical sense this man alone be her husband seem to weigh on her 
 more and more . 



 LII 


 during the small hour of the next morning , while it be still dark , 
 dweller near the highway be conscious of a disturbance of their 
 night 's rest by rumble noise , intermittently continue till 
 daylight - noise as certain to recur in this particular first week of 
 the month as the voice of the cuckoo in the third week of the same . 
 they be the preliminary of the general removal , the passing of 
 the empty waggon and team to fetch the good of the migrating 
 family ; for it be always by the vehicle of the farmer who require 
 his service that the hire man be convey to his destination . 
 that this might be accomplish within the day be the explanation 
 of the reverberation occur so soon after midnight , the aim of 
 the carter be to reach the door of the outgoing household by 
 six o'clock , when the loading of their movable at once begin . 

 but to Tess and her mother 's household no such anxious farmer send 
 his team . they be only woman ; they be not regular labourer ; 
 they be not particularly require anywhere ; hence they have to hire 
 a waggon at their own expense , and get nothing send gratuitously . 

 it be a relief to Tess , when she look out of the window that 
 morning , to find that though the weather be windy and louring , it 
 do not rain , and that the waggon have come . a wet Lady - Day be a 
 spectre which remove family never forget ; damp furniture , damp 
 bed , damp clothing accompany it , and leave a train of ill . 

 her mother , ' Liza - Lu , and Abraham be also awake , but the young 
 child be let sleep on . the four breakfast by the thin light , 
 and the " house - ridding " be take in hand . 

 it proceed with some cheerfulness , a friendly neighbour or two 
 assisting . when the large article of furniture have be pack in 
 position , a circular nest be make of the bed and bedding , in which 
 Joan Durbeyfield and the young child be to sit through the 
 journey . after load there be a long delay before the horse be 
 bring , these have be unharness during the ridding ; but at 
 length , about two o'clock , the whole be under way , the cooking - pot 
 swinging from the axle of the waggon , Mrs Durbeyfield and family 
 at the top , the matron have in her lap , to prevent injury to its 
 work , the head of the clock , which , at any exceptional lurch of the 
 waggon , strike one , or one - and - a - half , in hurt tone . Tess and the 
 next eld girl walk alongside till they be out of the village . 

 they have call on a few neighbour that morning and the previous 
 evening , and some come to see they off , all wish they well , 
 though , in their secret heart , hardly expect welfare possible 
 to such a family , harmless as the Durbeyfields be to all except 
 themselves . soon the equipage begin to ascend to high ground , 
 and the wind grow keener with the change of level and soil . 

 the day be the sixth of April , the Durbeyfield waggon meet many 
 other waggon with family on the summit of the load , which be 
 build on a wellnigh unvarying principle , as peculiar , probably , to 
 the rural labourer as the hexagon to the bee . the groundwork of the 
 arrangement be the family dresser , which , with its shin handle , 
 and finger - mark , and domestic evidence thick upon it , stand 
 importantly in front , over the tail of the shaft - horse , in its 
 erect and natural position , like some Ark of the Covenant that they 
 be bind to carry reverently . 

 some of the household be lively , some mournful ; some be stop 
 at the door of wayside inn ; where , in due time , the Durbeyfield 
 menagerie also draw up to bait horse and refresh the traveller . 

 during the halt Tess 's eye fall upon a three - pint blue mug , which 
 be ascend and descend through the air to and from the feminine 
 section of a household , sit on the summit of a load that have also 
 draw up at a little distance from the same inn . she follow one of 
 the mug 's journey upward , and perceive it to be clasp by hand 
 whose owner she well know . Tess go towards the waggon . 

 " Marian and Izz ! " she cry to the girl , for it be they , sit 
 with the move family at whose house they have lodge . " be you 
 house - rid to - day , like everybody else ? " 

 they be , they say . it have be too rough a life for they at 
 Flintcomb - Ash , and they have come away , almost without notice , 
 leave Groby to prosecute they if he choose . they tell Tess their 
 destination , and Tess tell they her . 

 marian leant over the load , and lower her voice . " do you know that 
 the gentleman who follow ' ee - you will guess who I mean - come to ask 
 for ' ee at Flintcomb after you have go ? we do not   tell'n where you 
 be , know you would not   wish to see he . " 

 " ah - but I do see he ! " Tess murmur . " he find I . " 

 " and do he know where you be go ? " 

 " I think so . " 

 " husband come back ? " 

 " no . " 

 she bid her acquaintance goodbye - for the respective carter have now 
 come out from the inn - and the two waggon resume their journey in 
 opposite direction ; the vehicle whereon sit Marian , Izz , and the 
 ploughman 's family with whom they have throw in their lot , be 
 brightly paint , and draw by three powerful horse with shin 
 brass ornament on their harness ; while the waggon on which Mrs 
 Durbeyfield and her family ride be a creak erection that would 
 scarcely bear the weight of the superincumbent load ; one which have 
 know no paint since it be make , and draw by two horse only . 
 the contrast well mark the difference between be fetch by a 
 thrive farmer and convey oneself whither no hirer wait one 's 
 come . 

 the distance be great - too great for a day 's journey - and it be 
 with the utmost difficulty that the horse perform it . though they 
 have start so early , it be quite late in the afternoon when they 
 turn the flank of an eminence which form part of the upland 
 call Greenhill . while the horse stand to stale and breathe 
 themselves Tess look around . under the hill , and just ahead of 
 they , be the half - dead townlet of their pilgrimage , Kingsbere , 
 where lie those ancestor of whom her father have speak and sing to 
 painfulness : Kingsbere , the spot of all spot in the world which 
 could be consider the d'Urbervilles ' home , since they have reside 
 there for full five hundred year . 

 a man could be see advance from the outskirt towards they , and 
 when he behold the nature of their waggon - load he quicken his 
 step . 

 " you be the woman they call Mrs Durbeyfield , I reckon ? " he say to 
 Tess 's mother , who have descend to walk the remainder of the way . 

 she nod . " though widow of the late Sir John d'Urberville , poor 
 nobleman , if I care for my right ; and return to the domain of 
 his forefather . " 

 " oh ? well , I know nothing about that ; but if you be Mrs Durbeyfield , 
 I be send to tell ' ee that the room you want be let . we do not 
 know that you be come till we get your letter this morning - when 
 ' twa too late . but no doubt you can get other lodging somewhere . " 

 the man have notice the face of Tess , which have become ash - pale at 
 his intelligence . her mother look hopelessly at fault . " what 
 shall we do now , Tess ? " she say bitterly . " here be a welcome to 
 your ancestor ' land ! however , let us try far . " 

 they move on into the town , and try with all their might , Tess 
 remain with the waggon to take care of the child whilst her 
 mother and ' Liza - Lu make inquiry . at the last return of Joan to 
 the vehicle , an hour later , when her search for accommodation have 
 still be fruitless , the driver of the waggon say the good must be 
 unload , as the horse be half - dead , and he be bind to return 
 part of the way at least that night . 

 " very well - unload it here , " say Joan recklessly . " I will get shelter 
 somewhere . " 

 the waggon have draw up under the churchyard wall , in a spot screen 
 from view , and the driver , nothing loth , soon haul down the poor 
 heap of household good . this do , she pay he , reduce herself 
 to almost her last shilling thereby , and he move off and leave they , 
 only too glad to get out of further dealing with such a family . it 
 be a dry night , and he guess that they would come to no harm . 

 Tess gaze desperately at the pile of furniture . the cold sunlight 
 of this spring evening peer invidiously upon the crock and 
 kettle , upon the bunch of dry herb shiver in the breeze , 
 upon the brass handle of the dresser , upon the wicker - cradle they 
 have all be rock in , and upon the well - rub clock - case , all of 
 which give out the reproachful gleam of indoor article abandon to 
 the vicissitude of a roofless exposure for which they be never 
 make . round about be deparke hill and slope - now cut up 
 into little paddock - and the green foundation that show where 
 the d'Urberville mansion once have stand ; also an outlying stretch 
 of Egdon Heath that have always belong to the estate . hard by , 
 the aisle of the church call the d'Urberville Aisle look on 
 imperturbably . 

 " be not   your family vault your own freehold ? " say Tess 's mother , as 
 she return from a reconnoitre of the church and graveyard . " why , 
 of course ' tis , and that be where we will camp , girl , till the place 
 of your ancestor find we a roof ! now , Tess and ' Liza and Abraham , 
 you help I . we will make a nest for these child , and then we will 
 have another look round . " 

 Tess listlessly lend a hand , and in a quarter of an hour the old 
 four - post bedstead be dissociate from the heap of good , and 
 erect under the south wall of the church , the part of the building 
 know as the d'Urberville Aisle , beneath which the huge vault lay . 
 over the tester of the bedstead be a beautiful traceried window , of 
 many light , its date be the fifteenth century . it be call 
 the d'Urberville Window , and in the upper part could be discern 
 heraldic emblem like those on Durbeyfield 's old seal and spoon . 

 Joan draw the curtain round the bed so as to make an excellent tent 
 of it , and put the small child inside . " if it come to the 
 bad we can sleep there too , for one night , " she say . " but let we 
 try far on , and get something for the dear to eat ! o , Tess , 
 what be the use of your playing at marry gentleman , if it leave 
 we like this ! " 

 accompany by ' Liza - Lu and the boy , she again ascend the little 
 lane which seclude the church from the townlet . as soon as they get 
 into the street they behold a man on horseback gaze up and down . 
 " ah - I be look for you ! " he say , rid up to they . " this be 
 indeed a family gathering on the historic spot ! " 

 it be Alec d'Urberville . " where be Tess ? " he ask . 

 personally Joan have no liking for Alec . she cursorily signify the 
 direction of the church , and go on , d'Urberville say that he 
 would see they again , in case they should be still unsuccessful in 
 their search for shelter , of which he have just hear . when they have 
 go , d'Urberville ride to the inn , and shortly after come out on 
 foot . 

 in the interim Tess , leave with the child inside the bedstead , 
 remain talk with they awhile , till , see that no more could 
 be do to make they comfortable just then , she walk about the 
 churchyard , now begin to be embrown by the shade of nightfall . 
 the door of the church be unfastened , and she enter it for the 
 first time in her life . 

 within the window under which the bedstead stand be the tomb of 
 the family , cover in their date several century . they be 
 canopy , altar - shape , and plain ; their carving be deface 
 and break ; their brass tear from the matrix , the rivet - hole 
 remain like martin - hole in a sandcliff . of all the reminder 
 that she have ever receive that her people be socially extinct , 
 there be none so forcible as this spoliation . 

 she draw near to a dark stone on which be inscribe : 


  OSTIUM sepulchri ANTIQUAE familiae D'URBERVILLE 


 Tess do not read Church - Latin like a Cardinal , but she know that 
 this be the door of her ancestral sepulchre , and that the tall 
 knight of whom her father have chant in his cup lie inside . 

 she musingly turn to withdraw , pass near an altar - tomb , the 
 old of they all , on which be a recumbent figure . in the dusk she 
 have not notice it before , and would hardly have notice it now but 
 for an odd fancy that the effigy move . as soon as she draw close 
 to it she discover all in a moment that the figure be a living 
 person ; and the shock to her sense of not have be alone be so 
 violent that she be quite overcome , and sink down nigh to fainting , 
 not , however , till she have recognize Alec d'Urberville in the form . 

 he leap off the slab and support she . 

 " I see you come in , " he say smile , " and get up there not to 
 interrupt your meditation . a family gathering , be it not , with 
 these old fellow under we here ? listen . " 

 he stamp with his heel heavily on the floor ; whereupon there arise 
 a hollow echo from below . 

 " that shake they a bit , I will warrant ! " he continue . " and you 
 think I be the mere stone reproduction of one of they . but no . 
 the old order changeth . the little finger of the sham d'Urberville 
 can do more for you than the whole dynasty of the real underneath ... 
 now command I . what shall I do ? " 

 " go away ! " she murmur . 

 " I will - I will look for your mother , " say he blandly . but in pass 
 she he whisper : " mind this ; you will be civil yet ! " 

 when he be go she bent down upon the entrance to the vault , and 
 say - 

 " why be I on the wrong side of this door ! " 


 in the meantime Marian and Izz Huett have journey onward with the 
 chattel of the ploughman in the direction of their land of Canaan - 
 the Egypt of some other family who have leave it only that morning . 
 but the girl do not for a long time think of where they be go . 
 their talk be of Angel Clare and Tess , and Tess 's persistent lover , 
 whose connection with her previous history they have partly hear and 
 partly guess ere this . 

 " ' tisn't   as though she have never know he afore , " say Marian . " his 
 have win she once make all the difference in the world . ' twould 
 be a thousand pity if he be to tole she away again . Mr Clare can 
 never be anything to we , Izz ; and why should we grudge he to she , 
 and not try to mend this quarrel ? if he could on'y know what strait 
 she be put to , and what be hover round , he might come to take care 
 of his own . " 

 " could we let he know ? " 

 they think of this all the way to their destination ; but the bustle 
 of re - establishment in their new place take up all their attention 
 then . but when they be settle , a month later , they hear of 
 Clare 's approach return , though they have learn nothing more of 
 Tess . upon that , agitated anew by their attachment to he , yet 
 honourably disposed to she , Marian uncork the penny ink - bottle they 
 share , and a few line be concoct between the two girl . 


  HONOUR'D SIR - 

  look to your wife if you do love she as much as she do 
  love you . for she be sore put to by an Enemy in the shape 
  of a Friend . Sir , there be one near she who ought to be 
  away . a woman should not be try'd beyond her strength , 
  and continual dropping will wear away a Stone - ay , 
  more - a Diamond . 

  from two WELL - wisher 


 this be address to Angel Clare at the only place they have ever 
 hear he to be connect with , Emminster vicarage ; after which they 
 continue in a mood of emotional exaltation at their own generosity , 
 which make they sing in hysterical snatch and weep at the same 
 time . 


 END of PHASE the SIXTH 





 phase the Seventh : Fulfilment 



 LIII 


 it be evening at Emminster Vicarage . the two customary candle be 
 burn under their green shade in the Vicar 's study , but he have not 
 be sit there . occasionally he come in , stir the small fire 
 which suffice for the increase mildness of the spring , and go 
 out again ; sometimes pause at the front door , go on to the 
 drawing - room , then return again to the front door . 

 it face westward , and though gloom prevail inside , there be still 
 light enough without to see with distinctness . Mrs Clare , who have 
 be sit in the drawing - room , follow he hither . 

 " plenty of time yet , " say the Vicar . " he do not   reach Chalk - Newton 
 till six , even if the train should be punctual , and ten mile of 
 country - road , five of they in Crimmercrock Lane , be not jogged over 
 in a hurry by our old horse . " 

 " but he have do it in an hour with we , my dear . " 

 " year ago . " 

 thus they pass the minute , each well know that this be only 
 waste of breath , the one essential be simply to wait . 

 at length there be a slight noise in the lane , and the old 
 pony - chaise appear indeed outside the railing . they see alight 
 therefrom a form which they affect to recognize , but would actually 
 have pass by in the street without identify have he not get out 
 of their carriage at the particular moment when a particular person 
 be due . 

 Mrs Clare rush through the dark passage to the door , and her 
 husband come more slowly after she . 

 the new arrival , who be just about to enter , see their anxious face 
 in the doorway and the gleam of the west in their spectacle because 
 they confront the last ray of day ; but they could only see his 
 shape against the light . 

 " o , my boy , my boy - home again at last ! " cry Mrs Clare , who care 
 no more at that moment for the stain of heterodoxy which have cause 
 all this separation than for the dust upon his clothe . what woman , 
 indeed , among the most faithful adherent of the truth , believe the 
 promise and threat of the Word in the sense in which she believe 
 in her own child , or would not throw her theology to the wind if 
 weigh against their happiness ? as soon as they reach the room 
 where the candle be light she look at his face . 

 " o , it be not Angel - not my son - the Angel who go away ! " she cry 
 in all the irony of sorrow , as she turn herself aside . 

 his father , too , be shocked to see he , so reduce be that figure 
 from its former contour by worry and the bad season that Clare have 
 experience , in the climate to which he have so rashly hurry in his 
 first aversion to the mockery of event at home . you could see the 
 skeleton behind the man , and almost the ghost behind the skeleton . 
 he match Crivelli 's dead Christus . his sunken eye - pit be of 
 morbid hue , and the light in his eye have wan . the angular hollow 
 and line of his aged ancestor have succeed to their reign in his 
 face twenty year before their time . 

 " I be ill over there , you know , " he say . " I be all right now . " 

 as if , however , to falsify this assertion , his leg seem to give 
 way , and he suddenly sit down to save himself from fall . it be 
 only a slight attack of faintness , result from the tedious day 's 
 journey , and the excitement of arrival . 

 " have any letter come for I lately ? " he ask . " I receive the 
 last you send on by the mere chance , and after considerable delay 
 through be inland ; or I might have come soon . " 

 " it be from your wife , we suppose ? " 

 " it be . " 

 only one other have recently come . they have not send it on to he , 
 know he would start for home so soon . 

 he hastily open the letter produce , and be much disturb to read 
 in Tess 's handwriting the sentiment express in her last hurried 
 scrawl to he . 


  o why have you treat I so monstrously , Angel ! I do 
  not deserve it . I have think it all over carefully , 
  and I can never , never forgive you ! you know that I 
  do not intend to wrong you - why have you so wrong 
  I ? you be cruel , cruel indeed ! I will try to forget 
  you . it be all injustice I have receive at your 
  hand ! 
  T. 

 " it be quite true ! " say Angel , throw down the letter . " perhaps 
 she will never be reconcile to I ! " 

 " do not , Angel , be so anxious about a mere child of the soil ! " say 
 his mother . 

 " child of the soil ! well , we all be child of the soil . I wish 
 she be so in the sense you mean ; but let I now explain to you what 
 I have never explain before , that her father be a descendant in the 
 male line of one of the old Norman house , like a good many other 
 who lead obscure agricultural life in our village , and be dub 
 ' son of the soil . ' " 

 he soon retire to bed ; and the next morning , feel exceedingly 
 unwell , he remain in his room ponder . the circumstance amid 
 which he have leave Tess be such that though , while on the south of 
 the Equator and just in receipt of her love epistle , it have seem 
 the easy thing in the world to rush back into her arm the moment 
 he choose to forgive she , now that he have arrive it be not so easy 
 as it have seem . she be passionate , and her present letter , 
 show that her estimate of he have change under his delay - too 
 justly change , he sadly own , - make he ask himself if it would 
 be wise to confront she unannounced in the presence of her parent . 
 suppose that her love have indeed turn to dislike during the last 
 week of separation , a sudden meeting might lead to bitter word . 

 Clare therefore think it would be good to prepare Tess and her 
 family by send a line to Marlott announce his return , and his 
 hope that she be still live with they there , as he have arrange 
 for she to do when he leave England . he despatch the inquiry that 
 very day , and before the week be out there come a short reply from 
 Mrs Durbeyfield which do not remove his embarrassment , for it bear 
 no address , though to his surprise it be not write from Marlott . 


  SIR , 

  J write these few line to say that my daughter be away 
  from I at present , and J be not sure when she will 
  return , but J will let you know as soon as she do . 
  J do not feel at liberty to tell you where she be 
  temperly bid . J should say that I and my family 
  have leave Marlott for some Time . - 

  your , 

  J. DURBEYFIELD 


 it be such a relief to Clare to learn that Tess be at least 
 apparently well that her mother 's stiff reticence as to she 
 whereabouts do not long distress he . they be all angry with he , 
 evidently . he would wait till Mrs Durbeyfield could inform he of 
 Tess 's return , which her letter imply to be soon . he deserve no 
 more . his have be a love " which alter when it alteration find " . 
 he have undergo some strange experience in his absence ; he have see 
 the virtual Faustina in the literal Cornelia , a spiritual Lucretia in 
 a corporeal Phryne ; he have think of the woman take and set in the 
 midst as one deserve to be stone , and of the wife of Uriah be 
 make a queen ; and he have ask himself why he have not judge Tess 
 constructively rather than biographically , by the will rather than 
 by the deed ? 

 a day or two pass while he wait at his father 's house for the 
 promise second note from Joan Durbeyfield , and indirectly to recover 
 a little more strength . the strength show sign of come back , 
 but there be no sign of Joan 's letter . then he hunt up the 
 old letter send on to he in Brazil , which Tess have write from 
 Flintcomb - Ash , and re - read it . the sentence touch he now as 
 much as when he have first peruse they . 


  ... I must cry to you in my trouble - I have no one 
  else ! ... I think I must die if you do not come 
  soon , or tell I to come to you ... please , please , 
  not to be just - only a little kind to I ... if 
  you would come , I could die in your arm ! I would 
  be well content to do that if so be you have forgive 
  I ! ... if you will send I one little line , and say , 
  " I be come soon , " I will bide on , Angel - O , so 
  cheerfully ! ... think how it do hurt my heart not to 
  see you ever - ever ! ah , if I could only make your 
  dear heart ache one little minute of each day as mine 
  do every day and all day long , it might lead you to 
  show pity to your poor lonely one . ... I would be 
  content , ay , glad , to live with you as your servant , 
  if I may not as your wife ; so that I could only be 
  near you , and get glimpse of you , and think of you 
  as mine . ... I long for only one thing in heaven 
  or earth or under the earth , to meet you , my own 
  dear ! come to I - come to I , and save I from what 
  threaten I ! 


 Clare determine that he would no long believe in her more recent 
 and severer regard of he , but would go and find she immediately . he 
 ask his father if she have apply for any money during his absence . 
 his father return a negative , and then for the first time it 
 occur to Angel that her pride have stand in her way , and that she 
 have suffer privation . from his remark his parent now gather 
 the real reason of the separation ; and their Christianity be such 
 that , reprobate be their especial care , the tenderness towards 
 Tess which her blood , her simplicity , even her poverty , have not 
 engender , be instantly excite by her sin . 

 whilst he be hastily pack together a few article for his journey 
 he glance over a poor plain missive also lately come to hand - the 
 one from Marian and Izz Huett , begin - 

 " Honour'd Sir , look to your wife if you do love she as much as she do 
 love you , " and sign , " from two Well - wisher . " 



 LIV 


 in a quarter of an hour Clare be leave the house , whence his 
 mother watch his thin figure as it disappear into the street . 
 he have decline to borrow his father 's old mare , well know of 
 its necessity to the household . he go to the inn , where he hire 
 a trap , and could hardly wait during the harnessing . in a very few 
 minute after , he be drive up the hill out of the town which , 
 three or four month early in the year , Tess have descend with 
 such hope and ascend with such shattered purpose . 

 Benvill Lane soon stretch before he , its hedge and tree purple 
 with bud ; but he be look at other thing , and only recall 
 himself to the scene sufficiently to enable he to keep the way . in 
 something less than an hour - and - a - half he have skirt the south of 
 the King 's Hintock estate and ascend to the untoward solitude of 
 cross - in - Hand , the unholy stone whereon Tess have be compel by 
 Alec d'Urberville , in his whim of reformation , to swear the strange 
 oath that she would never wilfully tempt he again . the pale and 
 blast nettle - stem of the precede year even now linger nakedly 
 in the bank , young green nettle of the present spring grow from 
 their root . 

 Thence he go along the verge of the upland overhang the other 
 Hintocks , and , turn to the right , plunge into the bracing 
 calcareous region of Flintcomb - Ash , the address from which she have 
 write to he in one of the letter , and which he suppose to be 
 the place of sojourn refer to by her mother . here , of course , he 
 do not find she ; and what add to his depression be the discovery 
 that no " Mrs Clare " have ever be hear of by the cottager or by 
 the farmer himself , though Tess be remember well enough by her 
 christian name . his name she have obviously never use during their 
 separation , and her dignified sense of their total severance be 
 show not much less by this abstention than by the hardship she have 
 choose to undergo   of which he now learn for the first time   rather 
 than apply to his father for more fund . 

 from this place they tell he Tess Durbeyfield have go , without due 
 notice , to the home of her parent on the other side of Blackmoor , 
 and it therefore become necessary to find Mrs Durbeyfield . she have 
 tell he she be not now at Marlott , but have be curiously reticent 
 as to her actual address , and the only course be to go to Marlott 
 and inquire for it . the farmer who have be so churlish with Tess 
 be quite smooth - tongue to Clare , and lend he a horse and man to 
 drive he towards Marlott , the gig he have arrive in be send back 
 to Emminster ; for the limit of a day 's journey with that horse be 
 reach . 

 Clare would not accept the loan of the farmer 's vehicle for a further 
 distance than to the outskirt of the Vale , and , send it back with 
 the man who have drive he , he put up at an inn , and next day enter 
 on foot the region wherein be the spot of his dear Tess 's birth . 
 it be as yet too early in the year for much colour to appear in the 
 garden and foliage ; the so - call spring be but winter overlay 
 with a thin coat of greenness , and it be of a parcel with his 
 expectation . 

 the house in which Tess have pass the year of her childhood be 
 now inhabit by another family who have never know she . the new 
 resident be in the garden , take as much interest in their own 
 doing as if the homestead have never pass its primal time in 
 conjunction with the history of other , beside which the history 
 of these be but as a tale tell by an idiot . they walk about the 
 garden path with thought of their own concern entirely uppermost , 
 bring their action at every moment in jarring collision with the 
 dim ghost behind they , talk as though the time when Tess live 
 there be not one whit intenser in story than now . even the spring 
 bird sing over their head as if they think there be nobody 
 miss in particular . 

 on inquiry of these precious innocent , to whom even the name of 
 their predecessor be a fail memory , Clare learn that John 
 Durbeyfield be dead ; that his widow and child have leave Marlott , 
 declare that they be go to live at Kingsbere , but instead of 
 do so have go on to another place they mention . by this time 
 Clare abhor the house for cease to contain Tess , and hasten 
 away from its hat presence without once look back . 

 his way be by the field in which he have first beheld she at the 
 dance . it be as bad as the house - even bad . he pass on through 
 the churchyard , where , amongst the new headstone , he see one of a 
 somewhat superior design to the rest . the inscription run thus : 


  in memory of John Durbeyfield , rightly d'Urberville , of 
  the once powerful family of that name , and direct 
  descendant through an illustrious line from Sir Pagan 
  d'Urberville , one of the Knights of the Conqueror . die 
  March 10th , 18 - 

  how be the mighty FALLEN . 


 some man , apparently the sexton , have observe Clare stand there , 
 and draw nigh . " ah , sir , now that be a man who do not   want to lie 
 here , but wish to be carry to Kingsbere , where his ancestor be . " 

 " and why do not   they respect his wish ? " 

 " oh - no money . bless your soul , sir , why - there , I would not   wish to 
 say it everywhere , but - even this headstone , for all the flourish 
 write upon en , be not pay for . " 

 " ah , who put it up ? " 

 the man tell the name of a mason in the village , and , on leave the 
 churchyard , Clare call at the mason 's house . he find that the 
 statement be true , and pay the bill . this do , he turn in the 
 direction of the migrant . 

 the distance be too long for a walk , but Clare feel such a strong 
 desire for isolation that at first he would neither hire a conveyance 
 nor go to a circuitous line of railway by which he might eventually 
 reach the place . at Shaston , however , he find he must hire ; but 
 the way be such that he do not enter Joan 's place till about seven 
 o'clock in the evening , have traverse a distance of over twenty 
 mile since leave Marlott . 

 the village be small he have little difficulty in find Mrs 
 Durbeyfield 's tenement , which be a house in a walled garden , 
 remote from the main road , where she have stow away her clumsy old 
 furniture as well she could . it be plain that for some reason or 
 other she have not wish he to visit she , and he feel his call to 
 be somewhat of an intrusion . she come to the door herself , and the 
 light from the evening sky fall upon her face . 

 this be the first time that Clare have ever meet she , but he be too 
 preoccupy to observe more than that she be still a handsome woman , 
 in the garb of a respectable widow . he be oblige to explain that 
 he be Tess 's husband , and his object in come there , and he do it 
 awkwardly enough . " I want to see she at once , " he add . " you say 
 you would write to I again , but you have not do so . " 

 " because she've   not come home , " say Joan . 

 " do you know if she be well ? " 

 " I do not . but you ought to , sir , " say she . 

 " I admit it . where be she stay ? " 

 from the beginning of the interview Joan have disclose she 
 embarrassment by keep her hand to the side of her cheek . 

 " I - do not   know exactly where she be stay , " she answer . " she 
 be - but - " 

 " where be she ? " 

 " well , she be not there now . " 

 in her evasiveness she pause again , and the young child have by 
 this time creep to the door , where , pull at his mother 's skirt , 
 the young murmur - 

 " be this the gentleman who be go to marry Tess ? " 

 " he have marry she , " Joan whisper . " go inside . " 

 Clare see her effort for reticence , and ask - 

 " do you think Tess would wish I to try and find she ? if not , of 
 course - " 

 " I do not   think she would . " 

 " be you sure ? " 

 " I be sure she would not . " 

 he be turn away ; and then he think of Tess 's tender letter . 

 " I be sure she would ! " he retort passionately . " I know she well 
 than you do . " 

 " that be very likely , sir ; for I have never really know she . " 

 " please tell I her address , Mrs Durbeyfield , in kindness to a lonely 
 wretched man ! " Tess 's mother again restlessly sweep her cheek with 
 her vertical hand , and see that he suffer , she at last say , be 
 a low voice - 

 " she be at Sandbourne . " 

 " ah - where there ? Sandbourne have become a large place , they say . " 

 " I do not   know more particularly than I have say - Sandbourne . for 
 myself , I be never there . " 

 it be apparent that Joan speak the truth in this , and he press she 
 no far . 

 " be you in want of anything ? " he say gently . 

 " no , sir , " she reply . " we be fairly well provide for . " 

 without enter the house Clare turn away . there be a station 
 three mile ahead , and pay off his coachman , he walk thither . 
 the last train to Sandbourne leave shortly after , and it bear Clare 
 on its wheel . 



 LV 


 at eleven o'clock that night , have secure a bed at one of the 
 hotel and telegraph his address to his father immediately on his 
 arrival , he walk out into the street of Sandbourne . it be too 
 late to call on or inquire for any one , and he reluctantly postpone 
 his purpose till the morning . but he could not retire to rest just 
 yet . 

 this fashionable watering - place , with its eastern and its western 
 station , its pier , its grove of pine , its promenade , and its 
 cover garden , be , to Angel Clare , like a fairy place suddenly 
 create by the stroke of a wand , and allow to get a little dusty . 
 an outlying eastern tract of the enormous Egdon Waste be close at 
 hand , yet on the very verge of that tawny piece of antiquity such a 
 glitter novelty as this pleasure city have choose to spring up . 
 within the space of a mile from its outskirt every irregularity 
 of the soil be prehistoric , every channel an undisturbed british 
 trackway ; not a sod have be turn there since the day of the 
 Caesars . yet the exotic have grow here , suddenly as the prophet 's 
 gourd ; and have draw hither Tess . 

 by the midnight lamp he go up and down the wind way of this new 
 world in an old one , and could discern between the tree and against 
 the star the lofty roof , chimney , gazebo , and tower of the 
 numerous fanciful residence of which the place be compose . it 
 be a city of detach mansion ; a Mediterranean lounging - place on 
 the English Channel ; and as see now by night it seem even more 
 impose than it be . 

 the sea be near at hand , but not intrusive ; it murmur , and he 
 think it be the pine ; the pine murmur in precisely the same 
 tone , and he think they be the sea . 

 where could Tess possibly be , a cottage - girl , his young wife , amidst 
 all this wealth and fashion ? the more he ponder , the more be he 
 puzzle . be there any cow to milk here ? there certainly be 
 no field to till . she be most probably engage to do something in 
 one of these large house ; and he saunter along , look at the 
 chamber - windows and their light go out one by one , and wonder 
 which of they might be her . 

 conjecture be useless , and just after twelve o'clock he enter 
 and go to bed . before put out his light he re - read Tess 's 
 impassioned letter . Sleep , however , he could not - so near she , yet 
 so far from she - and he continually lift the window - blind and 
 regard the back of the opposite house , and wonder behind which 
 of the sash she repose at that moment . 

 he might almost as well have sit up all night . in the morning he 
 arise at seven , and shortly after go out , take the direction of 
 the chief post - office . at the door he meet an intelligent postman 
 come out with letter for the morning delivery . 

 " do you know the address of a Mrs Clare ? " ask Angel . the postman 
 shake his head . 

 then , remember that she would have be likely to continue the use 
 of her maiden name , Clare say - 

 " of a Miss Durbeyfield ? " 

 " Durbeyfield ? " 

 this also be strange to the postman address . 

 " there 's visitor come and go every day , as you know , sir , " he 
 say ; " and without the name of the house ' tis impossible to find 
 them . " 

 one of his comrade hasten out at that moment , the name be 
 repeat to he . 

 " I know no name of Durbeyfield ; but there be the name of d'Urberville 
 at the heron , " say the second . 

 " that be it ! " cry Clare , please to think that she have revert to 
 the real pronunciation . " what place be the heron ? " 

 " a stylish lodge - house . ' tis all lodge - house here , bless ' ee . " 

 Clare receive direction how to find the house , and hasten 
 thither , arrive with the milkman . the Herons , though an ordinary 
 villa , stand in its own ground , and be certainly the last place 
 in which one would have expect to find lodging , so private be 
 its appearance . if poor Tess be a servant here , as he fear , she 
 would go to the back - door to that milkman , and he be inclined to go 
 thither also . however , in his doubt he turn to the front , and 
 rang . 

 the hour be early , the landlady herself open the door . Clare 
 inquire for Teresa d'Urberville or Durbeyfield . 

 " Mrs d'Urberville ? " 

 " yes . " 

 Tess , then , pass as a married woman , and he feel glad , even though 
 she have not adopt his name . 

 " will you kindly tell she that a relative be anxious to see she ? " 

 " it be rather early . what name shall I give , sir ? " 

 " Angel . " 

 " Mr Angel ? " 

 " No ; Angel . it be my christian name . she will understand . " 

 " I will see if she be awake . " 

 he be show into the front room - the dining - room - and look out 
 through the spring curtain at the little lawn , and the rhododendron 
 and other shrub upon it . obviously her position be by no mean so 
 bad as he have fear , and it cross his mind that she must somehow 
 have claim and sell the jewel to attain it . he do not blame she 
 for one moment . soon his sharpen ear detect footstep upon the 
 stair , at which his heart thump so painfully that he could hardly 
 stand firm . " dear I ! what will she think of I , so altered as I 
 be ! " he say to himself ; and the door open . 

 Tess appear on the threshold - not at all as he have expect to 
 see she - bewilderingly otherwise , indeed . her great natural beauty 
 be , if not heighten , render more obvious by her attire . she 
 be loosely wrap in a cashmere dressing - gown of gray - white , 
 embroider in half - mourn tint , and she wear slipper of the same 
 hue . her neck rise out of a frill of down , and her well - remember 
 cable of dark - brown hair be partially coil up in a mass at the 
 back of her head and partly hang on her shoulder - the evident 
 result of haste . 

 he have hold out his arm , but they have fall again to his side ; 
 for she have not come forward , remain still in the opening of the 
 doorway . mere yellow skeleton that he be now , he feel the contrast 
 between they , and think his appearance distasteful to she . 

 " Tess ! " he say huskily , " can you forgive I for go away ? can not 
 you - come to I ? how do you get to be - like this ? " 

 " it be too late , " say she , her voice sound hard through the room , 
 her eye shin unnaturally . 

 " I do not think rightly of you - I do not see you as you be ! " he 
 continue to plead . " I have learn to since , dearest tessy mine ! " 

 " too late , too late ! " she say , wave her hand in the impatience of 
 a person whose torture cause every instant to seem an hour . " do not 
 come close to I , Angel ! no - you must not . keep away . " 

 " but do not   you love I , my dear wife , because I have be so pull 
 down by illness ? you be not so fickle - I be come on purpose for 
 you - my mother and father will welcome you now ! " 

 " yes - o , yes , yes ! but I say , I say it be too late . " 

 she seem to feel like a fugitive in a dream , who try to move 
 away , but can not . " do not   you know all - do not   you know it ? yet how 
 do you come here if you do not know ? " 

 " I inquire here and there , and I find the way . " 

 " I wait and wait for you , " she go on , her tone suddenly 
 resume their old fluty pathos . " but you do not come ! and I write 
 to you , and you do not come ! he keep on say you would never come 
 any more , and that I be a foolish woman . he be very kind to I , 
 and to mother , and to all of we after father 's death . he - " 

 " I do not   understand . " 

 " he have win I back to he . " 

 Clare look at she keenly , then , gather her meaning , flag 
 like one plague - stricken , and his glance sink ; it fall on her hand , 
 which , once rosy , be now white and more delicate . 

 she continue - 

 " he be upstairs . I hate he now , because he tell I a lie - that you 
 would not come again ; and you have come ! these clothe be what he be 
 put upon I : I do not   care what he do wi ' I ! but - will you go 
 away , Angel , please , and never come any more ? " 

 they stand fix , their baffle heart look out of their eye with 
 a joylessness pitiful to see . both seem to implore something to 
 shelter they from reality . 

 " ah - it be my fault ! " say Clare . 

 but he could not get on . Speech be as inexpressive as silence . but 
 he have a vague consciousness of one thing , though it be not clear 
 to he till later ; that his original Tess have spiritually cease to 
 recognize the body before he as her - allow it to drift , like a 
 corpse upon the current , in a direction dissociate from its living 
 will . 

 a few instant pass , and he find that Tess be go . his face 
 grow cold and more shrunken as he stand concentrate on the moment , 
 and a minute or two after , he find himself in the street , walk 
 along he do not know whither . 



 LVI 


 Mrs Brooks , the lady who be the householder at the Herons and owner 
 of all the handsome furniture , be not a person of an unusually 
 curious turn of mind . she be too deeply materialize , poor woman , 
 by her long and enforce bondage to that arithmetical demon 
 Profit - and - Loss , to retain much curiousity for its own sake , and 
 apart from possible lodger ' pocket . nevertheless , the visit of 
 Angel Clare to her well - pay tenant , Mr and Mrs d'Urberville , as 
 she deem they , be sufficiently exceptional in point of time and 
 manner to reinvigorate the feminine proclivity which have be stifle 
 down as useless save in its bearing to the letting trade . 

 Tess have speak to her husband from the doorway , without enter 
 the dining - room , and Mrs Brooks , who stand within the partly - close 
 door of her own sitting - room at the back of the passage , could 
 hear fragment of the conversation - if conversation it could be 
 call - between those two wretched soul . she hear Tess re - ascend 
 the stair to the first floor , and the departure of Clare , and the 
 closing of the front door behind he . then the door of the room 
 above be shut , and Mrs Brooks know that Tess have re - enter her 
 apartment . as the young lady be not fully dress , Mrs Brooks know 
 that she would not emerge again for some time . 

 she accordingly ascend the stair softly , and stand at the door of 
 the front room - a drawing - room , connect with the room immediately 
 behind it   which be a bedroom   by fold - door in the common 
 manner . this first floor , contain Mrs Brooks 's good apartment , 
 have be take by the week by the d'Urbervilles . the back room be 
 now in silence ; but from the drawing - room there come sound . 

 all that she could at first distinguish of they be one syllable , 
 continually repeat in a low note of moaning , as if it come from a 
 soul bind to some ixionian wheel - 

 " o - o - o ! " 

 then a silence , then a heavy sigh , and again - 

 " o - o - o ! " 

 the landlady look through the keyhole . only a small space of the 
 room inside be visible , but within that space come a corner of the 
 breakfast table , which be already spread for the meal , and also a 
 chair beside . over the seat of the chair Tess 's face be bow , her 
 posture be a kneeling one in front of it ; her hand be clasp 
 over her head , the skirt of her dressing - gown and the embroidery of 
 her night - gown flow upon the floor behind she , and her stockingless 
 foot , from which the slipper have fall , protrude upon the carpet . 
 it be from her lip that come the murmur of unspeakable despair . 

 then a man 's voice from the adjoining bedroom - 

 " what be the matter ? " 

 she do not answer , but go on , in a tone which be a soliloquy 
 rather than an exclamation , and a dirge rather than a soliloquy . 
 Mrs Brooks could only catch a portion : 

 " and then my dear , dear husband come home to I ... and I do not 
 know it ! ... and you have use your cruel persuasion upon I ... you 
 do not stop use it - no - you do not stop ! my little sister and 
 brother and my mother 's need - they be the thing you move I 
 by ... and you say my husband would never come back - never ; and you 
 taunt I , and say what a simpleton I be to expect he ! ... and 
 at last I believe you and give way ! ... and then he come back ! 
 now he be go . go a second time , and I have lose he now 
 for ever ... and he will not love I the little bit ever any 
 more - only hate I ! ... o yes , I have lose he now - again because 
 of - you ! " in writhing , with her head on the chair , she turn she 
 face towards the door , and Mrs Brooks could see the pain upon it , 
 and that her lip be bleed from the clench of her tooth upon 
 they , and that the long lash of her closed eye stick in wet tag 
 to her cheek . she continue : " and he be die - he look as if he 
 be die ! ... and my sin will kill he and not kill I ! ... o , you 
 have tear my life all to piece ... make I be what I pray you in 
 pity not to make I be again ! ... my own true husband will never , 
 never - o God - I can not   bear this ! - I can not ! " 

 there be more and sharp word from the man ; then a sudden rustle ; 
 she have spring to her foot . Mrs Brooks , think that the speaker 
 be come to rush out of the door , hastily retreat down the 
 stair . 

 she need not have do so , however , for the door of the sit - room 
 be not open . but Mrs Brooks feel it unsafe to watch on the 
 landing again , and enter her own parlour below . 

 she could hear nothing through the floor , although she listen 
 intently , and thereupon go to the kitchen to finish her interrupted 
 breakfast . come up presently to the front room on the ground floor 
 she take up some sewing , wait for her lodger to ring that she 
 might take away the breakfast , which she mean to do herself , to 
 discover what be the matter if possible . Overhead , as she sit , she 
 could now hear the floorboard slightly creak , as if some one be 
 walk about , and presently the movement be explain by the rustle 
 of garment against the banister , the opening and the closing of 
 the front door , and the form of Tess pass to the gate on her way 
 into the street . she be fully dress now in the walk costume 
 of a well - to - do young lady in which she have arrive , with the sole 
 addition that over her hat and black feather a veil be draw . 

 Mrs Brooks have not be able to catch any word of farewell , temporary 
 or otherwise , between her tenant at the door above . they might have 
 quarrel , or Mr d'Urberville might still be asleep , for he be not 
 an early riser . 

 she go into the back room , which be more especially her own 
 apartment , and continue her sewing there . the lady lodger do not 
 return , nor do the gentleman ring his bell . Mrs Brooks ponder on 
 the delay , and on what probable relation the visitor who have call 
 so early bore to the couple upstairs . in reflect she leant back 
 in her chair . 

 as she do so her eye glance casually over the ceiling till they 
 be arrest by a spot in the middle of its white surface which she 
 have never notice there before . it be about the size of a wafer 
 when she first observe it , but it speedily grow as large as the palm 
 of her hand , and then she could perceive that it be red . the oblong 
 white ceiling , with this scarlet blot in the midst , have the 
 appearance of a gigantic ace of heart . 

 Mrs Brooks have strange qualm of misgiving . she get upon the table , 
 and touch the spot in the ceiling with her finger . it be damp , 
 and she fancy that it be a blood stain . 

 descend from the table , she leave the parlour , and go upstairs , 
 intend to enter the room overhead , which be the bedchamber at 
 the back of the drawing - room . but , nerveless woman as she have now 
 become , she could not bring herself to attempt the handle . she 
 listen . the dead silence within be break only by a regular beat . 

 Drip , drip , drip . 

 Mrs Brooks hasten downstair , open the front door , and run into 
 the street . a man she know , one of the workman employ at an 
 adjoining villa , be pass by , and she beg he to come in and go 
 upstairs with she ; she fear something have happen to one of her 
 lodger . the workman assent , and follow she to the landing . 

 she open the door of the drawing - room , and stand back for he 
 to pass in , enter herself behind he . the room be empty ; the 
 breakfast - a substantial repast of coffee , egg , and a cold ham - lay 
 spread upon the table untouched , as when she have take it up , 
 except that the carving - knife be miss . she ask the man to 
 go through the folding - door into the adjoining room . 

 he open the door , enter a step or two , and come back almost 
 instantly with a rigid face . " my good God , the gentleman in bed be 
 dead ! I think he have be hurt with a knife - a lot of blood have run 
 down upon the floor ! " 

 the alarm be soon give , and the house which have lately be so 
 quiet resound with the tramp of many footstep , a surgeon among the 
 rest . the wound be small , but the point of the blade have touch 
 the heart of the victim , who lie on his back , pale , fix , dead , as 
 if he have scarcely move after the infliction of the blow . in a 
 quarter of an hour the news that a gentleman who be a temporary 
 visitor to the town have be stab in his bed , spread through every 
 street and villa of the popular watering - place . 



 LVII 


 Meanwhile Angel Clare have walk automatically along the way by which 
 he have come , and , enter his hotel , sit down over the breakfast , 
 star at nothingness . he go on eat and drink unconsciously 
 till on a sudden he demand his bill ; have pay which , he take his 
 dressing - bag in his hand , the only luggage he have bring with he , 
 and go out . 

 at the moment of his departure a telegram be hand to he - a few 
 word from his mother , state that they be glad to know his 
 address , and inform he that his brother Cuthbert have propose to 
 and be accept by Mercy Chant . 

 Clare crumple up the paper and follow the route to the station ; 
 reach it , he find that there would be no train leave for an 
 hour and more . he sit down to wait , and have wait a quarter of 
 an hour feel that he could wait there no long . break in heart and 
 numb , he have nothing to hurry for ; but he wish to get out of a 
 town which have be the scene of such an experience , and turn to 
 walk to the first station onward , and let the train pick he up 
 there . 

 the highway that he follow be open , and at a little distance 
 dip into a valley , across which it could be see run from edge 
 to edge . he have traverse the great part of this depression , and 
 be climb the western acclivity when , pause for breath , he 
 unconsciously look back . why he do so he could not say , but 
 something seem to impel he to the act . the tape - like surface of 
 the road diminish in his rear as far as he could see , and as he 
 gaze a move spot intrude on the white vacuity of its perspective . 

 it be a human figure run . Clare wait , with a dim sense that 
 somebody be try to overtake he . 

 the form descend the incline be a woman 's , yet so entirely be 
 his mind blind to the idea of his wife 's follow he that even 
 when she come near he do not recognize she under the totally 
 change attire in which he now behold she . it be not till she be 
 quite close that he could believe she to be Tess . 

 " I see you - turn away from the station - just before I get there - and 
 I have be follow you all this way ! " 

 she be so pale , so breathless , so quiver in every muscle , that he 
 do not ask she a single question , but seize her hand , and pull 
 it within his arm , he lead she along . to avoid meet any possible 
 wayfarer he leave the high road and take a footpath under some 
 fir - tree . when they be deep among the moaning bough he stop 
 and look at she inquiringly . 

 " Angel , " she say , as if wait for this , " do you know what I have 
 be run after you for ? to tell you that I have kill he ! " 
 a pitiful white smile light her face as she speak . 

 " what ! " say he , think from the strangeness of her manner that she 
 be in some delirium . 

 " I have do it - I do not   know how , " she continue . " still , I owe it 
 to you , and to myself , Angel . I fear long ago , when I strike he 
 on the mouth with my glove , that I might do it some day for the trap 
 he set for I in my simple youth , and his wrong to you through I . 
 he have come between we and ruin we , and now he can never do it any 
 more . I never love he at all , Angel , as I love you . you know it , 
 do not   you ? you believe it ? you do not   come back to I , and I be 
 oblige to go back to he . why do you go away - why do you - when I 
 love you so ? I can not   think why you do it . but I do not   blame you ; 
 only , Angel , will you forgive I my sin against you , now I have 
 kill he ? I think as I run along that you would be sure to 
 forgive I now I have do that . it come to I as a shin light 
 that I should get you back that way . I could not bear the loss of 
 you any long - you do not   know how entirely I be unable to bear your 
 not love I ! say you do now , dear , dear husband ; say you do , now I 
 have kill he ! " 

 " I do love you , Tess - o , I do - it be all come back ! " he say , 
 tighten his arm round she with fervid pressure . " but how do you 
 mean - you have kill he ? " 

 " I mean that I have , " she murmur in a reverie . 

 " what , bodily ? be he dead ? " 

 " yes . he hear I cry about you , and he bitterly taunt I ; and 
 call you by a foul name ; and then I do it . my heart could not 
 bear it . he have nag I about you before . and then I dress 
 myself and come away to find you . " 

 by degree he be inclined to believe that she have faintly attempt , 
 at least , what she say she have do ; and his horror at her impulse 
 be mix with amazement at the strength of her affection for 
 himself , and at the strangeness of its quality , which have apparently 
 extinguish her moral sense altogether . unable to realize the 
 gravity of her conduct , she seem at last content ; and he look 
 at she as she lie upon his shoulder , weep with happiness , and 
 wonder what obscure strain in the d'Urberville blood have lead to 
 this aberration - if it be an aberration . there momentarily flash 
 through his mind that the family tradition of the coach and murder 
 might have arise because the d'Urbervilles have be know to do 
 these thing . as well as his confused and excited idea could 
 reason , he suppose that in the moment of mad grief of which she 
 speak , her mind have lose its balance , and plunge she into this 
 abyss . 

 it be very terrible if true ; if a temporary hallucination , sad . but , 
 anyhow , here be this deserted wife of his , this passionately - fond 
 woman , cling to he without a suspicion that he would be anything 
 to she but a protector . he see that for he to be otherwise be 
 not , in her mind , within the region of the possible . tenderness be 
 absolutely dominant in Clare at last . he kiss she endlessly with 
 his white lip , and hold her hand , and say - 

 " I will not desert you ! I will protect you by every mean in my 
 power , dearest love , whatever you may have do or not have do ! " 

 they then walk on under the tree , Tess turn her head every now 
 and then to look at he . wear and unhandsome as he have become , it 
 be plain that she do not discern the least fault in his appearance . 
 to she he be , as of old , all that be perfection , personally and 
 mentally . he be still her Antinous , her Apollo even ; his sickly 
 face be beautiful as the morning to her affectionate regard on 
 this day no less than when she first behold he ; for be it not the 
 face of the one man on earth who have love she purely , and who have 
 believe in she as pure ! 

 with an instinct as to possibility , he do not now , as he have 
 intend , make for the first station beyond the town , but plunge 
 still far under the fir , which here abound for mile . each 
 clasp the other round the waist they promenade over the dry bed 
 of fir - needle , throw into a vague intoxicating atmosphere at the 
 consciousness of be together at last , with no live soul between 
 they ; ignore that there be a corpse . thus they proceed for 
 several mile till Tess , arouse herself , look about she , and 
 say , timidly - 

 " be we go anywhere in particular ? " 

 " I do not   know , dearest . why ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " well , we might walk a few mile far , and when it be evening find 
 lodging somewhere or other - in a lonely cottage , perhaps . can you 
 walk well , Tessy ? " 

 " o yes ! I could walk for ever and ever with your arm round I ! " 

 upon the whole it seem a good thing to do . thereupon they 
 quicken their pace , avoid high road , and follow obscure 
 path tend more or less northward . but there be an unpractical 
 vagueness in their movement throughout the day ; neither one of they 
 seem to consider any question of effectual escape , disguise , or 
 long concealment . their every idea be temporary and unforefending , 
 like the plan of two child . 

 at mid - day they draw near to a roadside inn , and Tess would have 
 enter it with he to get something to eat , but he persuade 
 she to remain among the tree and bush of this half - woodland , 
 half - moorland part of the country till he should come back . her 
 clothe be of recent fashion ; even the ivory - handle parasol that 
 she carry be of a shape unknown in the retired spot to which they 
 have now wander ; and the cut of such article would have attract 
 attention in the settle of a tavern . he soon return , with food 
 enough for half - a - dozen people and two bottle of wine - enough to 
 last they for a day or more , should any emergency arise . 

 they sit down upon some dead bough and share their meal . between 
 one and two o'clock they pack up the remainder and go on again . 

 " I feel strong enough to walk any distance , " say she . 

 " I think we may as well steer in a general way towards the interior 
 of the country , where we can hide for a time , and be less likely to 
 be look for than anywhere near the coast , " Clare remark . " later 
 on , when they have forget we , we can make for some port . " 

 she make no reply to this beyond that of grasp he more tightly , 
 and straight inland they go . though the season be an English May , 
 the weather be serenely bright , and during the afternoon it be 
 quite warm . through the latter mile of their walk their footpath 
 have take they into the depth of the New Forest , and towards 
 evening , turn the corner of a lane , they perceive behind a brook 
 and bridge a large board on which be paint in white letter , " this 
 desirable Mansion to be Let furnish " ; particular follow , with 
 direction to apply to some London agent . pass through the gate 
 they could see the house , an old brick building of regular design and 
 large accommodation . 

 " I know it , " say Clare . " it be Bramshurst Court . you can see that 
 it be shut up , and grass be grow on the drive . " 

 " some of the window be open , " say Tess . 

 " just to air the room , I suppose . " 

 " all these room empty , and we without a roof to our head ! " 

 " you be get tired , my Tess ! " he say . " we will stop soon . " and 
 kiss her sad mouth , he again lead she onwards . 

 he be grow weary likewise , for they have wander a dozen or 
 fifteen mile , and it become necessary to consider what they should 
 do for rest . they look from afar at isolated cottage and little 
 inn , and be inclined to approach one of the latter , when their 
 heart fail they , and they sheer off . at length their gait 
 drag , and they stand still . 

 " could we sleep under the tree ? " she ask . 

 he think the season insufficiently advance . 

 " I have be think of that empty mansion we pass , " he say . 
 " let we go back towards it again . " 

 they retrace their step , but it be half an hour before they stand 
 without the entrance - gate as early . he then request she to stay 
 where she be , whilst he go to see who be within . 

 she sit down among the bush within the gate , and Clare creep 
 towards the house . his absence last some considerable time , and 
 when he return Tess be wildly anxious , not for herself , but for 
 he . he have find out from a boy that there be only an old woman in 
 charge as caretaker , and she only come there on fine day , from the 
 hamlet near , to open and shut the window . she would come to shut 
 they at sunset . " now , we can get in through one of the low 
 window , and rest there , " say he . 

 under his escort she go tardily forward to the main front , whose 
 shutter window , like sightless eyeball , exclude the possibility 
 of watcher . the door be reach a few step far , and one of 
 the window beside it be open . Clare clamber in , and pull Tess 
 in after he . 

 except the hall , the room be all in darkness , and they ascend 
 the staircase . up here also the shutter be tightly closed , 
 the ventilation be perfunctorily do , for this day at least , 
 by open the hall - window in front and an upper window behind . 
 Clare unlatche the door of a large chamber , feel his way across 
 it , and part the shutter to the width of two or three inch . 
 a shaft of dazzle sunlight glance into the room , reveal heavy , 
 old - fashioned furniture , crimson damask hanging , and an enormous 
 four - post bedstead , along the head of which be carve run 
 figure , apparently Atalanta 's race . 

 " rest at last ! " say he , set down his bag and the parcel of 
 viand . 

 they remain in great quietness till the caretaker should have come 
 to shut the window : as a precaution , put themselves in total 
 darkness by bar the shutter as before , lest the woman should 
 open the door of their chamber for any casual reason . between six 
 and seven o'clock she come , but do not approach the wing they 
 be in . they hear she close the window , fasten they , lock the 
 door , and go away . then Clare again steal a chink of light from 
 the window , and they share another meal , till by - and - by they 
 be envelop in the shade of night which they have no candle to 
 disperse . 



 LVIII 


 the night be strangely solemn and still . in the small hour she 
 whisper to he the whole story of how he have walk in his sleep 
 with she in his arm across the Froom stream , at the imminent risk of 
 both their life , and lay she down in the stone coffin at the ruin 
 abbey . he have never know of that till now . 

 " why do not   you tell I next day ? " he say . " it might have prevent 
 much misunderstanding and woe . " 

 " do not   think of what be past ! " say she . " I be not go to think 
 outside of now . why should we ! who know what to - morrow have in 
 store ? " 

 but it apparently have no sorrow . the morning be wet and foggy , and 
 Clare , rightly inform that the caretaker only open the window 
 on fine day , venture to creep out of their chamber and explore the 
 house , leave Tess asleep . there be no food on the premise , but 
 there be water , and he take advantage of the fog to emerge from the 
 mansion and fetch tea , bread , and butter from a shop in a little 
 place two mile beyond , as also a small tin kettle and spirit - lamp , 
 that they might get fire without smoke . his re - entry awake she ; and 
 they breakfast on what he have bring . 

 they be indispose to stir abroad , and the day pass , and the 
 night follow , and the next , and next ; till , almost without their 
 be aware , five day have slip by in absolute seclusion , not a 
 sight or sound of a human being disturb their peacefulness , such 
 as it be . the change of the weather be their only event , the 
 bird of the New Forest their only company . by tacit consent they 
 hardly once speak of any incident of the past subsequent to their 
 wedding - day . the gloomy intervening time seem to sink into chaos , 
 over which the present and prior time close as if it never have 
 be . whenever he suggest that they should leave their shelter , 
 and go forwards towards Southampton or London , she show a strange 
 unwillingness to move . 

 " why should we put an end to all that be sweet and lovely ! " she 
 deprecate . " what must come will come . " and , look through the 
 shutter - chink : " all be trouble outside there ; inside here content . " 

 he peep out also . it be quite true ; within be affection , union , 
 error forgive : outside be the inexorable . 

 " and - and , " she say , press her cheek against his , " I fear that 
 what you think of I now may not last . I do not wish to outlive your 
 present feeling for I . I would rather not . I would rather be dead 
 and bury when the time come for you to despise I , so that it may 
 never be know to I that you despise I . " 

 " I can not ever despise you . " 

 " I also hope that . but consider what my life have be , I can not 
 see why any man should , soon or later , be able to help despise 
 I .... how wickedly mad I be ! yet formerly I never could bear to 
 hurt a fly or a worm , and the sight of a bird in a cage use often to 
 make I cry . " 

 they remain yet another day . in the night the dull sky clear , 
 and the result be that the old caretaker at the cottage awake early . 
 the brilliant sunrise make she unusually brisk ; she decide to open 
 the contiguous mansion immediately , and to air it thoroughly on such 
 a day . thus it occur that , have arrive and open the low 
 room before six o'clock , she ascend to the bedchamber , and be 
 about to turn the handle of the one wherein they lay . at that moment 
 she fancy she could hear the breathing of person within . her 
 slipper and her antiquity have render her progress a noiseless one 
 so far , and she make for instant retreat ; then , deem that her 
 hearing might have deceive she , she turn anew to the door and 
 softly try the handle . the lock be out of order , but a piece of 
 furniture have be move forward on the inside , which prevent she 
 open the door more than an inch or two . a stream of morning light 
 through the shutter - chink fall upon the face of the pair , wrap in 
 profound slumber , Tess 's lip be part like a half - open flower 
 near his cheek . the caretaker be so strike with their innocent 
 appearance , and with the elegance of Tess 's gown hang across a 
 chair , her silk stocking beside it , the pretty parasol , and the 
 other habit in which she have arrive because she have none else , that 
 her first indignation at the effrontery of tramp and vagabond give 
 way to a momentary sentimentality over this genteel elopement , as it 
 seem . she close the door , and withdraw as softly as she have come , 
 to go and consult with her neighbour on the odd discovery . 

 not more than a minute have elapse after her withdrawal when Tess 
 wake , and then Clare . both have a sense that something have disturb 
 they , though they could not say what ; and the uneasy feeling which 
 it engender grow strong . as soon as he be dress he narrowly 
 scan the lawn through the two or three inch of shutter - chink . 

 " I think we will leave at once , " say he . " it be a fine day . and I 
 can not help fancy somebody be about the house . at any rate , the 
 woman will be sure to come to - day . " 

 she passively assent , and put the room in order , they take up 
 the few article that belong to they , and depart noiselessly . 
 when they have get into the Forest she turn to take a last look at 
 the house . 

 " ah , happy house - goodbye ! " she say . " my life can only be a 
 question of a few week . why should we not have stay there ? " 

 " do not   say it , Tess ! we shall soon get out of this district 
 altogether . we will continue our course as we have   begin it , and keep 
 straight north . nobody will think of look for we there . we shall 
 be look for at the Wessex port if we be seek at all . when we 
 be in the north we will get to a port and away . " 

 have thus persuade she , the plan be pursue , and they keep a 
 bee - line northward . their long repose at the manor - house lend they 
 walk power now ; and towards mid - day they find that they be 
 approach the steeple city of Melchester , which lie directly in 
 their way . he decide to rest she in a clump of tree during the 
 afternoon , and push onward under cover of darkness . at dusk Clare 
 purchase food as usual , and their night march begin , the boundary 
 between Upper and Mid - Wessex be cross about eight o'clock . 

 to walk across country without much regard to road be not new 
 to Tess , and she show her old agility in the performance . the 
 intercept city , ancient Melchester , they be oblige to pass 
 through in order to take advantage of the town bridge for cross a 
 large river that obstruct they . it be about midnight when they 
 go along the deserted street , light fitfully by the few lamp , 
 keep off the pavement that it might not echo their footstep . 
 the graceful pile of cathedral architecture rise dimly on their left 
 hand , but it be lose upon they now . once out of the town they 
 follow the turnpike - road , which after a few mile plunge across an 
 open plain . 

 though the sky be dense with cloud , a diffused light from some 
 fragment of a moon have hitherto help they a little . but the moon 
 have now sink , the cloud seem to settle almost on their head , and 
 the night grow as dark as a cave . however , they find their way 
 along , keep as much on the turf as possible that their tread might 
 not resound , which it be easy to do , there be no hedge or fence 
 of any kind . all around be open loneliness and black solitude , over 
 which a stiff breeze blew . 

 they have proceed thus gropingly two or three mile far when 
 on a sudden Clare become conscious of some vast erection close in 
 his front , rise sheer from the grass . they have almost strike 
 themselves against it . 

 " what monstrous place be this ? " say Angel . 

 " it hum , " say she . " Hearken ! " 

 he listen . the wind , play upon the edifice , produce a booming 
 tune , like the note of some gigantic one - string harp . no other 
 sound come from it , and lift his hand and advance a step or 
 two , Clare feel the vertical surface of the structure . it seem to 
 be of solid stone , without joint or moulding . carry his finger 
 onward he find that what he have come in contact with be a colossal 
 rectangular pillar ; by stretch out his left hand he could feel a 
 similar one adjoining . at an indefinite height overhead something 
 make the black sky blacker , which have the semblance of a vast 
 architrave unite the pillar horizontally . they carefully enter 
 beneath and between ; the surface echo their soft rustle ; but they 
 seem to be still out of door . the place be roofless . Tess draw 
 her breath fearfully , and Angel , perplex , say - 

 " what can it be ? " 

 feel sideways they encounter another tower - like pillar , square 
 and uncompromising as the first ; beyond it another and another . the 
 place be all door and pillar , some connect above by continuous 
 architrave . 

 " a very Temple of the wind , " he say . 

 the next pillar be isolate ; other compose a trilithon ; other 
 be prostrate , their flank form a causeway wide enough for a 
 carriage ; and it be soon obvious that they make up a forest of 
 monolith group upon the grassy expanse of the plain . the couple 
 advance far into this pavilion of the night till they stand in 
 its midst . 

 " it be Stonehenge ! " say Clare . 

 " the heathen temple , you mean ? " 

 " yes . old than the century ; old than the d'Urbervilles ! well , 
 what shall we do , darling ? we may find shelter far on . " 

 but Tess , really tired by this time , fling herself upon an oblong 
 slab that lie close at hand , and be shelter from the wind by a 
 pillar . owe to the action of the sun during the precede day , the 
 stone be warm and dry , in comfort contrast to the rough and chill 
 grass around , which have damp her skirt and shoe . 

 " I do not   want to go any far , Angel , " she say , stretch out her 
 hand for his . " can not   we bide here ? " 

 " I fear not . this spot be visible for mile by day , although it do 
 not seem so now . " 

 " one of my mother 's people be a shepherd hereabouts , now I think of 
 it . and you use to say at talbothay that I be a heathen . so now 
 I be at home . " 

 he kneel down beside her outstretched form , and put his lip upon 
 her . 

 " Sleepy be you , dear ? I think you be lie on an altar . " 

 " I like very much to be here , " she murmur . " it be so solemn and 
 lonely - after my great happiness - with nothing but the sky above my 
 face . it seem as if there be no folk in the world but we two ; 
 and I wish there be not - except ' Liza - Lu . " 

 clare though she might as well rest here till it should get a little 
 light , and he fling his overcoat upon she , and sit down by her 
 side . 

 " Angel , if anything happen to I , will you watch over ' Liza - Lu for 
 my sake ? " she ask , when they have listen a long time to the wind 
 among the pillar . 

 " I will . " 

 " she be so good and simple and pure . o , Angel - I wish you would 
 marry she if you lose I , as you will do shortly . o , if you would ! " 

 " if I lose you I lose all ! and she be my sister - in - law . " 

 " that be nothing , dear . People marry sister - law continually about 
 Marlott ; and ' Liza - Lu be so gentle and sweet , and she be grow 
 so beautiful . o , I could share you with she willingly when we be 
 spirit ! if you would train she and teach she , Angel , and bring she 
 up for your own self ! ... she have all the good of I without the bad 
 of I ; and if she be to become yours it would almost seem as if 
 death have not divide we ... well , I have say it . I will not   mention 
 it again . " 

 she cease , and he fall into thought . in the far north - east sky he 
 could see between the pillar a level streak of light . the uniform 
 concavity of black cloud be lift bodily like the lid of a pot , 
 let in at the earth 's edge the come day , against which the 
 tower monolith and trilithon begin to be blackly define . 

 " do they sacrifice to God here ? " ask she . 

 " no , " say he . 

 " who to ? " 

 " I believe to the sun . that lofty stone set away by itself be in the 
 direction of the sun , which will presently rise behind it . " 

 " this remind I , dear , " she say . " you remember you never would 
 interfere with any belief of mine before we be marry ? but I know 
 your mind all the same , and I think as you think - not from any 
 reason of my own , but because you think so . tell I now , Angel , 
 do you think we shall meet again after we be dead ? I want to know . " 

 he kiss she to avoid a reply at such a time . 

 " O , Angel - I fear that mean no ! " say she , with a suppress sob . 
 " and I want so to see you again - so much , so much ! what - not even 
 you and I , Angel , who love each other so well ? " 

 like a great than himself , to the critical question at the critical 
 time he do not answer ; and they be again silent . in a minute or 
 two her breathing become more regular , her clasp of his hand relax , 
 and she fall asleep . the band of silver paleness along the east 
 horizon make even the distant part of the Great Plain appear dark 
 and near ; and the whole enormous landscape bore that impress of 
 reserve , taciturnity , and hesitation which be usual just before day . 
 the eastward pillar and their architrave stand up blackly against 
 the light , and the great flame - shape Sun - stone beyond they ; and the 
 Stone of Sacrifice midway . presently the night wind die out , and 
 the quiver little pool in the cup - like hollow of the stone lay 
 still . at the same time something seem to move on the verge of the 
 dip eastward - a mere dot . it be the head of a man approach they 
 from the hollow beyond the Sun - stone . Clare wish they have go 
 onward , but in the circumstance decide to remain quiet . the figure 
 come straight towards the circle of pillar in which they be . 

 he hear something behind he , the brush of foot . turn , he see 
 over the prostrate column another figure ; then before he be aware , 
 another be at hand on the right , under a trilithon , and another on 
 the left . the dawn shine full on the front of the man westward , and 
 Clare could discern from this that he be tall , and walk as if 
 train . they all close in with evident purpose . her story then 
 be true ! spring to his foot , he look around for a weapon , 
 loose stone , mean of escape , anything . by this time the near 
 man be upon he . 

 " it be no use , sir , " he say . " there be sixteen of we on the Plain , 
 and the whole country be rear . " 

 " let she finish her sleep ! " he implore in a whisper of the man as 
 they gather round . 

 when they see where she lay , which they have not do till then , they 
 show no objection , and stand watch she , as still as the pillar 
 around . he go to the stone and bent over she , hold one poor 
 little hand ; her breathing now be quick and small , like that of a 
 less creature than a woman . all wait in the grow light , their 
 face and hand as if they be silver , the remainder of their 
 figure dark , the stone glisten green - gray , the Plain still a 
 mass of shade . soon the light be strong , and a ray shine upon her 
 unconscious form , peer under her eyelid and wake she . 

 " what be it , Angel ? " she say , start up . " have they come for I ? " 

 " yes , dearest , " he say . " they have come . " 

 " it be as it should be , " she murmur . " Angel , I be almost glad - yes , 
 glad ! this happiness could not have last . it be too much . I 
 have have enough ; and now I shall not live for you to despise I ! " 

 she stand up , shake herself , and go forward , neither of the man 
 have move . 

 " I be ready , " she say quietly . 



 LIX 


 the city of Wintoncester , that fine old city , aforetime capital 
 of Wessex , lie amidst its convex and concave downland in all the 
 brightness and warmth of a July morning . the gable brick , tile , and 
 freestone house have almost dry off for the season their integument 
 of lichen , the stream in the meadow be low , and in the sloping 
 High Street , from the West Gateway to the mediaeval cross , and from 
 the mediaeval cross to the bridge , that leisurely dust and sweep 
 be in progress which usually usher in an old - fashioned market - day . 

 from the western gate aforesaid the highway , as every Wintoncestrian 
 know , ascend a long and regular incline of the exact length of a 
 measure mile , leave the house gradually behind . up this road 
 from the precinct of the city two person be walk rapidly , 
 as if unconscious of the try ascent - unconscious through 
 preoccupation and not through buoyancy . they have emerge upon this 
 road through a narrow , bar wicket in a high wall a little low 
 down . they seem anxious to get out of the sight of the house and 
 of their kind , and this road appear to offer the quick mean 
 of do so . though they be young , they walk with bow head , 
 which gait of grief the sun 's ray smile on pitilessly . 

 one of the pair be Angel Clare , the other a tall bud 
 creature - half girl , half woman - a spiritualized image of Tess , 
 slighter than she , but with the same beautiful eye - Clare 's 
 sister - in - law , ' Liza - Lu . their pale face seem to have shrink 
 to half their natural size . they move on hand in hand , and never 
 speak a word , the drooping of their head be that of Giotto 's 
 " two apostle " . 

 when they have nearly reach the top of the great West Hill the 
 clock in the town strike eight . each give a start at the note , 
 and , walk onward yet a few step , they reach the first 
 milestone , stand whitely on the green margin of the grass , and 
 back by the down , which here be open to the road . they enter 
 upon the turf , and , impel by a force that seem to overrule their 
 will , suddenly stand still , turn , and wait in paralyzed suspense 
 beside the stone . 

 the prospect from this summit be almost unlimited . in the valley 
 beneath lie the city they have just leave , its more prominent building 
 show as in an isometric drawing - among they the broad cathedral 
 tower , with its Norman window and immense length of aisle and nave , 
 the spire of St Thomas 's , the pinnacled tower of the College , and , 
 more to the right , the tower and gable of the ancient hospice , 
 where to this day the pilgrim may receive his dole of bread and ale . 
 behind the city sweep the rotund upland of St Catherine 's Hill ; 
 far off , landscape beyond landscape , till the horizon be lose 
 in the radiance of the sun hang above it . 

 against these far stretch of country rise , in front of the other 
 city edifice , a large red - brick building , with level gray roof , 
 and row of short bar window bespeak captivity , the whole 
 contrast greatly by its formalism with the quaint irregularity 
 of the Gothic erection . it be somewhat disguised from the road in 
 pass it by yew and evergreen oak , but it be visible enough up 
 here . the wicket from which the pair have lately emerge be in the 
 wall of this structure . from the middle of the building an ugly 
 flat - top octagonal tower ascend against the east horizon , and 
 view from this spot , on its shady side and against the light , it 
 seem the one blot on the city 's beauty . yet it be with this blot , 
 and not with the beauty , that the two gazer be concern . 

 upon the cornice of the tower a tall staff be fix . their eye 
 be rivet on it . a few minute after the hour have strike 
 something move slowly up the staff , and extend itself upon the 
 breeze . it be a black flag . 

 " Justice " be do , and the President of the Immortals , in Aeschylean 
 phrase , have end his sport with Tess . and the d'Urberville knight 
 and dame sleep on in their tomb unknowe . the two speechless 
 gazer bent themselves down to the earth , as if in prayer , and 
 remain thus a long time , absolutely motionless : the flag continue 
 to wave silently . as soon as they have strength , they arise , join 
 hand again , and go on . 
