jude the obscure 
 by 
 Thomas Hardy 
 content 
 PART first 
 at Marygreen 
 PART SECOND 
 at Christminster 
 PART THIRD 
 at Melchester 
 part fourth 
 at Shaston 
 PART FIFTH 
 at Aldbrickham and elsewhere 
 PART SIXTH 
 at Christminster Again 
 Part First 
 AT marygreen 
 " Yea , many there be that have run out of their wit for 
 woman , and become servant for their sake . many also 
 have perish , have err , and sin , for woman .... o 
 ye man , how can it be but woman should be strong , see 
 they do thus ? " - ESDRAS . 
 I 
 the schoolmaster be leave the village , and everybody seem sorry . 
 the miller at Cresscombe lend he the small white tilt cart and 
 horse to carry his good to the city of his destination , about twenty 
 mile off , such a vehicle proving of quite sufficient size for the 
 depart teacher 's effect . for the schoolhouse have be partly 
 furnish by the manager , and the only cumbersome article possess 
 by the master , in addition to the packing - case of book , be a 
 cottage piano that he have buy at an auction during the year in 
 which he think of learn instrumental music . but the enthusiasm 
 have wan he have never acquire any skill in playing , and the 
 purchase article have be a perpetual trouble to he ever since in 
 move house . 
 the rector have go away for the day , be a man who dislike the 
 sight of change . he do not mean to return till the evening , when 
 the new school - teacher would have arrive and settle in , and 
 everything would be smooth again . 
 the blacksmith , the farm bailiff , and the schoolmaster himself be 
 stand in perplexed attitude in the parlour before the instrument . 
 the master have remark that even if he get it into the cart he 
 should not know what to do with it on his arrival at Christminster , 
 the city he be bind for , since he be only go into temporary 
 lodging just at first . 
 a little boy of eleven , who have be thoughtfully assist in the 
 packing , join the group of man , and as they rub their chin he 
 speak up , blush at the sound of his own voice : " aunt have get a 
 great fuel - house , and it could be put there , perhaps , till you have 
 find a place to settle in , sir . " 
 " a proper good notion , " say the blacksmith . 
 it be decide that a deputation should wait on the boy 's aunt - an 
 old maiden resident - and ask she if she would house the piano till 
 Mr. Phillotson should send for it . the smith and the bailiff start 
 to see about the practicability of the suggest shelter , and the boy 
 and the schoolmaster be leave stand alone . 
 " sorry I be go , Jude ? " ask the latter kindly . 
 tear rise into the boy 's eye , for he be not among the regular day 
 scholar , who come unromantically close to the schoolmaster 's life , 
 but one who have attend the night school only during the present 
 teacher 's term of office . the regular scholar , if the truth must 
 be tell , stand at the present moment afar off , like certain historic 
 disciple , indispose to any enthusiastic volunteering of aid . 
 the boy awkwardly open the book he hold in his hand , which Mr. 
 Phillotson have bestow on he as a parting gift , and admit that 
 he be sorry . 
 " so be I , " say Mr. Phillotson . 
 " why do you go , sir ? " ask the boy . 
 " ah - that would be a long story . you would not   understand my reason , 
 Jude . you will , perhaps , when you be old . " 
 " I think I should now , sir . " 
 " well - do not   speak of this everywhere . you know what a university 
 be , and a university degree ? it be the necessary hallmark of a man 
 who want to do anything in teaching . my scheme , or dream , be to be 
 a university graduate , and then to be ordain . by go to live at 
 Christminster , or near it , I shall be at headquarters , so to speak , 
 and if my scheme be practicable at all , I consider that be on the 
 spot will afford I a well chance of carry it out than I should 
 have elsewhere . " 
 the smith and his companion return . Old Miss Fawley 's fuel - house 
 be dry , and eminently practicable ; and she seem willing to give 
 the instrument standing - room there . it be accordingly leave in 
 the school till the evening , when more hand would be available for 
 remove it ; and the schoolmaster give a final glance round . 
 the boy Jude assist in load some small article , and at nine 
 o'clock Mr. Phillotson mount beside his box of book and other 
  impedimenta , and bade his friend good - bye . 
 " I shall not   forget you , Jude , " he say , smile , as the cart move off . 
 " be a good boy , remember ; and be kind to animal and bird , and read 
 all you can . and if ever you come to Christminster remember you hunt 
 I out for old acquaintance ' sake . " 
 the cart creak across the green , and disappear round the corner 
 by the rectory - house . the boy return to the draw - well at the edge 
 of the greensward , where he have leave his bucket when he go to help 
 his patron and teacher in the loading . there be a quiver in his lip 
 now and after open the well - cover to begin lower the bucket he 
 pause and leant with his forehead and arm against the framework , 
 his face wear the fixity of a thoughtful child 's who have feel the 
 prick of life somewhat before his time . the well into which he be 
 look be as ancient as the village itself , and from his present 
 position appear as a long circular perspective end in a shin 
 disk of quivering water at a distance of a hundred foot down . 
 there be a lining of green moss near the top , and near still the 
 hart's - tongue fern . 
 he say to himself , in the melodramatic tone of a whimsical boy , 
 that the schoolmaster have draw at that well score of time on a 
 morning like this , and would never draw there any more . " I have   see 
 he look down into it , when he be tired with his drawing , just as I 
 do now , and when he rest a bit before carry the bucket home ! 
 but he be too clever to bide here any long - a small sleepy place 
 like this ! " 
 a tear roll from his eye into the depth of the well . the morning 
 be a little foggy , and the boy 's breathing unfurl itself as 
 a thick fog upon the still and heavy air . his thought be 
 interrupt by a sudden outcry : 
 " bring on that water , will ye , you idle young harlican ! " 
 it come from an old woman who have emerge from her door towards the 
 garden gate of a green - thatched cottage not far off . the boy quickly 
 wave a signal of assent , draw the water with what be a great effort 
 for one of his stature , land and empty the big bucket into his 
 own pair of small one , and pause a moment for breath , start 
 with they across the patch of clammy greensward whereon the well 
 stand - nearly in the centre of the little village , or rather hamlet 
 of Marygreen . 
 it be as old - fashioned as it be small , and it rest in the lap of 
 an undulating upland adjoining the North Wessex down . old as it 
 be , however , the well - shaft be probably the only relic of the local 
 history that remain absolutely unchanged . many of the thatched 
 and dormere dwelling - house have be pull down of late year , and 
 many tree fell on the green . above all , the original church , 
 hump - back , wood - turrete , and quaintly hippe , have be take 
 down , and either crack up into heap of road - metal in the lane , or 
 utilize as pig - sty wall , garden seat , guard - stone to fence , and 
 rockery in the flower - bed of the neighbourhood . in place of it 
 a tall new building of modern Gothic design , unfamiliar to english 
 eye , have be erect on a new piece of ground by a certain 
 obliterator of historic record who have run down from London and back 
 in a day . the site whereon so long have stand the ancient temple to 
 the christian divinity be not even record on the green and level 
 grass - plot that have immemorially be the churchyard , the obliterate 
 graf be commemorate by eighteen - penny cast - iron cross 
 warrant to last five year . 
 II 
 Slender as be Jude Fawley 's frame he bear the two brim 
 house - bucket of water to the cottage without rest . over the door 
 be a little rectangular piece of blue board , on which be paint 
 in yellow letter , " Drusilla Fawley , Baker . " within the little lead 
 pane of the window - this be one of the few old house leave - be 
 five bottle of sweet , and three bun on a plate of the willow 
 pattern . 
 while empty the bucket at the back of the house he could hear an 
 animate conversation in progress within - door between his great - aunt , 
 the Drusilla of the sign - board , and some other villager . have 
 see the school - master depart , they be sum up particular of 
 the event , and indulge in prediction of his future . 
 " and who be he ? " ask one , comparatively a stranger , when the boy 
 enter . 
 " well ye me ask it , Mrs. Williams . he be my great - nephew - come since 
 you be last this way . " the old inhabitant who answer be a tall , 
 gaunt woman , who speak tragically on the most trivial subject , and 
 give a phrase of her conversation to each auditor in turn . " he come 
 from Mellstock , down in South Wessex , about a year ago - bad luck 
 for ' n , Belinda "   turn to the right   " where his father be live , 
 and be take wi ' the shaking for death , and die in two day , as you 
 know , Caroline "   turn to the left . " it would ha ' be a blessing 
 if Goddy - mighty have take thee too , wi ' thy mother and father , poor 
 useless boy ! but I have   get he here to stay with I till I can see 
 what be to be do with un , though I be oblige to let he earn any 
 penny he can . just now he be a - scaring of bird for Farmer Troutham . 
 it keep he out of mischty . why do ye turn away , Jude ? " she 
 continue , as the boy , feel the impact of their glance like slap 
 upon his face , move aside . 
 the local washerwoman reply that it be perhaps a very good plan of 
 Miss or Mrs. Fawley 's   as they call she indifferently   to have he 
 with she - " to kip ' ee company in your loneliness , fetch water , shet 
 the winder - shetter o ' night , and help in the bit o ' baking . " 
 Miss Fawley doubt it .... " why do not   ye get the schoolmaster to 
 take ' ee to Christminster wi ' un , and make a scholar of ' ee , " she 
 continue , in frown pleasantry . " I be sure he could not   ha ' take a 
 well one . the boy be crazy for book , that he be . it run in our 
 family rather . his cousin Sue be just the same - so I have   hear ; but 
 I have not see the child for year , though she be bear in this 
 place , within these four wall , as it happen . my niece and her 
 husband , after they be marry , didn ' get a house of their own for 
 some year or more ; and then they only have one till - well , I will not   go 
 into that . Jude , my child , do not   you ever marry . ' tisn't   for the 
 Fawleys to take that step any more . she , their only one , be like 
 a child o ' my own , Belinda , till the split come ! ah , that a little 
 maid should know such change ! " 
 Jude , find the general attention again center on himself , go 
 out to the bakehouse , where he eat the cake provide for his 
 breakfast . the end of his spare time have now arrive , and emerge 
 from the garden by get over the hedge at the back he pursue a 
 path northward , till he come to a wide and lonely depression in the 
 general level of the upland , which be sow as a corn - field . this 
 vast concave be the scene of his labour for Mr Troutham the farmer , 
 and he descend into the midst of it . 
 the brown surface of the field go right up towards the sky all 
 round , where it be lose by degree in the mist that shut out the 
 actual verge and accentuate the solitude . the only mark on the 
 uniformity of the scene be a rick of last year 's produce stand 
 in the midst of the arable , the rook that rise at his approach , and 
 the path athwart the fallow by which he have come , trodden now by he 
 hardly know whom , though once by many of his own dead family . 
 " how ugly it be here ! " he murmur . 
 the fresh harrow - line seem to stretch like the channelling in 
 a piece of new corduroy , lend a meanly utilitarian air to the 
 expanse , take away its gradation , and deprive it of all history 
 beyond that of the few recent month , though to every clod and stone 
 there really attach association enough and to spare - echo of 
 song from ancient harvest - day , of speak word , and of sturdy 
 deed . every inch of ground have be the site , first or last , 
 of energy , gaiety , horse - play , bickering , weariness . group of 
 gleaner have squat in the sun on every square yard . love - match 
 that have populate the adjoining hamlet have be make up there 
 between reap and carry . under the hedge which divide the 
 field from a distant plantation girl have give themselves to lover 
 who would not turn their head to look at they by the next harvest ; 
 and in that ancient cornfield many a man have make love - promise to 
 a woman at whose voice he have tremble by the next seed - time after 
 fulfil they in the church adjoining . but this neither Jude nor 
 the rook around he consider . for they it be a lonely place , 
 possessing , in the one view , only the quality of a work - ground , and 
 in the other that of a granary good to feed in . 
 the boy stand under the rick before mention , and every few second 
 use his clacker or rattle briskly . at each clack the rook leave off 
 pecking , and rise and go away on their leisurely wing , burnish 
 like tasset of mail , afterwards wheel back and regard he 
 warily , and descend to feed at a more respectful distance . 
 he sound the clacker till his arm ache , and at length his heart 
 grow sympathetic with the bird ' thwart desire . they seem , like 
 himself , to be live in a world which do not want they . why should 
 he frighten they away ? they take upon more and more the aspect of 
 gentle friend and pensioner - the only friend he could claim as 
 be in the least degree interested in he , for his aunt have often 
 tell he that she be not . he cease his rattling , and they alight 
 anew . 
 " poor little dear ! " say Jude , aloud . " you shall have some dinner - 
 you shall . there be enough for we all . Farmer Troutham can afford 
 to let you have some . Eat , then my dear little birdie , and make a 
 good meal ! " 
 they stay and eat , inky spot on the nut - brown soil , and Jude 
 enjoy their appetite . a magic thread of fellow - feeling unite his 
 own life with theirs . puny and sorry as those life be , they much 
 resemble his own . 
 his clacker he have by this time throw away from he , as be a mean 
 and sordid instrument , offensive both to the bird and to himself 
 as their friend . all at once he become conscious of a smart blow 
 upon his buttock , follow by a loud clack , which announce to his 
 surprised sens that the clacker have be the instrument of offence 
 use . the bird and Jude start up simultaneously , and the daze 
 eye of the latter beheld the farmer in person , the great Troutham 
 himself , his red face glare down upon Jude 's cower frame , the 
 clacker swing in his hand . 
 " so it be ' eat my dear birdie , ' be it , young man ? ' eat , dear 
 birdie , ' indeed ! I will tickle your breech , and see if you say , 
 ' eat , dear birdie , ' again in a hurry ! and you have   be idle at the 
 schoolmaster 's too , instead of come here , ha'n't   ye , hey ? that be 
 how you earn your sixpence a day for keep the rook off my corn ! " 
 Whilst salute Jude 's ear with this impassioned rhetoric , Troutham 
 have seize his left hand with his own left , and swing his slim 
 frame round he at arm' - length , again strike Jude on the hind part 
 with the flat side of Jude 's own rattle , till the field echo with 
 the blow , which be deliver once or twice at each revolution . 
 " do not   ' ee , sir - please do not   ' ee ! " cry the whirling child , as 
 helpless under the centrifugal tendency of his person as a hooked 
 fish swing to land , and behold the hill , the rick , the 
 plantation , the path , and the rook go round and round he in an 
 amazing circular race . " I - I sir - only mean that - there be a good 
 crop in the ground - I see them sow it - and the rook could have a 
 little bit for dinner - and you would not   miss it , sir - and Mr. 
 Phillotson say I be to be kind to them - oh , oh , oh ! " 
 this truthful explanation seem to exasperate the farmer even more 
 than if Jude have stoutly deny say anything at all , and he still 
 smack the whirling urchin , the clack of the instrument continue 
 to resound all across the field and as far as the ear of distant 
 worker - who gather thereupon that Jude be pursue his business 
 of clack with great assiduity - and echo from the brand - new 
 church tower just behind the mist , towards the building of which 
 structure the farmer have largely subscribe , to testify his love for 
 God and man . 
 presently Troutham grow tired of his punitive task , and deposit 
 the quivering boy on his leg , take a sixpence from his pocket and 
 give it he in payment for his day 's work , tell he to go home and 
 never let he see he in one of those field again . 
 Jude leap out of arm 's reach , and walk along the trackway 
 weeping - not from the pain , though that be keen enough ; not from the 
 perception of the flaw in the terrestrial scheme , by which what be 
 good for God 's bird be bad for God 's gardener ; but with the awful 
 sense that he have wholly disgrace himself before he have be a year 
 in the parish , and hence might be a burden to his great - aunt for 
 life . 
 with this shadow on his mind he do not care to show himself in the 
 village , and go homeward by a roundabout track behind a high hedge 
 and across a pasture . here he behold score of couple earthworm 
 lie half their length on the surface of the damp ground , as 
 they always do in such weather at that time of the year . it be 
 impossible to advance in regular step without crush some of they 
 at each tread . 
 though Farmer Troutham have just hurt he , he be a boy who could not 
 himself bear to hurt anything . he have never bring home a nest of 
 young bird without lie awake in misery half the night after , and 
 often reinstate they and the nest in their original place the next 
 morning . he could scarcely bear to see tree cut down or lop , 
 from a fancy that it hurt they ; and late pruning , when the sap be up 
 and the tree bleed profusely , have be a positive grief to he in his 
 infancy . this weakness of character , as it may be call , suggest 
 that he be the sort of man who be bear to ache a good deal before 
 the fall of the curtain upon his unnecessary life should signify that 
 all be well with he again . he carefully pick his way on tiptoe 
 among the earthworm , without kill a single one . 
 on enter the cottage he find his aunt sell a penny loaf to a 
 little girl , and when the customer be go she say , " well , how do 
 you come to be back here in the middle of the morning like this ? " 
 " I be turn away . " 
 " what ? " 
 " Mr. Troutham have turn I away because I let the rook have a few 
 pecking of corn . and there be my wage - the last I shall ever hae ! " 
 he throw the sixpence tragically on the table . 
 " ah ! " say his aunt , suspend her breath . and she open upon he 
 a lecture on how she would now have he all the spring upon her hand 
 do nothing . " if you can not   skeer bird , what can ye do ? there ! 
 do not   ye look so deedy ! Farmer Troutham be not so much well than 
 myself , come to that . but ' tis as Job say , ' now they that be 
 young than I have I in derision , whose father I would have 
 disdain to have set with the dog of my flock . ' his father be my 
 father 's journeyman , anyhow , and I must have be a fool to let ' ee 
 go to work for ' n , which I should not   ha ' do but to keep ' ee out of 
 mischty . " 
 more angry with Jude for demean she by come there than for 
 dereliction of duty , she rat he primarily from that point of view , 
 and only secondarily from a moral one . 
 " not that you should have let the bird eat what Farmer Troutham 
 plant . of course you be wrong in that . Jude , Jude , why didstn't 
 go off with that schoolmaster of thine to Christminster or somewhere ? 
 but , oh no - poor or'nary child - there never be any sprawl on thy 
 side of the family , and never will be ! " 
 " where be this beautiful city , Aunt - this place where Mr. Phillotson 
 be go to ? " ask the boy , after meditate in silence . 
 " Lord ! you ought to know where the city of Christminster be . near a 
 score of mile from here . it be a place much too good for you ever 
 to have much to do with , poor boy , I be a - thinking . " 
 " and will Mr. Phillotson always be there ? " 
 " how can I tell ? " 
 " could I go to see he ? " 
 " Lord , no ! you do not   grow up hereabout , or you would not   ask such as 
 that . we have   never have anything to do with folk in Christminster , nor 
 folk in Christminster with we . " 
 Jude go out , and , feel more than ever his existence to be an 
 undemanded one , he lie down upon his back on a heap of litter near 
 the pig - sty . the fog have by this time become more translucent , and 
 the position of the sun could be see through it . he pull his 
 straw hat over his face , and peer through the interstice of the 
 plaiting at the white brightness , vaguely reflect . grow up 
 bring responsibility , he find . event do not rhyme quite as 
 he have think . Nature 's logic be too horrid for he to care for . 
 that mercy towards one set of creature be cruelty towards another 
 sicken his sense of harmony . as you get old , and feel yourself 
 to be at the centre of your time , and not at a point in its 
 circumference , as you have feel when you be little , you be seize 
 with a sort of shudder , he perceive . all around you there seem 
 to be something glare , garish , rattling , and the noise and glare 
 hit upon the little cell call your life , and shake it , and warp 
 it . 
 if he could only prevent himself grow up ! he do not want to be a 
 man . 
 then , like the natural boy , he forget his despondency , and spring up . 
 during the remainder of the morning he help his aunt , and in the 
 afternoon , when there be nothing more to be do , he go into the 
 village . here he ask a man whereabout Christminster lay . 
 " Christminster ? oh , well , out by there yonder ; though I have   never bin 
 there - not I. I have   never have any business at such a place . " 
 the man point north - eastward , in the very direction where lay that 
 field in which Jude have so disgrace himself . there be something 
 unpleasant about the coincidence for the moment , but the fearsomeness 
 of this fact rather increase his curiosity about the city . the 
 farmer have say he be never to be see in that field again ; yet 
 Christminster lie across it , and the path be a public one . so , 
 steal out of the hamlet , he descend into the same hollow which 
 have witness his punishment in the morning , never swerve an inch 
 from the path , and climb up the long and tedious ascent on the 
 other side till the track join the highway by a little clump of 
 tree . here the plough land end , and all before he be bleak 
 open down . 
 III 
 not a soul be visible on the hedgeless highway , or on either side of 
 it , and the white road seem to ascend and diminish till it join 
 the sky . at the very top it be cross at right angle by a green 
 " ridgeway " - the Ickneild Street and original roman road through the 
 district . this ancient track run east and west for many mile , and 
 down almost to within live memory have be use for drive flock 
 and herd to fair and market . but it be now neglect and 
 overgrown . 
 the boy have never before stray so far north as this from the 
 nestling hamlet in which he have be deposit by the carrier from a 
 railway station southward , one dark evening some few month early , 
 and till now he have have no suspicion that such a wide , flat , 
 low - lie country lie so near at hand , under the very verge of his 
 upland world . the whole northern semicircle between east and west , 
 to a distance of forty or fifty mile , spread itself before he ; a 
 bluer , moister atmosphere , evidently , than that he breathe up here . 
 not far from the road stand a weather - beat old barn of reddish - grey 
 brick and tile . it be know as the Brown House by the people of the 
 locality . he be about to pass it when he perceive a ladder against 
 the eave ; and the reflection that the high he get , the further he 
 could see , lead Jude to stand and regard it . on the slope of the roof 
 two man be repair the tiling . he turn into the ridgeway and 
 draw towards the barn . 
 when he have wistfully watch the workman for some time he take 
 courage , and ascend the ladder till he stand beside they . 
 " well , my lad , and what may you want up here ? " 
 " I want to know where the city of Christminster be , if you please . " 
 " christminster be out across there , by that clump . you can see 
 it - at least you can on a clear day . ah , no , you can not   now . " 
 the other tiler , glad of any kind of diversion from the monotony of 
 his labour , have also turn to look towards the quarter designate . 
 " you can not   often see it in weather like this , " he say . " the time 
 I have   notice it be when the sun be go down in a blaze of flame , 
 and it look like - I do not   know what . " 
 " the heavenly Jerusalem , " suggest the serious urchin . 
 " ay - though I should never ha ' thought of it myself .... but I can not 
 see no Christminster to - day . " 
 the boy strain his eye also ; yet neither could he see the far - off 
 city . he descend from the barn , and abandon Christminster with 
 the versatility of his age he walk along the ridge - track , look 
 for any natural object of interest that might lie in the bank 
 thereabout . when he repasse the barn to go back to Marygreen he 
 observe that the ladder be still in its place , but that the man have 
 finish their day 's work and go away . 
 it be wan towards evening ; there be still a faint mist , but it 
 have clear a little except in the damper tract of subjacent country 
 and along the river - course . he think again of Christminster , and 
 wish , since he have come two or three mile from his aunt 's house 
 on purpose , that he could have see for once this attractive city of 
 which he have be tell . but even if he wait here it be hardly 
 likely that the air would clear before night . yet he be loth to 
 leave the spot , for the northern expanse become lose to view on 
 retreat towards the village only a few hundred yard . 
 he ascend the ladder to have one more look at the point the man 
 have designate , and perch himself on the high rung , overlie 
 the tile . he might not be able to come so far as this for many 
 day . perhaps if he pray , the wish to see Christminster might be 
 forward . People say that , if you pray , thing sometimes come to 
 you , even though they sometimes do not . he have read in a tract that 
 a man who have begin to build a church , and have no money to finish 
 it , knelt down and pray , and the money come in by the next post . 
 another man try the same experiment , and the money do not come ; 
 but he find afterwards that the breech he kneel in be make by 
 a wicked Jew . this be not discourage , and turn on the ladder 
 Jude kneel on the third rung , where , rest against those above it , 
 he pray that the mist might rise . 
 he then seat himself again , and wait . in the course of ten or 
 fifteen minute the thin mist dissolve altogether from the 
 northern horizon , as it have already do elsewhere , and about a 
 quarter of an hour before the time of sunset the westward cloud 
 part , the sun 's position be partially uncover , and the beam 
 stream out in visible line between two bar of slaty cloud . the 
 boy immediately look back in the old direction . 
 some way within the limit of the stretch of landscape , point of 
 light like the topaz gleam . the air increase in transparency with 
 the lapse of minute , till the topaz point show themselves to be 
 the vane , window , wet roof slate , and other shin spot upon the 
 spire , dome , freestone - work , and varied outline that be faintly 
 reveal . it be Christminster , unquestionably ; either directly 
 see , or mirage in the peculiar atmosphere . 
 the spectator gaze on and on till the window and vane lose their 
 shine , go out almost suddenly like extinguish candle . the 
 vague city become veil in mist . turn to the west , he see that 
 the sun have disappear . the foreground of the scene have grow 
 funereally dark , and near object put on the hue and shape of 
 chimaeras . 
 he anxiously descend the ladder , and start homeward at a run , 
 try not to think of giant , Herne the Hunter , Apollyon lie in 
 wait for Christian , or of the captain with the bleed hole in his 
 forehead and the corps round he that remutinie every night on 
 board the bewitch ship . he know that he have grow out of belief in 
 these horror , yet he be glad when he see the church tower and the 
 light in the cottage window , even though this be not the home of 
 his birth , and his great - aunt do not care much about he . 
 inside and round about that old woman 's ' shop " window , with its 
 twenty - four little pane set in lead - work , the glass of some of 
 they oxidize with age , so that you could hardly see the poor penny 
 article exhibit within , and form part of a stock which a strong 
 man could have carry , Jude have his outer be for some long 
 tideless time . but his dream be as gigantic as his surrounding 
 be small . 
 through the solid barrier of cold cretaceous upland to the northward 
 he be always behold a gorgeous city - the fancy place he have 
 liken to the new Jerusalem , though there be perhaps more of the 
 painter 's imagination and less of the diamond merchant 's in his 
 dream thereof than in those of the apocalyptic writer . and the city 
 acquire a tangibility , a permanence , a hold on his life , mainly from 
 the one nucleus of fact that the man for whose knowledge and purpose 
 he have so much reverence be actually live there ; not only so , but 
 live among the more thoughtful and mentally shin one therein . 
 in sad wet season , though he know it must rain at Christminster too , 
 he could hardly believe that it rain so drearily there . whenever 
 he could get away from the confine of the hamlet for an hour or two , 
 which be not often , he would steal off to the Brown House on the 
 hill and strain his eye persistently ; sometimes to be reward by 
 the sight of a dome or spire , at other time by a little smoke , which 
 in his estimate have some of the mysticism of incense . 
 then the day come when it suddenly occur to he that if he 
 ascend to the point of view after dark , or possibly go a mile or 
 two far , he would see the night light of the city . it would be 
 necessary to come back alone , but even that consideration do not 
 deter he , for he could throw a little manliness into his mood , no 
 doubt . 
 the project be duly execute . it be not late when he arrive at 
 the place of outlook , only just after dusk , but a black north - east 
 sky , accompany by a wind from the same quarter , make the occasion 
 dark enough . he be reward ; but what he see be not the lamp in 
 row , as he have half expect . no individual light be visible , only 
 a halo or glow - fog over - arch the place against the black heaven 
 behind it , make the light and the city seem distant but a mile or 
 so . 
 he set himself to wonder on the exact point in the glow where the 
 schoolmaster might be - he who never communicate with anybody at 
 Marygreen now ; who be as if dead to they here . in the glow he 
 seem to see Phillotson promenade at ease , like one of the form 
 in Nebuchadnezzar 's furnace . 
 he have hear that breeze travel at the rate of ten mile an hour , 
 and the fact now come into his mind . he part his lip as he face 
 the north - east , and draw in the wind as if it be a sweet liquor . 
 " you , " he say , address the breeze caressingly " be in 
 Christminster city between one and two hour ago , float along the 
 street , pull round the weather - cock , touch Mr. Phillotson 's 
 face , be breathe by he ; and now you be here , breathe by 
 I - you , the very same . " 
 suddenly there come along this wind something towards he - a message 
 from the place - from some soul reside there , it seem . surely it 
 be the sound of bell , the voice of the city , faint and musical , 
 call to he , " we be happy here ! " 
 he have become entirely lose to his bodily situation during this 
 mental leap , and only get back to it by a rough recalling . a few 
 yard below the brow of the hill on which he pause a team of horse 
 make its appearance , have reach the place by dint of half an 
 hour 's serpentine progress from the bottom of the immense declivity . 
 they have a load of coal behind they - a fuel that could only be get 
 into the upland by this particular route . they be accompany by a 
 carter , a second man , and a boy , who now kick a large stone behind 
 one of the wheel , and allow the pant animal to have a long 
 rest , while those in charge take a flagon off the load and indulge 
 in a drink round . 
 they be elderly man , and have genial voice . Jude address they , 
 inquire if they have come from Christminster . 
 " heaven forbid , with this load ! " say they . 
 " the place I mean be that one yonder . " he be get so 
 romantically attach to Christminster that , like a young lover 
 allude to his mistress , he feel bashful at mention its name 
 again . he point to the light in the sky - hardly perceptible to 
 their old eye . 
 " yes . there do seem a spot a bit bright in the nor'-east than 
 elsewhere , though I should not   ha ' notice it myself , and no doubt it 
 med be Christminster . " 
 here a little book of tale which Jude have tuck up under his arm , 
 have bring they to read on his way hither before it grow dark , 
 slip and fall into the road . the carter eye he while he pick 
 it up and straighten the leaf . 
 " ah , young man , " he observe , " you would have to get your head screw on 
 t'other way before you could read what they read there . " 
 " why ? " ask the boy . 
 " oh , they never look at anything that folk like we can understand , " 
 the carter continue , by way of pass the time . " On'y foreign 
 tongue use in the day of the Tower of Babel , when no two family 
 speak alike . they read that sort of thing as fast as a night - hawk 
 will whir . ' tis all learn there - nothing but learning , except 
 religion . and that be learn too , for I never could understand it . 
 yes , ' tis a serious - minded place . not but there be wench in the 
 street o ' night ... you know , I suppose , that they raise pa'son 
 there like radish in a bed ? and though it do take - how many year , 
 Bob ? - five year to turn a lirrupe hobble - de - hoy chap into a solemn 
 preach man with no corrupt passion , they will do it , if it can be 
 do , and polish un off like the workman they be , and turn un out wi ' 
 a long face , and a long black coat and waistcoat , and a religious 
 collar and hat , same as they use to wear in the scripture , so that 
 his own mother would not   know un sometimes .... there , ' tis their 
 business , like anybody else 's . " 
 " but how should you know " 
 " now do not   you interrupt , my boy . never interrupt your senyer . 
 move the fore hoss aside , Bobby ; here 's som'at come ... you must 
 mind that I be a - talk of the college life . ' em live on a lofty 
 level ; there be no gainsay it , though I myself me not think much 
 of them . as we be here in our body on this high ground , so be they 
 in their mind - noble - minded man enough , no doubt - some on them - able 
 to earn hundred by think out loud . and some on them be strong 
 young fellow that can earn a'most as much in silver cup . as for 
 music , there be beautiful music everywhere in Christminster . you me 
 be religious , or you me not , but you can not   help strike in your 
 homely note with the rest . and there be a street in the place - the 
 main street - that ha'n't   another like it in the world . I should 
 think I do know a little about Christminster ! " 
 by this time the horse have recover breath and bent to their 
 collar again . Jude , throw a last adore look at the distant 
 halo , turn and walk beside his remarkably well - inform friend , 
 who have no objection to tell he as they move on more yet of 
 the city - its tower and hall and church . the waggon turn 
 into a cross - road , whereupon Jude thank the carter warmly for his 
 information , and say he only wish he could talk half as well about 
 Christminster as he . 
 " well , ' tis oonly what have come in my way , " say the carter 
 unboastfully . " I have   never be there , no more than you ; but I have 
 pick up the knowledge here and there , and you be welcome to it . 
 a - getting about the world as I do , and mix with all class of 
 society , one can not   help hear of thing . a friend o ' mine , that 
 use to clane the boot at the Crozier Hotel in Christminster when he 
 be in his prime , why , I know un as well as my own brother in his 
 later year . " 
 Jude continue his walk homeward alone , ponder so deeply that 
 he forget to feel timid . he suddenly grow old . it have be the 
 yearning of his heart to find something to anchor on , to cling 
 to - for some place which he could call admirable . should he find 
 that place in this city if he could get there ? would it be a spot in 
 which , without fear of farmer , or hindrance , or ridicule , he could 
 watch and wait , and set himself to some mighty undertaking like the 
 man of old of whom he have hear ? as the halo have be to his eye 
 when gaze at it a quarter of an hour early , so be the spot 
 mentally to he as he pursue his dark way . 
 " it be a city of light , " he say to himself . 
 " the tree of knowledge grow there , " he add a few step far on . 
 " it be a place that teacher of man spring from and go to . " 
 " it be what you may call a castle , man by scholarship and 
 religion . " 
 after this figure he be silent a long while , till he add : 
 " it would just suit I . " 
 iv 
 walk somewhat slowly by reason of his concentration , the boy - an 
 ancient man in some phase of thought , much young than his year 
 in other - be overtake by a light - footed pedestrian , whom , 
 notwithstanding the gloom , he could perceive to be wear an 
 extraordinarily tall hat , a swallow - tail coat , and a watch - chain 
 that dance madly and throw around scintillation of sky - light as 
 its owner swing along upon a pair of thin leg and noiseless boot . 
 Jude , begin to feel lonely , endeavour to keep up with he . 
 " well , my man ! I be in a hurry , so you will have to walk pretty fast 
 if you keep alongside of I . do you know who I be ? " 
 " yes , I think . Physician Vilbert ? " 
 " ah - I be know everywhere , I see ! that come of be a public 
 benefactor . " 
 Vilbert be an itinerant quack - doctor , well know to the rustic 
 population , and absolutely unknown to anybody else , as he , indeed , 
 take care to be , to avoid inconvenient investigation . cottager 
 form his only patient , and his wessex - wide repute be among they 
 alone . his position be humbler and his field more obscure than 
 those of the quack with capital and an organized system of 
 advertising . he be , in fact , a survival . the distance he 
 traverse on foot be enormous , and extend nearly the whole length 
 and breadth of Wessex . Jude have one day see he sell a pot of 
 coloured lard to an old woman as a certain cure for a bad leg , the 
 woman arrange to pay a guinea , in instalment of a shill a 
 fortnight , for the precious salve , which , accord to the physician , 
 could only be obtain from a particular animal which graze on 
 Mount Sinai , and be to be capture only at great risk to life and 
 limb . Jude , though he already have his doubt about this gentleman 's 
 medicine , feel he to be unquestionably a travelled personage , and 
 one who might be a trustworthy source of information on matter not 
 strictly professional . 
 " I s'pose you have   be to Christminster , Physician ? " 
 " I have - many time , " reply the long thin man . " that be one of my 
 centre . " 
 " it be a wonderful city for scholarship and religion ? " 
 " you would say so , my boy , if you have see it . why , the very son of the 
 old woman who do the washing of the college can talk in Latin - not 
 good Latin , that I admit , as a critic : dog - latin - cat - Latin , as we 
 use to call it in my undergraduate day . " 
 " and greek ? " 
 " well - that be more for the man who be in training for bishop , that 
 they may be able to read the New Testament in the original . " 
 " I want to learn Latin and Greek myself . " 
 " a lofty desire . you must get a grammar of each tongue . " 
 " I mean to go to Christminster some day . " 
 " whenever you do , you say that Physician Vilbert be the only 
 proprietor of those celebrate pill that infallibly cure all 
 disorder of the alimentary system , as well as asthma and shortness 
 of breath . two and threepence a box - specially license by the 
 government stamp . " 
 " can you get I the grammar if I promise to say it hereabout ? " 
 " I will sell you mine with pleasure - those I use as a student . " 
 " oh , thank you , sir ! " say Jude gratefully , but in gasp , for the 
 amazing speed of the physician 's walk keep he in a dog - trot which 
 be give he a stitch in the side . 
 " I think you would well drop behind , my young man . now I will tell you 
 what I will do . I will get you the grammar , and give you a first 
 lesson , if you will remember , at every house in the village , to 
 recommend Physician Vilbert 's golden ointment , life - drop , and female 
 pill . " 
 " where will you be with the grammar ? " 
 " I shall be pass here this day fortnight at precisely this hour of 
 five - and - twenty minute past seven . my movement be as truly time 
 as those of the planet in their course . " 
 " here I will be to meet you , " say Jude . 
 " with order for my medicine ? " 
 " yes , Physician . " 
 Jude then drop behind , wait a few minute to recover breath , 
 and go home with a consciousness of have strike a blow for 
 Christminster . 
 through the intervene fortnight he run about and smile outwardly 
 at his inward thought , as if they be people meet and nod to 
 he - smile with that singularly beautiful irradiation which be see 
 to spread on young face at the inception of some glorious idea , as 
 if a supernatural lamp be hold inside their transparent nature , 
 give rise to the flattering fancy that heaven lie about they then . 
 he honestly perform his promise to the man of many cure , in whom 
 he now sincerely believe , walk mile hither and thither among 
 the surround hamlet as the Physician 's agent in advance . on the 
 evening appoint he stand motionless on the plateau , at the place 
 where he have part from Vilbert , and there await his approach . 
 the road - physician be fairly up to time ; but , to the surprise of 
 Jude on strike into his pace , which the pedestrian do not diminish 
 by a single unit of force , the latter seem hardly to recognize his 
 young companion , though with the lapse of the fortnight the evening 
 have grow light . Jude think it might perhaps be owe to his 
 wear another hat , and he salute the physician with dignity . 
 " well , my boy ? " say the latter abstractedly . 
 " I have   come , " say Jude . 
 " you ? who be you ? oh yes - to be sure ! get any order , lad ? " 
 " yes . " and Jude tell he the name and address of the cottager 
 who be willing to test the virtue of the world - renowne pill and 
 salve . the quack mentally register these with great care . 
 " and the latin and greek grammar ? " Jude 's voice tremble with 
 anxiety . 
 " what about they ? " 
 " you be to bring I your , that you use before you take your 
 degree . " 
 " ah , yes , yes ! forgot all about it - all ! so many live depend on 
 my attention , you see , my man , that I can not   give so much thought as I 
 would like to other thing . " 
 Jude control himself sufficiently long to make sure of the truth ; 
 and he repeat , in a voice of dry misery , " you have not   bring them ! " 
 " no . but you must get I some more order from sick people , and I will 
 bring the grammar next time . " 
 Jude drop behind . he be an unsophisticated boy , but the gift of 
 sudden insight which be sometimes vouchsafe to child show he 
 all at once what shoddy humanity the quack be make of . there be to 
 be no intellectual light from this source . the leaf drop from 
 his imaginary crown of laurel ; he turn to a gate , leant against it , 
 and cry bitterly . 
 the disappointment be follow by an interval of blankness . he 
 might , perhaps , have obtain grammar from Alfredston , but to do 
 that require money , and a knowledge of what book to order ; and 
 though physically comfortable , he be in such absolute dependence as 
 to be without a farthing of his own . 
 at this date Mr. Phillotson send for his pianoforte , and it give Jude 
 a lead . why should he not write to the schoolmaster , and ask he to 
 be so kind as to get he the grammar in Christminster ? he might 
 slip a letter inside the case of the instrument , and it would be 
 sure to reach the desire eye . why not ask he to send any old 
 second - hand copy , which would have the charm of be mellow by 
 the university atmosphere ? 
 to tell his aunt of his intention would be to defeat it . it be 
 necessary to act alone . 
 after a further consideration of a few day he do act , and on the 
 day of the piano 's departure , which happen to be his next birthday , 
 clandestinely place the letter inside the packing - case , direct to 
 his much - admire friend , be afraid to reveal the operation to his 
 aunt Drusilla , lest she should discover his motive , and compel he to 
 abandon his scheme . 
 the piano be despatch , and Jude wait day and week , call 
 every morning at the cottage post office before his great - aunt be 
 stirring . at last a packet do indeed arrive at the village , and he 
 see from the end of it that it contain two thin book . he take it 
 away into a lonely place , and sit down on a felled elm to open it . 
 ever since his first ecstasy or vision of Christminster and its 
 possibility , Jude have meditate much and curiously on the probable 
 sort of process that be involve in turn the expression of one 
 language into those of another . he conclude that a grammar of the 
 require tongue would contain , primarily , a rule , prescription , or 
 clue of the nature of a secret cipher , which , once know , would 
 enable he , by merely apply it , to change at will all word of his 
 own speech into those of the foreign one . his childish idea be , in 
 fact , a pushing to the extremity of mathematical precision what be 
 everywhere know as Grimm 's Law - an aggrandizement of rough rule to 
 ideal completeness . thus he assume that the word of the require 
 language be always to be find somewhere latent in the word of the 
 give language by those who have the art to uncover they , such art 
 be furnish by the book aforesaid . 
 when , therefore , have note that the packet bear the postmark of 
 Christminster , he cut the string , open the volume , and turn to 
 the Latin grammar , which chance to come uppermost , he could scarcely 
 believe his eye . 
 the book be an old one - thirty year old , soil , scribble 
 wantonly over with a strange name in every variety of enmity to the 
 letterpress , and mark at random with date twenty year early 
 than his own day . but this be not the cause of Jude 's amazement . 
 he learn for the first time that there be no law of transmutation , 
 as in his innocence he have suppose   there be , in some degree , but 
 the grammarian do not recognize it , but that every word in both 
 Latin and Greek be to be individually commit to memory at the 
 cost of year of plod . 
 Jude fling down the book , lie backward along the broad trunk of the 
 elm , and be an utterly miserable boy for the space of a quarter of 
 an hour . as he have often do before , he pull his hat over his 
 face and watch the sun peer insidiously at he through the 
 interstice of the straw . this be latin and Greek , then , be it 
 this grand delusion ! the charm he have suppose in store for he be 
 really a labour like that of Israel in Egypt . 
 what brain they must have in Christminster and the great school , he 
 presently think , to learn word one by one up to ten of thousand ! 
 there be no brain in his head equal to this business ; and as the 
 little sun - ray continue to stream in through his hat at he , he 
 wish he have never see a book , that he might never see another , 
 that he have never be bear . 
 somebody might have come along that way who would have ask he his 
 trouble , and might have cheer he by say that his notion be 
 far advanced than those of his grammarian . but nobody do come , 
 because nobody do ; and under the crush recognition of his 
 gigantic error Jude continue to wish himself out of the world . 
 v 
 during the three or four succeed year a quaint and singular 
 vehicle might have be discern move along the lane and by - road 
 near Marygreen , drive in a quaint and singular way . 
 in the course of a month or two after the receipt of the book 
 Jude have grow callous to the shabby trick play he by the dead 
 language . in fact , his disappointment at the nature of those 
 tongue have , after a while , be the mean of still far 
 glorify the erudition of Christminster . to acquire language , 
 depart or live in spite of such obstinacy as he now know they 
 inherently to possess , be a herculean performance which gradually 
 lead he on to a great interest in it than in the presuppose patent 
 process . the mountain - weight of material under which the idea lay 
 in those dusty volume call the classic pique he into a dog , 
 mouselike subtlety of attempt to move it piecemeal . 
 he have endeavour to make his presence tolerable to his crusty 
 maiden aunt by assist she to the good of his ability , and the 
 business of the little cottage bakery have grow in consequence . an 
 aged horse with a hang head have be purchase for eight pound at 
 a sale , a creak cart with a whity - brown tilt obtain for a few 
 pound more , and in this turn - out it become Jude 's business thrice a 
 week to carry loaf of bread to the villager and solitary cotter 
 immediately round Marygreen . 
 the singularity aforesaid lay , after all , less in the conveyance 
 itself than in Jude 's manner of conduct it along its route . 
 its interior be the scene of most of Jude 's education by " private 
 study . " as soon as the horse have learn the road and the house 
 at which he be to pause awhile , the boy , seat in front , would 
 slip the rein over his arm , ingeniously fix open , by mean of a 
 strap attach to the tilt , the volume he be read , spread the 
 dictionary on his knee , and plunge into the simple passage from 
 Caesar , Virgil , or Horace , as the case might be , in his purblind 
 stumble way , and with an expenditure of labour that would have make 
 a tender - hearted pedagogue shed tear ; yet somehow get at the 
 meaning of what he read , and divine rather than behold the 
 spirit of the original , which often to his mind be something else 
 than that which he be teach to look for . 
 the only copy he have be able to lay hand on be old Delphin 
 edition , because they be supersede , and therefore cheap . but , 
 bad for idle schoolboy , it do so happen that they be passably 
 good for he . the hampered and lonely itinerant conscientiously 
 cover up the marginal reading , and use they merely on point of 
 construction , as he would have use a comrade or tutor who should 
 have happen to be pass by . and though Jude may have have little 
 chance of become a scholar by these rough and ready mean , he be 
 in the way of get into the groove he wish to follow . 
 while he be busy with these ancient page , which have already be 
 thumb by hand possibly in the grave , dig out the thought 
 of these mind so remote yet so near , the bony old horse pursue 
 his round , and Jude would be arouse from the woe of Dido by the 
 stoppage of his cart and the voice of some old woman cry , " two 
 to - day , baker , and I return this stale one . " 
 he be frequently meet in the lane by pedestrian and other without 
 his see they , and by degree the people of the neighbourhood 
 begin to talk about his method of combine work and play   such they 
 consider his reading to be , which , though probably convenient 
 enough to himself , be not altogether a safe proceeding for other 
 traveller along the same road . there be murmur . then a private 
 resident of an adjoining place inform the local policeman that the 
 baker 's boy should not be allow to read while drive , and insist 
 that it be the constable 's duty to catch he in the act , and 
 take he to the police court at Alfredston , and get he fin for 
 dangerous practice on the highway . the policeman thereupon lie in 
 wait for Jude , and one day accost he and caution he . 
 as Jude have to get up at three o'clock in the morning to heat the 
 oven , and mix and set in the bread that he distribute later in the 
 day , he be oblige to go to bed at night immediately after lay 
 the sponge ; so that if he could not read his classic on the highway 
 he could hardly study at all . the only thing to be do be , 
 therefore , to keep a sharp eye ahead and around he as well as he 
 could in the circumstance , and slip away his book as soon as 
 anybody loom in the distance , the policeman in particular . to do 
 that official justice , he do not put himself much in the way of 
 Jude 's bread - cart , consider that in such a lonely district the 
 chief danger be to Jude himself , and often on see the white tilt 
 over the hedge he would move in another direction . 
 on a day when Fawley be get quite advanced , be now about 
 sixteen , and have be stumble through the " Carmen Saeculare , " on 
 his way home , he find himself to be pass over the high edge of 
 the plateau by the Brown House . the light have change , and it be 
 the sense of this which have cause he to look up . the sun be go 
 down , and the full moon be rise simultaneously behind the wood in 
 the opposite quarter . his mind have become so impregnated with the 
 poem that , in a moment of the same impulsive emotion which year 
 before have cause he to kneel on the ladder , he stop the horse , 
 alight , and glance round to see that nobody be in sight , knelt 
 down on the roadside bank with open book . he turn first to the 
 shiny goddess , who seem to look so softly and critically at his 
 doing , then to the disappear luminary on the other hand , as he 
 begin : 
 " phoebe silvarumque poten Diana ! " 
 the horse stand still till he have finish the hymn , which Jude 
 repeat under the sway of a polytheistic fancy that he would never 
 have think of humour in broad daylight . 
 reach home , he muse over his curious superstition , innate or 
 acquire , in do this , and the strange forgetfulness which have lead 
 to such a lapse from common sense and custom in one who wish , next 
 to be a scholar , to be a christian divine . it have all come of 
 read heathen work exclusively . the more he think of it the 
 more convinced he be of his inconsistency . he begin to wonder 
 whether he could be read quite the right book for his object 
 in life . certainly there seem little harmony between this pagan 
 literature and the mediaeval college at Christminster , that 
 ecclesiastical romance in stone . 
 ultimately he decide that in his sheer love of read he have take 
 up a wrong emotion for a christian young man . he have dabble in 
 Clarke 's Homer , but have never yet work much at the New Testament 
 in the Greek , though he possess a copy , obtain by post from a 
 second - hand bookseller . he abandon the now familiar Ionic for a 
 new dialect , and for a long time onward limit his reading almost 
 entirely to the Gospels and Epistles in Griesbach 's text . moreover , 
 on go into Alfredston one day , he be introduce to patristic 
 literature by find at the bookseller 's some volume of the 
 Fathers which have be leave behind by an insolvent clergyman of the 
 neighbourhood . 
 as another outcome of this change of groove he visit on Sundays all 
 the church within a walk , and decipher the latin inscription on 
 fifteenth - century brass and tomb . on one of these pilgrimage he 
 meet with a hunch - back old woman of great intelligence , who read 
 everything she could lay her hand on , and she tell he more yet 
 of the romantic charm of the city of light and lore . Thither he 
 resolve as firmly as ever to go . 
 but how live in that city ? at present he have no income at all . he 
 have no trade or calling of any dignity or stability whatever on which 
 he could subsist while carry out an intellectual labour which 
 might spread over many year . 
 what be most require by citizen ? food , clothing , and shelter . 
 an income from any work in prepare the first would be too meagre ; 
 for make the second he feel a distaste ; the preparation of the 
 third requisite he incline to . they build in a city ; therefore he 
 would learn to build . he think of his unknown uncle , his cousin 
 Susanna 's father , an ecclesiastical worker in metal , and somehow 
 mediaeval art in any material be a trade for which he have rather a 
 fancy . he could not go far wrong in follow his uncle 's footstep , 
 and engage himself awhile with the carcase that contain the 
 scholar soul . 
 as a preliminary he obtain some small block of freestone , metal 
 not be available , and suspend his study awhile , occupy his 
 spare half - hour in copy the head and capital in his parish 
 church . 
 there be a stone - mason of a humble kind in Alfredston , and as 
 soon as he have find a substitute for himself in his aunt 's little 
 business , he offer his service to this man for a trifling wage . 
 here Jude have the opportunity of learn at least the rudiment of 
 freestone - working . some time later he go to a church - builder in 
 the same place , and under the architect 's direction become handy at 
 restore the dilapidated masonry of several village church round 
 about . 
 not forget that he be only follow up this handicraft as 
 a prop to lean on while he prepare those great engine which 
 he flatter himself would be well fit for he , he yet be 
 interested in his pursuit on its own account . he now have lodging 
 during the week in the little town , whence he return to Marygreen 
 village every Saturday evening . and thus he reach and pass his 
 nineteenth year . 
 VI 
 at this memorable date of his life he be , one Saturday , return 
 from Alfredston to Marygreen about three o'clock in the afternoon . 
 it be fine , warm , and soft summer weather , and he walk with his 
 tool at his back , his little chisel clink faintly against the 
 large one in his basket . it be the end of the week he have leave 
 work early , and have come out of the town by a round - about route which 
 he do not usually frequent , have promise to call at a flour - mill 
 near Cresscombe to execute a commission for his aunt . 
 he be in an enthusiastic mood . he seem to see his way to live 
 comfortably in Christminster in the course of a year or two , and 
 knock at the door of one of those stronghold of learning of 
 which he have dream so much . he might , of course , have go there 
 now , in some capacity or other , but he prefer to enter the city 
 with a little more assurance as to mean than he could be say to 
 feel at present . a warm self - content suffuse he when he consider 
 what he have already do . now and then as he go along he turn 
 to face the peep of country on either side of he . but he hardly 
 see they ; the act be an automatic repetition of what he have be 
 accustom to do when less occupy ; and the one matter which really 
 engage he be the mental estimate of his progress thus far . 
 " I have acquire quite an average student 's power to read the 
 common ancient classic , Latin in particular . " this be true , 
 Jude possess a facility in that language which enable he with 
 great ease to himself to beguile his lonely walk by imaginary 
 conversation therein . 
 " I have read two book of the Iliad , besides be pretty familiar 
 with passage such as the speech of Phoenix in the ninth book , 
 the fight of Hector and Ajax in the fourteenth , the appearance of 
 Achilles unarmed and his heavenly armour in the eighteenth , and the 
 funeral game in the twenty - third . I have also do some Hesiod , a 
 little scrap of Thucydides , and a lot of the Greek Testament ... I 
 wish there be only one dialect all the same . 
 " I have do some mathematic , include the first six and the 
 eleventh and twelfth book of Euclid ; and algebra as far as simple 
 equation . 
 " I know something of the Fathers , and something of roman and English 
 history . 
 " these thing be only a beginning . but I shall not make much 
 far advance here , from the difficulty of get book . hence I 
 must next concentrate all my energy on settle in Christminster . 
 once there I shall so advance , with the assistance I shall there 
 get , that my present knowledge will appear to I but as childish 
 ignorance . I must save money , and I will ; and one of those college 
 shall open its door to I - shall welcome whom now it would spurn , 
 if I wait twenty year for the welcome . 
 " I will be D.D. before I have do ! " 
 and then he continue to dream , and think he might become even a 
 bishop by lead a pure , energetic , wise , christian life . and what 
 an example he would set ! if his income be L5000 a year , he would 
 give away L4500 in one form and another , and live sumptuously   for 
 he   on the remainder . well , on second thought , a bishop be 
 absurd . he would draw the line at an archdeacon . perhaps a man 
 could be as good and as learn and as useful in the capacity of 
 archdeacon as in that of bishop . yet he think of the bishop again . 
 " meanwhile I will read , as soon as I be settle in Christminster , 
 the book I have not be able to get hold of here : Livy , Tacitus , 
 Herodotus , Aeschylus , Sophocles , Aristophanes - " 
 " ha , ha , ha ! hoity - toity ! " the sound be express in light 
 voice on the other side of the hedge , but he do not notice they . 
 his thought go on : 
 " - Euripides , Plato , Aristotle , Lucretius , Epictetus , Seneca , 
 Antoninus . then I must master other thing : the father thoroughly ; 
 Bede and ecclesiastical history generally ; a smattering of Hebrew - I 
 only know the letter as yet - " 
 " hoity - toity ! " 
 " - but I can work hard . I have stay power in abundance , thank 
 God ! and it be that which tell .... yes , Christminster shall be my 
 Alma Mater ; and I will be her beloved son , in whom she shall be well 
 pleased . " 
 in his deep concentration on these transaction of the future Jude 's 
 walk have slacken , and he be now stand quite still , look 
 at the ground as though the future be throw thereon by a magic 
 lantern . on a sudden something smack he sharply in the ear , and 
 he become aware that a soft cold substance have be fling at he , and 
 have fall at his foot . 
 a glance tell he what it be - a piece of flesh , the characteristic 
 part of a barrow - pig , which the countryman use for grease their 
 boot , as it be useless for any other purpose . pig be rather 
 plentiful hereabout , be breed and fatten in large number in 
 certain part of North Wessex . 
 on the other side of the hedge be a stream , whence , as he now for 
 the first time realize , have come the slight sound of voice and 
 laughter that have mingle with his dream . he mount the bank and 
 look over the fence . on the further side of the stream stand a 
 small homestead , have a garden and pig - sty attach ; in front of 
 it , beside the brook , three young woman be kneel , with bucket 
 and platter beside they contain heap of pig ' chitterling , 
 which they be wash in the run water . one or two pair of 
 eye slyly glance up , and perceive that his attention have at last 
 be attract , and that he be watch they , they brace themselves 
 for inspection by put their mouth demurely into shape and 
 recommence their rinse operation with assiduity . 
 " thank you ! " say Jude severely . 
 " I didn't throw it , I tell you ! " assert one girl to her neighbour , 
 as if unconscious of the young man 's presence . 
 " nor I , " the second answer . 
 " oh , Anny , how can you ! " say the third . 
 " if I have throw anything at all , it should not   have be that ! " 
 " Pooh ! I do not   care for he ! " and they laugh and continue their 
 work , without look up , still ostentatiously accuse each other . 
 Jude grow sarcastic as he wipe his face , and catch their remark . 
 " you do not   do it - oh no ! " he say to the up - stream one of the three . 
 she whom he address be a fine dark - eyed girl , not exactly 
 handsome , but capable of pass as such at a little distance , 
 despite some coarseness of skin and fibre . she have a round and 
 prominent bosom , full lip , perfect tooth , and the rich complexion 
 of a Cochin hen 's egg . she be a complete and substantial female 
 animal - no more , no less ; and Jude be almost certain that to she be 
 attributable the enterprise of attract his attention from dream 
 of the humaner letter to what be simmer in the mind around he . 
 " that you will never be tell , " say she deedily . 
 " whoever do it be wasteful of other people 's property . " 
 " oh , that be nothing . " 
 " but you want to speak to I , I suppose ? " 
 " oh yes ; if you like to . " 
 " shall I clamber across , or will you come to the plank above here ? " 
 perhaps she foresee an opportunity ; for somehow or other the eye 
 of the brown girl rest in his own when he have say the word , and 
 there be a momentary flash of intelligence , a dumb announcement of 
 affinity in posse between herself and he , which , so far as Jude 
 Fawley be concern , have no sort of premeditation in it . she see 
 that he have single she out from the three , as a woman be single out 
 in such case , for no reasoned purpose of further acquaintance , but 
 in commonplace obedience to conjunctive order from headquarters , 
 unconsciously receive by unfortunate man when the last intention of 
 their life be to be occupy with the feminine . 
 spring to her foot , she say : " bring back what be lie there . " 
 Jude be now aware that no message on any matter connect with her 
 father 's business have prompt her signal to he . he set down his 
 basket of tool , pick up the scrap of offal , beat a pathway for 
 himself with his stick , and get over the hedge . they walk in 
 parallel line , one on each bank of the stream , towards the small 
 plank bridge . as the girl draw near to it , she give without Jude 
 perceive it , an adroit little suck to the interior of each of her 
 cheek in succession , by which curious and original manoeuvre she 
 bring as by magic upon its smooth and rotund surface a perfect 
 dimple , which she be able to retain there as long as she continue 
 to smile . this production of dimple at will be a not unknown 
 operation , which many attempt , but only a few succeed in 
 accomplish . 
 they meet in the middle of the plank , and Jude , toss back her 
 missile , seem to expect she to explain why she have audaciously 
 stop he by this novel artillery instead of by hail he . 
 but she , slyly look in another direction , sway herself backwards 
 and forwards on her hand as it clutch the rail of the bridge ; till , 
 move by amatory curiosity , she turn her eye critically upon he . 
 " you do not   think I would shy thing at you ? " 
 " oh no . " 
 " we be do this for my father , who naturally do not   want anything 
 throw away . he make that into dubbin . " she nod towards the 
 fragment on the grass . 
 " what make either of the other throw it , I wonder ? " Jude ask , 
 politely accept her assertion , though he have very large doubt as 
 to its truth . 
 " impudence . do not   tell folk it be I , mind ! " 
 " how can I ? I do not   know your name . " 
 " ah , no . shall I tell it to you ? " 
 " do ! " 
 " Arabella Donn . I be live here . " 
 " I must have know it if I have often come this way . but I mostly go 
 straight along the high - road . " 
 " my father be a pig - breeder , and these girl be help I wash the 
 innerd for black - pudding and such like . " 
 they talk a little more and a little more , as they stand regard 
 each other and lean against the hand - rail of the bridge . the 
 unvoiced call of woman to man , which be utter very distinctly 
 by Arabella 's personality , hold Jude to the spot against his 
 intention - almost against his will , and in a way new to his 
 experience . it be scarcely an exaggeration to say that till this 
 moment Jude have never look at a woman to consider she as such , but 
 have vaguely regard the sex as being outside his life and purpose . 
 he gaze from her eye to her mouth , thence to her bosom , and to she 
 full round naked arm , wet , mottle with the chill of the water , and 
 firm as marble . 
 " what a nice - look girl you be ! " he murmur , though the word have 
 not be necessary to express his sense of her magnetism . 
 " ah , you should see I Sundays ! " she say piquantly . 
 " I do not   suppose I could ? " he answer 
 " that be for you to think on . there be nobody after I just now , 
 though there me be in a week or two . " she have speak this without 
 a smile , and the dimple disappear . 
 Jude feel himself drift strangely , but could not help it . " will 
 you let I ? " 
 " I do not   mind . " 
 by this time she have manage to get back one dimple by turn 
 her face aside for a moment and repeat the odd little suck 
 operation before mention , Jude be still unconscious of more than 
 a general impression of her appearance . " Next Sunday ? " he hazard . 
 " to - morrow , that be ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " shall I call ? " 
 " yes . " 
 she brighten with a little glow of triumph , sweep he almost 
 tenderly with her eye in turning , and retrace her step down the 
 brookside grass rejoin her companion . 
 Jude Fawley shoulder his tool - basket and resume his lonely way , 
 fill with an ardour at which he mentally stand at gaze . he have 
 just inhale a single breath from a new atmosphere , which have 
 evidently be hang round he everywhere he go , for he know not 
 how long , but have somehow be divide from his actual breathing as 
 by a sheet of glass . the intention as to read , working , and 
 learning , which he have so precisely formulate only a few minute 
 early , be suffer a curious collapse into a corner , he know not 
 how . 
 " well , it be only a bit of fun , " he say to himself , faintly conscious 
 that to common sense there be something lacking , and still more 
 obviously something redundant in the nature of this girl who have 
 draw he to she which make it necessary that he should assert mere 
 sportiveness on his part as his reason in seek she - something in 
 she quite antipathetic to that side of he which have be occupy 
 with literary study and the magnificent Christminster dream . it have 
 be no vestal who choose that missile for open her attack on he . 
 he see this with his intellectual eye , just for a short ; fleeting 
 while , as by the light of a fall lamp one might momentarily see an 
 inscription on a wall before be enshroud in darkness . and then 
 this pass discriminative power be withdraw , and Jude be lose to 
 all condition of thing in the advent of a fresh and wild pleasure , 
 that of have find a new channel for emotional interest hitherto 
 unsuspected , though it have lain close beside he . he be to meet 
 this enkindle one of the other sex on the following Sunday . 
 meanwhile the girl have join her companion , and she silently 
 resume her flicking and souse of the chitterling in the pellucid 
 stream . 
 " catched un , my dear ? " laconically ask the girl call Anny . 
 " I do not   know . I wish I have throw something else than that ! " 
 regretfully murmur Arabella . 
 " Lord ! he be nobody , though you me think so . he use to drive old 
 Drusilla Fawley 's bread - cart out at Marygreen , till he ' prentice 
 himself at Alfredston . since then he be be very stuck up , and 
 always read . he want to be a scholar , they say . " 
 " oh , I do not   care what he be , or anything about ' n. do not   you think 
 it , my child ! " 
 " oh , do not   ye ! you need not   try to deceive we ! what do you stay 
 talk to he for , if you do not   want un ? whether you do or whether 
 you do not , he be as simple as a child . I could see it as you court 
 on the bridge , when he look at ' ee as if he have never see a woman 
 before in his bear day . well , he be to be have by any woman who can 
 get he to care for she a bit , if she like to set herself to catch 
 he the right way . " 
 VII 
 the next day Jude Fawley be pause in his bedroom with the slop 
 ceiling , look at the book on the table , and then at the black 
 mark on the plaster above they , make by the smoke of his lamp in past 
 month . 
 it be Sunday afternoon , four - and - twenty hour after his meeting with 
 Arabella Donn . during the whole bygone week he have be resolve to 
 set this afternoon apart for a special purpose , - the re - reading of 
 his Greek Testament - his new one , with well type than his old copy , 
 follow Griesbach 's text as amend by numerous corrector , and 
 with variorum reading in the margin . he be proud of the book , 
 have obtain it by boldly write to its London publisher , a thing 
 he have never do before . 
 he have anticipate much pleasure in this afternoon 's reading , under 
 the quiet roof of his great - aunt 's house as formerly , where he now 
 sleep only two night a week . but a new thing , a great hitch , have 
 happen yesterday in the gliding and noiseless current of his life , 
 and he feel as a snake must feel who have slough off its winter 
 skin , and can not understand the brightness and sensitiveness of its 
 new one . 
 he would not go out to meet she , after all . he sit down , open the 
 book , and with his elbow firmly plant on the table , and his hand 
 to his temple , begin at the beginning : 
 he KAINE DIATHEKE 
 have he promise to call for she ? surely he have ! she would wait 
 indoor , poor girl , and waste all her afternoon on account of he . 
 there be a something in she , too , which be very win , apart from 
 promise . he ought not to break faith with she . even though he have 
 only Sundays and week - day evening for read he could afford one 
 afternoon , see that other young man afford so many . after 
 to - day he would never probably see she again . indeed , it would be 
 impossible , consider what his plan be . 
 in short , as if materially , a compelling arm of extraordinary 
 muscular power seize hold of he - something which have nothing in 
 common with the spirit and influence that have move he hitherto . 
 this seem to care little for his reason and his will , nothing for 
 his so - call elevated intention , and move he along , as a violent 
 schoolmaster a schoolboy he have seize by the collar , in a direction 
 which tend towards the embrace of a woman for whom he have no 
 respect , and whose life have nothing in common with his own except 
 locality . 
 he KAINE DIATHEKE be no more heed , and the predestinate Jude 
 spring up and across the room . foresee such an event he have 
 already array himself in his good clothe . in three minute he be 
 out of the house and descend by the path across the wide vacant 
 hollow of corn - ground which lie between the village and the isolate 
 house of Arabella in the dip beyond the upland . 
 as he walk he look at his watch . he could be back in two hour , 
 easily , and a good long time would still remain to he for read 
 after tea . 
 pass the few unhealthy fir - tree and cottage where the path 
 join the highway he hasten along , and strike away to the left , 
 descend the steep side of the country to the west of the Brown 
 House . here at the base of the chalk formation he near the brook 
 that ooze from it , and follow the stream till he reach she 
 dwelling . a smell of piggery come from the back , and the grunting 
 of the originator of that smell . he enter the garden , and knock 
 at the door with the knob of his stick . 
 somebody have see he through the window , for a male voice on the 
 inside say : 
 " Arabella ! here be your young man come coorte ! Mizzle , my girl ! " 
 Jude wince at the word . court in such a businesslike aspect as 
 it evidently wear to the speaker be the last thing he be think 
 of . he be go to walk with she , perhaps kiss she ; but " courting " 
 be too coolly purposeful to be anything but repugnant to his idea . 
 the door be open and he enter , just as Arabella come downstairs 
 in radiant walking attire . 
 " take a chair , Mr. What's - your - name ? " say her father , an energetic , 
 black - whisker man , in the same businesslike tone Jude have hear 
 from outside . 
 " I would rather go out at once , would not   you ? " she whisper to Jude . 
 " yes , " say he . " we will walk up to the Brown House and back , we can 
 do it in half an hour . " 
 Arabella look so handsome amid her untidy surrounding that he feel 
 glad he have come , and all the misgiving vanish that have hitherto 
 haunted he . 
 first they clamber to the top of the great down , during which 
 ascent he have occasionally to take her hand to assist she . then 
 they bear off to the left along the crest into the ridgeway , which 
 they follow till it intersect the high - road at the Brown 
 House aforesaid , the spot of his former fervid desire to behold 
 Christminster . but he forget they now . he talk the commonest 
 local twaddle to Arabella with great z than he would have feel 
 in discuss all the philosophy with all the don in the recently 
 adore university , and pass the spot where he have kneel to Diana 
 and Phoebus without remember that there be any such people in 
 the mythology , or that the sun be anything else than a useful 
 lamp for illuminate Arabella 's face . an indescribable lightness 
 of heel serve to lift he along ; and Jude , the incipient scholar , 
 prospective D.D. , professor , bishop , or what not , feel himself 
 honour and glorify by the condescension of this handsome country 
 wench in agree to take a walk with he in her Sunday frock and 
 ribbon . 
 they reach the Brown House barn - the point at which he have plan 
 to turn back . while look over the vast northern landscape from 
 this spot they be strike by the rise of a dense volume of smoke 
 from the neighbourhood of the little town which lie beneath they at a 
 distance of a couple of mile . 
 " it be a fire , " say Arabella . " let us run and see it - do ! it be not 
 far ! " 
 the tenderness which have grow up in Jude 's bosom leave he no will to 
 thwart her inclination now - which please he in afford he excuse 
 for a long time with she . they start off down the hill almost at 
 a trot ; but on gain level ground at the bottom , and walk a 
 mile , they find that the spot of the fire be much far off than 
 it have seem . 
 have begin their journey , however , they push on ; but it be not 
 till five o'clock that they find themselves on the scene , - the 
 distance be altogether about half - a - dozen mile from Marygreen , 
 and three from Arabella 's . the conflagration have be get under 
 by the time they reach it , and after a short inspection of the 
 melancholy ruin they retrace their step - their course lie 
 through the town of Alfredston . 
 Arabella say she would like some tea , and they enter an inn of an 
 inferior class , and give their order . as it be not for beer they 
 have a long time to wait . the maid - servant recognize Jude , and 
 whisper her surprise to her mistress in the background , that he , 
 the student " who keep hisself up so particular , " should have suddenly 
 descend so low as to keep company with Arabella . the latter 
 guess what be be say , and laugh as she meet the serious and 
 tender gaze of her lover - the low and triumphant laugh of a careless 
 woman who see she be win her game . 
 they sit and look round the room , and at the picture of Samson and 
 Delilah which hang on the wall , and at the circular beer - stain on 
 the table , and at the spittoon underfoot fill with sawdust . the 
 whole aspect of the scene have that depressing effect on Jude which 
 few place can produce like a tap - room on a Sunday evening when 
 the set sun be slant in , and no liquor be go , and the 
 unfortunate wayfarer find himself with no other haven of rest . 
 it begin to grow dusk . they could not wait long , really , for the 
 tea , they say . " yet what else can we do ? " ask Jude . " it be a 
 three - mile walk for you . " 
 " I suppose we can have some beer , " say Arabella . 
 " Beer , oh yes . I have forget that . somehow it seem odd to come 
 to a public - house for beer on a Sunday evening . " 
 " but we do not . " 
 " no , we do not . " Jude by this time wish he be out of such an 
 uncongenial atmosphere ; but he order the beer , which be promptly 
 bring . 
 Arabella taste it . " Ugh ! " she say . 
 Jude taste . " what be the matter with it ? " he ask . " I do not 
 understand beer very much now , it be true . I like it well enough , 
 but it be bad to read on , and I find coffee well . but this seem 
 all right . " 
 " Adulterated - I can not   touch it ! " she mention three or four 
 ingredient that she detect in the liquor beyond malt and hop , 
 much to Jude 's surprise . 
 " how much you know ! " he say good - humouredly . 
 nevertheless she return to the beer and drink her share , and they 
 go on their way . it be now nearly dark , and as soon as they have 
 withdraw from the light of the town they walk close together , 
 till they touch each other . she wonder why he do not put his 
 arm round her waist , but he do not ; he merely say what to himself 
 seem a quite bold enough thing : " take my arm . " 
 she take it , thoroughly , up to the shoulder . he feel the warmth of 
 her body against his , and put his stick under his other arm hold 
 with his right hand she right as it rest in its place . 
 " now we be well together , dear , be not   we ? " he observe . 
 " yes , " say she ; add to herself : " rather mild ! " 
 " how fast I have become ! " he be think . 
 thus they walk till they reach the foot of the upland , where they 
 could see the white highway ascend before they in the gloom . from 
 this point the only way of get to Arabella 's be by go up the 
 incline , and dip again into her valley on the right . before they 
 have climb far they be nearly run into by two man who have be 
 walk on the grass unseen . 
 " these lover - you find them out o ' door in all season and 
 weather - lover and homeless dog only , " say one of the man as 
 they vanish down the hill . 
 Arabella titter lightly . 
 " be we lover ? " ask Jude . 
 " you know well . " 
 " but you can tell I ? " 
 for answer she incline her head upon his shoulder . Jude take the 
 hint , and encircle her waist with his arm , pull she to he and 
 kiss she . 
 they walk now no long arm in arm but , as she have desire , clasp 
 together . after all , what do it matter since it be dark , say Jude 
 to himself . when they be half - way up the long hill they pause as 
 by arrangement , and he kiss she again . they reach the top , and 
 he kiss she once more . 
 " you can keep your arm there , if you would like to , " she say gently . 
 he do so , think how trust she be . 
 thus they slowly go towards her home . he have leave his cottage 
 at half - past three , intend to be sit down again to the New 
 Testament by half - past five . it be nine o'clock when , with another 
 embrace , he stand to deliver she up at her father 's door . 
 she ask he to come in , if only for a minute , as it would seem so 
 odd otherwise , and as if she have be out alone in the dark . he give 
 way , and follow she in . immediately that the door be open he 
 find , in addition to her parent , several neighbour sit round . 
 they all speak in a congratulatory manner , and take he seriously as 
 Arabella 's intend partner . 
 they do not belong to his set or circle , and he feel out of place 
 and embarrassed . he have not mean this : a mere afternoon of 
 pleasant walking with Arabella , that be all he have mean . he do 
 not stay long than to speak to her stepmother , a simple , quiet 
 woman without feature or character ; and bid they all good night 
 plunge with a sense of relief into the track over the down . 
 but that sense be only temporary : arabella soon re - assert she 
 sway in his soul . he walk as if he feel himself to be another man 
 from the Jude of yesterday . what be his book to he ? what be 
 his intention , hitherto adhere to so strictly , as to not waste a 
 single minute of time day by day ? " waste ! " it depend on your 
 point of view to define that : he be just live for the first 
 time : not waste life . it be well to love a woman than to be a 
 graduate , or a parson ; ay , or a pope ! 
 when he get back to the house his aunt have go to bed , and a general 
 consciousness of his neglect seem write on the face of all thing 
 confront he . he go upstairs without a light , and the dim 
 interior of his room accost he with sad inquiry . there lie his 
 book open , just as he have leave it , and the capital letter on the 
 title - page regard he with fix reproach in the grey starlight , 
 like the unclosed eye of a dead man : 
 he KAINE DIATHEKE 
           
 Jude have to leave early next morning for his usual week of absence at 
 lodging ; and it be with a sense of futility that he throw into his 
 basket upon his tool and other necessary the unread book he have 
 bring with he . 
 he keep his impassioned doing a secret almost from himself . 
 Arabella , on the contrary , make they public among all her friend 
 and acquaintance . 
 retrace by the light of dawn the road he have follow a few hour 
 early under cover of darkness , with his sweetheart by his side , he 
 reach the bottom of the hill , where he walk slowly , and stand 
 still . he be on the spot where he have give she the first kiss . as 
 the sun have only just rise it be possible that nobody have pass 
 there since . Jude look on the ground and sigh . he look 
 closely , and could just discern in the damp dust the imprint of 
 their foot as they have stand lock in each other 's arm . she be 
 not there now , and " the embroidery of imagination upon the stuff of 
 nature " so depict her past presence that a void be in his heart 
 which nothing could fill . a pollard willow stand close to the place , 
 and that willow be different from all other willow in the world . 
 utter annihilation of the six day which must elapse before he could 
 see she again as he have promise would have be his intense wish 
 if he have have only the week to live . 
 an hour and a half later Arabella come along the same way with her 
 two companion of the Saturday . she pass unheedingly the scene of 
 the kiss , and the willow that mark it , though chatter freely on 
 the subject to the other two . 
 " and what do he tell ' ee next ? " 
 " then he say - " and she relate almost word for word some of his 
 tender speech . if Jude have be behind the fence he would have 
 feel not a little surprised at learn how very few of his saying 
 and doing on the previous evening be private . 
 " you have   get he to care for ' ee a bit , ' nation if you han't ! " 
 murmur Anny judicially . " it be well to be you ! " 
 in a few moment Arabella reply in a curiously low , hungry tone of 
 latent sensuousness : " I have   get he to care for I : yes ! but I want 
 he to more than care for I ; I want he to have I - to marry I ! I 
 must have he . I can not   do without he . he be the sort of man I long 
 for . I shall go mad if I can not   give myself to he altogether ! I 
 feel I should when I first see he ! " 
 " as he be a romancing , straightfor'ard , honest chap , he be to be have , 
 and as a husband , if you set about catch he in the right way . " 
 Arabella remain think awhile . " what med be the right way ? " she 
 ask . 
 " oh you do not   know - you do not ! " say Sarah , the third girl . 
 " on my word I do not ! - no far , that is , than by plain courting , 
 and take care he do not   go too far ! " 
 the third girl look at the second . " she don't know ! " 
 " ' tis clear she do not ! " say Anny . 
 " and have live in a town , too , as one may say ! well , we can teach 
 ' ee som'at then , as well as you we . " 
 " yes . and how do you mean - a sure way to gain a man ? take I for an 
 innocent , and have do wi ' it ! " 
 " as a husband . " 
 " as a husband . " 
 " a countryman that be honourable and serious - minded such as he ; God 
 forbid that I should say a sojer , or sailor , or commercial gent from 
 the town , or any of they that be slippery with poor woman ! I would do 
 no friend that harm ! " 
 " well , such as he , of course ! " 
 Arabella 's companion look at each other , and turn up their eye 
 in drollery begin smirk . then one go up close to Arabella , and , 
 although nobody be near , impart some information in a low tone , 
 the other observe curiously the effect upon Arabella . 
 " ah ! " say the last - name slowly . " I own I do not   think of that 
 way ! ... but suppose he isn't honourable ? a woman have well not 
 have try it ! " 
 " nothing venture nothing have ! besides , you make sure that he be 
 honourable before you begin . you would be safe enough with your . I 
 wish I have the chance ! lot of girl do it ; or do you think they would 
 get marry at all ? " 
 Arabella pursue her way in silent thought . " I will try it ! " she 
 whisper ; but not to they . 
 viii 
 one week 's end Jude be as usual walk out to his aunt 's at 
 Marygreen from his lodging in Alfredston , a walk which now have large 
 attraction for he quite other than his desire to see his aged and 
 morose relative . he diverge to the right before ascend the hill 
 with the single purpose of gain , on his way , a glimpse of Arabella 
 that should not come into the reckoning of regular appointment . 
 before quite reach the homestead his alert eye perceive the top 
 of her head move quickly hither and thither over the garden hedge . 
 enter the gate he find that three young unfattened pig have 
 escape from their sty by leap clean over the top , and that she 
 be endeavour unassisted to drive they in through the door which 
 she have set open . the line of her countenance change from the 
 rigidity of business to the softness of love when she see Jude , and 
 she bend her eye languishingly upon he . the animal take advantage 
 of the pause by double and bolt out of the way . 
 " they be only put in this morning ! " she cry , stimulate to pursue 
 in spite of her lover 's presence . " they be drive from Spaddleholt 
 Farm only yesterday , where Father buy them at a stiff price enough . 
 they be want to get home again , the stupid toad ! will you shut 
 the garden gate , dear , and help I to get them in . there be no man 
 folk at home , only Mother , and they will be lose if we do not   mind . " 
 he set himself to assist , and dodge this way and that over the 
 potato row and the cabbage . every now and then they run together , 
 when he catch she for a moment and kiss she . the first pig be 
 get back promptly ; the second with some difficulty ; the third a 
 long - legged creature , be more obstinate and agile . he plunge 
 through a hole in the garden hedge , and into the lane . 
 " he will be lose if I do not   follow ' n ! " say she . " come along with 
 I ! " 
 she rush in full pursuit out of the garden , Jude alongside she , 
 barely contrive to keep the fugitive in sight . occasionally they 
 would shout to some boy to stop the animal , but he always wriggle 
 past and run on as before . 
 " let I take your hand , darling , " say Jude . " you be get out of 
 breath . " she give he her now hot hand with apparent willingness , 
 and they trot along together . 
 " this come of drive them home , " she remark . " they always know 
 the way back if you do that . they ought to have be cart over . " 
 by this time the pig have reach an unfastened gate admit to the 
 open down , across which he speed with all the agility his little leg 
 afford . as soon as the pursuer have enter and ascend to the 
 top of the high ground it become apparent that they would have to run 
 all the way to the farmer 's if they wish to get at he . from this 
 summit he could be see as a minute speck , follow an unerring line 
 towards his old home . 
 " it be no good ! " cry Arabella . " he will be there long before we get 
 there . it do not   matter now we know he be not lose or steal on the 
 way . they will see it be ours , and send un back . oh dear , how hot I 
 be ! " 
 without relinquish her hold of Jude 's hand she swerve aside and 
 fling herself down on the sod under a stunt thorn , precipitately 
 pull Jude on to his knee at the same time . 
 " oh , I ask pardon - I nearly throw you down , do not   I ! but I be so 
 tired ! " 
 she lie supine , and straight as an arrow , on the slop sod of this 
 hill - top , gaze up into the blue mile of sky , and still retain 
 her warm hold of Jude 's hand . he recline on his elbow near she . 
 " we have   run all this way for nothing , " she go on , her form heaving 
 and fall in quick pant , her face flush , her full red lip 
 part , and a fine dew of perspiration on her skin . " well - why do not 
 you speak , deary ? " 
 " I be blow too . it be all up hill . " 
 they be in absolute solitude - the most apparent of all solitude , 
 that of empty surround space . nobody could be near than a mile 
 to they without their see he . they be , in fact , on one of the 
 summit of the county , and the distant landscape around Christminster 
 could be discern from where they lay . but Jude do not think of 
 that then . 
 " oh , I can see such a pretty thing up this tree , " say Arabella . " a 
 sort of a - caterpillar , of the most lovely green and yellow you 
 ever come across ! " 
 " where ? " say Jude , sit up . 
 " you can not   see he there - you must come here , " say she . 
 he bend near and put his head in front of her . " no - I can not   see 
 it , " he say . 
 " why , on the limb there where it branch off - close to the moving 
 leaf - there ! " she gently pull he down beside she . 
 " I do not   see it , " he repeat , the back of his head against her 
 cheek . " but I can , perhaps , stand up . " he stand accordingly , 
 place himself in the direct line of her gaze . 
 " how stupid you be ! " she say crossly , turn away her face . 
 " I do not   care to see it , dear : why should I ? " he reply look 
 down upon she . " get up , Abby . " 
 " why ? " 
 " I want you to let I kiss you . I have   be wait to ever so long ! " 
 she roll round her face , remain a moment look deedily aslant 
 at he ; then with a slight curl of the lip spring to her foot , and 
 exclaim abruptly " I must mizzle ! " walk off quickly homeward . 
 Jude follow and rejoin she . 
 " just one ! " he coax . 
 " shall not ! " she say . 
 he , surprised : " what be the matter ? " 
 she keep she two lip resentfully together , and Jude follow she 
 like a pet lamb till she slacken her pace and walk beside he , 
 talk calmly on indifferent subject , and always check he if 
 he try to take her hand or clasp her waist . thus they descend 
 to the precinct of her father 's homestead , and Arabella go in , 
 nod good - bye to he with a supercilious , affronted air . 
 " I expect I take too much liberty with she , somehow , " Jude say to 
 himself , as he withdraw with a sigh and go on to Marygreen . 
 on Sunday morning the interior of Arabella 's home be , as usual , 
 the scene of a grand weekly cooking , the preparation of the special 
 Sunday dinner . her father be shave before a little glass hang on 
 the mullion of the window , and her mother and Arabella herself be 
 shell bean hard by . a neighbour pass on her way home from 
 morning service at the near church , and see Donn engage at 
 the window with the razor , nod and come in . 
 she at once speak playfully to Arabella : " I zeed ' ee run with 
 ' un - hee - hee ! I hope ' tis come to something ? " 
 Arabella merely throw a look of consciousness into her face without 
 raise her eye . 
 " he be for Christminster , I hear , as soon as he can get there . " 
 " have you hear that lately - quite lately ? " ask Arabella with a 
 jealous , tigerish indrawe of breath . 
 " oh no ! but it have be know a long time that it be his plan . he be 
 on'y wait here for an opening . ah well : he must walk about with 
 somebody , I s'pose . young man do not   mean much now - a - day . ' tis a sip 
 here and a sip there with them . ' twa different in my time . " 
 when the gossip have depart Arabella say suddenly to her mother : 
 " I want you and Father to go and inquire how the Edlins be , this 
 evening after tea . or no - there 's evening service at Fensworth - you 
 can walk to that . " 
 " oh ? what be up to - night , then ? " 
 " nothing . only I want the house to myself . he be shy ; and I can not 
 get un to come in when you be here . I shall let he slip through my 
 finger if I do not   mind , much as I care for ' n ! " 
 " if it be fine we me as well go , since you wish . " 
 in the afternoon Arabella meet and walk with Jude , who have now 
 for week cease to look into a book of Greek , Latin , or any other 
 tongue . they wander up the slope till they reach the green 
 track along the ridge , which they follow to the circular british 
 earth - bank adjoining , Jude thinking of the great age of the trackway , 
 and of the drover who have frequent it , probably before the Romans 
 know the country . up from the level land below they float the 
 chime of church bell . presently they be reduce to one note , 
 which quicken , and stop . 
 " now we will go back , " say Arabella , who have attend to the sound . 
 Jude assent . so long as he be near she he mind little where he 
 be . when they arrive at her house he say lingeringly : " I will not 
 come in . why be you in such a hurry to go in to - night ? it be not 
 near dark . " 
 " wait a moment , " say she . she try the handle of the door and 
 find it lock . 
 " ah - they be go to church , " she add . and search behind the 
 scraper she find the key and unlock the door . " now , you will come 
 in a moment ? " she ask lightly . " we shall be all alone . " 
 " certainly , " say Jude with alacrity , the case be unexpectedly 
 alter . 
 indoor they go . do he want any tea ? no , it be too late : he 
 would rather sit and talk to she . she take off her jacket and hat , 
 and they sit down - naturally enough close together . 
 " do not   touch I , please , " she say softly . " I be part egg - shell . or 
 perhaps I have well put it in a safe place . " she begin unfasten 
 the collar of her gown . 
 " what be it ? " say her lover . 
 " an egg - a cochin 's egg . I be hatch a very rare sort . I carry it 
 about everywhere with I , and it will get hatch in less than three 
 week . " 
 " where do you carry it ? " 
 " just here . " she put her hand into her bosom and draw out the egg , 
 which be wrap in wool , outside it be a piece of pig 's bladder , 
 in case of accident . have exhibit it to he she put it back , 
 " now mind you do not   come near I . I do not   want to get it break , and 
 have to begin another . " 
 " why do you do such a strange thing ? " 
 " it be an old custom . I suppose it be natural for a woman to want to 
 bring live thing into the world . " 
 " it be very awkward for I just now , " he say , laugh . 
 " it serve you right . there - that be all you can have of I " 
 she have turn round her chair , and , reach over the back of it , 
 present her cheek to he gingerly . 
 " that be very shabby of you ! " 
 " you should have catch I a minute ago when I have put the egg down ! 
 there ! " she say defiantly , " I be without it now ! " she have quickly 
 withdraw the egg a second time ; but before he could quite reach she 
 she have put it back as quickly , laugh with the excitement of her 
 strategy . then there be a little struggle , Jude make a plunge for 
 it and capture it triumphantly . her face flush ; and become 
 suddenly conscious he flush also . 
 they look at each other , panting ; till he rise and say : " one kiss , 
 now I can do it without damage to property ; and I will go ! " 
 but she have jump up too . " you must find I first ! " she cry . 
 her lover follow she as she withdraw . it be now dark inside the 
 room , and the window be small he could not discover for a long 
 time what have become of she , till a laugh reveal she to have rush 
 up the stair , whither Jude rush at her heel . 
 IX 
 it be some two month later in the year , and the pair have meet 
 constantly during the interval . Arabella seem dissatisfied ; she 
 be always imagine , and waiting , and wonder . 
 one day she meet the itinerant Vilbert . she , like all the cottager 
 thereabout , know the quack well , and she begin tell he of her 
 experience . Arabella have be gloomy , but before he leave she she 
 have grow brighter . that evening she keep an appointment with Jude , 
 who seem sad . 
 " I be go away , " he say to she . " I think I ought to go . I think 
 it will be well both for you and for I . I wish some thing have 
 never begin ! I be much to blame , I know . but it be never too late 
 to mend . " 
 Arabella begin to cry . " how do you know it be not too late ? " she 
 say . " that be all very well to say ! I have not   tell you yet ! " and 
 she look into his face with streaming eye . 
 " what ? " he ask , turn pale . " not ... ? " 
 " yes ! and what shall I do if you desert I ? " 
 " oh , Arabella - how can you say that , my dear ! you know I would not 
 desert you ! " 
 " well then - " 
 " I have next to no wage as yet , you know ; or perhaps I should have 
 thought of this before ... but , of course if that be the case , we must 
 marry ! what other thing do you think I could dream of do ? " 
 " I think - I think , deary , perhaps you would go away all the more 
 for that , and leave I to face it alone ! " 
 " you know well ! of course I never dream six month ago , or even 
 three , of marry . it be a complete smashing up of my plan - I mean 
 my plan before I know you , my dear . but what be they , after all ! 
 dream about book , and degree , and impossible fellowship , and all 
 that . certainly we will marry : we must ! " 
 that night he go out alone , and walk in the dark self - communing . 
 he know well , too well , in the secret centre of his brain , that 
 Arabella be not worth a great deal as a speciman of womankind . 
 yet , such be the custom of the rural district among honourable 
 young man who have drift so far into intimacy with a woman as he 
 unfortunately have do , he be ready to abide by what he have say , 
 and take the consequence . for his own soothing he keep up a 
 factitious belief in she . his idea of she be the thing of most 
 consequence , not arabella herself , he sometimes say laconically . 
 the bann be put in and publish the very next Sunday . the people 
 of the parish all say what a simple fool young Fawley be . all his 
 reading have only come to this , that he would have to sell his book 
 to buy saucepan . those who guess the probable state of affair , 
 Arabella 's parent be among they , declare that it be the sort of 
 conduct they would have expect of such an honest young man as Jude 
 in reparation of the wrong he have do his innocent sweetheart . the 
 parson who marry they seem to think it satisfactory too . and so , 
 stand before the aforesaid officiator , the two swear that at every 
 other time of their life till death take they , they would assuredly 
 believe , feel , and desire precisely as they have believe , feel , and 
 desire during the few precede week . what be as remarkable 
 as the undertaking itself be the fact that nobody seem at all 
 surprised at what they swear . 
 Fawley 's aunt be a baker she make he a bride - cake , say 
 bitterly that it be the last thing she could do for he , poor silly 
 fellow ; and that it would have be far well if , instead of his 
 living to trouble she , he have go underground year before with his 
 father and mother . of this cake Arabella take some slice , wrap 
 they up in white note - paper , and send they to her companion in the 
 pork - dress business , Anny and Sarah , label each packet " in 
 remembrance of good advice . " 
 the prospect of the newly married couple be certainly not very 
 brilliant even to the most sanguine mind . he , a stone - mason 's 
 apprentice , nineteen year of age , be work for half wage till 
 he should be out of his time . his wife be absolutely useless in a 
 town - lodging , where he at first have consider it would be necessary 
 for they to live . but the urgent need of add to income in ever so 
 little a degree cause he to take a lonely roadside cottage between 
 the Brown House and Marygreen , that he might have the profit of a 
 vegetable garden , and utilize she past experience by let she 
 keep a pig . but it be not the sort of life he have bargain for , 
 and it be a long way to walk to and from Alfredston every day . 
 Arabella , however , feel that all these make - shift be temporary ; 
 she have gain a husband ; that be the thing - a husband with a lot 
 of earn power in he for buy her frock and hat when he should 
 begin to get frighten a bit , and stick to his trade , and throw 
 aside those stupid book for practical undertaking . 
 so to the cottage he take she on the evening of the marriage , give 
 up his old room at his aunt 's - where so much of the hard labour at 
 Greek and Latin have be carry on . 
 a little chill overspread he at her first unrobing . a long tail of 
 hair , which Arabella wear twist up in an enormous knob at the back 
 of her head , be deliberately unfastened , stroke out , and hang upon 
 the look - glass which he have buy she . 
 " what - it be not   your own ? " he say , with a sudden distaste for she . 
 " oh no - it never be nowadays with the well class . " 
 " Nonsense ! perhaps not in town . but in the country it be suppose 
 to be different . besides , you have   enough of your own , surely ? " 
 " yes , enough as country notion go . but in town the man expect more , 
 and when I be barmaid at Aldbrickham - " 
 " Barmaid at Aldbrickham ? " 
 " well , not exactly barmaid - I use to draw the drink at a 
 public - house there - just for a little time ; that be all . some 
 people put I up to get this , and I buy it just for a fancy . 
 the more you have the well in Aldbrickham , which be a fine town 
 than all your christminster . every lady of position wear false 
 hair - the barber 's assistant tell I so . " 
 Jude think with a feeling of sickness that though this might be 
 true to some extent , for all that he know , many unsophisticated girl 
 would and do go to town and remain there for year without lose 
 their simplicity of life and embellishment . other , alas , have an 
 instinct towards artificiality in their very blood , and become adept 
 in counterfeit at the first glimpse of it . however , perhaps there 
 be no great sin in a woman add to her hair , and he resolve to 
 think no more of it . 
 a new - make wife can usually manage to excite interest for a few 
 week , even though the prospect of the household way and mean 
 be cloudy . there be a certain piquancy about her situation , and 
 her manner to her acquaintance at the sense of it , which carry off 
 the gloom of fact , and render even the humblest bride independent 
 awhile of the real . Mrs. Jude Fawley be walk in the street of 
 Alfredston one market - day with this quality in her carriage when she 
 meet Anny her former friend , whom she have not see since the wedding . 
 as usual they laugh before talk ; the world seem funny to they 
 without say it . 
 " so it turn out a good plan , you see ! " remark the girl to the 
 wife . " I know it would with such as he . he be a dear good fellow , 
 and you ought to be proud of un . " 
 " I be , " say Mrs. Fawley quietly . 
 " and when do you expect ? " 
 " Ssh ! not at all . " 
 " what ! " 
 " I be mistaken . " 
 " oh , Arabella , Arabella ; you be a deep one ! Mistaken ! well , that be 
 clever - it be a real stroke of genius ! it be a thing I never think 
 o ' , wi ' all my experience ! I never think beyond bring about the 
 real thing - not that one could sham it ! " 
 " do not   you be too quick to cry sham ! ' twasn't   sham . I do not   know . " 
 " my word - will not   he be in a taking ! he will give it to ' ee o ' Saturday 
 night ! whatever it be , he will say it be a trick - a double one , by 
 the Lord ! " 
 " I will own to the first , but not to the second ... pooh - he will not 
 care ! he will be glad I be wrong in what I say . he will shake down , 
 bless ' ee - man always do . what can them do otherwise ? married be 
 married . " 
 nevertheless it be with a little uneasiness that Arabella approach 
 the time when in the natural course of thing she would have to 
 reveal that the alarm she have raise have be without foundation . 
 the occasion be one evening at bedtime , and they be in their 
 chamber in the lonely cottage by the wayside to which Jude walk 
 home from his work every day . he have work hard the whole twelve 
 hour , and have retire to rest before his wife . when she come into 
 the room he be between sleep and wake , and be barely conscious 
 of her undressing before the little look - glass as he lay . 
 one action of her , however , bring he to full cognition . her face 
 be reflect towards he as she sit , he could perceive that she 
 be amusing herself by artificially produce in each cheek the 
 dimple before allude to , a curious accomplishment of which she be 
 mistress , effect it by a momentary suction . it seem to he for 
 the first time that the dimple be far oftener absent from her face 
 during his intercourse with she nowadays than they have be in the 
 early week of their acquaintance . 
 " do not   do that , Arabella ! " he say suddenly . " there be no harm in 
 it , but - I do not   like to see you . " 
 she turn and laugh . " Lord , I do not   know you be awake ! " she 
 say . " how countrifie you be ! that be nothing . " 
 " where do you learn it ? " 
 " nowhere that I know of . they use to stay without any trouble when 
 I be at the public - house ; but now they will not . my face be fat 
 then . " 
 " I do not   care about dimple . I do not   think they improve a 
 woman - particularly a married woman , and of full - sized figure like 
 you . " 
 " Most man think otherwise . " 
 " I do not   care what most man think , if they do . how do you know ? " 
 " I use to be tell so when I be serve in the tap - room . " 
 " ah - that public - house experience account for your know about 
 the adulteration of the ale when we go and have some that Sunday 
 evening . I think when I marry you that you have always live in 
 your father 's house . " 
 " you ought to have know well than that , and see I be a little 
 more finished than I could have be by stay where I be bear . 
 there be not much to do at home , and I be eat my head off , so I 
 go away for three month . " 
 " you will soon have plenty to do now , dear , will not   you ? " 
 " how do you mean ? " 
 " why , of course - little thing to make . " 
 " oh . " 
 " when will it be ? can not   you tell I exactly , instead of in such 
 general term as you have use ? " 
 " tell you ? " 
 " yes - the date . " 
 " there be nothing to tell . I make a mistake . " 
 " what ? " 
 " it be a mistake . " 
 he sit bolt upright in bed and look at she . " how can that be ? " 
 " woman fancy wrong thing sometimes . " 
 " but - ! why , of course , so unprepared as I be , without a stick of 
 furniture , and hardly a shilling , I should not   have hurry on our 
 affair , and bring you to a half - furnish hut before I be ready , 
 if it have not be for the news you give I , which make it necessary 
 to save you , ready or no ... Good God ! " 
 " do not   take on , dear . what be do can not   be undo . " 
 " I have no more to say ! " 
 he give the answer simply , and lie down ; and there be silence 
 between they . 
 when Jude awake the next morning he seem to see the world with a 
 different eye . as to the point in question he be compel to 
 accept her word ; in the circumstance he could not have act 
 otherwise while ordinary notion prevail . but how come they to 
 prevail ? 
 there seem to he , vaguely and dimly , something wrong in a social 
 ritual which make necessary a cancelling of well - form scheme 
 involve year of thought and labour , of forego a man 's one 
 opportunity of show himself superior to the low animal , and of 
 contribute his unit of work to the general progress of his 
 generation , because of a momentary surprise by a new and transitory 
 instinct which have nothing in it of the nature of vice , and could be 
 only at the most call weakness . he be inclined to inquire what he 
 have do , or she lose , for that matter , that he deserve to be catch 
 in a gin which would cripple he , if not she also , for the rest of a 
 lifetime ? there be perhaps something fortunate in the fact that the 
 immediate reason of his marriage have prove to be non - existent . but 
 the marriage remain . 
 X 
 the time arrive for kill the pig which Jude and his wife have 
 fatten in their sty during the autumn month , and the butchering 
 be time to take place as soon as it be light in the morning , so 
 that Jude might get to Alfredston without lose more than a quarter 
 of a day . 
 the night have seem strangely silent . Jude look out of the window 
 long before dawn , and perceive that the ground be cover with 
 snow - snow rather deep for the season , it seem , a few flake still 
 fall . 
 " I be afraid the pig - killer will not   be able to come , " he say to 
 Arabella . 
 " oh , he will come . you must get up and make the water hot , if you want 
 Challow to scald he . though I like singe well . " 
 " I will get up , " say Jude . " I like the way of my own county . " 
 he go downstairs , light the fire under the copper , and begin feed 
 it with bean - stalk , all the time without a candle , the blaze 
 fling a cheerful shine into the room ; though for he the sense of 
 cheerfulness be lessen by thought on the reason of that blaze - to 
 heat water to scald the bristle from the body of an animal that as 
 yet live , and whose voice could be continually hear from a corner 
 of the garden . at half - past six , the time of appointment with the 
 butcher , the water boil , and Jude 's wife come downstairs . 
 " be Challow come ? " she ask . 
 " no . " 
 they wait , and it grow light , with the dreary light of a snowy 
 dawn . she go out , gaze along the road , and returning say , " he be 
 not come . Drunk last night , I expect . the snow be not enough to 
 hinder he , surely ! " 
 " then we must put it off . it be only the water boil for nothing . 
 the snow may be deep in the valley . " 
 " can not   be put off . there be no more victual for the pig . he eat the 
 last mix o ' barleymeal yesterday morning . " 
 " yesterday morning ? what have he live on since ? " 
 " nothing . " 
 " what - he have be starve ? " 
 " yes . we always do it the last day or two , to save bother with the 
 innerd . what ignorance , not to know that ! " 
 " that account for his cry so . poor creature ! " 
 " well - you must do the sticking - there be no help for it . I will show 
 you how . or I will do it myself - I think I could . though as it be 
 such a big pig I have rather Challow have do it . however , his basket 
 o ' knife and thing have be already send on here , and we can use 
 them . " 
 " of course you shall not   do it , " say Jude . " I will do it , since it must 
 be do . " 
 he go out to the sty , shovel away the snow for the space of a 
 couple of yard or more , and place the stool in front , with the 
 knife and rope at hand . a robin peer down at the preparation 
 from the near tree , and , not like the sinister look of the 
 scene , fly away , though hungry . by this time Arabella have join 
 her husband , and Jude , rope in hand , get into the sty , and noose the 
 affrighted animal , who , begin with a squeak of surprise , rise to 
 repeat cry of rage . Arabella open the sty - door , and together 
 they hoist the victim on to the stool , leg upward , and while Jude 
 hold he Arabella bind he down , loop the cord over his leg to 
 keep he from struggle . 
 the animal 's note change its quality . it be not now rage , but the 
 cry of despair ; long - draw , slow and hopeless . 
 " upon my soul I would soon have go without the pig than have have 
 this to do ! " say Jude . " a creature I have feed with my own hand . " 
 " do not   be such a tender - hearted fool ! there be the sticking - knife - 
 the one with the point . now whatever you do , do not   stick un too 
 deep . " 
 " I will stick he effectually , so as to make short work of it . that be 
 the chief thing . " 
 " you must not ! " she cry . " the meat must be well bleed , and to do 
 that he must die slow . we shall lose a shilling a score if the meat 
 be red and bloody ! just touch the vein , that be all . I be bring 
 up to it , and I know . every good butcher keep un bleed long . 
 he ought to be eight or ten minute die , at least . " 
 " he shall not be half a minute if I can help it , however the meat may 
 look , " say Jude determinedly . scrap the bristle from the pig 's 
 upturned throat , as he have see the butcher do , he slit the fat ; 
 then plunge in the knife with all his might . 
 " ' od damn it all ! " she cry , " that ever I should say it ! you have 
 over - stuck un ! and I tell you all the time - " 
 " do be quiet , Arabella , and have a little pity on the creature ! " 
 " hold up the pail to catch the blood , and do not   talk ! " 
 however unworkmanlike the deed , it have be mercifully do . the 
 blood flow out in a torrent instead of in the trickling stream she 
 have desire . the die animal 's cry assume its third and final 
 tone , the shriek of agony ; his glaze eye rivet themselves on 
 Arabella with the eloquently keen reproach of a creature recognize 
 at last the treachery of those who have seem his only friend . 
 " make un stop that ! " say Arabella . " such a noise will bring 
 somebody or other up here , and I do not   want people to know we be 
 do it ourselves . " pick up the knife from the ground whereon 
 Jude have fling it , she slip it into the gash , and slit the 
 windpipe . the pig be instantly silent , his die breath come 
 through the hole . 
 " that be well , " she say . 
 " it be a hateful business ! " say he . 
 " pig must be kill . " 
 the animal heave in a final convulsion , and , despite the rope , 
 kick out with all his last strength . a tablespoonful of black 
 clot come forth , the trickling of red blood have cease for some 
 second . 
 " that be it ; now he will go , " say she . " artful creature - they always 
 keep back a drop like that as long as they can ! " 
 the last plunge have come so unexpectedly as to make Jude stagger , and 
 in recover himself he kick over the vessel in which the blood 
 have be catch . 
 " there ! " she cry , thoroughly in a passion . " now I can not   make any 
 blackpot . there be a waste , all through you ! " 
 Jude put the pail upright , but only about a third of the whole 
 steam liquid be leave in it , the main part be splash over 
 the snow , and form a dismal , sordid , ugly spectacle - to those who 
 see it as other than an ordinary obtaining of meat . the lip and 
 nostril of the animal turn livid , then white , and the muscle of 
 his limb relax . 
 " thank God ! " Jude say . " he be dead . " 
 " what be God get to do with such a messy job as a pig - killing , I 
 should like to know ! " she say scornfully . " poor folk must live . " 
 " I know , I know , " say he . " I do not   scold you . " 
 suddenly they become aware of a voice at hand . 
 " well do , young married volk ! I could not   have carry it out much 
 well myself , cus I if I could ! " the voice , which be husky , 
 come from the garden - gate , and look up from the scene of slaughter 
 they see the burly form of Mr. Challow lean over the gate , 
 critically survey their performance . 
 " ' tis well for ' ee to stand there and glane ! " say Arabella . " owe 
 to your be late the meat be blooded and half spoil ! ' twon't 
 fetch so much by a shilling a score ! " 
 Challow express his contrition . " you should have wait a bit " 
 he say , shake his head , " and not have do this - in the delicate 
 state , too , that you be in at present , ma'am . ' tis risk yourself 
 too much . " 
 " you need not   be concern about that , " say Arabella , laugh . 
 Jude too laugh , but there be a strong flavour of bitterness in 
 his amusement . 
 Challow make up for his neglect of the killing by zeal in the 
 scalding and scrap . Jude feel dissatisfied with himself as a man 
 at what he have do , though aware of his lack of common sense , and 
 that the deed would have amount to the same thing if carry out by 
 deputy . the white snow , stain with the blood of his fellow - mortal , 
 wear an illogical look to he as a lover of justice , not to say a 
 Christian ; but he could not see how the matter be to be mend . no 
 doubt he be , as his wife have call he , a tender - hearted fool . 
 he do not like the road to Alfredston now . it star he cynically 
 in the face . the wayside object remind he so much of his 
 courtship of his wife that , to keep they out of his eye , he 
 read whenever he could as he walk to and from his work . yet 
 he sometimes feel that by care for book he be not escape 
 common - place nor gain rare idea , every work - man being of that 
 taste now . when pass near the spot by the stream on which he have 
 first make her acquaintance he one day hear voice just as he have 
 do at that early time . one of the girl who have be Arabella 's 
 companion be talk to a friend in a shed , himself be the 
 subject of discourse , possibly because they have see he in the 
 distance . they be quite unaware that the shed - wall be so thin 
 that he could hear their word as he pass . 
 " Howsomever , ' twa I put she up to it ! ' nothing venture nothing 
 have , ' I say . if I have not   she would no more have be his mis'ess than 
 I. " 
 " ' tis my belief she know there be nothing the matter when she tell 
 he she be ... " 
 what have Arabella be put up to by this woman , so that he should 
 make she his " mis'ess , " otherwise wife ? the suggestion be horridly 
 unpleasant , and it rankle in his mind so much that instead of 
 enter his own cottage when he reach it he fling his basket 
 inside the garden - gate and pass on , determined to go and see his 
 old aunt and get some supper there . 
 this make his arrival home rather late . arabella however , be busy 
 melt down lard from fat of the deceased pig , for she have be out 
 on a jaunt all day , and so delay her work . dread lest what he 
 have hear should lead he to say something regrettable to she he 
 speak little . but Arabella be very talkative , and say among other 
 thing that she want some money . see the book stick out of 
 his pocket she add that he ought to earn more . 
 " an apprentice 's wage be not mean to be enough to keep a wife on , 
 as a rule , my dear . " 
 " then you should not   have have one . " 
 " come , Arabella ! that be too bad , when you know how it come about . " 
 " I will declare afore Heaven that I think what I tell you be true . 
 Doctor Vilbert think so . it be a good job for you that it be not 
 so ! " 
 " I do not   mean that , " he say hastily . " I mean before that time . 
 I know it be not your fault ; but those woman friend of yours give 
 you bad advice . if they have not , or you have not   take it , we should at 
 this moment have be free from a bond which , not to mince matter , 
 gall both of we devilishly . it may be very sad , but it be true . " 
 " who be be tell you about my friend ? what advice ? I insist 
 upon you tell I . " 
 " Pooh - I would rather not . " 
 " but you shall - you ought to . it be mean of ' ee not to ! " 
 " very well . " and he hint gently what have be reveal to he . 
 " but I do not   wish to dwell upon it . let we say no more about it . " 
 her defensive manner collapse . " that be nothing , " she say , 
 laugh coldly . " every woman have a right to do such as that . the 
 risk be her . " 
 " I quite deny it , Bella . she might if no lifelong penalty attach 
 to it for the man , or , in his default , for herself ; if the weakness 
 of the moment could end with the moment , or even with the year . 
 but when effect stretch so far she should not go and do that which 
 entrap a man if he be honest , or herself if he be otherwise . " 
 " what ought I to have do ? " 
 " give I time ... why do you fuss yourself about melt down that 
 pig 's fat to - night ? please put it away ! " 
 " then I must do it to - morrow morning . it will not   keep . " 
 " very well - do . " 
 XI 
 next morning , which be Sunday , she resume operation about ten 
 o'clock ; and the renew work recall the conversation which have 
 accompany it the night before , and put she back into the same 
 intractable temper . 
 " that be the story about I in Marygreen , be it - that I entrap ' ee ? 
 much of a catch you be , Lord send ! " as she warm she see some of 
 Jude 's dear ancient classic on a table where they ought not to have 
 be lay . " I will not   have they book here in the way ! " she cry 
 petulantly ; and seize they one by one she begin throw they upon 
 the floor . 
 " leave my book alone ! " he say . " you might have throw they 
 aside if you have like , but as to soil they like that , it be 
 disgusting ! " in the operation of make lard Arabella 's hand have 
 become smear with the hot grease , and her finger consequently 
 leave very perceptible imprint on the book - cover . she continue 
 deliberately to toss the book severally upon the floor , till Jude , 
 incense beyond bear , catch she by the arm to make she leave 
 off . somehow , in go so , he loosen the fastening of her hair , 
 and it roll about her ear . 
 " let I go ! " she say . 
 " promise to leave the book alone . " 
 she hesitate . " let I go ! " she repeat . 
 " promise ! " 
 after a pause : " I do . " 
 Jude relinquish his hold , and she cross the room to the door , 
 out of which she go with a set face , and into the highway . here 
 she begin to saunter up and down , perversely pull her hair into a 
 bad disorder than he have cause , and unfastening several button of 
 her gown . it be a fine Sunday morning , dry , clear and frosty , and 
 the bell of Alfredston Church could be hear on the breeze from the 
 north . People be go along the road , dress in their holiday 
 clothe ; they be mainly lover - such pair as Jude and Arabella 
 have be when they sport along the same track some month early . 
 these pedestrian turn to stare at the extraordinary spectacle she 
 now present , bonnetless , her dishevel hair blow in the wind , 
 her bodice apart , her sleeve roll above her elbow for her work , 
 and her hand reek with melt fat . one of the passer say in 
 mock terror : " good Lord deliver we ! " 
 " see how he be serve I ! " she cry . " make I work Sunday morning 
 when I ought to be go to my church , and tear my hair off my 
 head , and my gown off my back ! " 
 Jude be exasperate , and go out to drag she in by main force . 
 then he suddenly lose his heat . illuminate with the sense that all 
 be over between they , and that it matter not what she do , or he , 
 her husband stand still , regard she . their life be ruin , he 
 think ; ruin by the fundamental error of their matrimonial union : 
 that of have base a permanent contract on a temporary feeling 
 which have no necessary connection with affinity that alone render 
 a lifelong comradeship tolerable . 
 " go to ill - use I on principle , as your father ill - use your 
 mother , and your father 's sister ill - use her husband ? " she ask . 
 " all you be a queer lot as husband and wife ! " 
 Jude fix an arrest , surprised look on she . but she say no more , 
 and continue her saunter till she be tired . he leave the spot , and , 
 after wander vaguely a little while , walk in the direction of 
 Marygreen . here he call upon his great - aunt , whose infirmity 
 daily increase . 
 " Aunt - do my father ill - use my mother , and my aunt her husband ? " 
 say Jude abruptly , sit down by the fire . 
 she raise her ancient eye under the rim of the by - go bonnet that 
 she always wear . " who be be tell you that ? " she say . 
 " I have hear it speak of , and want to know all . " 
 " you me so well , I s'pose ; though your wife - I reckon ' twas 
 she - must have be a fool to open up that ! there be not   much to know 
 after all . your father and mother could not   get on together , and they 
 part . it be come home from Alfredston market , when you be a 
 baby - on the hill by the Brown House barn - that they have their last 
 difference , and take leave of one another for the last time . your 
 mother soon afterwards die - she drown herself , in short , and your 
 father go away with you to South Wessex , and never come here any 
 more . " 
 Jude recall his father 's silence about North Wessex and Jude 's 
 mother , never speak of either till his die day . 
 " it be the same with your father 's sister . her husband offend 
 she , and she so dislike live with he afterwards that she go 
 away to London with her little maid . the Fawleys be not make for 
 wedlock : it never seem to sit well upon we . there be sommat in our 
 blood that will not   take kindly to the notion of be bind to do what 
 we do readily enough if not bind . that be why you ought to have 
 hearken to I , and not ha ' married . " 
 " where do Father and Mother part - by the Brown House , do you say ? " 
 " a little far on - where the road to Fenworth branch off , and 
 the handpost stand . a gibbet once stand there not onconnecte with 
 our history . but let that be . " 
 in the dusk of that evening Jude walk away from his old aunt 's as 
 if to go home . but as soon as he reach the open down he strike out 
 upon it till he come to a large round pond . the frost continue , 
 though it be not particularly sharp , and the large star overhead 
 come out slow and flicker . Jude put one foot on the edge of the 
 ice , and then the other : it crack under his weight ; but this do 
 not deter he . he plough his way inward to the centre , the ice 
 make sharp noise as he go . when just about the middle he look 
 around he and give a jump . the cracking repeat itself ; but he do 
 not go down . he jump again , but the cracking have cease . Jude 
 go back to the edge , and step upon the ground . 
 it be curious , he think . what be he reserve for ? he suppose 
 he be not a sufficiently dignified person for suicide . peaceful 
 death abhor he as a subject , and would not take he . 
 what could he do of a low kind than self - extermination ; what be 
 there less noble , more in keep with his present degraded position ? 
 he could get drunk . of course that be it ; he have forget . 
 drinking be the regular , stereotyped resource of the despairing 
 worthless . he begin to see now why some man booze at inn . he 
 strike down the hill northward and come to an obscure public - house . 
 on enter and sit down the sight of the picture of Samson and 
 Delilah on the wall cause he to recognize the place as that he 
 have visit with Arabella on that first Sunday evening of their 
 courtship . he call for liquor and drink briskly for an hour or 
 more . 
 stagger homeward late that night , with all his sense of 
 depression go , and his head fairly clear still , he begin to laugh 
 boisterously , and to wonder how Arabella would receive he in his 
 new aspect . the house be in darkness when he enter , and in 
 his stumble state it be some time before he could get a light . 
 then he find that , though the mark of pig - dressing , of fat and 
 scallop , be visible , the material themselves have be take away . 
 a line write by his wife on the inside of an old envelope be 
 pin to the cotton blower of the fireplace : 
 " have go to my friend . shall not return . " 
 all the next day he remain at home , and send off the carcase of the 
 pig to Alfredston . he then clean up the premise , lock the door , 
 put the key in a place she would know if she come back , and return 
 to his masonry at Alfredston . 
 at night when he again plod home he find she have not visit the 
 house . the next day go in the same way , and the next . then there 
 come a letter from she . 
 that she have go tired of he she frankly admit . he be such 
 a slow old coach , and she do not care for the sort of life he 
 lead . there be no prospect of his ever better himself or she . 
 she far go on to say that her parent have , as he know , for 
 some time consider the question of emigrate to Australia , the 
 pig - job business be a poor one nowadays . they have at last 
 decide to go , and she propose to go with they , if he have no 
 objection . a woman of her sort would have more chance over there 
 than in this stupid country . 
 Jude reply that he have not the least objection to she go . he 
 think it a wise course , since she wish to go , and one that might 
 be to the advantage of both . he enclose in the packet contain 
 the letter the money that have be realize by the sale of the pig , 
 with all he have besides , which be not much . 
 from that day he hear no more of she except indirectly , though her 
 father and his household do not immediately leave , but wait till 
 his good and other effect have be sell off . when Jude learn 
 that there be to be an auction at the house of the Donns he pack 
 his own household good into a waggon , and send they to she at the 
 aforesaid homestead , that she might sell they with the rest , or as 
 many of they as she should choose . 
 he then go into lodging at Alfredston , and see in a shopwindow the 
 little handbill announce the sale of his father - in - law 's furniture . 
 he note its date , which come and pass without Jude 's go near 
 the place , or perceive that the traffic out of Alfredston by 
 the southern road be materially increase by the auction . a few 
 day later he enter a dingy broker 's shop in the main street 
 of the town , and amid a heterogeneous collection of saucepan , a 
 clothe - horse , rolling - pin , brass candlestick , swing look - glass , 
 and other thing at the back of the shop , evidently just bring in 
 from a sale , he perceive a frame photograph , which turn out to be 
 his own portrait . 
 it be one which he have have specially take and frame by a local man 
 in bird's - eye maple , as a present for Arabella , and have duly give 
 she on their wedding - day . on the back be still to be read , " Jude 
 to Arabella , " with the date . she must have throw it in with the 
 rest of her property at the auction . 
 " oh , " say the broker , see he look at this and the other article 
 in the heap , and not perceive that the portrait be of himself : 
 " it be a small lot of stuff that be knock down to I at a cottage 
 sale out on the road to Marygreen . the frame be a very useful one , 
 if you take out the likeness . you shall have it for a shilling . " 
 the utter death of every tender sentiment in his wife , as bring 
 home to he by this mute and undesigned evidence of her sale of 
 his portrait and gift , be the conclusive little stroke require 
 to demolish all sentiment in he . he pay the shilling , take the 
 photograph away with he , and burn it , frame and all , when he 
 reach his lodging . 
 two or three day later he hear that Arabella and her parent have 
 depart . he have send a message offering to see she for a formal 
 leave - taking , but she have say that it would be well otherwise , 
 since she be bent on go , which perhaps be true . on the evening 
 follow their emigration , when his day 's work be do , he come out 
 of door after supper , and stroll in the starlight along the too 
 familiar road towards the upland whereon have be experience the 
 chief emotion of his life . it seem to be his own again . 
 he could not realize himself . on the old track he seem to be a 
 boy still , hardly a day old than when he have stand dream at the 
 top of that hill , inwardly fire for the first time with ardour for 
 Christminster and scholarship . " yet I be a man , " he say . " I have 
 a wife . More , I have arrive at the still riper stage of have 
 disagree with she , dislike she , have a scuffle with she , and part 
 from she . " 
 he remember then that he be stand not far from the spot at 
 which the parting between his father and his mother be say to have 
 occur . 
 a little far on be the summit whence Christminster , or what he 
 have take for that city , have seem to be visible . a milestone , now 
 as always , stand at the roadside hard by . Jude draw near it , and 
 feel rather than read the mileage to the city . he remember that 
 once on his way home he have proudly cut with his keen new chisel an 
 inscription on the back of that milestone , embody his aspiration . 
 it have be do in the first week of his apprenticeship , before 
 he have be divert from his purpose by an unsuitable woman . he 
 wonder if the inscription be legible still , and go to the back 
 of the milestone brush away the nettle . by the light of a match 
 he could still discern what he have cut so enthusiastically so long 
 ago : 
 THITHER 
 J. F. 
  with a point finger 
 the sight of it , unimpaired , within its screen of grass and nettle , 
 light in his soul a spark of the old fire . surely his plan should 
 be to move onward through good and ill - to avoid morbid sorrow 
 even though he do see ugliness in the world ? bene agere et 
 loetari - to do good cheerfully - which he have hear to be the 
 philosophy of one Spinoza , might be his own even now . 
 he might battle with his evil star , and follow out his original 
 intention . 
 by move to a spot a little way off he uncover the horizon in a 
 north - easterly direction . there actually rise the faint halo , a 
 small dim nebulousness , hardly recognizable save by the eye of faith . 
 it be enough for he . he would go to Christminster as soon as the 
 term of his apprenticeship expire . 
 he return to his lodging in a well mood , and say his prayer . 
 Part Second 
 AT CHRISTMINSTER 
 " save his own soul he hath no star . " - SWINBURNE . 
 " notitiam primosque gradus vicinia fecit ; 
 Tempore crevit amor . " - OVID . 
 I 
 the next noteworthy move in Jude 's life be that in which he appear 
 gliding steadily onward through a dusky landscape of some three 
 year ' later leafage than have grace his courtship of Arabella , 
 and the disruption of his coarse conjugal life with she . he be 
 walk towards Christminster City , at a point a mile or two to the 
 south - west of it . 
 he have at last find himself clear of Marygreen and Alfredston : he 
 be out of his apprenticeship , and with his tool at his back seem 
 to be in the way of make a new start - the start to which , bar 
 the interruption involve in his intimacy and married experience with 
 Arabella , he have be look forward for about ten year . 
 Jude would now have be describe as a young man with a forcible , 
 meditative , and earnest rather than handsome cast of countenance . 
 he be of dark complexion , with dark harmonize eye , and he wear 
 a closely trim black beard of more advanced growth than be usual 
 at his age ; this , with his great mass of black curly hair , be some 
 trouble to he in comb and wash out the stone - dust that settle 
 on it in the pursuit of his trade . his capability in the latter , 
 have be acquire in the country , be of an all - round sort , 
 include monumental stone - cutting , gothic free - stone work for the 
 restoration of church , and carving of a general kind . in London 
 he would probably have become specialized and have make himself a 
 " mould mason , " a " foliage sculptor " - perhaps a ' statuary . " 
 he have that afternoon drive in a cart from Alfredston to the village 
 near the city in this direction , and be now walk the remain 
 four mile rather from choice than from necessity , have always 
 fancy himself arrive thus . 
 the ultimate impulse to come have have a curious origin - one more 
 nearly related to the emotional side of he than to the intellectual , 
 as be often the case with young man . one day while in lodging at 
 Alfredston he have go to Marygreen to see his old aunt , and have 
 observe between the brass candlestick on her mantlepiece the 
 photograph of a pretty girlish face , in a broad hat with radiating 
 fold under the brim like the ray of a halo . he have ask who she 
 be . his grand - aunt have gruffly reply that she be his cousin 
 Sue Bridehead , of the inimical branch of the family ; and on far 
 question the old woman have reply that the girl live in 
 Christminster , though she do not know where , or what she be do . 
 his aunt would not give he the photograph . but it haunt he ; and 
 ultimately form a quickening ingredient in his latent intent of 
 follow his friend the school master thither . 
 he now pause at the top of a crooked and gentle declivity , 
 and obtain his first near view of the city . Grey - stone and 
 dun - roof , it stand within hail of the Wessex border , and almost 
 with the tip of one small toe within it , at the northernmost point of 
 the crinkle line along which the leisurely Thames stroke the field 
 of that ancient kingdom . the building now lie quiet in the sunset , 
 a vane here and there on their many spire and dome give sparkle 
 to a picture of sober secondary and tertiary hue . 
 reach the bottom he move along the level way between pollard 
 willow grow indistinct in the twilight , and soon confront the 
 outmost lamp of the town - some of those lamp which have send into 
 the sky the gleam and glory that catch his strained gaze in his day 
 of dream , so many year ago . they wink their yellow eye at he 
 dubiously , and as if , though they have be await he all these 
 year in disappointment at his tarrying , they do not much want he 
 now . 
 he be a species of Dick Whittington whose spirit be touch to 
 fine issue than a mere material gain . he go along the outlying 
 street with the cautious tread of an explorer . he see nothing of 
 the real city in the suburb on this side . his first want be a 
 lodge he scrutinize carefully such locality as seem to offer 
 on inexpensive term the modest type of accommodation he demand ; 
 and after inquiry take a room in a suburb nickname " Beersheba , " 
 though he do not know this at the time . here he instal himself , 
 and have have some tea sally forth . 
 it be a windy , whispering , moonless night . to guide himself he 
 open under a lamp a map he have bring . the breeze ruffle and 
 flutter it , but he could see enough to decide on the direction he 
 should take to reach the heart of the place . 
 after many turning he come up to the first ancient mediaeval pile 
 that he have encounter . it be a college , as he could see by the 
 gateway . he enter it , walk round , and penetrate to dark corner 
 which no lamplight reach . close to this college be another ; and 
 a little far on another ; and then he begin to be encircled as it 
 be with the breath and sentiment of the venerable city . when he 
 pass object out of harmony with its general expression he allow 
 his eye to slip over they as if he do not see they . 
 a bell begin clang , and he listen till a hundred - and - one stroke 
 have sound . he must have make a mistake , he think : it be mean 
 for a hundred . 
 when the gate be shut , and he could no long get into the 
 quadrangle , he ramble under the wall and doorway , feel with 
 his finger the contours of their moulding and carving . the minute 
 pass , few and few people be visible , and still he serpentine 
 among the shadow , for have he not imagine these scene through 
 ten bygone year , and what matter a night 's rest for once ? high 
 against the black sky the flash of a lamp would show crocketed 
 pinnacle and indented battlement . down obscure alley , apparently 
 never trodden now by the foot of man , and whose very existence seem 
 to be forget , there would jut into the path portico , oriel , 
 doorway of enriched and florid middle - age design , their extinct air 
 be accentuate by the rottenness of the stone . it seem 
 impossible that modern thought could house itself in such decrepit 
 and supersede chamber . 
 know not a human being here , Jude begin to be impressed with 
 the isolation of his own personality , as with a self - spectre , the 
 sensation be that of one who walk but could not make himself 
 see or hear . he draw his breath pensively , and , seem thus 
 almost his own ghost , give his thought to the other ghostly 
 presence with which the nook be haunt . 
 during the interval of preparation for this venture , since his wife 
 and furniture 's uncompromise disappearance into space , he have read 
 and learn almost all that could be read and learn by one in his 
 position , of the worthy who have spend their youth within these 
 reverend wall , and whose soul have haunt they in their mature 
 age . some of they , by the accident of his reading , loom out in 
 his fancy disproportionately large by comparison with the rest . the 
 brushing of the wind against the angle , buttress , and door - jambs 
 be as the passing of these only other inhabitant , the tapping 
 of each ivy leaf on its neighbour be as the muttering of their 
 mournful soul , the shadow as their thin shape in nervous movement , 
 make he comrade in his solitude . in the gloom it be as if he 
 run against they without feel their bodily frame . 
 the street be now desert , but on account of these thing he 
 could not go in . there be poet abroad , of early date and of late , 
 from the friend and eulogist of Shakespeare down to he who have 
 recently pass into silence , and that musical one of the tribe who 
 be still among we . speculative philosopher draw along , not always 
 with wrinkle forehead and hoary hair as in framed portrait , but 
 pink - faced , slim , and active as in youth ; modern divine sheet in 
 their surplice , among whom the most real to Jude Fawley be the 
 founder of the religious school call Tractarian ; the well - know 
 three , the enthusiast , the poet , and the formularist , the echo 
 of whose teaching have influence he even in his obscure home . 
 a start of aversion appear in his fancy to move they at sight of 
 those other son of the place , the form in the full - bottom wig , 
 statesman , rake , reasoner , and sceptic ; the smoothly shaven historian 
 so ironically civil to Christianity ; with other of the same 
 incredulous temper , who know each quad as well as the faithful , and 
 take equal freedom in haunt its cloister . 
 he regard the statesman in their various type , man of firm 
 movement and less dreamy air ; the scholar , the speaker , the plodder ; 
 the man whose mind grow with his growth in year , and the man whose 
 mind contract with the same . 
 the scientist and philologist follow on in his mind - sight in 
 an odd impossible combination , man of meditative face , strained 
 forehead , and weak - eyed as bat with constant research ; 
 then official character - such man as governor - general and 
 lord - lieutenants , in whom he take little interest ; chief - justice and 
 lord chancellors , silent thin - lipped figure of whom he know barely 
 the name . a keener regard attach to the prelate , by reason of 
 his own former hope . of they he have an ample band - some man of 
 heart , other rather man of head ; he who apologize for the Church 
 in Latin ; the saintly author of the Evening Hymn ; and near they the 
 great itinerant preacher , hymn - writer , and zealot , shadow like Jude 
 by his matrimonial difficulty . 
 Jude find himself speak out loud , hold conversation with 
 they as it be , like an actor in a melodrama who apostrophize the 
 audience on the other side of the footlight ; till he suddenly cease 
 with a start at his absurdity . perhaps those incoherent word of the 
 wanderer be hear within the wall by some student or thinker over 
 his lamp ; and he may have raise his head , and wonder what voice it 
 be , and what it betoken . Jude now perceive that , so far as solid 
 flesh go , he have the whole aged city to himself with the exception 
 of a belate townsman here and there , and that he seem to be 
 catch a cold . 
 a voice reach he out of the shade ; a real and local voice : 
 " you have   be a - settin ' a long time on that plinth - stone , young man . 
 what me you be up to ? " 
 it come from a policeman who have be observe Jude without the 
 latter observe he . 
 Jude go home and to bed , after read up a little about these man 
 and their several message to the world from a book or two that he 
 have bring with he concern the son of the university . as he 
 draw towards sleep various memorable word of theirs that he have 
 just be con seem speak by they in mutter utterance ; 
 some audible , some unintelligible to he . one of the spectre   who 
 afterwards mourn Christminster as " the home of lose cause , " though 
 Jude do not remember this   be now apostrophize she thus : 
 " beautiful city ! so venerable , so lovely , so unravaged by the fierce 
 intellectual life of our century , so serene ! ... her ineffable charm 
 keep ever call we to the true goal of all of we , to the ideal , to 
 perfection . " 
 another voice be that of the Corn Law convert , whose phantom he have 
 just see in the quadrangle with a great bell . Jude think his soul 
 might have be shape the historic word of his master - speech : 
 " Sir , I may be wrong , but my impression be that my duty towards a 
 country threaten with famine require that that which have be the 
 ordinary remedy under all similar circumstance should be resort to 
 now , namely , that there should be free access to the food of man from 
 whatever quarter it may come ... deprive I of office to - morrow , you 
 can never deprive I of the consciousness that I have exercise the 
 power commit to I from no corrupt or interested motif , from no 
 desire to gratify ambition , for no personal gain . " 
 then the sly author of the immortal chapter on Christianity : " how 
 shall we excuse the supine inattention of the Pagan and philosophic 
 world , to those evidence   miracle   which be present by 
 Omnipotence ? ... the sage of Greece and Rome turn aside from the 
 awful spectacle , and appear unconscious of any alteration in the 
 moral or physical government of the world . " 
 then the shade of the poet , the last of the optimist : 
 how the world be make for each of we ! 
         
 and each of the many help to recruit 
 the life of the race by a general plan . 
 then one of the three enthusiast he have see just now , the author of 
 the Apologia : 
 " my argument be ... that absolute certitude as to the truth of 
 natural theology be the result of an assemblage of concur and 
 converging probability ... that probability which do not reach 
 to logical certainty might create a mental certitude . " 
 the second of they , no polemic , murmur quieter thing : 
 why should we faint , and fear to live alone , 
 since all alone , so Heaven have will'd , we die ? 
 he likewise hear some phrase speak by the phantom with the short 
 face , the genial Spectator : 
 " when I look upon the tomb of the great , every motion of envy die 
 in I ; when I read the epitaph of the beautiful , every inordinate 
 desire go out ; when I meet with the grief of parent upon a 
 tombstone , my heart melt with compassion ; when I see the tomb of 
 the parent themselves , I consider the vanity of grieve for those 
 whom we must quickly follow . " 
 and lastly a gentle - voice prelate speak , during whose meek , familiar 
 rhyme , endear to he from early childhood , Jude fall asleep : 
 teach I to live , that I may dread 
 the grave as little as my bed . 
 teach I to die ... 
 he do not wake till morning . the ghostly past seem to have go , 
 and everything speak of to - day . he start up in bed , think he 
 have overslept himself and then say : 
 " by Jove - I have quite forget my sweet - faced cousin , and that she be 
 here all the time ! ... and my old schoolmaster , too . " his word 
 about his schoolmaster have , perhaps , less z in they than his word 
 concern his cousin . 
 II 
 necessary meditation on the actual , include the mean 
 bread - and - cheese question , dissipate the phantasmal for a while , and 
 compel Jude to smother high thinking under immediate need . he 
 have to get up , and seek for work , manual work ; the only kind deem 
 by many of its professor to be work at all . 
 pass out into the street on this errand he find that the 
 college have treacherously change their sympathetic countenance : 
 some be pompous ; some have put on the look of family vault above 
 ground ; something barbaric loom in the masonry of all . the 
 spirit of the great man have disappear . 
 the numberless architectural page around he he read , naturally , 
 less as an artist - critic of their form than as an artizan and 
 comrade of the dead handicraftsman whose muscle have actually 
 execute those form . he examine the moulding , stroke they as 
 one who know their beginning , say they be difficult or easy in 
 the working , have take little or much time , be try to the arm , 
 or convenient to the tool . 
 what at night have be perfect and ideal be by day the more or 
 less defective real . cruelty , insult , have , he perceive , be 
 inflict on the aged erection . the condition of several move he 
 as he would have be move by maim sentient being . they be 
 wound , break , slough off their outer shape in the deadly 
 struggle against year , weather , and man . 
 the rottenness of these historical document remind he that he be 
 not , after all , hasten on to begin the morning practically as he 
 have intend . he have come to work , and to live by work , and the 
 morning have nearly go . it be , in one sense , encouraging to think 
 that in a place of crumble stone there must be plenty for one of 
 his trade to do in the business of renovation . he ask his way to 
 the workyard of the stone - mason whose name have be give he at 
 Alfredston ; and soon hear the familiar sound of the rubber and 
 chisel . 
 the yard be a little centre of regeneration . here , with keen edge 
 and smooth curve , be form in the exact likeness of those he have 
 see abrade and time - eat on the wall . these be the idea in 
 modern prose which the lichene college present in old poetry . 
 even some of those antique might have be call prose when they 
 be new . they have do nothing but wait , and have become poetical . 
 how easy to the small building ; how impossible to most man . 
 he ask for the foreman , and look round among the new tracery , 
 mullion , transom , shaft , pinnacle , and battlement stand on 
 the banker half work , or wait to be remove . they be mark 
 by precision , mathematical straightness , smoothness , exactitude : 
 there in the old wall be the broken line of the original idea ; 
 jagged curve , disdain of precision , irregularity , disarray . 
 for a moment there fall on Jude a true illumination ; that here in the 
 stone yard be a centre of effort as worthy as that dignified by the 
 name of scholarly study within the noblest of the college . but he 
 lose it under stress of his old idea . he would accept any employment 
 which might be offer he on the strength of his late employer 's 
 recommendation ; but he would accept it as a provisional thing only . 
 this be his form of the modern vice of unrest . 
 moreover he perceive that at good only copying , patch and 
 imitating go on here ; which he fancy to be owe to some 
 temporary and local cause . he do not at that time see that 
 mediaevalism be as dead as a fern - leaf in a lump of coal ; that other 
 development be shape in the world around he , in which Gothic 
 architecture and its association have no place . the deadly animosity 
 of contemporary logic and vision towards so much of what he hold in 
 reverence be not yet reveal to he . 
 have fail to obtain work here as yet he go away , and think 
 again of his cousin , whose presence somewhere at hand he seem to 
 feel in wavelet of interest , if not of emotion . how he wish he 
 have that pretty portrait of she ! at last he write to his aunt to 
 send it . she do so , with a request , however , that he be not to 
 bring disturbance into the family by go to see the girl or her 
 relation . Jude , a ridiculously affectionate fellow , promise 
 nothing , put the photograph on the mantel - piece , kiss it - he do 
 not know why - and feel more at home . she seem to look down and 
 preside over his tea . it be cheer - the one thing unite he to 
 the emotion of the live city . 
 there remain the schoolmaster - probably now a reverend parson . 
 but he could not possibly hunt up such a respectable man just yet ; 
 so raw and unpolished be his condition , so precarious be his 
 fortune . thus he still remain in loneliness . although people 
 move round he he virtually see none . not as yet have mingle 
 with the active life of the place it be largely non - existent to he . 
 but the saint and prophet in the window - tracery , the painting 
 in the gallery , the statue , the bust , the gargoyle , the 
 corbel - head - these seem to breathe his atmosphere . like all 
 newcomer to a spot on which the past be deeply graven he hear that 
 past announce itself with an emphasis altogether unsuspecte by , 
 and even incredible to , the habitual resident . 
 for many day he haunt the cloister and quadrangle of the 
 college at odd minute in pass they , surprise by impish 
 echo of his own footstep , smart as the blow of a mallet . the 
 Christminster ' sentiment , " as it have be call , eat far and 
 far into he ; till he probably know more about those building 
 materially , artistically , and historically , than any one of their 
 inmate . 
 it be not till now , when he find himself actually on the spot of 
 his enthusiasm , that Jude perceive how far away from the object of 
 that enthusiasm he really be . only a wall divide he from those 
 happy young contemporary of his with whom he share a common mental 
 life ; man who have nothing to do from morning till night but to read , 
 mark , learn , and inwardly digest . only a wall - but what a wall ! 
 every day , every hour , as he go in search of labour , he see they 
 go and come also , rub shoulder with they , hear their 
 voice , mark their movement . the conversation of some of the 
 more thoughtful among they seem oftentime , owe to his long and 
 persistent preparation for this place , to be peculiarly akin to his 
 own thought . yet he be as far from they as if he have be at the 
 antipode . of course he be . he be a young workman in a white 
 blouse , and with stone - dust in the crease of his clothe ; and in 
 pass he they do not even see he , or hear he , rather see 
 through he as through a pane of glass at their familiar beyond . 
 whatever they be to he , he to they be not on the spot at all ; and 
 yet he have fancy he would be close to their life by come there . 
 but the future lie ahead after all ; and if he could only be so 
 fortunate as to get into good employment he would put up with the 
 inevitable . so he thank God for his health and strength , and take 
 courage . for the present he be outside the gate of everything , 
 college include : perhaps some day he would be inside . those 
 palace of light and leading ; he might some day look down on the 
 world through their pane . 
 at length he do receive a message from the stone - mason 's yard - that 
 a job be wait for he . it be his first encouragement , and he 
 close with the offer promptly . 
 he be young and strong , or he never could have execute with such 
 z the undertaking to which he now apply himself , since they 
 involve read most of the night after work all the day . first 
 he buy a shaded lamp for four and six - pence , and obtain a good 
 light . then he get pen , paper , and such other necessary book as he 
 have be unable to obtain elsewhere . then , to the consternation of 
 his landlady , he shift all the furniture of his room - a single one 
 for living and sleep - rig up a curtain on a rope across the 
 middle , to make a double chamber out of one , hang up a thick blind 
 that nobody should know how he be curtail the hour of sleep , 
 lay out his book , and sit down . 
 have be deeply encumber by marry , get a cottage , and 
 buy the furniture which have disappear in the wake of his wife , 
 he have never be able to save any money since the time of those 
 disastrous venture , and till his wage begin to come in he be 
 oblige to live in the narrow way . after buy a book or two 
 he could not even afford himself a fire ; and when the night reek 
 with the raw and cold air from the meadow he sit over his lamp in 
 a great - coat , hat , and woollen glove . 
 from his window he could perceive the spire of the cathedral , and the 
 ogee dome under which resound the great bell of the city . the tall 
 tower , tall belfry window , and tall pinnacle of the college by the 
 bridge he could also get a glimpse of by go to the staircase . 
 these object he use as stimulant when his faith in the future be 
 dim . 
 like enthusiast in general he make no inquiry into detail of 
 procedure . pick up general notion from casual acquaintance , he 
 never dwelt upon they . for the present , he say to himself , the one 
 thing necessary be to get ready by accumulate money and knowledge , 
 and await whatever chance be afford to such an one of become 
 a son of the University . " for wisdom be a defence , and money be a 
 defence ; but the excellency of knowledge be , that wisdom giveth life 
 to they that have it . " his desire absorb he , and leave no part of 
 he to weigh its practicability . 
 at this time he receive a nervously anxious letter from his poor old 
 aunt , on the subject which have previously distress she - a fear that 
 Jude would not be strong - minded enough to keep away from his cousin 
 Sue Bridehead and her relation . Sue 's father , his aunt believe , 
 have go back to London , but the girl remain at Christminster . to 
 make she still more objectionable she be an artist or designer of 
 some sort in what be call an ecclesiastical warehouse , which be 
 a perfect seed - bed of idolatry , and she be no doubt abandon to 
 mummery on that account - if not quite a Papist .   Miss Drusilla 
 Fawley be of her date , Evangelical . 
 as Jude be rather on an intellectual track than a theological , this 
 news of Sue 's probable opinion do not much influence he one way or 
 the other , but the clue to her whereabouts be decidedly interesting . 
 with an altogether singular pleasure he walk at his early spare 
 minute past the shop answer to his great - aunt 's description ; and 
 beheld in one of they a young girl sit behind a desk , who be 
 suspiciously like the original of the portrait . he venture to enter 
 on a trivial errand , and have make his purchase linger on the 
 scene . the shop seem to be keep entirely by woman . it contain 
 anglican book , stationery , text , and fancy good : little plaster 
 angel on bracket , Gothic - frame picture of saint , ebony cross 
 that be almost crucifix , prayer - book that be almost missal . 
 he feel very shy of look at the girl in the desk ; she be so 
 pretty that he could not believe it possible that she should belong 
 to he . then she speak to one of the two old woman behind the 
 counter ; and he recognize in the accent certain quality of his 
 own voice ; soften and sweeten , but his own . what be she do ? 
 he steal a glance round . before she lie a piece of zinc , cut to 
 the shape of a scroll three or four foot long , and coat with a 
 dead - surface paint on one side . Hereon she be design or 
 illuminating , in character of Church text , the single word 
 A L L E l u J A 
 " a sweet , saintly , christian business , her ! " think he . 
 her presence here be now fairly enough explain , her skill in 
 work of this sort have no doubt be acquire from her father 's 
 occupation as an ecclesiastical worker in metal . the lettering on 
 which she be engage be clearly intend to be fix up in some 
 chancel to assist devotion . 
 he come out . it would have be easy to speak to she there and then , 
 but it seem scarcely honourable towards his aunt to disregard her 
 request so incontinently . she have use he roughly , but she have 
 bring he up : and the fact of she be powerless to control he 
 lend a pathetic force to a wish that would have be inoperative as 
 an argument . 
 so Jude give no sign . he would not call upon Sue just yet . he have 
 other reason against do so when he have walk away . she seem 
 so dainty beside himself in his rough working - jacket and dusty 
 trouser that he feel he be as yet unready to encounter she , as he 
 have feel about Mr. Phillotson . and how possible it be that she have 
 inherit the antipathy of her family , and would scorn he , as 
 far as a Christian could , particularly when he have tell she that 
 unpleasant part of his history which have result in his becoming 
 enchain to one of her own sex whom she would certainly not admire . 
 thus he keep watch over she , and like to feel she be there . 
 the consciousness of her live presence stimulate he . but she 
 remain more or less an ideal character , about whose form he begin 
 to weave curious and fantastic day - dream . 
 between two and three week afterwards Jude be engage with some 
 more man , outside Crozier College in Old - time Street , in get a 
 block of work freestone from a waggon across the pavement , before 
 hoist it to the parapet which they be repair . stand in 
 position the head man say , " Spaik when he heave ! he - ho ! " and they 
 heave . 
 all of a sudden , as he lift , his cousin stand close to his elbow , 
 pause a moment on the bend of her foot till the obstruct object 
 should have be remove . she look right into his face with 
 liquid , untranslatable eye , that combine , or seem to he to 
 combine , keenness with tenderness , and mystery with both , their 
 expression , as well as that of her lip , take its life from some 
 word just speak to a companion , and be carry on into his face 
 quite unconsciously . she no more observe his presence than that of 
 the dust - mote which his manipulation raise into the sunbeam . 
 his closeness to she be so suggestive that he tremble , and turn 
 his face away with a shy instinct to prevent she recognize he , 
 though as she have never once see he she could not possibly do so ; 
 and might very well never have hear even his name . he could 
 perceive that though she be a country - girl at bottom , a latter 
 girlhood of some year in London , and a womanhood here , have take 
 all rawness out of she . 
 when she be go he continue his work , reflect on she . he have 
 be so catch by her influence that he have take no count of her 
 general mould and build . he remember now that she be not a large 
 figure , that she be light and slight , of the type dub elegant . 
 that be about all he have see . there be nothing statuesque in she ; 
 all be nervous motion . she be mobile , living , yet a painter might 
 not have call she handsome or beautiful . but the much that she be 
 surprised he . she be quite a long way remove from the rusticity 
 that be his . how could one of his cross - grained , unfortunate , 
 almost accurse stock , have contrive to reach this pitch of 
 niceness ? London have do it , he suppose . 
 from this moment the emotion which have be accumulate in his 
 breast as the bottle - up effect of solitude and the poetized 
 locality he dwelt in , insensibly begin to precipitate itself on this 
 half - visionary form ; and he perceive that , whatever his obedient 
 wish in a contrary direction , he would soon be unable to resist the 
 desire to make himself know to she . 
 he affect to think of she quite in a family way , since there be 
 crush reason why he should not and could not think of she in any 
 other . 
 the first reason be that he be marry , and it would be wrong . 
 the second be that they be cousin . it be not well for cousin 
 to fall in love even when circumstance seem to favour the passion . 
 the third : even be he free , in a family like his own where marriage 
 usually mean a tragic sadness , marriage with a blood - relation would 
 duplicate the adverse condition , and a tragic sadness might be 
 intensify to a tragic horror . 
 therefore , again , he would have to think of Sue with only a 
 relation 's mutual interest in one belong to he ; regard she in 
 a practical way as some one to be proud of ; to talk and nod to ; 
 later on , to be invite to tea by , the emotion spend on her being 
 rigorously that of a kinsman and well - wisher . so would she be to he 
 a kindly star , an elevate power , a companion in anglican worship , 
 a tender friend . 
 III 
 but under the various deterrent influence Jude 's instinct be to 
 approach she timidly , and the next Sunday he go to the morning 
 service in the cathedral church of Cardinal College to gain a further 
 view of she , for he have find that she frequently attend there . 
 she do not come , and he await she in the afternoon , which be 
 fine . he know that if she come at all she would approach the 
 building along the eastern side of the great green quadrangle from 
 which it be accessible , and he stand in a corner while the bell be 
 go . a few minute before the hour for service she appear as 
 one of the figure walk along under the college wall , and at 
 sight of she he advance up the side opposite , and follow she into 
 the building , more than ever glad that he have not as yet reveal 
 himself . to see she , and to be himself unseen and unknown , be 
 enough for he at present . 
 he linger awhile in the vestibule , and the service be some way 
 advance when he be put into a seat . it be a louring , mournful , 
 still afternoon , when a religion of some sort seem a necessity to 
 ordinary practical man , and not only a luxury of the emotional 
 and leisure class . in the dim light and the baffle glare of 
 the clerestory window he could discern the opposite worshipper 
 indistinctly only , but he see that Sue be among they . he have not 
 long discover the exact seat that she occupy when the chanting 
 of the 119th Psalm in which the choir be engage reach its second 
 part , in quo corriget , the organ change to a pathetic gregorian 
 tune as the singer give forth : 
 Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way ? 
 it be the very question that be engage Jude 's attention at this 
 moment . what a wicked worthless fellow he have be to give vent as 
 he have do to an animal passion for a woman , and allow it to lead 
 to such disastrous consequence ; then to think of put an end to 
 himself ; then to go recklessly and get drunk . the great wave of 
 pedal music tumble round the choir , and , nurse on the supernatural 
 as he have be , it be not wonderful that he could hardly believe that 
 the psalm be not specially set by some regardful Providence for this 
 moment of his first entry into the solemn building . and yet it be 
 the ordinary psalm for the twenty - fourth evening of the month . 
 the girl for whom he be begin to nourish an extraordinary 
 tenderness be at this time ensphere by the same harmony as those 
 which float into his ear ; and the thought be a delight to he . 
 she be probably a frequenter of this place , and , steep body and 
 soul in church sentiment as she must be by occupation and habit , have , 
 no doubt , much in common with he . to an impressionable and lonely 
 young man the consciousness of have at last find anchorage for 
 his thought , which promise to supply both social and spiritual 
 possibility , be like the dew of Hermon , and he remain throughout 
 the service in a sustain atmosphere of ecstasy . 
 though he be loth to suspect it , some people might have say to he 
 that the atmosphere blow as distinctly from Cyprus as from Galilee . 
 Jude wait till she have leave her seat and pass under the screen 
 before he himself move . she do not look towards he , and by the 
 time he reach the door she be half - way down the broad path . 
 be dress up in his Sunday suit he be inclined to follow she 
 and reveal himself . but he be not quite ready ; and , alas , ought 
 he to do so with the kind of feeling that be awakening in he ? 
 for though it have seem to have an ecclesiastical basis during the 
 service , and he have persuade himself that such be the case , he 
 could not altogether be blind to the real nature of the magnetism . 
 she be such a stranger that the kinship be affectation , and he 
 say , " it can not   be ! I , a man with a wife , must not know she ! " still 
 Sue be his own kin , and the fact of his have a wife , even though 
 she be not in evidence in this hemisphere , might be a help in one 
 sense . it would put all thought of a tender wish on his part out 
 of Sue 's mind , and make her intercourse with he free and fearless . 
 it be with some heartache that he see how little he care for the 
 freedom and fearlessness that would result in she from such 
 knowledge . 
 some little time before the date of this service in the cathedral the 
 pretty , liquid - eye , light - foot young woman Sue Bridehead have an 
 afternoon 's holiday , and leave the ecclesiastical establishment in 
 which she not only assist but lodge , take a walk into the country 
 with a book in her hand . it be one of those cloudless day which 
 sometimes occur in Wessex and elsewhere between day of cold and wet , 
 as if intercalate by caprice of the weather - god . she go along for 
 a mile or two until she come to much high ground than that of the 
 city she have leave behind she . the road pass between green field , 
 and come to a stile Sue pause there , to finish the page she be 
 read , and then look back at the tower and dome and pinnacle 
 new and old . 
 on the other side of the stile , in the footpath , she behold a 
 foreigner with black hair and a sallow face , sit on the grass 
 beside a large square board whereon be fix , as closely as they 
 could stand , a number of plaster statuette , some of they bronze , 
 which he be re - arrange before proceed with they on his way . 
 they be in the main reduced copy of ancient marble , and 
 comprise divinity of a very different character from those the 
 girl be accustomed to see portray , among they be a Venus of 
 standard pattern , a Diana , and , of the other sex , Apollo , Bacchus , 
 and Mars . though the figure be many yard away from her the 
 south - west sun bring they out so brilliantly against the green 
 herbage that she could discern their contour with luminous 
 distinctness ; and be almost in a line between herself and the 
 church tower of the city they awake in she an oddly foreign and 
 contrasting set of idea by comparison . the man rise , and , see 
 she , politely take off his cap , and cry " I - I - i - mage ! " in an accent 
 that agree with his appearance . in a moment he dexterously lift 
 upon his knee the great board with its assemble notability divine 
 and human , and raise it to the top of his head , bring they on to 
 she and rest the board on the stile . first he offer she his 
 small ware - the bust of king and queen , then a minstrel , then 
 a wing Cupid . she shake her head . 
 " how much be these two ? " she say , touch with her finger the 
 Venus and the Apollo - the large figure on the tray . 
 he say she should have they for ten shilling . 
 " I can not afford that , " say Sue . she offer considerably less , 
 and to her surprise the image - man draw they from their wire stay and 
 hand they over the stile . she clasp they as treasure . 
 when they be pay for , and the man have go , she begin to be 
 concern as to what she should do with they . they seem so very 
 large now that they be in her possession , and so very naked . 
 be of a nervous temperament she tremble at her enterprise . 
 when she handle they the white pipeclay come off on her glove and 
 jacket . after carry they along a little way openly an idea come 
 to she , and , pull some huge burdock leaf , parsley , and other 
 rank growth from the hedge , she wrap up her burden as well as she 
 could in these , so that what she carry appear to be an enormous 
 armful of green stuff gather by a zealous lover of nature . 
 " well , anything be well than those everlaste church fallal ! " she 
 say . but she be still in a trembling state , and seem almost to 
 wish she have not buy the figure . 
 occasionally peep inside the leaf to see that Venus 's arm be 
 not break , she enter with her heathen load into the most christian 
 city in the country by an obscure street run parallel to the main 
 one , and round a corner to the side door of the establishment to 
 which she be attach . her purchase be take straight up to her 
 own chamber , and she at once attempt to lock they in a box that be 
 her very own property ; but find they too cumbersome she wrap 
 they in large sheet of brown paper , and stand they on the floor in a 
 corner . 
 the mistress of the house , Miss Fontover , be an elderly lady in 
 spectacle , dress almost like an abbess ; a dab at Ritual , as become 
 one of her business , and a worshipper at the ceremonial church of St. 
 Silas , in the suburb of Beersheba before - mention , which Jude also 
 have begin to attend . she be the daughter of a clergyman in reduced 
 circumstance , and at his death , which have occur several year 
 before this date , she boldly avoid penury by take over a little 
 shop of church requisite and develop it to its present creditable 
 proportion . she wear a cross and bead round her neck as her only 
 ornament , and know the Christian Year by heart . 
 she now come to call Sue to tea , and , find that the girl do not 
 respond for a moment , enter the room just as the other be hastily 
 put a string round each parcel . 
 " something you have be buy , Miss Bridehead ? " she ask , 
 regard the enwrap object . 
 " yes - just something to ornament my room , " say Sue . 
 " well , I should have think I have put enough here already , " say 
 Miss Fontover , look round at the Gothic - frame print of saint , 
 the church - text scroll , and other article which , have become too 
 stale to sell , have be use to furnish this obscure chamber . " what 
 be it ? how bulky ! " she tear a little hole , about as big as a wafer , 
 in the brown paper , and try to peep in . " why , statuary ? two 
 figure ? where do you get they ? " 
 " oh - I buy they of a travel man who sell cast - " 
 " two saint ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " what one ? " 
 " St. Peter and St. - St. Mary Magdalen . " 
 " well - now come down to tea , and go and finish that organ - text , if 
 there be light enough afterwards . " 
 these little obstacle to the indulgence of what have be the mere 
 pass fancy create in Sue a great zest for unpack her object 
 and look at they ; and at bedtime , when she be sure of be 
 undisturbed , she unrobe the divinity in comfort . place the pair 
 of figure on the chest of drawer , a candle on each side of they , 
 she withdraw to the bed , fling herself down thereon , and begin 
 read a book she have take from her box , which Miss Fontover know 
 nothing of . it be a volume of Gibbon , and she read the chapter 
 deal with the reign of Julian the Apostate . occasionally she 
 look up at the statuette , which appear strange and out of place , 
 there happen to be a Calvary print hang between they , and , 
 as if the scene suggest the action , she at length jump up and 
 withdraw another book from her box - a volume of verse - and turn to 
 the familiar poem - 
 Thou hast conquer , o pale Galilean : 
 the world have grow grey from thy breath ! 
 which she read to the end . presently she put out the candle , 
 undressed , and finally extinguish her own light . 
 she be of an age which usually sleep soundly , yet to - night she 
 keep wake up , and every time she open her eye there be enough 
 diffused light from the street to show she the white plaster figure , 
 stand on the chest of drawer in odd contrast to their environment 
 of text and martyr , and the Gothic - frame Crucifix - picture that be 
 only discernible now as a Latin cross , the figure thereon be 
 obscure by the shade . 
 on one of these occasion the church clock strike some small hour . 
 it fall upon the ear of another person who sit bend over his 
 book at a not very distant spot in the same city . be Saturday 
 night the morrow be one on which Jude have not set his alarm - clock to 
 call he at his usually early time , and hence he have stay up , as 
 be his custom , two or three hour later than he could afford to do 
 on any other day of the week . just then he be earnestly read 
 from his Griesbach 's text . at the very time that Sue be toss and 
 star at her figure , the policeman and belate citizen pass 
 along under his window might have hear , if they have stand still , 
 strange syllable mumble with fervour within - word that have for 
 Jude an indescribable enchantment : inexplicable sound something 
 like these : - 
 " all hemin heis Theos ho Pater , ex hou ta panta , kai hemeis eis 
 auton : " 
 till the sound roll with reverent loudness , as a book be hear 
 to close : - 
 " Kai heis Kurios Iesous Christos , di hou ta panta kai hemeis di 
 autou ! " 
 IV 
 he be a handy man at his trade , an all - round man , as artizan in 
 country - town be apt to be . in London the man who carve the boss 
 or knob of leafage decline to cut the fragment of moulding which 
 merge in that leafage , as if it be a degradation to do the second 
 half of one whole . when there be not much gothic moulding for 
 Jude to run , or much window - tracery on the banker , he would go out 
 letter monument or tombstone , and take a pleasure in the change 
 of handiwork . 
 the next time that he see she be when he be on a ladder execute 
 a job of this sort inside one of the church . there be a short 
 morning service , and when the parson enter Jude come down from his 
 ladder , and sit with the half - dozen people form the congregation , 
 till the prayer should be end , and he could resume his tapping . he 
 do not observe till the service be half over that one of the woman 
 be Sue , who have perforce accompany the elderly Miss Fontover 
 thither . 
 Jude sit watch her pretty shoulder , her easy , curiously 
 nonchalant rising and sitting , and her perfunctory genuflexion , 
 and think what a help such an Anglican would have be to he in 
 happy circumstance . it be not so much his anxiety to get on with 
 his work that make he go up to it immediately the worshiper begin 
 to take their leave : it be that he dare not , in this holy spot , 
 confront the woman who be begin to influence he in such an 
 indescribable manner . those three enormous reason why he must 
 not attempt intimate acquaintance with Sue Bridehead , now that his 
 interest in she have show itself to be unmistakably of a sexual kind , 
 loom as stubbornly as ever . but it be also obvious that man could 
 not live by work alone ; that the particular man Jude , at any rate , 
 want something to love . some man would have rush incontinently 
 to she , snatch the pleasure of easy friendship which she could 
 hardly refuse , and have leave the rest to chance . not so Jude - at 
 first . 
 but as the day , and still more particularly the lonely evening , 
 drag along , he find himself , to his moral consternation , 
 to be think more of she instead of think less of she , and 
 experience a fearful bliss in do what be erratic , informal , and 
 unexpected . surround by her influence all day , walk past the 
 spot she frequent , he be always think of she , and be oblige 
 to own to himself that his conscience be likely to be the loser in 
 this battle . 
 to be sure she be almost an ideality to he still . perhaps to know 
 she would be to cure himself of this unexpected and unauthorized 
 passion . a voice whisper that , though he desire to know she , he 
 do not desire to be cure . 
 there be not the least doubt that from his own orthodox point of 
 view the situation be grow immoral . for Sue to be the love one 
 of a man who be license by the law of his country to love Arabella 
 and none other unto his life 's end , be a pretty bad second beginning 
 when the man be bent on such a course as Jude purpose . this 
 conviction be so real with he that one day when , as be frequent , 
 he be at work in a neighbouring village church alone , he feel it to 
 be his duty to pray against his weakness . but much as he wish to 
 be an exemplar in these thing he could not get on . it be quite 
 impossible , he find , to ask to be deliver from temptation when 
 your heart 's desire be to be tempt unto seventy time seven . so 
 he excuse himself . " after all , " he say , " it be not altogether 
 an erotolepsy that be the matter with I , as at that first time . 
 I can see that she be exceptionally bright ; and it be partly a wish 
 for intellectual sympathy , and a craving for loving - kindness in my 
 solitude . " thus he go on adore she , fear to realize that 
 it be human perversity . for whatever Sue 's virtue , talent , or 
 ecclesiastical saturation , it be certain that those item be not 
 at all the cause of his affection for she . 
 on an afternoon at this time a young girl enter the stone - mason 's 
 yard with some hesitation , and , lift her skirt to avoid draggle 
 they in the white dust , cross towards the office . 
 " that be a nice girl , " say one of the man know as Uncle Joe . 
 " who be she ? " ask another . 
 " I do not   know - I have   see she about here and there . why , yes , she be 
 the daughter of that clever chap Bridehead who do all the wrought 
 ironwork at St. Silas ' ten year ago , and go away to London 
 afterwards . I do not   know what he be do now - not much I fancy - as 
 she be come back here . " 
 meanwhile the young woman have knock at the office door and ask if 
 Mr. Jude Fawley be at work in the yard . it so happen that Jude 
 have go out somewhere or other that afternoon , which information she 
 receive with a look of disappointment , and go away immediately . 
 when Jude return they tell he , and describe she , whereupon he 
 exclaim , " why - that be my cousin Sue ! " 
 he look along the street after she , but she be out of sight . he 
 have no long any thought of a conscientious avoidance of she , and 
 resolve to call upon she that very evening . and when he reach 
 his lodging he find a note from she - a first note - one of those 
 document which , simple and commonplace in themselves , be see 
 retrospectively to have be pregnant with impassioned consequence . 
 the very unconsciousness of a loom drama which be show in such 
 innocent first epistle from woman to man , or vice versa , make 
 they , when such a drama follow , and they be read over by the purple 
 or lurid light of it , all the more impressive , solemn , and in case , 
 terrible . 
 Sue 's be of the most artless and natural kind . she address he 
 as her dear cousin Jude ; say she have only just learn by the merest 
 accident that he be live in Christminster , and reproach he with 
 not let she know . they might have have such nice time together , 
 she say , for she be throw much upon herself , and have hardly any 
 congenial friend . but now there be every probability of she soon 
 go away , so that the chance of companionship would be lose perhaps 
 for ever . 
 a cold sweat overspread Jude at the news that she be go away . 
 that be a contingency he have never think of , and it spur he 
 to write all the more quickly to she . he would meet she that very 
 evening , he say , one hour from the time of writing , at the cross in 
 the pavement which mark the spot of the Martyrdoms . 
 when he have despatch the note by a boy he regret that in his 
 hurry he should have suggest to she to meet he out of door , when 
 he might have say he would call upon she . it be , in fact , the 
 country custom to meet thus , and nothing else have occur to he . 
 Arabella have be meet in the same way , unfortunately , and it might 
 not seem respectable to a dear girl like Sue . however , it could not 
 be help now , and he move towards the point a few minute before 
 the hour , under the glimmer of the newly light lamp . 
 the broad street be silent , and almost deserted , although it be 
 not late . he see a figure on the other side , which turn out to 
 be her , and they both converge towards the crossmark at the same 
 moment . before either have reach it she call out to he : 
 " I be not go to meet you just there , for the first time in my 
 life ! come far on . " 
 the voice , though positive and silvery , have be tremulous . they 
 walk on in parallel line , and , wait her pleasure , Jude watch 
 till she show sign of close in , when he do likewise , the place 
 be where the carrier ' cart stand in the daytime , though there 
 be none on the spot then . 
 " I be sorry that I ask you to meet I , and do not   call , " begin Jude 
 with the bashfulness of a lover . " but I think it would save time 
 if we be go to walk . " 
 " oh - I do not   mind that , " she say with the freedom of a friend . " I 
 have really no place to ask anybody in to . what I mean be that the 
 place you choose be so horrid - I suppose I ought not to say horrid - I 
 mean gloomy and inauspicious in its association ... but be not   it 
 funny to begin like this , when I do not   know you yet ? " she look he 
 up and down curiously , though Jude do not look much at she . 
 " you seem to know I more than I know you , " she add . 
 " yes - I have see you now and then . " 
 " and you know who I be , and do not   speak ? and now I be go away ! " 
 " yes . that be unfortunate . I have hardly any other friend . I have , 
 indeed , one very old friend here somewhere , but I do not   quite like 
 to call on he just yet . I wonder if you know anything of he - Mr. 
 Phillotson ? a parson somewhere about the county I think he be . " 
 " no - I only know of one Mr. Phillotson . he live a little way out in 
 the country , at Lumsdon . he be a village schoolmaster . " 
 " ah ! I wonder if he be the same . surely it be impossible ! only a 
 schoolmaster still ! do you know his christian name - be it Richard ? " 
 " yes - it be ; I have   direct book to he , though I have   never see he . " 
 " then he could not   do it ! " 
 Jude 's countenance fall , for how could he succeed in an enterprise 
 wherein the great Phillotson have fail ? he would have have a day of 
 despair if the news have not arrive during his sweet Sue 's presence , 
 but even at this moment he have vision of how Phillotson 's failure in 
 the grand university scheme would depress he when she have go . 
 " as we be go to take a walk , suppose we go and call upon he ? " 
 say Jude suddenly . " it be not late . " 
 she agree , and they go along up a hill , and through some prettily 
 woode country . presently the embattle tower and square turret 
 of the church rise into the sky , and then the school - house . they 
 inquire of a person in the street if Mr. Phillotson be likely to 
 be at home , and be inform that he be always at home . a knock 
 bring he to the school - house door , with a candle in his hand and a 
 look of inquiry on his face , which have grow thin and careworn since 
 Jude last set eye on he . 
 that after all these year the meeting with Mr. Phillotson should be 
 of this homely complexion destroy at one stroke the halo which have 
 surround the school - master 's figure in Jude 's imagination ever 
 since their parting . it create in he at the same time a sympathy 
 with Phillotson as an obviously much chastened and disappointed man . 
 Jude tell he his name , and say he have come to see he as an old 
 friend who have be kind to he in his youthful day . 
 " I do not   remember you in the least , " say the school - master 
 thoughtfully . " you be one of my pupil , you say ? yes , no doubt ; 
 but they number so many thousand by this time of my life , and have 
 naturally change so much , that I remember very few except the quite 
 recent one . " 
 " it be out at Marygreen , " say Jude , wish he have not come . 
 " yes . I be there a short time . and be this an old pupil , too ? " 
 " no - that be my cousin ... I write to you for some grammar , if you 
 recollect , and you send they ? " 
 " ah - yes ! - I do dimly recall that incident . " 
 " it be very kind of you to do it . and it be you who first start 
 I on that course . on the morning you leave Marygreen , when your 
 good be on the waggon , you wish I good - bye , and say your 
 scheme be to be a university man and enter the Church - that a degree 
 be the necessary hall - mark of one who want to do anything as a 
 theologian or teacher . " 
 " I remember I think all that privately ; but I wonder I do not keep 
 my own counsel . the idea be give up year ago . " 
 " I have never forget it . it be that which bring I to this 
 part of the country , and out here to see you to - night . " 
 " come in , " say Phillotson . " and your cousin , too . " 
 they enter the parlour of the school - house , where there be a lamp 
 with a paper shade , which throw the light down on three or four 
 book . Phillotson take it off , so that they could see each other 
 well , and the ray fall on the nervous little face and vivacious 
 dark eye and hair of Sue , on the earnest feature of her cousin , 
 and on the schoolmaster 's own mature face and figure , show he 
 to be a spare and thoughtful personage of five - and - forty , with a 
 thin - lipped , somewhat refined mouth , a slightly stoop habit , and 
 a black frock coat , which from continue friction shine a little at 
 the shoulder - blade , the middle of the back , and the elbow . 
 the old friendship be imperceptibly renew , the schoolmaster 
 speaking of his experience , and the cousin of theirs . he tell they 
 that he still think of the Church sometimes , and that though he 
 could not enter it as he have intend to do in former year he might 
 enter it as a licentiate . meanwhile , he say , he be comfortable in 
 his present position , though he be in want of a pupil - teacher . 
 they do not stay to supper , Sue have to be indoor before it grow 
 late , and the road be retrace to Christminster . though they have 
 talk of nothing more than general subject , Jude be surprised to 
 find what a revelation of woman his cousin be to he . she be so 
 vibrant that everything she do seem to have its source in feeling . 
 an exciting thought would make she walk ahead so fast that he could 
 hardly keep up with she ; and her sensitiveness on some point 
 be such that it might have be misread as vanity . it be with 
 heart - sickness he perceive that , while her sentiment towards he 
 be those of the frank friendliness only , he love she more than 
 before become acquaint with she ; and the gloom of the walk home 
 lie not in the night overhead , but in the thought of her departure . 
 " why must you leave Christminster ? " he say regretfully . " how can 
 you do otherwise than cle to a city in whose history such man as 
 Newman , Pusey , Ward , Keble , loom so large ! " 
 " yes - they do . though how large do they loom in the history of the 
 world ? ... what a funny reason for care to stay ! I should never 
 have think of it ! " she laugh . 
 " well - I must go , " she continue . " Miss Fontover , one of the 
 partner whom I serve , be offend with I , and I with she ; and it 
 be good to go . " 
 " how do that happen ? " 
 " she break some statuary of mine . " 
 " oh ? wilfully ? " 
 " yes . she find it in my room , and though it be my property she 
 throw it on the floor and stamp on it , because it be not accord 
 to her taste , and grind the arm and the head of one of the figure 
 all to bit with her heel - a horrid thing ! " 
 " Too Catholic - Apostolic for she , I suppose ? no doubt she call they 
 popish image and talk of the invocation of saint . " 
 " no ... no , she do not   do that . she see the matter quite 
 differently . " 
 " ah ! then I be surprised ! " 
 " yes . it be for quite some other reason that she do not   like my 
 patron - saint . so I be lead to retort upon she ; and the end of it 
 be that I resolve not to stay , but to get into an occupation in 
 which I shall be more independent . " 
 " why do not   you try teach again ? you once do , I hear . " 
 " I never think of resume it ; for I be get on as an 
 art - designer . " 
 " do let I ask Mr. Phillotson to let you try your hand in his 
 school ? if you like it , and go to a training college , and become a 
 first - class certificated mistress , you get twice as large an income 
 as any designer or church artist , and twice as much freedom . " 
 " well - ask he . now I must go in . good - bye , dear Jude ! I be so 
 glad we have meet at last . we need not   quarrel because our parent 
 do , need we ? " 
 Jude do not like to let she see quite how much he agree with she , 
 and go his way to the remote street in which he have his lodging . 
 to keep Sue Bridehead near he be now a desire which operate 
 without regard of consequence , and the next evening he again set out 
 for Lumsdon , fear to trust to the persuasive effect of a note 
 only . the school - master be unprepared for such a proposal . 
 " what I rather want be a second year 's transfer , as it be call , " 
 he say . " of course your cousin would do , personally ; but she have 
 have no experience . oh - she have , have she ? do she really think of 
 adopt teaching as a profession ? " 
 Jude say she be disposed to do so , he think , and his ingenious 
 argument on her natural fitness for assist Mr. Phillotson , of 
 which Jude know nothing whatever , so influence the schoolmaster that 
 he say he would engage she , assure Jude as a friend that unless 
 his cousin really mean to follow on in the same course , and regard 
 this step as the first stage of an apprenticeship , of which her 
 training in a normal school would be the second stage , her time would 
 be waste quite , the salary be merely nominal . 
 the day after this visit Phillotson receive a letter from Jude , 
 contain the information that he have again consult his cousin , 
 who take more and more warmly to the idea of tuition ; and that 
 she have agree to come . it do not occur for a moment to the 
 schoolmaster and recluse that Jude 's ardour in promote the 
 arrangement arise from any other feeling towards Sue than the 
 instinct of co - operation common among member of the same family . 
 V 
 the schoolmaster sit in his homely dwelling attach to the school , 
 both be modern erection ; and he look across the way at the old 
 house in which his teacher Sue have a lodging . the arrangement have 
 be conclude very quickly . a pupil - teacher who be to have be 
 transfer to Mr. Phillotson 's school have fail he , and Sue have 
 be take as stop - gap . all such provisional arrangement as these 
 could only last till the next annual visit of H.M. Inspector , whose 
 approval be necessary to make they permanent . have teach for 
 some two year in London , though she have abandon that vocation of 
 late , Miss Bridehead be not exactly a novice , and Phillotson think 
 there would be no difficulty in retain her service , which he 
 already wish to do , though she have only be with he three or four 
 week . he have find she quite as bright as Jude have describe she ; 
 and what master - tradesman do not wish to keep an apprentice who 
 save he half his labour ? 
 it be a little over half - past eight o'clock in the morning and he 
 be wait to see she cross the road to the school , when he would 
 follow . at twenty minute to nine she do cross , a light hat toss 
 on her head ; and he watch she as a curiosity . a new emanation , 
 which have nothing to do with her skill as a teacher , seem to 
 surround she this morning . he go to the school also , and Sue 
 remain govern her class at the other end of the room , all day 
 under his eye . she certainly be an excellent teacher . 
 it be part of his duty to give her private lesson in the evening , 
 and some article in the Code make it necessary that a respectable , 
 elderly woman should be present at these lesson when the teacher and 
 the taught be of different sex . Richard Phillotson think of 
 the absurdity of the regulation in this case , when he be old enough 
 to be the girl 's father ; but he faithfully act up to it ; and sit 
 down with she in a room where Mrs. Hawes , the widow at whose house 
 Sue lodge , occupy herself with sewing . the regulation be , 
 indeed , not easy to evade , for there be no other sitting - room in the 
 dwelling . 
 sometimes as she figure - it be arithmetic that they be work 
 at - she would involuntarily glance up with a little inquire smile 
 at he , as if she assume that , be the master , he must perceive 
 all that be pass in her brain , as right or wrong . Phillotson be 
 not really think of the arithmetic at all , but of she , in a novel 
 way which somehow seem strange to he as preceptor . perhaps she 
 know that he be think of she thus . 
 for a few week their work have go on with a monotony which in 
 itself be a delight to he . then it happen that the child be 
 to be take to Christminster to see an itinerant exhibition , in the 
 shape of a model of Jerusalem , to which school be admit at 
 a penny a head in the interest of education . they march along 
 the road two and two , she beside her class with her simple cotton 
 sunshade , her little thumb cock up against its stem ; and phillotson 
 behind in his long dangling coat , handle his walking - stick 
 genteelly , in the musing mood which have come over he since her 
 arrival . the afternoon be one of sun and dust , and when they 
 enter the exhibition room few people be present but themselves . 
 the model of the ancient city stand in the middle of the apartment , 
 and the proprietor , with a fine religious philanthropy write on his 
 feature , walk round it with a pointer in his hand , show the 
 young people the various quarter and place know to they by name 
 from read their bible ; Mount Moriah , the Valley of Jehoshaphat , 
 the City of Zion , the wall and the gate , outside one of which there 
 be a large mound like a tumulus , and on the mound a little white 
 cross . the spot , he say , be Calvary . 
 " I think , " say Sue to the schoolmaster , as she stand with he a 
 little in the background , " that this model , elaborate as it be , be a 
 very imaginary production . how do anybody know that Jerusalem be 
 like this in the time of Christ ? I be sure this man do not . " 
 " it be make after the good conjectural map , base on actual visit 
 to the city as it now exist . " 
 " I fancy we have have enough of Jerusalem , " she say , " consider we 
 be not descend from the Jews . there be nothing first - rate about 
 the place , or people , after all - as there be about Athens , Rome , 
 Alexandria , and other old city . " 
 " but my dear girl , consider what it be to we ! " 
 she be silent , for she be easily repress ; and then perceive 
 behind the group of child cluster round the model a young man 
 in a white flannel jacket , his form be bent so low in his intent 
 inspection of the Valley of Jehoshaphat that his face be almost 
 hide from view by the Mount of Olives . " look at your cousin Jude , " 
 continue the schoolmaster . " he do not   think we have have enough of 
 Jerusalem ! " 
 " ah - I do not   see he ! " she cry in her quick , light voice . 
 " Jude - how seriously you be go into it ! " 
 Jude start up from his reverie , and see she . " oh - Sue ! " he say , 
 with a glad flush of embarrassment . " these be your school - child , 
 of course ! I see that school be admit in the afternoon , and 
 think you might come ; but I get so deeply interested that I do not 
 remember where I be . how it carry one back , do not   it ! I could 
 examine it for hour , but I have only a few minute , unfortunately ; 
 for I be in the middle of a job out here . " 
 " your cousin be so terribly clever that she criticize it 
 unmercifully , " say Phillotson , with good - humour satire . " she be 
 quite sceptical as to its correctness . " 
 " no , Mr. Phillotson , I be not - altogether ! I hate to be what be 
 call a clever girl - there be too many of that sort now ! " answer 
 Sue sensitively . " I only mean - I do not   know what I mean - except 
 that it be what you do not   understand ! " 
 " I know your meaning , " say Jude ardently   although he do not . 
 " and I think you be quite right . " 
 " that be a good Jude - I know you believe in I ! " she impulsively 
 seize his hand , and leave a reproachful look on the schoolmaster 
 turn away to Jude , her voice reveal a tremor which she herself 
 feel to be absurdly uncalled for by sarcasm so gentle . she have not 
 the least conception how the heart of the twain go out to she at 
 this momentary revelation of feeling , and what a complication she be 
 build up thereby in the future of both . 
 the model wear too much of an educational aspect for the child not 
 to tire of it soon , and a little later in the afternoon they be all 
 march back to Lumsdon , Jude return to his work . he watch the 
 juvenile flock in their clean frock and pinafore , file down the 
 street towards the country beside Phillotson and Sue , and a sad , 
 dissatisfied sense of be out of the scheme of the latter ' life 
 have possession of he . Phillotson have invite he to walk out 
 and see they on Friday evening , when there would be no lesson to 
 give to Sue , and Jude have eagerly promise to avail himself of the 
 opportunity . 
 meanwhile the scholar and teacher move homeward , and the next 
 day , on look on the blackboard in Sue 's class , Phillotson be 
 surprised to find upon it , skilfully draw in chalk , a perspective 
 view of Jerusalem , with every building show in its place . 
 " I think you take no interest in the model , and hardly look at 
 it ? " he say . 
 " I hardly do , " say she , " but I remember that much of it . " 
 " it be more than I have remember myself . " 
 her Majesty 's school - inspector be at that time pay 
 ' surprise - visit " in this neighbourhood to test the teaching 
 unaware ; and two day later , in the middle of the morning lesson , 
 the latch of the door be softly lift , and in walk my gentleman , 
 the king of terror - to pupil - teacher . 
 to Mr. Phillotson the surprise be not great ; like the lady in the 
 story he have be play that trick too many time to be unprepared . 
 but Sue 's class be at the further end of the room , and her back be 
 towards the entrance ; the inspector therefore come and stand behind 
 she and watch she teach some half - minute before she become aware 
 of his presence . she turn , and realize that an oft - dread moment 
 have come . the effect upon her timidity be such that she utter a 
 cry of fright . Phillotson , with a strange instinct of solicitude 
 quite beyond his control , be at her side just in time to prevent she 
 fall from faintness . she soon recover herself , and laugh ; 
 but when the inspector have go there be a reaction , and she be 
 so white that Phillotson take she into his room , and give she some 
 brandy to bring she round . she find he hold her hand . 
 " you ought to have tell I , " she gasp petulantly , " that one of the 
 inspector 's surprise - visit be imminent ! oh , what shall I do ! now 
 he will write and tell the manager that I be no good , and I shall be 
 disgrace for ever ! " 
 " he will not   do that , my dear little girl . you be the good teacher 
 ever I have ! " 
 he look so gently at she that she be move , and regret that she 
 have upbraid he . when she be well she go home . 
 Jude in the meantime have be wait impatiently for Friday . on 
 both Wednesday and Thursday he have be so much under the influence 
 of his desire to see she that he walk after dark some distance 
 along the road in the direction of the village , and , on return to 
 his room to read , find himself quite unable to concentrate his mind 
 on the page . on Friday , as soon as he have get himself up as he 
 think Sue would like to see he , and make a hasty tea , he set 
 out , notwithstanding that the evening be wet . the tree overhead 
 deepen the gloom of the hour , and they drip sadly upon he , 
 impress he with foreboding - illogical foreboding ; for though he 
 know that he love she he also know that he could not be more to she 
 than he be . 
 on turn the corner and enter the village the first sight that 
 greet his eye be that of two figure under one umbrella come 
 out of the vicarage gate . he be too far back for they to notice 
 he , but he know in a moment that they be Sue and Phillotson . the 
 latter be hold the umbrella over her head , and they have evidently 
 be pay a visit to the vicar - probably on some business connect 
 with the school work . and as they walk along the wet and deserted 
 lane Jude see Phillotson place his arm round the girl 's waist ; 
 whereupon she gently remove it ; but he replace it ; and she let it 
 remain , look quickly round she with an air of misgiving . she do 
 not look absolutely behind she , and therefore do not see Jude , who 
 sink into the hedge like one strike with a blight . there he remain 
 hide till they have reach Sue 's cottage and she have pass in , 
 Phillotson go on to the school hard by . 
 " oh , he be too old for she - too old ! " cry Jude in all the terrible 
 sickness of hopeless , handicapped love . 
 he could not interfere . be he not Arabella 's ? he be unable to 
 go on far , and retrace his step towards Christminster . every 
 tread of his foot seem to say to he that he must on no account 
 stand in the schoolmaster 's way with Sue . Phillotson be perhaps 
 twenty year her senior , but many a happy marriage have be make 
 in such condition of age . the ironical clinch to his sorrow be 
 give by the thought that the intimacy between his cousin and the 
 schoolmaster have be bring about entirely by himself . 
 VI 
 Jude 's old and embitter aunt lie unwell at Marygreen , and on the 
 follow Sunday he go to see she - a visit which be the result of 
 a victorious struggle against his inclination to turn aside to the 
 village of Lumsdon and obtain a miserable interview with his cousin , 
 in which the word near his heart could not be speak , and the 
 sight which have torture he could not be reveal . 
 his aunt be now unable to leave she bed , and a great part of Jude 's 
 short day be occupy in make arrangement for her comfort . the 
 little bakery business have be sell to a neighbour , and with the 
 proceed of this and her saving she be comfortably supply with 
 necessary and more , a widow of the same village live with she and 
 minister to her want . it be not till the time have nearly come 
 for he to leave that he obtain a quiet talk with she , and his 
 word tend insensibly towards his cousin . 
 " be Sue bear here ? " 
 " she be - in this room . they be live here at that time . what 
 make ' ee ask that ? " 
 " oh - I want to know . " 
 " now you have   be see she ! " say the harsh old woman . " and what 
 do I tell ' ee ? " 
 " well - that I be not to see she . " 
 " have you gossip with she ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " then do not   keep it up . she be bring up by her father to hate her 
 mother 's family ; and she will look with no favour upon a work chap 
 like you - a townish girl as she be become by now . I never care much 
 about she . a pert little thing , that be what she be too often , with 
 her tight - strained nerve . many be the time I have   smack she for her 
 impertinence . why , one day when she be walk into the pond with 
 her shoe and stocking off , and her petticoat pull above her 
 knee , afore I could cry out for shame , she say : ' move on , Aunty ! 
 this be no sight for modest eye ! ' " 
 " she be a little child then . " 
 " she be twelve if a day . " 
 " well - of course . but now she be old she be of a thoughtful , 
 quivering , tender nature , and as sensitive as - " 
 " Jude ! " cry his aunt , spring up in bed . " do not   you be a fool 
 about she ! " 
 " no , no , of course not . " 
 " your marry that woman Arabella be about as bad a thing as a man 
 could possibly do for himself by try hard . but she be go to 
 the other side of the world , and me never trouble you again . and 
 there will be a bad thing if you , tie and bind as you be , should 
 have a fancy for Sue . if your cousin be civil to you , take she 
 civility for what it be worth . but anything more than a relation 's 
 good wish it be stark madness for ' ee to give she . if she be 
 townish and wanton it me bring ' ee to ruin . " 
 " do not   say anything against she , Aunt ! do not , please ! " 
 a relief be afford to he by the entry of the companion and nurse 
 of his aunt , who must have be listen to the conversation , for 
 she begin a commentary on past year , introduce Sue Bridehead as 
 a character in her recollection . she describe what an odd little 
 maid Sue have be when a pupil at the village school across the green 
 opposite , before her father go to London - how , when the vicar 
 arrange reading and recitation , she appear on the platform , the 
 small of they all , " in her little white frock , and shoe , and pink 
 sash " ; how she recite " Excelsior , " " there be a sound of revelry by 
 night , " and " the Raven " ; how during the delivery she would knit she 
 little brow and glare round tragically , and say to the empty air , as 
 if some real creature stand there - 
 " ghastly , grim , and ancient Raven , 
 wander from the Nightly shore , 
 tell I what thy lordly name be 
 on the Night 's plutonian shore ! " 
 " she would bring up the nasty carrion bird that clear , " corroborate the 
 sick woman reluctantly , " as she stand there in her little sash and 
 thing , that you could see un a'most before your very eye . you too , 
 Jude , have the same trick as a child of seem to see thing in the 
 air . " 
 the neighbour tell also of Sue 's accomplishment in other kind : 
 " she be not exactly a tomboy , you know ; but she could do thing that 
 only boy do , as a rule . I have   see she hit in and steer down the 
 long slide on yonder pond , with her little curl blow , one of 
 a file of twenty move along against the sky like shape paint 
 on glass , and up the back slide without stop . all boy except 
 herself ; and then they would cheer she , and then she would say , ' do not   be 
 saucy , boy , ' and suddenly run indoor . they would try to coax she out 
 again . but ' a would not   come . " 
 these retrospective vision of Sue only make Jude the more miserable 
 that he be unable to woo she , and he leave the cottage of his aunt 
 that day with a heavy heart . he would fain have glance into the 
 school to see the room in which Sue 's little figure have so glorify 
 itself ; but he check his desire and go on . 
 it be Sunday evening some villager who have know he during his 
 residence here be stand in a group in their good clothe . Jude 
 be startle by a salute from one of they : 
 " Ye've   get there right enough , then ! " 
 Jude show that he do not understand . 
 " why , to the seat of l'arning - the ' City of Light ' you use to talk 
 to we about as a little boy ! be it all you expect of it ? " 
 " yes ; more ! " cry Jude . 
 " when I be there once for an hour I do not   see much in it for my 
 part ; auld crumble building , half church , half almshouse , and not 
 much go on at that . " 
 " you be wrong , John ; there be more go on than meet the eye of a 
 man walk through the street . it be a unique centre of thought 
 and religion - the intellectual and spiritual granary of this country . 
 all that silence and absence of going - on be the stillness of 
 infinite motion - the sleep of the spinning - top , to borrow the simile 
 of a well - know writer . " 
 " oh , well , it me be all that , or it me not . as I say , I do not   see 
 nothing of it the hour or two I be there ; so I go in and have a pot 
 o ' beer , and a penny loaf , and a ha'porth o ' cheese , and wait till 
 it be time to come along home . you have   j'ine a college by this 
 time , I suppose ? " 
 " ah , no ! " say Jude . " I be almost as far off that as ever . " 
 " how so ? " 
 Jude slap his pocket . 
 " just what we think ! such place be not for such as you - only for 
 they with plenty o ' money . " 
 " there you be wrong , " say Jude , with some bitterness . " they be 
 for such one ! " 
 still , the remark be sufficient to withdraw Jude 's attention from 
 the imaginative world he have lately inhabit , in which an abstract 
 figure , more or less himself , be steep his mind in a sublimation 
 of the art and science , and make his calling and election sure 
 to a seat in the paradise of the learn . he be set regard his 
 prospect in a cold northern light . he have lately feel that he 
 could not quite satisfy himself in his Greek - in the Greek of 
 the dramatist particularly . so fatigued be he sometimes after 
 his day 's work that he could not maintain the critical attention 
 necessary for thorough application . he feel that he want a 
 coach - a friend at his elbow to tell he in a moment what sometimes 
 would occupy he a weary month in extract from unanticipative , 
 clumsy book . 
 it be decidedly necessary to consider fact a little more closely 
 than he have do of late . what be the good , after all , of use 
 up his spare hour in a vague labour call " private study " without 
 give an outlook on practicability ? 
 " I ought to have think of this before , " he say , as he journey 
 back . " it would have be well never to have embark in the 
 scheme at all than to do it without see clearly where I be go , 
 or what I be aim at ... this hover outside the wall of the 
 college , as if expect some arm to be stretch out from they to 
 lift I inside , will not   do ! I must get special information . " 
 the next week accordingly he seek it . what at first seem an 
 opportunity occur one afternoon when he see an elderly gentleman , 
 who have be point out as the head of a particular college , walk 
 in the public path of a parklike enclosure near the spot at which 
 Jude chance to be sit . the gentleman come near , and Jude 
 look anxiously at his face . it seem benign , considerate , yet 
 rather reserved . on second thought Jude feel that he could not 
 go up and address he ; but he be sufficiently influence by the 
 incident to think what a wise thing it would be for he to state his 
 difficulty by letter to some of the good and most judicious of 
 these old master , and obtain their advice . 
 during the next week or two he accordingly place himself in such 
 position about the city as would afford he glimpse of several 
 of the most distinguished among the provost , warden , and other 
 head of house ; and from those he ultimately select five whose 
 physiognomy seem to say to he that they be appreciative and 
 far - see man . to these five he address letter , briefly state 
 his difficulty , and ask their opinion on his stranded situation . 
 when the letter be post Jude mentally begin to criticize 
 they ; he wish they have not be send . " it be just one of those 
 intrusive , vulgar , pushing , application which be so common in these 
 day , " he think . " why could not   I know well than address utter 
 stranger in such a way ? I may be an impostor , an idle scamp , a man 
 with a bad character , for all that they know to the contrary ... 
 perhaps that be what I be ! " 
 nevertheless , he find himself cling to the hope of some reply 
 as to his one last chance of redemption . he wait day after day , 
 say that it be perfectly absurd to expect , yet expect . 
 while he wait he be suddenly stir by news about Phillotson . 
 Phillotson be give up the school near Christminster , for a large 
 one further south , in Mid - Wessex . what this mean ; how it would 
 affect his cousin ; whether , as seem possible , it be a practical 
 move of the schoolmaster 's towards a large income , in view of a 
 provision for two instead of one , he would not allow himself to say . 
 and the tender relation between Phillotson and the young girl of 
 whom Jude be passionately enamour effectually make it repugnant to 
 Jude 's taste to apply to Phillotson for advice on his own scheme . 
 meanwhile the academic dignitary to whom Jude have write 
 vouchsafe no answer , and the young man be thus throw back 
 entirely on himself , as formerly , with the add gloom of a weakened 
 hope . by indirect inquiry he soon perceive clearly what he have 
 long uneasily suspect , that to qualify himself for certain open 
 scholarship and exhibition be the only brilliant course . but to 
 do this a good deal of coaching would be necessary , and much natural 
 ability . it be next to impossible that a man read on his own 
 system , however widely and thoroughly , even over the prolonged period 
 of ten year , should be able to compete with those who have pass 
 their life under train teacher and have work to ordain line . 
 the other course , that of buy himself in , so to speak , seem the 
 only one really open to man like he , the difficulty be simply of 
 a material kind . with the help of his information he begin to reckon 
 the extent of this material obstacle , and ascertain , to his dismay , 
 that , at the rate at which , with the good of fortune , he would be 
 able to save money , fifteen year must elapse before he could be in a 
 position to forward testimonial to the head of a college and advance 
 to a matriculation examination . the undertaking be hopeless . 
 he see what a curious and cunning glamour the neighbourhood of the 
 place have exercise over he . to get there and live there , to move 
 among the church and hall and become imbued with the genius 
 loci , have seem to his dream youth , as the spot shape its 
 charm to he from its halo on the horizon , the obvious and ideal 
 thing to do . " let I only get there , " he have say with the 
 fatuousness of Crusoe over his big boat , " and the rest be but a 
 matter of time and energy . " it would have be far well for he in 
 every way if he have never come within sight and sound of the delusive 
 precinct , have go to some busy commercial town with the sole object 
 of make money by his wit , and thence survey his plan in true 
 perspective . well , all that be clear to he amount to this , that 
 the whole scheme have burst up , like an iridescent soap - bubble , under 
 the touch of a reason inquiry . he look back at himself along the 
 vista of his past year , and his thought be akin to Heine 's : 
 above the youth 's inspire and flash eye 
 I see the motley mock fool's - cap rise ! 
 fortunately he have not be allow to bring his disappointment into 
 his dear Sue 's life by involve she in this collapse . and the 
 painful detail of his awakening to a sense of his limitation should 
 now be spar she as far as possible . after all , she have only know 
 a little part of the miserable struggle in which he have be engage 
 thus unequipped , poor , and unforeseee . 
 he always remember the appearance of the afternoon on which he 
 awake from his dream . not quite know what to do with himself , he 
 go up to an octagonal chamber in the lantern of a singularly build 
 theatre that be set amidst this quaint and singular city . it have 
 window all round , from which an outlook over the whole town and 
 its edifice could be gain . Jude 's eye sweep all the view in 
 succession , meditatively , mournfully , yet sturdily . those building 
 and their association and privilege be not for he . from the 
 loom roof of the great library , into which he hardly ever have time 
 to enter , his gaze travel on to the varied spire , hall , gable , 
 street , chapel , garden , quadrangle , which compose the ensemble 
 of this unrivalled panorama . he see that his destiny lie not with 
 these , but among the manual toiler in the shabby purlieu which he 
 himself occupy , unrecognize as part of the city at all by its 
 visitor and panegyrist , yet without whose denizen the hard reader 
 could not read nor the high thinker live . 
 he look over the town into the country beyond , to the tree which 
 screen she whose presence have at first be the support of his 
 heart , and whose loss be now a madden torture . but for this blow 
 he might have bear with his fate . with Sue as companion he could 
 have renounce his ambition with a smile . without she it be 
 inevitable that the reaction from the long strain to which he have 
 subject himself should affect he disastrously . Phillotson have 
 no doubt pass through a similar intellectual disappointment to 
 that which now envelop he . but the schoolmaster have be since 
 blest with the consolation of sweet Sue , while for he there be no 
 consoler . 
 descend to the street , he go listlessly along till he arrive 
 at an inn , and enter it . here he drink several glass of beer in 
 rapid succession , and when he come out it be night . by the light of 
 the flicker lamp he ramble home to supper , and have not long be 
 sit at table when his landlady bring up a letter that have just 
 arrive for he . she lay it down as if impress with a sense of 
 its possible importance , and on look at it Jude perceive that it 
 bear the embossed stamp of one of the college whose head he have 
 address . " one - at last ! " cry Jude . 
 the communication be brief , and not exactly what he have expect ; 
 though it really be from the master in person . it run thus : 
 BIBLIOLL COLLEGE . 
 SIR , - I have read your letter with interest ; and , judge 
 from your description of yourself as a working - man , I 
 venture to think that you will have a much well chance 
 of success in life by remain in your own sphere and 
 stick to your trade than by adopt any other course . 
 that , therefore , be what I advise you to do . your 
 faithfully , 
 T. TETUPHENAY . 
 to Mr. J. FAWLEY , Stone - mason . 
 this terribly sensible advice exasperate Jude . he have know all 
 that before . he know it be true . yet it seem a hard slap after 
 ten year of labour , and its effect upon he just now be to make he 
 rise recklessly from the table , and , instead of read as usual , to 
 go downstairs and into the street . he stand at a bar and toss off 
 two or three glass , then unconsciously saunter along till he 
 come to a spot call the Fourways in the middle of the city , gaze 
 abstractedly at the group of people like one in a trance , till , 
 come to himself , he begin talk to the policeman fix there . 
 that officer yawn , stretch out his elbow , elevate himself 
 an inch and a half on the ball of his toe , smile , and look 
 humorously at Jude , say , " you have   have a wet , young man . " 
 " no ; I have   only begin , " he reply cynically . 
 whatever his wetness , his brain be dry enough . he only hear in 
 part the policeman 's further remark , have fall into thought on 
 what struggle people like himself have stand at that crossway , whom 
 nobody ever think of now . it have more history than the old 
 college in the city . it be literally teem , stratify , with the 
 shade of human group , who have meet there for tragedy , comedy , farce ; 
 real enactment of the intense kind . at fourway man have stand 
 and talk of Napoleon , the loss of America , the execution of King 
 Charles , the burning of the Martyrs , the Crusades , the Norman 
 Conquest , possibly of the arrival of Caesar . here the two sex have 
 meet for love , hating , coupling , parting ; have wait , have suffer , 
 for each other ; have triumph over each other ; curse each other in 
 jealousy , bless each other in forgiveness . 
 he begin to see that the town life be a book of humanity infinitely 
 more palpitating , varied , and compendious than the gown life . 
 these struggle man and woman before he be the reality of 
 Christminster , though they know little of Christ or Minster . 
 that be one of the humour of thing . the float population 
 of student and teacher , who do know both in a way , be not 
 Christminster in a local sense at all . 
 he look at his watch , and , in pursuit of this idea , he go on till 
 he come to a public hall , where a promenade concert be in progress . 
 Jude enter , and find the room full of shop youth and girl , 
 soldier , apprentice , boy of eleven smoke cigarette , and light 
 woman of the more respectable and amateur class . he have tap the 
 real Christminster life . a band be play , and the crowd walk 
 about and jostle each other , and every now and then a man get upon 
 a platform and sing a comic song . 
 the spirit of Sue seem to hover round he and prevent his flirting 
 and drink with the frolicsome girl who make advance - wistful 
 to gain a little joy . at ten o'clock he come away , choose a 
 circuitous route homeward to pass the gate of the college whose head 
 have just send he the note . 
 the gate be shut , and , by an impulse , he take from his pocket the 
 lump of chalk which as a workman he usually carry there , and write 
 along the wall : 
 " I have understanding as well as you ; I be not inferior to you : 
 yea , who knoweth not such thing as these ? " - Job xii . 3 . 
 VII 
 the stroke of scorn relieve his mind , and the next morning he 
 laugh at his self - conceit . but the laugh be not a healthy one . 
 he re - read the letter from the master , and the wisdom in its line , 
 which have at first exasperate he , chill and depress he now . 
 he see himself as a fool indeed . 
 deprive of the object of both intellect and emotion , he could not 
 proceed to his work . whenever he feel reconcile to his fate as a 
 student , there come to disturb his calm his hopeless relation with 
 Sue . that the one affined soul he have ever meet be lose to he 
 through his marriage return upon he with cruel persistency , till , 
 unable to bear it long , he again rush for distraction to the 
 real Christminster life . he now seek it out in an obscure and 
 low - ceile tavern up a court which be well known to certain worthy 
 of the place , and in bright time would have interest he simply 
 by its quaintness . here he sit more or less all the day , convince 
 that he be at bottom a vicious character , of whom it be hopeless to 
 expect anything . 
 in the evening the frequenter of the house drop in one by one , 
 Jude still retain his seat in the corner , though his money be all 
 spend , and he have not eat anything the whole day except a biscuit . 
 he survey his gathering companion with all the equanimity 
 and philosophy of a man who have be drink long and slowly , 
 and make friend with several : to wit , Tinker Taylor , a decayed 
 church - ironmonger who appear to have be of a religious turn in 
 early year , but be somewhat blasphemous now ; also a red - nosed 
 auctioneer ; also two Gothic mason like himself , call Uncle Jim and 
 Uncle Joe . there be present , too , some clerk , and a gown- and 
 surplice - maker 's assistant ; two lady who sport moral character 
 of various depth of shade , accord to their company , nickname 
 " bower o ' Bliss " and " freckle " ; some horsey man " in the know " 
 of bet circle ; a travel actor from the theatre , and two 
 devil - may - care young man who prove to be gownless undergraduate ; 
 they have slip in by stealth to meet a man about bull - pup , 
 and stay to drink and smoke short pipe with the race gent 
 aforesaid , look at their watch every now and then . 
 the conversation wax general . christminster society be 
 criticize , the don , magistrate , and other people in authority 
 be sincerely pity for their shortcoming , while opinion on how 
 they ought to conduct themselves and their affair to be properly 
 respect , be exchange in a large - minded and disinterested manner . 
 Jude Fawley , with the self - conceit , effrontery , and aplomb of 
 a strong - brain fellow in liquor , throw in his remark somewhat 
 peremptorily ; and his aim have be what they be for so many 
 year , everything the other say turn upon his tongue , by a sort 
 of mechanical craze , to the subject of scholarship and study , the 
 extent of his own learning be dwell upon with an insistence that 
 would have appear pitiable to himself in his sane hour . 
 " I do not   care a damn , " he be say , " for any provost , warden , 
 principal , fellow , or cursed master of art in the university ! what 
 I know be that I would lick them on their own ground if they would give I a 
 chance , and show them a few thing they be not up to yet ! " 
 " hear , hear ! " say the undergraduate from the corner , where they 
 be talk privately about the pup . 
 " you always be fond o ' book , I have   hear , " say Tinker Taylor , " and 
 I do not   doubt what you state . now with I ' twa different . I always 
 see there be more to be learn outside a book than in ; and I take my 
 step accordingly , or I should not   have be the man I be . " 
 " you aim at the Church , I believe ? " say Uncle Joe . " if you be such 
 a scholar as to pitch yer hope so high as that , why not give we a 
 speciman of your scholarship ? Canst say the Creed in Latin , man ? 
 that be how they once put it to a chap down in my country . " 
 " I should think so ! " say Jude haughtily . 
 " not he ! like his conceit ! " scream one of the lady . 
 " just you shut up , Bower o ' Bliss ! " say one of the undergraduate . 
 " Silence ! " he drink off the spirit in his tumbler , rap with it 
 on the counter , and announce , " the gentleman in the corner be go 
 to rehearse the Articles of his Belief , in the Latin tongue , for the 
 edification of the company . " 
 " I will not ! " say Jude . 
 " yes - have a try ! " say the surplice - maker . 
 " you can not ! " say Uncle Joe . 
 " yes , he can ! " say Tinker Taylor . 
 " I will swear I can ! " say Jude . " well , come now , stand I a small 
 Scotch cold , and I will do it straight off . " 
 " that be a fair offer , " say the undergraduate , throw down the 
 money for the whisky . 
 the barmaid concoct the mixture with the bearing of a person 
 compel to live amongst animal of an inferior specie , and the 
 glass be hand across to Jude , who , have drink the content , 
 stand up and begin rhetorically , without hesitation : 
 " Credo in unum Deum , Patrem omnipotentem , Factorem coeli et terrae , 
 visibilium omnium et invisibilium . " 
 " good ! Excellent Latin ! " cry one of the undergraduate , who , 
 however , have not the slight conception of a single word . 
 a silence reign among the rest in the bar , and the maid stand 
 still , Jude 's voice echo sonorously into the inner parlour , where 
 the landlord be doze , and bring he out to see what be go 
 on . Jude have declaim steadily ahead , and be continue : 
 " Crucifixus etiam pro nobis : sub Pontio Pilato passus , et sepultus 
 est . et resurrexit tertia die , secundum Scripturas . " 
 " that be the Nicene , " sneer the second undergraduate . " and we 
 want the apostle ' ! " 
 " you do not   say so ! and every fool know , except you , that the 
 Nicene be the most historic creed ! " 
 " let un go on , let un go on ! " say the auctioneer . 
 but Jude 's mind seem to grow confused soon , and he could not get 
 on . he put his hand to his forehead , and his face assume an 
 expression of pain . 
 " give he another glass - then he will fetch up and get through it , " 
 say Tinker Taylor . 
 somebody throw down threepence , the glass be hand , Jude stretch 
 out his arm for it without look , and have swallow the liquor , 
 go on in a moment in a revive voice , raise it as he near the 
 end with the manner of a priest lead a congregation : 
 " et in Spiritum Sanctum , Dominum et vivificantem , qui ex Patre 
 filioque procedit . Qui cum Patre et Filio simul adoratur et 
 conglorificatur . Qui locutus est per propheta . 
 " et unam Catholicam et Apostolicam Ecclesiam . Confiteor unum 
 Baptisma in remissionem peccatorum . et exspecto Resurrectionem 
 mortuorum . et vitam venturi saeculi . amen . " 
 " well do ! " say several , enjoy the last word , as be the first 
 and only one they have recognize . 
 then Jude seem to shake the fume from his brain , as he star 
 round upon they . 
 " you pack of fool ! " he cry . " which one of you know whether I 
 have say it or no ? it might have be the Ratcatcher 's daughter 
 in double Dutch for all that your besotte head can tell ! see what 
 I have bring myself to - the crew I have come among ! " 
 the landlord , who have already have his license endorse for harbouring 
 queer character , fear a riot , and come outside the counter ; but 
 Jude , in his sudden flash of reason , have turn in disgust and leave 
 the scene , the door slam with a dull thud behind he . 
 he hasten down the lane and round into the straight broad street , 
 which he follow till it merge in the highway , and all sound of his 
 late companion have be leave behind . onward he still go , under 
 the influence of a childlike yearn for the one be in the world 
 to whom it seem possible to fly - an unreasone desire , whose ill 
 judgement be not apparent to he now . in the course of an hour , 
 when it be between ten and eleven o'clock , he enter the village of 
 Lumsdon , and reach the cottage , see that a light be burn in 
 a downstairs room , which he assume , rightly as it happen , to be 
 her . 
 Jude step close to the wall , and tap with his finger on the 
 pane , say impatiently , " Sue , Sue ! " 
 she must have recognize his voice , for the light disappear from 
 the apartment , and in a second or two the door be unlocked and 
 open , and Sue appear with a candle in her hand . 
 " be it Jude ? yes , it be ! my dear , dear cousin , what be the matter ? " 
 " oh , I be - I could not   help come , Sue ! " say he , sink down upon 
 the doorstep . " I be so wicked , Sue - my heart be nearly break , 
 and I could not bear my life as it be ! so I have be drink , 
 and blaspheming , or next door to it , and say holy thing in 
 disreputable quarter - repeat in idle bravado word which ought 
 never to be utter but reverently ! oh , do anything with I , 
 Sue - kill I - I do not   care ! only do not   hate I and despise I like 
 all the rest of the world ! " 
 " you be ill , poor dear ! no , I will not   despise you ; of course I will not ! 
 come in and rest , and let I see what I can do for you . now lean on 
 I , and do not   mind . " with one hand hold the candle and the other 
 support he , she lead he indoor , and place he in the only easy 
 chair the meagrely furnish house afford , stretch his foot upon 
 another , and pull off his boot . Jude , now get towards his 
 sober sens , could only say , " dear , dear Sue ! " in a voice break by 
 grief and contrition . 
 she ask he if he want anything to eat , but he shake his head . 
 then tell he to go to sleep , and that she would come down early 
 in the morning and get he some breakfast , she bid he good - night 
 and ascend the stair . 
 almost immediately he fall into a heavy slumber , and do not wake 
 till dawn . at first he do not know where he be , but by degree his 
 situation clear to he , and he behold it in all the ghastliness 
 of a right mind . she know the bad of he - the very bad . how 
 could he face she now ? she would soon be come down to see about 
 breakfast , as she have say , and there would he be in all his shame 
 confront she . he could not bear the thought , and softly draw 
 on his boot , and take his hat from the nail on which she have hang 
 it , he slip noiselessly out of the house . 
 his fix idea be to get away to some obscure spot and hide , and 
 perhaps pray ; and the only spot which occur to he be Marygreen . 
 he call at his lodging in Christminster , where he find await 
 he a note of dismissal from his employer ; and have pack up he 
 turn his back upon the city that have be such a thorn in his 
 side , and strike southward into Wessex . he have no money leave in 
 his pocket , his small saving , deposit at one of the bank in 
 Christminster , have fortunately be leave untouched . to get to 
 Marygreen , therefore , his only course be walk ; and the distance 
 be nearly twenty mile , he have ample time to complete on the way 
 the sobering process begin in he . 
 at some hour of the evening he reach Alfredston . here he pawn 
 his waistcoat , and have go out of the town a mile or two , sleep 
 under a rick that night . at dawn he rise , shake off the hayseed and 
 stem from his clothe , and start again , breast the long white 
 road up the hill to the down , which have be visible to he a long 
 way off , and pass the milestone at the top , whereon he have carve 
 his hope year ago . 
 he reach the ancient hamlet while the people be at breakfast . 
 weary and mud - bespatter , but quite possess of his ordinary 
 clearness of brain , he sit down by the well , think as he do so 
 what a poor Christ he make . see a trough of water near he bath 
 his face , and go on to the cottage of his great - aunt , whom he find 
 breakfasting in bed , attend by the woman who live with she . 
 " what - out o ' work ? " ask his relative , regard he through eye 
 sink deep , under lid heavy as pot - cover , no other cause for his 
 tumbled appearance suggest itself to one whose whole life have be 
 a struggle with material thing . 
 " yes , " say Jude heavily . " I think I must have a little rest . " 
 refresh by some breakfast , he go up to his old room and lie down 
 in his shirt - sleeve , after the manner of the artizan . he fall 
 asleep for a short while , and when he awake it be as if he have 
 awaken in hell . it be hell - " the hell of conscious failure , " both 
 in ambition and in love . he think of that previous abyss into 
 which he have fall before leave this part of the country ; the 
 deep deep he have suppose it then ; but it be not so deep as this . 
 that have be the breaking in of the outer bulwark of his hope : 
 this be of his second line . 
 if he have be a woman he must have scream under the nervous 
 tension which he be now undergo . but that relief be deny to 
 his virility , he clench his tooth in misery , bring line about 
 his mouth like those in the Laocoon , and corrugation between his 
 brow . 
 a mournful wind blow through the tree , and sound in the chimney 
 like the pedal note of an organ . each ivy leaf overgrow the wall 
 of the churchless church - yard hard by , now abandon , peck its 
 neighbour smartly , and the vane on the new victorian - Gothic church in 
 the new spot have already begin to creak . yet apparently it be not 
 always the outdoor wind that make the deep murmur ; it be a voice . 
 he guess its origin in a moment or two ; the curate be pray with 
 his aunt in the adjoining room . he remember she speak of he . 
 presently the sound cease , and a step seem to cross the landing . 
 Jude sit up , and shout " Hoi ! " 
 the step make for his door , which be open , and a man look in . 
 it be a young clergyman . 
 " I think you be Mr. Highridge , " say Jude . " my aunt have mention 
 you more than once . well , here I be , just come home ; a fellow go 
 to the bad ; though I have the good intention in the world at one 
 time . now I be melancholy mad , what with drinking and one thing and 
 another . " 
 slowly Jude unfold to the curate his late plan and movement , by 
 an unconscious bias dwell less upon the intellectual and ambitious 
 side of his dream , and more upon the theological , though this have , up 
 till now , be merely a portion of the general plan of advancement . 
 " now I know I have be a fool , and that folly be with I , " add 
 Jude in conclusion . " and I do not   regret the collapse of my 
 university hop one jot . I would not   begin again if I be sure to 
 succeed . I do not   care for social success any more at all . but I do 
 feel I should like to do some good thing ; and I bitterly regret the 
 Church , and the loss of my chance of be her ordain minister . " 
 the curate , who be a new man to this neighbourhood , have grow deeply 
 interested , and at last he say : " if you feel a real call to the 
 ministry , and I will not   say from your conversation that you do not , 
 for it be that of a thoughtful and educated man , you might enter the 
 Church as a licentiate . only you must make up your mind to avoid 
 strong drink . " 
 " I could avoid that easily enough , if I have any kind of hope to 
 support I ! " 
 Part Third 
 AT MELCHESTER 
 " for there be no other girl , o bridegroom , 
 like she ! " - SAPPHO   H. T. Wharton . 
 I 
 it be a new idea - the ecclesiastical and altruistic life as distinct 
 from the intellectual and emulative life . a man could preach and 
 do good to his fellow - creature without take double - first in the 
 school of Christminster , or have anything but ordinary knowledge . 
 the old fancy which have lead on to the culminate vision of the 
 bishopric have not be an ethical or theological enthusiasm at all , 
 but a mundane ambition masquerade in a surplice . he fear that 
 his whole scheme have degenerate to , even though it might not have 
 originate in , a social unrest which have no foundation in the nobler 
 instinct ; which be purely an artificial product of civilization . 
 there be thousand of young man on the same self - seek track 
 at the present moment . the sensual hind who eat , drank , and live 
 carelessly with his wife through the day of his vanity be a more 
 likable be than he . 
 but to enter the Church in such an unscholarly way that he could not 
 in any probability rise to a high grade through all his career than 
 that of the humble curate wear his life out in an obscure village 
 or city slum - that might have a touch of goodness and greatness in 
 it ; that might be true religion , and a purgatorial course worthy of 
 be follow by a remorseful man . 
 the favourable light in which this new thought show itself by 
 contrast with his foregone intention cheer Jude , as he sit there , 
 shabby and lonely ; and it may be say to have give , during the next 
 few day , the coup de grace to his intellectual career - a career 
 which have extend over the great part of a dozen year . he do 
 nothing , however , for some long stagnant time to advance his new 
 desire , occupy himself with little local job in put up and 
 lettering headstone about the neighbouring village , and submit 
 to be regard as a social failure , a return purchase , by the 
 half - dozen or so of farmer and other country - people who condescend 
 to nod to he . 
 the human interest of the new intention - and a human interest be 
 indispensable to the most spiritual and self - sacrifice - be create 
 by a letter from Sue , bear a fresh postmark . she evidently 
 write with anxiety , and tell very little about her own doing , more 
 than that she have pass some sort of examination for a Queen 's 
 scholarship , and be go to enter a training college at Melchester 
 to complete herself for the vocation she have choose , partly by his 
 influence . there be a theological college at Melchester ; Melchester 
 be a quiet and soothing place , almost entirely ecclesiastical in its 
 tone ; a spot where worldly learn and intellectual smartness have no 
 establishment ; where the altruistic feeling that he do possess would 
 perhaps be more highly estimate than a brilliancy which he do not . 
 as it would be necessary that he should continue for a time to work 
 at his trade while read up divinity , which he have neglect at 
 Christminster for the ordinary classical grind , what well course 
 for he than to get employment at the further city , and pursue this 
 plan of reading ? that his excessive human interest in the new place 
 be entirely of Sue 's making , while at the same time Sue be to be 
 regard even less than formerly as proper to create it , have an 
 ethical contradictoriness to which he be not blind . but that much 
 he concede to human frailty , and hop to learn to love she only as 
 a friend and kinswoman . 
 he consider that he might so mark out his come year as to begin 
 his ministry at the age of thirty - an age which much attract he as 
 be that of his exemplar when he first begin to teach in Galilee . 
 this would allow he plenty of time for deliberate study , and for 
 acquire capital by his trade to help his aftercourse of keep the 
 necessary term at a theological college . 
 Christmas have come and pass , and Sue have go to the Melchester 
 Normal School . the time be just the bad in the year for Jude to 
 get into new employment , and he have write suggest to she that 
 he should postpone his arrival for a month or so , till the day have 
 lengthen . she have acquiesce so readily that he wish he have not 
 propose it - she evidently do not much care about he , though she 
 have never once reproach he for his strange conduct in come to 
 she that night , and his silent disappearance . neither have she ever 
 say a word about her relation with Mr. Phillotson . 
 suddenly , however , quite a passionate letter arrive from Sue . 
 she be quite lonely and miserable , she tell he . she hat the 
 place she be in ; it be bad than the ecclesiastical designer 's ; 
 bad than anywhere . she feel utterly friendless ; could he come 
 immediately ? - though when he do come she would only be able to 
 see he at limited time , the rule of the establishment she find 
 herself in be strict to a degree . it be Mr. Phillotson who have 
 advise she to come there , and she wish she have never listen to 
 he . 
 Phillotson 's suit be not exactly prosper , evidently ; and Jude 
 feel unreasonably glad . he pack up his thing and go to 
 Melchester with a light heart than he have know for month . 
 this be the turning over a new leaf he duly look about for 
 a temperance hotel , and find a little establishment of that 
 description in the street lead from the station . when he have 
 have something to eat he walk out into the dull winter light over 
 the town bridge , and turn the corner towards the Close . the 
 day be foggy , and stand under the wall of the most graceful 
 architectural pile in England he pause and look up . the lofty 
 building be visible as far as the roofridge ; above , the dwindle 
 spire rise more and more remotely , till its apex be quite lose in 
 the mist drift across it . 
 the lamp now begin to be light , and turn to the west front 
 he walk round . he take it as a good omen that numerous block 
 of stone be lie about , which signify that the cathedral be 
 undergo restoration or repair to a considerable extent . it seem 
 to he , full of the superstition of his belief , that this be an 
 exercise of forethought on the part of a rule power , that he might 
 find plenty to do in the art he practise while wait for a call to 
 high labour . 
 then a wave of warmth come over he as he think how near he now 
 stand to the bright - eyed vivacious girl with the broad forehead 
 and pile of dark hair above it ; the girl with the kindling glance , 
 daringly soft at time - something like that of the girl he have 
 see in engraving from painting of the spanish school . she be 
 here - actually in this close - in one of the house confront this 
 very west facade . 
 he go down the broad gravel path towards the building . it be 
 an ancient edifice of the fifteenth century , once a palace , now 
 a training - school , with mullione and transome window , and a 
 courtyard in front shut in from the road by a wall . Jude open the 
 gate and go up to the door through which , on inquire for his 
 cousin , he be gingerly admit to a waiting - room , and in a few 
 minute she come . 
 though she have be here such a short while , she be not as he have 
 see she last . all her bounding manner be go ; her curve of 
 motion have become subdued line . the screen and subtlety of 
 convention have likewise disappear . yet neither be she quite the 
 woman who have write the letter that summon he . that have plainly 
 be dash off in an impulse which second thought have somewhat 
 regret ; thought that be possibly of his recent self - disgrace . 
 Jude be quite overcome with emotion . 
 " you do not   - think I a demoralize wretch - for come to you as I 
 be - and go so shamefully , Sue ? " 
 " oh , I have try not to ! you say enough to let I know what have 
 cause it . I hope I shall never have any doubt of your worthiness , 
 my poor Jude ! and I be glad you have come ! " 
 she wear a murrey - colour gown with a little lace collar . it be 
 make quite plain , and hang about her slight figure with clinging 
 gracefulness . her hair , which formerly she have wear accord to the 
 custom of the day be now twist up tightly , and she have altogether 
 the air of a woman clip and prune by severe discipline , 
 an under - brightness shin through from the depth which that 
 discipline have not yet be able to reach . 
 she have come forward prettily , but Jude feel that she have hardly 
 expect he to kiss she , as he be burn to do , under other 
 colour than those of cousinship . he could not perceive the least 
 sign that Sue regard he as a lover , or ever would do so , now that 
 she know the bad of he , even if he have the right to behave as one ; 
 and this help on his grow resolve to tell she of his matrimonial 
 entanglement , which he have put off do from time to time in sheer 
 dread of lose the bliss of her company . 
 Sue come out into the town with he , and they walk and talk with 
 tongue centre only on the pass moment . Jude say he would like 
 to buy she a little present of some sort , and then she confess , 
 with something of shame , that she be dreadfully hungry . they be 
 keep on very short allowance in the college , and a dinner , tea , and 
 supper all in one be the present she most desire in the world . 
 Jude thereupon take she to an inn and order whatever the house 
 afford , which be not much . the place , however , give they a 
 delightful opportunity for a tete - a - tete , nobody else be in the 
 room , and they talk freely . 
 she tell he about the school as it be at that date , and the rough 
 living , and the mixed character of her fellow - student , gather 
 together from all part of the diocese , and how she have to get up and 
 work by gas - light in the early morning , with all the bitterness of 
 a young person to whom restraint be new . to all this he listen ; 
 but it be not what he want especially to know - her relation with 
 Phillotson . that be what she do not tell . when they have sit and 
 eat , Jude impulsively place his hand upon her ; she look up 
 and smile , and take his quite freely into her own little soft one , 
 divide his finger and coolly examine they , as if they be the 
 finger of a glove she be purchase . 
 " your hand be rather rough , Jude , be not   they ? " she say . 
 " yes . so would yours be if they hold a mallet and chisel all day . " 
 " I do not   dislike it , you know . I think it be noble to see a man 's 
 hand subdue to what he work in ... well , I be rather glad I come 
 to this training - school , after all . see how independent I shall be 
 after the two year ' training ! I shall pass pretty high , I expect , 
 and Mr. Phillotson will use his influence to get I a big school . " 
 she have touch the subject at last . " I have a suspicion , a fear , " 
 say Jude , " that he - care about you rather warmly , and perhaps 
 want to marry you . " 
 " now do not   be such a silly boy ! " 
 " he have say something about it , I expect . " 
 " if he have , what would it matter ? an old man like he ! " 
 " oh , come , Sue ; he be not so very old . and I know what I see he 
 do - " 
 " not kiss I - that I be certain ! " 
 " no . but put his arm round your waist . " 
 " ah - I remember . but I do not   know he be go to . " 
 " you be wriggle out if it , Sue , and it be not   quite kind ! " 
 her ever - sensitive lip begin to quiver , and her eye to blink , at 
 something this reproof be decide she to say . 
 " I know you will be angry if I tell you everything , and that be why I 
 do not   want to ! " 
 " very well , then , dear , " he say soothingly . " I have no real right 
 to ask you , and I do not   wish to know . " 
 " I shall tell you ! " say she , with the perverseness that be 
 part of she . " this be what I have do : I have promise - I 
 have promise - that I will marry he when I come out of the 
 training - school two year hence , and have get my certificate ; his 
 plan be that we shall then take a large double school in a great 
 town - he the boy ' and I the girl ' - as married school - teacher often 
 do , and make a good income between we . " 
 " oh , Sue ! ... but of course it be right - you could not   have do 
 well ! " 
 he glance at she and their eye meet , the reproach in his own belying 
 his word . then he draw his hand quite away from her , and turn 
 his face in estrangement from she to the window . Sue regard he 
 passively without move . 
 " I know you would be angry ! " she say with an air of no emotion 
 whatever . " very well - I be wrong , I suppose ! I ought not to have 
 let you come to see I ! we have well not meet again ; and we will only 
 correspond at long interval , on purely business matter ! " 
 this be just the one thing he would not be able to bear , as she 
 probably know , and it bring he round at once . " oh yes , we will , " 
 he say quickly . " your being engage can make no difference to I 
 whatever . I have a perfect right to see you when I want to ; and I 
 shall ! " 
 " then do not   let we talk of it any more . it be quite spoil our 
 evening together . what do it matter about what one be go to do 
 two year hence ! " 
 she be something of a riddle to he , and he let the subject drift 
 away . " shall we go and sit in the cathedral ? " he ask , when their 
 meal be finish . 
 " Cathedral ? yes . though I think I would rather sit in the railway 
 station , " she answer , a remnant of vexation still in her voice . 
 " that be the centre of the town life now . the cathedral have have its 
 day ! " 
 " how modern you be ! " 
 " so would you be if you have live so much in the Middle Ages as I 
 have do these last few year ! the cathedral be a very good place 
 four or five century ago ; but it be play out now ... I be not 
 modern , either . I be more ancient than mediaevalism , if you only 
 know . " 
 Jude look distressed . 
 " there - I will not   say any more of that ! " she cry . " only you do not 
 know how bad I be , from your point of view , or you would not   think so 
 much of I , or care whether I be engage or not . now there be just 
 time for we to walk round the close , then I must go in , or I shall be 
 lock out for the night . " 
 he take she to the gate and they part . Jude have a conviction that 
 his unhappy visit to she on that sad night have precipitate this 
 marriage engagement , and it do anything but add to his happiness . 
 her reproach have take that shape , then , and not the shape of word . 
 however , next day he set about seek employment , which it be not 
 so easy to get as at Christminster , there be , as a rule , less 
 stone - cutting in progress in this quiet city , and hand be mostly 
 permanent . but he edge himself in by degree . his first work be 
 some carving at the cemetery on the hill ; and ultimately he become 
 engage on the labour he most desire - the cathedral repair , which 
 be very extensive , the whole interior stonework have be 
 overhaul , to be largely replace by new . it might be a labour of 
 year to get it all do , and he have confidence enough in his own 
 skill with the mallet and chisel to feel that it would be a matter of 
 choice with himself how long he would stay . 
 the lodging he take near the Close Gate would not have disgrace a 
 curate , the rent represent a high percentage on his wage than 
 mechanic of any sort usually care to pay . his combined bed and 
 sit - room be furnish with frame photograph of the rectory 
 and deanery at which his landlady have live as trust servant in 
 her time , and the parlour downstairs bear a clock on the mantelpiece 
 inscribe to the effect that it be present to the same 
 serious - minded woman by her fellow - servant on the occasion of her 
 marriage . Jude add to the furniture of his room by unpack 
 photograph of the ecclesiastical carving and monument that he 
 have execute with his own hand ; and he be deem a satisfactory 
 acquisition as tenant of the vacant apartment . 
 he find an ample supply of theological book in the city book - shop , 
 and with these his study be recommence in a different spirit and 
 direction from his former course . as a relaxation from the Fathers , 
 and such stock work as Paley and Butler , he read Newman , Pusey , and 
 many other modern light . he hire a harmonium , set it up in his 
 lodging , and practise chant thereon , single and double . 
 II 
 " to - morrow be our grand day , you know . where shall we go ? " 
 " I have leave from three till nine . wherever we can get to and come 
 back from in that time . not ruin , Jude - I do not   care for they . " 
 " well - Wardour Castle . and then we can do Fonthill if we like - all 
 in the same afternoon . " 
 " wardour be Gothic ruin - and I hate Gothic ! " 
 " no . quite otherwise . it be a classic building - Corinthian , I 
 think ; with a lot of picture . " 
 " ah - that will do . I like the sound of Corinthian . we will go . " 
 their conversation have run thus some few week later , and next 
 morning they prepare to start . every detail of the outing be 
 a facet reflect a sparkle to Jude , and he do not venture to 
 meditate on the life of inconsistency he be lead . his Sue 's 
 conduct be one lovely conundrum to he ; he could say no more . 
 there duly come the charm of call at the college door for she ; her 
 emergence in a nunlike simplicity of costume that be rather enforce 
 than desire ; the traipsing along to the station , the porter ' 
 " b'your leave ! , " the screaming of the train - everything form the 
 basis of a beautiful crystallization . nobody star at Sue , because 
 she be so plainly dress , which comfort Jude in the thought that 
 only himself know the charm those habiliment subdue . a matter 
 of ten pound spend in a drapery - shop , which have no connection 
 with her real life or her real self , would have set all Melchester 
 star . the guard of the train think they be lover , and put 
 they into a compartment all by themselves . 
 " that be a good intention waste ! " say she . 
 Jude do not respond . he think the remark unnecessarily cruel , 
 and partly untrue . 
 they reach the park and castle and wander through the 
 picture - gallery , Jude stop by preference in front of the 
 devotional picture by Del Sarto , Guido Reni , Spagnoletto , 
 Sassoferrato , Carlo Dolci , and other . Sue pause patiently beside 
 he , and steal critical look into his face as , regard the 
 Virgins , Holy Families , and saint , it grow reverent and abstract . 
 when she have thoroughly estimate he at this , she would move on and 
 wait for he before a Lely or Reynolds . it be evident that her 
 cousin deeply interested she , as one might be interested in a man 
 puzzle out his way along a labyrinth from which one have one 's self 
 escape . 
 when they come out a long time still remain to they and Jude 
 propose that as soon as they have have something to eat they should 
 walk across the high country to the north of their present position , 
 and intercept the train of another railway lead back to 
 Melchester , at a station about seven mile off . Sue , who be 
 incline for any adventure that would intensify the sense of she 
 day 's freedom , readily agree ; and away they go , leave the 
 adjoining station behind they . 
 it be indeed open country , wide and high . they talk and bound 
 on , Jude cut from a little covert a long walking - stick for Sue 
 as tall as herself , with a great crook , which make she look like a 
 shepherdess . about half - way on their journey they cross a main 
 road run due east and west - the old road from London to Land 's 
 end . they pause , and look up and down it for a moment , and 
 remark upon the desolation which have come over this once lively 
 thoroughfare , while the wind dip to earth and scoop straw and 
 hay - stem from the ground . 
 they cross the road and pass on , but during the next half - mile 
 Sue seem to grow tired , and Jude begin to be distressed for she . 
 they have walk a good distance altogether , and if they could not 
 reach the other station it would be rather awkward . for a long 
 time there be no cottage visible on the wide expanse of down and 
 turnip - land ; but presently they come to a sheepfold , and next to the 
 shepherd , pitch hurdle . he tell they that the only house near 
 be his mother 's and his , point to a little dip ahead from which a 
 faint blue smoke arise , and recommend they to go on and rest there . 
 this they do , and enter the house , admit by an old woman 
 without a single tooth , to whom they be as civil as stranger can 
 be when their only chance of rest and shelter lie in the favour of 
 the householder . 
 " a nice little cottage , " say Jude . 
 " oh , I do not   know about the niceness . I shall have to thatch it 
 soon , and where the thatch be to come from I can not   tell , for straw do 
 get that dear , that ' twill soon be cheap to cover your house wi ' 
 chainey plate than thatch . " 
 they sit rest , and the shepherd come in . " do not   ' ee mind I , " he 
 say with a deprecate wave of the hand ; " bide here as long as ye 
 will . but mid you be think o ' get back to Melchester to - night 
 by train ? because you will never do it in this world , since you do not 
 know the lie of the country . I do not   mind go with ye some o ' the 
 way , but even then the train mid be go . " 
 they start up . 
 " you can bide here , you know , over the night - can not   them , Mother ? 
 the place be welcome to ye . ' tis hard lying , rather , but volk may do 
 bad . " he turn to Jude and ask privately : " be you a married 
 couple ? " 
 " Hsh - no ! " say Jude . 
 " oh - I mean nothing ba'dy - not I ! well then , she can go into 
 Mother 's room , and you and I can lie in the outer chimmer after 
 they have   go through . I can call ye soon enough to catch the first 
 train back . you have   lose this one now . " 
 on consideration they decide to close with this offer , and draw up 
 and share with the shepherd and his mother the boil bacon and 
 green for supper . 
 " I rather like this , " say Sue , while their entertainer be 
 clear away the dish . " outside all law except gravitation and 
 germination . " 
 " you only think you like it ; you do not : you be quite a product of 
 civilization , " say Jude , a recollection of her engagement revive 
 his soreness a little . 
 " indeed I be not , Jude . I like read and all that , but I crave to 
 get back to the life of my infancy and its freedom . " 
 " do you remember it so well ? you seem to I to have nothing 
 unconventional at all about you . " 
 " oh , have not   I ! you do not   know what be inside I . " 
 " what ? " 
 " the Ishmaelite . " 
 " an urban miss be what you be . " 
 she look severe disagreement , and turn away . 
 the shepherd arouse they the next morning , as he have say . it be 
 bright and clear , and the four mile to the train be accomplish 
 pleasantly . when they have reach Melchester , and walk to the 
 Close , and the gable of the old building in which she be again to 
 be immure rise before Sue 's eye , she look a little scared . " I 
 expect I shall catch it ! " she murmur . 
 they ring the great bell and wait . 
 " oh , I buy something for you , which I have nearly forget , " she 
 say quickly , search her pocket . " it be a new little photograph 
 of I . would you like it ? " 
 " would I ! " he take it gladly , and the porter come . there seem to 
 be an ominous glance on his face when he open the gate . she pass 
 in , look back at Jude , and wave her hand . 
 III 
 the seventy young woman , of age vary in the main from nineteen to 
 one - and - twenty , though several be old , who at this date fill 
 the specie of nunnery know as the Training - School at Melchester , 
 form a very mixed community , which include the daughter of 
 mechanic , curate , surgeon , shopkeeper , farmer , dairy - man , 
 soldier , sailor , and villager . they sit in the large school - room 
 of the establishment on the evening previously describe , and word 
 be pass round that Sue Bridehead have not come in at closing - time . 
 " she go out with her young man , " say a second - year 's student , who 
 know about young man . " and Miss Traceley see she at the station with 
 he . she will have it hot when she do come . " 
 " she say he be her cousin , " observe a youthful new girl . 
 " that excuse have be make a little too often in this school to be 
 effectual in save our soul , " say the head girl of the year , 
 drily . 
 the fact be that , only twelve month before , there have occur 
 a lamentable seduction of one of the pupil who have make the same 
 statement in order to gain meeting with her lover . the affair have 
 create a scandal , and the management have consequently be rough on 
 cousin ever since . 
 at nine o'clock the name be call , Sue be be pronounce three 
 time sonorously by Miss Traceley without elicit an answer . 
 at a quarter past nine the seventy stand up to sing the " Evening 
 Hymn , " and then kneel down to prayer . after prayer they go in to 
 supper , and every girl 's thought be , where be Sue Bridehead ? some 
 of the student , who have see Jude from the window , feel that they 
 would not mind risk her punishment for the pleasure of be 
 kiss by such a kindly - faced young man . hardly one among they 
 believe in the cousinship . 
 half an hour later they all lay in their cubicle , their tender 
 feminine face upturned to the flare gas - jet which at interval 
 stretch down the long dormitory , every face bear the legend 
 " the weak " upon it , as the penalty of the sex wherein they be 
 mould , which by no possible exertion of their willing heart and 
 ability could be make strong while the inexorable law of nature 
 remain what they be . they form a pretty , suggestive , pathetic 
 sight , of whose pathos and beauty they be themselves unconscious , 
 and would not discover till , amid the storm and strain of 
 after - year , with their injustice , loneliness , child - bearing , and 
 bereavement , their mind would revert to this experience as to 
 something which have be allow to slip past they insufficiently 
 regard . 
 one of the mistress come in to turn out the light , and before 
 do so give a final glance at Sue 's cot , which remain empty , and 
 at her little dressing - table at the foot , which , like all the rest , 
 be ornament with various girlish trifle , frame photograph be 
 not the least conspicuous among they . Sue 's table have a moderate 
 show , two man in their filigree and velvet frame stand together 
 beside her look - glass . 
 " who be these man - do she ever say ? " ask the mistress . " strictly 
 speaking , relation ' portrait only be allow on these table , you 
 know . " 
 " one - the middle - aged man , " say a student in the next bed - " be the 
 schoolmaster she serve under - Mr. Phillotson . " 
 " and the other - this undergraduate in cap and gown - who be he ? " 
 " he be a friend , or be . she have never tell his name . " 
 " be it either of these two who come for she ? " 
 " no . " 
 " you be sure ' twa not the undergraduate ? " 
 " quite . he be a young man with a black beard . " 
 the light be promptly extinguish , and till they fall asleep the 
 girl indulge in conjecture about Sue , and wonder what game 
 she have carry on in London and at Christminster before she come 
 here , some of the more restless one get out of bed and look 
 from the mullione window at the vast west front of the cathedral 
 opposite , and the spire rise behind it . 
 when they awake the next morning they glance into Sue 's nook , 
 to find it still without a tenant . after the early lesson by 
 gas - light , in half - toilet , and when they have come up to dress for 
 breakfast , the bell of the entrance gate be hear to ring loudly . 
 the mistress of the dormitory go away , and presently come back to 
 say that the principal 's order be that nobody be to speak to 
 Bridehead without permission . 
 when , accordingly , Sue come into the dormitory to hastily tidy 
 herself , look flushed and tired , she go to her cubicle in 
 silence , none of they come out to greet she or to make inquiry . 
 when they have go downstairs they find that she do not follow they 
 into the dining - hall to breakfast , and they then learn that she have 
 be severely reprimand , and order to a solitary room for a week , 
 there to be confine , and take her meal , and do all her reading . 
 at this the seventy murmur , the sentence being , they think , too 
 severe . a round robin be prepare and send in to the principal , 
 ask for a remission of Sue 's punishment . no notice be take . 
 towards evening , when the geography mistress begin dictate she 
 subject , the girl in the class sit with fold arm . 
 " you mean that you be not go to work ? " say the mistress at last . 
 " I may as well tell you that it have be ascertain that the young 
 man Bridehead stay out with be not her cousin , for the very 
 good reason that she have no such relative . we have write to 
 Christminster to ascertain . " 
 " we be willing to take her word , " say the head girl . 
 " this young man be discharge from his work at Christminster for 
 drunkenness and blasphemy in public - house , and he have come here to 
 live , entirely to be near she . " 
 however , they remain stolid and motionless , and the mistress leave 
 the room to inquire from her superior what be to be do . 
 presently , towards dusk , the pupil , as they sit , hear exclamation 
 from the first - year 's girl in an adjoining classroom , and one rush 
 in to say that Sue Bridehead have get out of the back window of the 
 room in which she have be confine , escape in the dark across the 
 lawn , and disappear . how she have manage to get out of the garden 
 nobody could tell , as it be bound by the river at the bottom , and 
 the side door be lock . 
 they go and look at the empty room , the casement between the 
 middle mullion of which stand open . the lawn be again search 
 with a lantern , every bush and shrub be examine , but she be 
 nowhere hidden . then the porter of the front gate be interrogate , 
 and on reflection he say that he remember hear a sort of 
 splash in the stream at the back , but he have take no notice , 
 think some duck have come down the river from above . 
 " she must have walk through the river ! " say a mistress . 
 " or drownde herself , " say the porter . 
 the mind of the matron be horrify - not so much at the possible 
 death of Sue as at the possible half - column detail that event in 
 all the newspaper , which , add to the scandal of the year before , 
 would give the college an unenviable notoriety for many month to 
 come . 
 More lantern be procure , and the river examine ; and then , at 
 last , on the opposite shore , which be open to the field , some 
 little boot - track be discern in the mud , which leave no doubt 
 that the too excitable girl have wad through a depth of water 
 reach nearly to her shoulder - for this be the chief river of the 
 county , and be mention in all the geography book with respect . 
 as Sue have not bring disgrace upon the school by drown herself , 
 the matron begin to speak superciliously of she , and to express 
 gladness that she be go . 
 on the self - same evening Jude sit in his lodging by the Close Gate . 
 often at this hour after dusk he would enter the silent close , and 
 stand opposite the house that contain Sue , and watch the shadow of 
 the girl ' head pass to and fro upon the blind , and wish he have 
 nothing else to do but to sit reading and learn all day what many 
 of the thoughtless inmate despise . but to - night , have finish 
 tea and brush himself up , he be deep in the perusal of the 
 twenty - ninth volume of Pusey 's Library of the Fathers , a set of book 
 which he have purchase of a second - hand dealer at a price that seem 
 to he to be one of miraculous cheapness for that invaluable work . he 
 fancy he hear something rattle lightly against his window ; then he 
 hear it again . certainly somebody have throw gravel . he rise and 
 gently lift the sash . 
 " Jude ! "   from below . 
 " Sue ! " 
 " yes - it be ! can I come up without be see ? " 
 " oh yes ! " 
 " then do not   come down . shut the window . " 
 Jude wait , know that she could enter easily enough , the front 
 door be open merely by a knob which anybody could turn , as 
 in most old country town . he palpitate at the thought that she 
 have flee to he in her trouble as he have flee to she in his . what 
 counterpart they be ! he unlatche the door of his room , hear a 
 stealthy rustle on the dark stair , and in a moment she appear in 
 the light of his lamp . he go up to seize her hand , and find she 
 be clammy as a marine deity , and that her clothe clung to she like 
 the robe upon the figure in the Parthenon frieze . 
 " I be so cold ! " she say through her chatter tooth . " can I come by 
 your fire , Jude ? " 
 she cross to his little grate and very little fire , but as the 
 water drip from she as she move , the idea of dry herself be 
 absurd . " whatever have you do , darling ? " he ask , with alarm , the 
 tender epithet slip out unaware . 
 " walk through the large river in the county - that be what I have 
 do ! they lock I up for be out with you ; and it seem so 
 unjust that I could not   bear it , so I get out of the window and 
 escape across the stream ! " she have begin the explanation in her 
 usual slightly independent tone , but before she have finish the 
 thin pink lip tremble , and she could hardly refrain from cry . 
 " Dear Sue ! " he say . " you must take off all your thing ! and let I 
 see - you must borrow some from the landlady . I will ask she . " 
 " no , no ! do not   let she know , for God 's sake ! we be so near the 
 school that they will come after I ! " 
 " then you must put on mine . you do not   mind ? " 
 " oh no . " 
 " my Sunday suit , you know . it be close here . " in fact , everything 
 be close and handy in Jude 's single chamber , because there be not 
 room for it to be otherwise . he open a drawer , take out his good 
 dark suit , and give the garment a shake , say , " now , how long 
 shall I give you ? " 
 " ten minute . " 
 Jude leave the room and go into the street , where he walk up and 
 down . a clock strike half - past seven , and he return . sit in 
 his only arm - chair he see a slim and fragile be masquerade as 
 himself on a Sunday , so pathetic in her defencelessness that his 
 heart feel big with the sense of it . on two other chair before the 
 fire be her wet garment . she blush as he sit down beside she , 
 but only for a moment . 
 " I suppose , Jude , it be odd that you should see I like this and all 
 my thing hang there ? yet what nonsense ! they be only a woman 's 
 clothe - sexless cloth and linen ... I wish I do not   feel so ill and 
 sick ! will you dry my clothe now ? please do , Jude , and I will get a 
 lodging by and by . it be not late yet . " 
 " no , you shall not , if you be ill . you must stay here . dear , dear 
 Sue , what can I get for you ? " 
 " I do not   know ! I can not   help shiver . I wish I could get warm . " 
 Jude put on her his great - coat in addition , and then run out to the 
 near public - house , whence he return with a little bottle in his 
 hand . " here be six of good brandy , " he say . " now you drink it , 
 dear ; all of it . " 
 " I can not   out of the bottle , can I ? " Jude fetch the glass from the 
 dressing - table , and administer the spirit in some water . she 
 gasp a little , but gulp it down , and lie back in the armchair . 
 she then begin to relate circumstantially her experience since 
 they have part ; but in the middle of her story her voice falter , 
 her head nod , and she cease . she be in a sound sleep . Jude , 
 die of anxiety lest she should have catch a chill which might 
 permanently injure she , be glad to hear the regular breathing . he 
 softly go near to she , and observe that a warm flush now rose 
 her hitherto blue cheek , and feel that her hang hand be no 
 long cold . then he stand with his back to the fire regard she , 
 and see in she almost a divinity . 
 IV 
 Jude 's reverie be interrupt by the creak of footstep ascend 
 the stair . 
 he whisk Sue 's clothing from the chair where it be dry , thrust 
 it under the bed , and sit down to his book . somebody knock and 
 open the door immediately . it be the landlady . 
 " oh , I do not   know whether you be in or not , Mr. Fawley . I 
 want to know if you would require supper . I see you have   a young 
 gentleman - " 
 " yes , ma'am . but I think I will not   come down to - night . will you bring 
 supper up on a tray , and I will have a cup of tea as well . " 
 it be Jude 's custom to go downstairs to the kitchen , and eat his 
 meal with the family , to save trouble . his landlady bring up the 
 supper , however , on this occasion , and he take it from she at the 
 door . 
 when she have descend he set the teapot on the hob , and draw out 
 Sue 's clothe anew ; but they be far from dry . a thick woollen 
 gown , he find , hold a deal of water . so he hang they up again , and 
 enlarge his fire and muse as the steam from the garment go up 
 the chimney . 
 suddenly she say , " Jude ! " 
 " yes . all right . how do you feel now ? " 
 " well . quite well . why , I fall asleep , do not   I ? what time be 
 it ? not late surely ? " 
 " it be past ten . " 
 " be it really ? what shall I do ! " she say , start up . 
 " stay where you be . " 
 " yes ; that be what I want to do . but I do not   know what they would 
 say ! and what will you do ? " 
 " I be go to sit here by the fire all night , and read . to - morrow 
 be Sunday , and I have not   to go out anywhere . perhaps you will be 
 save a severe illness by rest there . do not   be frightened . I be 
 all right . look here , what I have get for you . some supper . " 
 when she have sit upright she breathe plaintively and say , " I do 
 feel rather weak still . I think I be well ; and I ought not to be 
 here , ought I ? " but the supper fortify she somewhat , and when she 
 have have some tea and have lain back again she be bright and cheerful . 
 the tea must have be green , or too long draw , for she seem 
 preternaturally wakeful afterwards , though Jude , who have not take 
 any , begin to feel heavy ; till her conversation fix his attention . 
 " you call I a creature of civilization , or something , do not   you ? " 
 she say , break a silence . " it be very odd you should have do 
 that . " 
 " why ? " 
 " well , because it be provokingly wrong . I be a sort of negation of 
 it . " 
 " you be very philosophical . ' a negation ' be profound talk . " 
 " be it ? do I strike you as be learn ? " she ask , with a touch 
 of raillery . 
 " no - not learn . only you do not   talk quite like a girl - well , a 
 girl who have have no advantage . " 
 " I have have advantage . I do not   know Latin and Greek , though I know 
 the grammar of those tongue . but I know most of the greek and 
 latin classic through translation , and other book too . I read 
 Lempriere , Catullus , Martial , Juvenal , Lucian , Beaumont and Fletcher , 
 Boccaccio , Scarron , De Brantome , Sterne , De Foe , Smollett , Fielding , 
 Shakespeare , the Bible , and other such ; and find that all interest 
 in the unwholesome part of those book end with its mystery . " 
 " you have read more than I , " he say with a sigh . " how come you to 
 read some of those queerer one ? " 
 " well , " she say thoughtfully , " it be by accident . my life have be 
 entirely shape by what people call a peculiarity in I . I have no 
 fear of man , as such , nor of their book . I have mix with they - one 
 or two of they particularly - almost as one of their own sex . I mean 
 I have not feel about they as most woman be teach to feel - to be on 
 their guard against attack on their virtue ; for no average man - no 
 man short of a sensual savage - will molest a woman by day or night , 
 at home or abroad , unless she invite he . until she say by a look 
 ' come on ' he be always afraid to , and if you never say it , or look 
 it , he never come . however , what I be go to say be that when I 
 be eighteen I form a friendly intimacy with an undergraduate at 
 Christminster , and he teach I a great deal , and lend I book which 
 I should never have get hold of otherwise . " 
 " be your friendship break off ? " 
 " oh yes . he die , poor fellow , two or three year after he have take 
 his degree and leave Christminster . " 
 " you see a good deal of he , I suppose ? " 
 " yes . we use to go about together - on walking tour , read tour , 
 and thing of that sort - like two man almost . he ask I to live 
 with he , and I agree to by letter . but when I join he in London 
 I find he mean a different thing from what I mean . he want I 
 to be his mistress , in fact , but I be not   in love with he - and on 
 my say I should go away if he do not   agree to MY plan , he do 
 so . we share a sitting - room for fifteen month ; and he become a 
 leader - writer for one of the great London daily ; till he be take 
 ill , and have to go abroad . he say I be break his heart by 
 hold out against he so long at such close quarter ; he could 
 never have believe it of woman . I might play that game once too 
 often , he say . he come home merely to die . his death cause a 
 terrible remorse in I for my cruelty - though I hope he die of 
 consumption and not of I entirely . I go down to Sandbourne 
 to his funeral , and be his only mourner . he leave I a little 
 money - because I break his heart , I suppose . that be how man 
 be - so much well than woman ! " 
 " good heaven ! - what do you do then ? " 
 " ah - now you be angry with I ! " she say , a contralto note of 
 tragedy come suddenly into her silvery voice . " I would not   have 
 tell you if I have know ! " 
 " no , I be not . tell I all . " 
 " well , I invest his money , poor fellow , in a bubble scheme , and 
 lose it . I live about London by myself for some time , and then I 
 return to Christminster , as my father - who be also in London , and 
 have start as an art metal - worker near Long - acre - would not   have I 
 back ; and I get that occupation in the artist - shop where you find 
 I ... I say you do not   know how bad I be ! " 
 Jude look round upon the arm - chair and its occupant , as if to read 
 more carefully the creature he have give shelter to . his voice 
 tremble as he say : " however you have live , Sue , I believe you be 
 as innocent as you be unconventional ! " 
 " I be not particularly innocent , as you see , now that I have 
 ' twitch the robe 
 from that blank lay - figure your fancy drape , ' " 
 say she , with an ostensible sneer , though he could hear that she be 
 brim with tear . " but I have never yield myself to any lover , 
 if that be what you mean ! I have remain as I begin . " 
 " I quite believe you . but some woman would not have remain as they 
 begin . " 
 " perhaps not . well woman would not . People say I must be 
 cold - natured - sexless - on account of it . but I will not   have it ! 
 some of the most passionately erotic poet have be the most 
 self - contain in their daily life . " 
 " have you tell Mr. Phillotson about this university scholar friend ? " 
 " yes - long ago . I have never make any secret of it to anybody . " 
 " what do he say ? " 
 " he do not pass any criticism - only say I be everything to he , 
 whatever I do ; and thing like that . " 
 Jude feel much depressed ; she seem to get far and far away 
 from he with her strange way and curious unconsciousness of gender . 
 " be not   you REALLY vex with I , dear Jude ? " she suddenly ask , in 
 a voice of such extraordinary tenderness that it hardly seem to 
 come from the same woman who have just tell her story so lightly . " I 
 would rather offend anybody in the world than you , I think ! " 
 " I do not   know whether I be vex or not . I know I care very much 
 about you ! " 
 " I care as much for you as for anybody I ever meet . " 
 " you do not   care MORE ! there , I ought not to say that . do not   answer 
 it ! " 
 there be another long silence . he feel that she be treat 
 he cruelly , though he could not quite say in what way . her very 
 helplessness seem to make she so much strong than he . 
 " I be awfully ignorant on general matter , although I have work so 
 hard , " he say , to turn the subject . " I be absorb in theology , you 
 know . and what do you think I should be do just about now , if you 
 be not   here ? I should be say my evening prayer . I suppose you 
 would not   like - " 
 " oh no , no , " she answer , " I would rather not , if you do not   mind . 
 I should seem so - such a hypocrite . " 
 " I think you would not   join , so I do not   propose it . you must 
 remember that I hope to be a useful minister some day . " 
 " to be ordain , I think you say ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " then you have not   give up the idea ? - I think that perhaps you have 
 by this time . " 
 " of course not . I fondly think at first that you feel as I do 
 about that , as you be so mixed up in Christminster Anglicanism . 
 and Mr. Phillotson - " 
 " I have no respect for Christminster whatever , except , in a qualified 
 degree , on its intellectual side , " say Sue Bridehead earnestly . " my 
 friend I speak of take that out of I . he be the most irreligious 
 man I ever know , and the most moral . and intellect at Christminster 
 be new wine in old bottle . the mediaevalism of Christminster must 
 go , be slough off , or Christminster itself will have to go . to 
 be sure , at time one could not   help have a sneaking like for 
 the tradition of the old faith , as preserve by a section of the 
 thinker there in touching and simple sincerity ; but when I be in my 
 sad , right mind I always feel , 
 ' o ghastly glory of saint , dead limb of gibbeted Gods ! ' " ... 
 " Sue , you be not a good friend of mine to talk like that ! " 
 " then I will not , dear Jude ! " the emotional throat - note have come back , 
 and she turn her face away . 
 " I still think Christminster have much that be glorious ; though I 
 be resentful because I could not   get there . " he speak gently , and 
 resist his impulse to pique she on to tear . 
 " it be an ignorant place , except as to the townspeople , artizan , 
 drunkard , and pauper , " she say , perverse still at his differing 
 from she . " they see life as it be , of course ; but few of the people 
 in the college do . you prove it in your own person . you be one 
 of the very man Christminster be intend for when the college 
 be found ; a man with a passion for learning , but no money , or 
 opportunity , or friend . but you be elbow off the pavement 
 by the millionaire ' son . " 
 " well , I can do without what it confer . I care for something 
 high . " 
 " and I for something broad , truer , " she insist . " at present 
 intellect in Christminster be push one way , and religion the 
 other ; and so they stand stock - still , like two ram butt each 
 other . " 
 " what would Mr. Phillotson - " 
 " it be a place full of fetishist and ghost - seer ! " 
 he notice that whenever he try to speak of the schoolmaster she 
 turn the conversation to some generalization about the offend 
 university . Jude be extremely , morbidly , curious about her life as 
 Phillotson 's protegee and betroth ; yet she would not enlighten 
 he . 
 " well , that be just what I be , too , " he say . " I be fearful of life , 
 spectre - seeing always . " 
 " but you be good and dear ! " she murmur . 
 his heart bump , and he make no reply . 
 " you be in the tractarian stage just now , be you not ? " she add , 
 put on flippancy to hide real feeling , a common trick with she . 
 " let I see - when be I there ? in the year eighteen hundred and - " 
 " there be a sarcasm in that which be rather unpleasant to I , Sue . 
 now will you do what I want you to ? at this time I read a chapter , 
 and then say prayer , as I tell you . now will you concentrate your 
 attention on any book of these you like , and sit with your back to 
 I , and leave I to my custom ? you be sure you will not   join I ? " 
 " I will look at you . " 
 " no . do not   tease , Sue ! " 
 " very well - I will do just as you bid I , and I will not   vex you , Jude , " 
 she reply , in the tone of a child who be go to be good for ever 
 after , turn she back upon he accordingly . a small Bible other 
 than the one he be use lie near she , and during his retreat she 
 take it up , and turn over the leaf . 
 " Jude , " she say brightly , when he have finish and come back to she ; 
 " will you let I make you a NEW New Testament , like the one I make 
 for myself at Christminster ? " 
 " oh yes . how be that make ? " 
 " I alter my old one by cut up all the Epistles and Gospels into 
 separate brochure , and rearrange they in chronological order as 
 write , begin the book with Thessalonians , follow on with the 
 Epistles , and put the Gospels much far on . then I have the 
 volume rebound . my university friend Mr. - but never mind his name , 
 poor boy - say it be an excellent idea . I know that read it 
 afterwards make it twice as interesting as before , and twice as 
 understandable . " 
 " H'm ! " say Jude , with a sense of sacrilege . 
 " and what a literary enormity this be , " she say , as she glance 
 into the page of Solomon 's Song . " I mean the synopsis at the head 
 of each chapter , explain away the real nature of that rhapsody . 
 you need not   be alarm : nobody claim inspiration for the chapter 
 heading . indeed , many divine treat they with contempt . it seem 
 the droll thing to think of the four - and - twenty elder , or 
 bishop , or whatever number they be , sit with long face and 
 write down such stuff . " 
 Jude look pained . " you be quite voltairean ! " he murmur . 
 " indeed ? then I will not   say any more , except that people have no 
 right to falsify the Bible ! I hate such hum - bug as could attempt to 
 plaster over with ecclesiastical abstraction such ecstatic , natural , 
 human love as lie in that great and passionate song ! " her speech 
 have grow spirit , and almost petulant at his rebuke , and her eye 
 moist . " I wish I have a friend here to support I ; but nobody be ever 
 on my side ! " 
 " but my dear Sue , my very dear Sue , I be not against you ! " he say , 
 take her hand , and surprise at her introduce personal feeling 
 into mere argument . 
 " yes you be , yes you be ! " she cry , turn away her face that he 
 might not see her brim eye . " you be on the side of the people 
 in the training - school - at least you seem almost to be ! what I 
 insist on be , that to explain such verse as this : ' whither be thy 
 beloved gone , o thou fairest among woman ? ' by the note : ' the Church 
 professeth her faith , ' be supremely ridiculous ! " 
 " well then , let it be ! you make such a personal matter of 
 everything ! I be - only too inclined just now to apply the word 
 profanely . you know you be fairest among woman to I , come to 
 that ! " 
 " but you be not to say it now ! " Sue reply , her voice change 
 to its soft note of severity . then their eye meet , and they 
 shake hand like crony in a tavern , and Jude see the absurdity of 
 quarrel on such a hypothetical subject , and she the silliness of 
 cry about what be write in an old book like the Bible . 
 " I will not   disturb your conviction - I really will not ! " she go on 
 soothingly , for now he be rather more ruffled than she . " but I do 
 want and long to ennoble some man to high aim ; and when I see you , 
 and know you want to be my comrade , I - shall I confess it ? - think 
 that man might be you . but you take so much tradition on trust that 
 I do not   know what to say . " 
 " well , dear ; I suppose one must take some thing on trust . life 
 be not   long enough to work out everything in Euclid problem before 
 you believe it . I take Christianity . " 
 " well , perhaps you might take something bad . " 
 " indeed I might . perhaps I have do so ! " he think of Arabella . 
 " I will not   ask what , because we be go to be very nice with each 
 other , be not   we , and never , never , vex each other any more ? " she 
 look up trustfully , and her voice seem try to nestle in his 
 breast . 
 " I shall always care for you ! " say Jude . 
 " and I for you . because you be single - hearted , and forgive to 
 your faulty and tiresome little Sue ! " 
 he look away , for that epicene tenderness of hers be too 
 harrowing . be it that which have break the heart of the poor 
 leader - writer ; and be he to be the next one ? ... but Sue be so 
 dear ! ... if he could only get over the sense of her sex , as she 
 seem to be able to do so easily of his , what a comrade she would 
 make ; for their difference of opinion on conjectural subject only 
 draw they close together on matter of daily human experience . she 
 be near to he than any other woman he have ever meet , and he could 
 scarcely believe that time , creed , or absence , would ever divide he 
 from she . 
 but his grief at her incredulity return . they sit on till she 
 fall asleep again , and he nod in his chair likewise . whenever 
 he arouse himself he turn her thing , and make up the fire anew . 
 about six o'clock he awake completely , and light a candle , find 
 that her clothe be dry . her chair be a far more comfortable 
 one than his she still sleep on inside his great - coat , look warm 
 as a new bun and boyish as a Ganymede . place the garment by she 
 and touch she on the shoulder he go downstairs , and wash 
 himself by starlight in the yard . 
 V 
 when he return she be dress as usual . 
 " now could I get out without anybody see I ? " she ask . " the 
 town be not yet astir . " 
 " but you have have no breakfast . " 
 " oh , I do not   want any ! I fear I ought not to have run away from that 
 school ! thing seem so different in the cold light of morning , do not 
 they ? what Mr. Phillotson will say I do not   know ! it be quite by 
 his wish that I go there . he be the only man in the world for whom 
 I have any respect or fear . I hope he will forgive I ; but he will scold 
 I dreadfully , I expect ! " 
 " I will go to he and explain - " begin Jude . 
 " oh no , you shall not . I do not   care for he ! he may think what he 
 like - I shall do just as I choose ! " 
 " but you just this moment say - " 
 " well , if I do , I shall do as I like for all he ! I have think of 
 what I shall do - go to the sister of one of my fellow - student in the 
 training - school , who have ask I to visit she . she have a school 
 near Shaston , about eighteen mile from here - and I shall stay there 
 till this have blow over , and I get back to the training - school 
 again . " 
 at the last moment he persuade she to let he make she a cup of 
 coffee , in a portable apparatus he keep in his room for use on rise 
 to go to his work every day before the household be astir . 
 " now a dew - bit to eat with it , " he say ; " and off we go . you can 
 have a regular breakfast when you get there . " 
 they go quietly out of the house , Jude accompany she to the 
 station . as they depart along the street a head be thrust out 
 of an upper window of his lodging and quickly withdraw . Sue still 
 seem sorry for her rashness , and to wish she have not rebel ; 
 tell he at part that she would let he know as soon as she 
 get re - admit to the training - school . they stand rather miserably 
 together on the platform ; and it be apparent that he want to say 
 more . 
 " I want to tell you something - two thing , " he say hurriedly as the 
 train come up . " one be a warm one , the other a cold one ! " 
 " Jude , " she say . " I know one of they . and you must not ! " 
 " what ? " 
 " you must not   love I . you be to like I - that be all ! " 
 Jude 's face become so full of complicated gloom that her be 
 agitated in sympathy as she bid he adieu through the carriage 
 window . and then the train move on , and wave she pretty hand to 
 he she vanish away . 
 Melchester be a dismal place enough for Jude that Sunday of her 
 departure , and the Close so hateful that he do not go once to the 
 cathedral service . the next morning there come a letter from she , 
 which , with her usual promptitude , she have write directly she have 
 reach her friend 's house . she tell he of her safe arrival and 
 comfortable quarter , and then add : - 
 what I really write about , dear Jude , be something I say 
 to you at part . you have be so very good and kind to 
 I that when you be out of sight I feel what a cruel and 
 ungrateful woman I be to say it , and it have reproach I 
 ever since . if you want to love ME , JUDE , you may : I do not 
 mind at all ; and I will never say again that you must not ! 
 now I will not   write any more about that . you do forgive your 
 thoughtless friend for her cruelty ? and will not   make she 
 miserable by say you do not ? - ever , 
 SUE . 
 it would be superfluous to say what his answer be ; and how he 
 think what he would have do have he be free , which should have 
 render a long residence with a female friend quite unnecessary for 
 Sue . he feel he might have be pretty sure of his own victory if 
 it have come to a conflict between Phillotson and himself for the 
 possession of she . 
 yet Jude be in danger of attach more meaning to Sue 's impulsive 
 note than it really be intend to bear . 
 after the lapse of a few day he find himself hop that she would 
 write again . but he receive no further communication ; and in the 
 intensity of his solicitude he send another note , suggest that he 
 should pay she a visit some Sunday , the distance be under eighteen 
 mile . 
 he expect a reply on the second morning after despatch his 
 missive ; but none come . the third morning arrive ; the postman do 
 not stop . this be Saturday , and in a feverish state of anxiety 
 about she he send off three brief line state that he be come 
 the follow day , for he feel sure something have happen . 
 his first and natural thought have be that she be ill from her 
 immersion ; but it soon occur to he that somebody would have 
 write for she in such a case . conjecture be put an end to by 
 his arrival at the village school - house near Shaston on the bright 
 morning of Sunday , between eleven and twelve o'clock , when the parish 
 be as vacant as a desert , most of the inhabitant have gather 
 inside the church , whence their voice could occasionally be hear in 
 unison . 
 a little girl open the door . " Miss Bridehead be up - stair , " she 
 say . " and will you please walk up to she ? " 
 " be she ill ? " ask Jude hastily . 
 " only a little - not very . " 
 Jude enter and ascend . on reach the landing a voice tell he 
 which way to turn - the voice of Sue call his name . he pass the 
 doorway , and find she lie in a little bed in a room a dozen foot 
 square . 
 " oh , Sue ! " he cry , sit down beside she and take her hand . 
 " how be this ! you could not   write ? " 
 " no - it be not   that ! " she answer . " I do catch a bad cold - but I 
 could have write . only I would not ! " 
 " why not ? - frighten I like this ! " 
 " yes - that be what I be afraid of ! but I have decide not to write 
 to you any more . they will not   have I back at the school - that be why I 
 could not   write . not the fact , but the reason ! " 
 " well ? " 
 " they not only will not   have I , but they give I a parting piece of 
 advice - " 
 " what ? " 
 she do not answer directly . " I vow I never would tell you , 
 Jude - it be so vulgar and distressing ! " 
 " be it about we ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " but do tell I ! " 
 " well - somebody have send they baseless report about we , and they 
 say you and I ought to marry as soon as possible , for the sake of my 
 reputation ! ... there - now I have tell you , and I wish I have not ! " 
 " oh , poor Sue ! " 
 " I do not   think of you like that mean ! it do just occur to I to 
 regard you in the way they think I do , but I have not   begin to . I have 
 recognize that the cousinship be merely nominal , since we meet as 
 total stranger . but my marry you , dear Jude - why , of course , 
 if I have reckon upon marry you I should not   have come to you so 
 often ! and I never suppose you think of such a thing as marry 
 I till the other evening ; when I begin to fancy you do love I a 
 little . perhaps I ought not to have be so intimate with you . it 
 be all my fault . everything be my fault always ! " 
 the speech seem a little forced and unreal , and they regard each 
 other with a mutual distress . 
 " I be so blind at first ! " she go on . " I do not   see what you feel 
 at all . oh , you have be unkind to I - you have - to look upon I 
 as a sweetheart without say a word , and leave I to discover it 
 myself ! your attitude to I have become know ; and naturally they 
 think we have   be do wrong ! I will never trust you again ! " 
 " yes , Sue , " he say simply ; " I be to blame - more than you think . I 
 be quite aware that you do not suspect till within the last meeting 
 or two what I be feel about you . I admit that our meeting as 
 stranger prevent a sense of relationship , and that it be a sort 
 of subterfuge to avail myself of it . but do not   you think I deserve a 
 little consideration for conceal my wrong , very wrong , sentiment , 
 since I could not   help have they ? " 
 she turn her eye doubtfully towards he , and then look away as 
 if afraid she might forgive he . 
 by every law of nature and sex a kiss be the only rejoinder that 
 fit the mood and the moment , under the suasion of which Sue 's 
 undemonstrative regard of he might not inconceivably have change 
 its temperature . some man would have cast scruple to the wind , 
 and venture it , oblivious both of Sue 's declaration of her neutral 
 feeling , and of the pair of autograph in the vestry chest of 
 Arabella 's parish church . Jude do not . he have , in fact , come in 
 part to tell his own fatal story . it be upon his lip ; yet at the 
 hour of this distress he could not disclose it . he prefer to 
 dwell upon the recognize barrier between they . 
 " of course - I know you do not   - care about I in any particular way , " 
 he sorrow . " you ought not , and you be right . you belong to - Mr. 
 Phillotson . I suppose he have be to see you ? " 
 " yes , " she say shortly , her face change a little . " though I 
 do not   ask he to come . you be glad , of course , that he have be ! 
 but I should not   care if he do not   come any more ! " 
 it be very perplexing to her lover that she should be pique at his 
 honest acquiescence in his rival , if Jude 's feeling of love be 
 deprecate by she . he go on to something else . 
 " this will blow over , dear Sue , " he say . " the training - school 
 authority be not all the world . you can get to be a student in 
 some other , no doubt . " 
 " I will ask Mr. Phillotson , " she say decisively . 
 Sue 's kind hostess now return from church , and there be no more 
 intimate conversation . Jude leave in the afternoon , hopelessly 
 unhappy . but he have see she , and sit with she . such intercourse 
 as that would have to content he for the remainder of his life . 
 the lesson of renunciation it be necessary and proper that he , as 
 a parish priest , should learn . 
 but the next morning when he awake he feel rather vex with she , 
 and decide that she be rather unreasonable , not to say capricious . 
 then , in illustration of what he have begin to discern as one of her 
 redeem characteristic there come promptly a note , which she must 
 have write almost immediately he have go from she : 
 forgive I for my petulance yesterday ! I be horrid to 
 you ; I know it , and I feel perfectly miserable at my 
 horridness . it be so dear of you not to be angry ! Jude , 
 please still keep I as your friend and associate , with 
 all my fault . I will try not to be like it again . 
 I be come to Melchester on Saturday , to get my thing 
 away from the T. S. ,   c. I could walk with you for half 
 an hour , if you would like ? - your repentant 
 SUE . 
 Jude forgave her straightway , and ask she to call for he at the 
 cathedral work when she come . 
 VI 
 meanwhile a middle - aged man be dream a dream of great beauty 
 concern the writer of the above letter . he be Richard 
 Phillotson , who have recently remove from the mixed village school at 
 Lumsdon near Christminster , to undertake a large boy ' school in his 
 native town of Shaston , which stand on a hill sixty mile to the 
 south - west as the crow fly . 
 a glance at the place and its accessory be almost enough to reveal 
 that the schoolmaster 's plan and dream so long indulge in have 
 be abandon for some new dream with which neither the Church nor 
 literature have much in common . essentially an unpractical man , he 
 be now bent on make and save money for a practical purpose - that 
 of keep a wife , who , if she choose , might conduct one of the girl ' 
 school adjoin his own ; for which purpose he have advise she to go 
 into training , since she would not marry he offhand . 
 about the time that Jude be remove from Marygreen to Melchester , 
 and enter on adventure at the latter place with Sue , the 
 schoolmaster be settle down in the new school - house at Shaston . 
 all the furniture be fix , the book shelve , and the nail 
 drive , he have begin to sit in his parlour during the dark winter 
 night and re - attempt some of his old study - one branch of 
 which have include roman - Britannic antiquity - an unremunerative 
 labour for a national school - master but a subject , that , after his 
 abandonment of the university scheme , have interest he as be a 
 comparatively unworked mine ; practicable to those who , like himself , 
 have live in lonely spot where these remain be abundant , and be 
 see to compel inference in startle contrast to accept view on 
 the civilization of that time . 
 a resumption of this investigation be the outward and apparent hobby 
 of Phillotson at present - his ostensible reason for go alone into 
 field where causeway , dyke , and tumuli abound , or shut 
 himself up in his house with a few urn , tile , and mosaic he have 
 collect , instead of call round upon his new neighbour , who for 
 their part have show themselves willing enough to be friendly with 
 he . but it be not the real , or the whole , reason , after all . 
 thus on a particular evening in the month , when it have grow quite 
 late - to near midnight , indeed - and the light of his lamp , shin 
 from his window at a salient angle of the hill - top town over infinite 
 mile of valley westward , announce as by word a place and person 
 give over to study , he be not exactly study . 
 the interior of the room - the book , the furniture , the 
 schoolmaster 's loose coat , his attitude at the table , even the 
 flickering of the fire , bespoke the same dignified tale of 
 undistracted research - more than creditable to a man who have have no 
 advantage beyond those of his own making . and yet the tale , true 
 enough till latterly , be not true now . what he be regard be 
 not history . they be historic note , write in a bold womanly 
 hand at his dictation some month before , and it be the clerical 
 rendering of word after word that absorb he . 
 he presently take from a drawer a carefully tie bundle of letter , 
 few , very few , as correspondence count nowadays . each be in its 
 envelope just as it have arrive , and the handwriting be of the same 
 womanly character as the historic note . he unfold they one by 
 one and read they musingly . at first sight there seem in these 
 small document to be absolutely nothing to muse over . they be 
 straightforward , frank letter , sign " Sue B - " ; just such one as 
 would be write during short absence , with no other thought than 
 their speedy destruction , and chiefly concern book in reading 
 and other experience of a training school , forget doubtless by 
 the writer with the passing of the day of their inditing . in one of 
 they - quite a recent note - the young woman say that she have receive 
 his considerate letter , and that it be honourable and generous of 
 he to say he would not come to see her oftener than she desire   the 
 school be such an awkward place for caller , and because of her 
 strong wish that her engagement to he should not be know , which it 
 would infallibly be if he visit she often . over these phrase the 
 school - master pore . what precise shade of satisfaction be to be 
 gather from a woman 's gratitude that the man who love she have not 
 be often to see she ? the problem occupy he , distract he . 
 he open another drawer , and find therein an envelope , from which 
 he draw a photograph of Sue as a child , long before he have know she , 
 stand under trelli - work with a little basket in her hand . there 
 be another of she as a young woman , her dark eye and hair make a 
 very distinct and attractive picture of she , which just disclose , 
 too , the thoughtfulness that lie behind her light mood . it be 
 a duplicate of the one she have give Jude , and would have give to 
 any man . Phillotson bring it half - way to his lip , but withdraw 
 it in doubt at her perplexing phrase : ultimately kiss the 
 dead pasteboard with all the passionateness , and more than all the 
 devotion , of a young man of eighteen . 
 the schoolmaster 's be an unhealthy - looking , old - fashioned face , 
 render more old - fashioned by his style of shaving . a certain 
 gentlemanliness have be impart to it by nature , suggest an 
 inherent wish to do rightly by all . his speech be a little slow , 
 but his tone be sincere enough to make his hesitation no defect . 
 his grey hair be curly , and radiate from a point in the middle 
 of his crown . there be four line across his forehead , and he only 
 wear spectacle when read at night . it be almost certainly a 
 renunciation force upon he by his academic purpose , rather than a 
 distaste for woman , which have hitherto keep he from close with one 
 of the sex in matrimony . 
 such silent proceeding as those of this evening be repeat many 
 and oft time when he be not under the eye of the boy , whose quick 
 and penetrate regard would frequently become almost intolerable to 
 the self - conscious master in his present anxious care for Sue , make 
 he , in the grey hour of morning , dread to meet anew the gimlet 
 glance , lest they should read what the dream within he be . 
 he have honourably acquiesce in Sue 's announce wish that he be 
 not often to visit she at the training school ; but at length , his 
 patience be sorely try , he set out one Saturday afternoon to pay 
 she an unexpected call . there the news of her departure - expulsion 
 as it might almost have be consider - be flash upon he without 
 warning or mitigation as he stand at the door expect in a few 
 minute to behold her face ; and when he turn away he could hardly 
 see the road before he . 
 Sue have , in fact , never write a line to her suitor on the subject , 
 although it be fourteen day old . a short reflection tell he that 
 this prove nothing , a natural delicacy be as ample a reason for 
 silence as any degree of blameworthiness . 
 they have inform he at the school where she be live , and have 
 no immediate anxiety about her comfort his thought take the 
 direction of a burn indignation against the training school 
 committee . in his bewilderment Phillotson enter the adjacent 
 cathedral , just now in a direly dismantle state by reason of 
 the repair . he sit down on a block of freestone , regardless of 
 the dusty imprint it make on his breech ; and his listless eye 
 follow the movement of the workman he presently become aware 
 that the reputed culprit , Sue 's lover Jude , be one amongst they . 
 Jude have never speak to his former hero since the meeting by the 
 model of Jerusalem . have inadvertently witness Phillotson 's 
 tentative courtship of Sue in the lane there have grow up in the 
 young man 's mind a curious dislike to think of the elder , to meet 
 he , to communicate in any way with he ; and since Phillotson 's 
 success in obtain at least her promise have become know to Jude , 
 he have frankly recognize that he do not wish to see or hear of his 
 senior any more , learn anything of his pursuit , or even imagine 
 again what excellency might appertain to his character . on this 
 very day of the schoolmaster 's visit Jude be expect Sue , as she 
 have promise ; and when therefore he see the schoolmaster in the nave 
 of the building , see , moreover , that he be come to speak to he , 
 he feel no little embarrassment ; which Phillotson 's own embarrassment 
 prevent his observing . 
 Jude join he , and they both withdraw from the other workman to the 
 spot where Phillotson have be sit . Jude offer he a piece of 
 sackcloth for a cushion , and tell he it be dangerous to sit on the 
 bare block . 
 " yes ; yes , " say Phillotson abstractedly , as he reseat himself , his 
 eye rest on the ground as if he be try to remember where he 
 be . " I will not   keep you long . it be merely that I have hear that 
 you have see my little friend Sue recently . it occur to I to 
 speak to you on that account . I merely want to ask - about she . " 
 " I think I know what ! " Jude hurriedly say . " about she escape 
 from the training school , and she come to I ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " well " - Jude for a moment feel an unprincipled and fiendish wish to 
 annihilate his rival at all cost . by the exercise of that treachery 
 which love for the same woman render possible to man the most 
 honourable in every other relation of life , he could send off 
 Phillotson in agony and defeat by say that the scandal be true , 
 and that Sue have irretrievably commit herself with he . but his 
 action do not respond for a moment to his animal instinct ; and what 
 he say be , " I be glad of your kindness in come to talk plainly to 
 I about it . you know what they say ? - that I ought to marry she . " 
 " what ! " 
 " and I wish with all my soul I could ! " 
 Phillotson tremble , and his naturally pale face acquire a 
 corpselike sharpness in its line . " I have no idea that it be of 
 this nature ! God forbid ! " 
 " no , no ! " say Jude aghast . " I think you understand ? I mean that 
 be I in a position to marry she , or someone , and settle down , 
 instead of live in lodging here and there , I should be glad ! " 
 what he have really mean be simply that he love she . 
 " but - since this painful matter have be open up - what really 
 happen ? " ask Phillotson , with the firmness of a man who feel that 
 a sharp smart now be well than a long agony of suspense hereafter . 
 " case arise , and this be one , when even ungenerous question must be 
 put to make false assumption impossible , and to kill scandal . " 
 Jude explain readily ; give the whole series of adventure , 
 include the night at the shepherd 's , her wet arrival at his 
 lodging , her indisposition from her immersion , their vigil of 
 discussion , and his see she off next morning . 
 " well now , " say Phillotson at the conclusion , " I take it as your 
 final word , and I know I can believe you , that the suspicion which 
 lead to her rustication be an absolutely baseless one ? " 
 " it be , " say Jude solemnly . " absolutely . so help I God ! " 
 the schoolmaster rise . each of the twain feel that the interview 
 could not comfortably merge in a friendly discussion of their recent 
 experience , after the manner of friend ; and when Jude have take he 
 round , and show he some feature of the renovation which the old 
 cathedral be undergo , Phillotson bid the young man good - day and 
 go away . 
 this visit take place about eleven o'clock in the morning ; but no Sue 
 appear . when Jude go to his dinner at one he see his beloved 
 ahead of he in the street lead up from the North Gate , walk 
 as if no way look for he . speedily overtake she he remark 
 that he have ask she to come to he at the cathedral , and she have 
 promise . 
 " I have be to get my thing from the college , " she say - an 
 observation which he be expect to take as an answer , though it be 
 not one . find she to be in this evasive mood he feel inclined to 
 give she the information so long withhold . 
 " you have not see Mr. Phillotson to - day ? " he venture to inquire . 
 " I have not . but I be not go to be cross - examined about he ; and 
 if you ask anything more I will not   answer ! " 
 " it be very odd that - " he stop , regard she . 
 " what ? " 
 " that you be often not so nice in your real presence as you be in 
 your letter ! " 
 " do it really seem so to you ? " say she , smile with quick 
 curiosity . " well , that be strange ; but I feel just the same about 
 you , Jude . when you be go away I seem such a coldhearted - " 
 as she know his sentiment towards her Jude see that they be get 
 upon dangerous ground . it be now , he think , that he must speak as 
 an honest man . 
 but he do not speak , and she continue : " it be that which make I 
 write and say - I do not   mind your love I - if you want to , much ! " 
 the exultation he might have feel at what that imply , or seem to 
 imply , be nullify by his intention , and he rest rigid till he 
 begin : " I have never tell you - " 
 " yes you have , " murmur she . 
 " I mean , I have never tell you my history - all of it . " 
 " but I guess it . I know nearly . " 
 Jude look up . could she possibly know of that morning performance 
 of his with Arabella ; which in a few month have cease to be a 
 marriage more completely than by death ? he see that she do not . 
 " I can not   quite tell you here in the street , " he go on with a gloomy 
 tongue . " and you have well not come to my lodging . let we go in 
 here . " 
 the building by which they stand be the market - house ; it be the 
 only place available ; and they enter , the market be over , and 
 the stall and area empty . he would have prefer a more congenial 
 spot , but , as usually happen , in place of a romantic field or solemn 
 aisle for his tale , it be tell while they walk up and down over a 
 floor litter with rotten cabbage - leaf , and amid all the usual 
 squalor of decay vegetable matter and unsaleable refuse . he 
 begin and finish his brief narrative , which merely lead up to the 
 information that he have marry a wife some year early , and that 
 his wife be live still . almost before her countenance have time to 
 change she hurry out the word , 
 " why do not   you tell I before ! " 
 " I could not . it seem so cruel to tell it . " 
 " to yourself , Jude . so it be well to be cruel to I ! " 
 " no , dear darling ! " cry Jude passionately . he try to take she 
 hand , but she withdraw it . their old relation of confidence seem 
 suddenly to have end , and the antagonism of sex to sex be leave 
 without any counter - poise predilection . she be his comrade , 
 friend , unconscious sweetheart no long ; and her eye regard he 
 in estranged silence . 
 " I be ashamed of the episode in my life which bring about the 
 marriage , " he continue . " I can not   explain it precisely now . I could 
 have do it if you have take it differently ! " 
 " but how can I ? " she burst out . " here I have be say , or 
 writing , that - that you might love I , or something of the 
 sort ! - just out of charity - and all the time - oh , it be perfectly 
 damnable how thing be ! " she say , stamp her foot in a nervous 
 quiver . 
 " you take I wrong , Sue ! I never think you care for I at all , 
 till quite lately ; so I feel it do not matter ! do you care for I , 
 Sue ? - you know how I mean ? - I do not   like ' out of charity ' at all ! " 
 it be a question which in the circumstance Sue do not choose to 
 answer . 
 " I suppose she - your wife - be - a very pretty woman , even if she be 
 wicked ? " she ask quickly . 
 " she be pretty enough , as far as that go . " 
 " pretty than I be , no doubt ! " 
 " you be not the least alike . and I have never see she for 
 year ... but she be sure to come back - they always do ! " 
 " how strange of you to stay apart from she like this ! " say Sue , 
 her tremble lip and lumpy throat belie her irony . " you , such a 
 religious man . how will the demi - god in your Pantheon - I mean those 
 legendary person you call saint - intercede for you after this ? 
 now if I have do such a thing it would have be different , and not 
 remarkable , for I at least do not   regard marriage as a sacrament . 
 your theory be not so advanced as your practice ! " 
 " Sue , you be terribly cut when you like to be - a perfect 
 voltaire ! but you must treat I as you will ! " 
 when she see how wretched he be she soften , and try to blink 
 away her sympathetic tear say with all the win reproachfulness 
 of a heart - hurt woman : " ah - you should have tell I before you give 
 I that idea that you want to be allow to love I ! I have no 
 feeling before that moment at the railway - station , except - " for 
 once Sue be as miserable as he , in her attempt to keep herself free 
 from emotion , and her less than half - success . 
 " do not   cry , dear ! " he implore . 
 " I be - not cry - because I mean to - love you ; but because of your 
 want of - confidence ! " 
 they be quite screen from the market - square without , and he could 
 not help put out his arm towards her waist . his momentary desire 
 be the mean of her rallying . " no , no ! " she say , draw back 
 stringently , and wipe her eye . " of course not ! it would be 
 hypocrisy to pretend that it would be mean as from my cousin ; and it 
 can not   be in any other way . " 
 they move on a dozen pace , and she show herself recover . it 
 be distract to Jude , and his heart would have ache less have she 
 appear anyhow but as she do appear ; essentially large - minded and 
 generous on reflection , despite a previous exercise of those narrow 
 womanly humour on impulse that be necessary to give her sex . 
 " I do not   blame you for what you could not   help , " she say , smile . 
 " how should I be so foolish ? I do blame you a little bit for not 
 tell I before . but , after all , it do not   matter . we should 
 have have to keep apart , you see , even if this have not be in your 
 life . " 
 " no , we should not , Sue ! this be the only obstacle . " 
 " you forget that I must have love you , and want to be your 
 wife , even if there have be no obstacle , " say Sue , with a gentle 
 seriousness which do not reveal her mind . " and then we be cousin , 
 and it be bad for cousin to marry . and - I be engaged to somebody 
 else . as to our go on together as we be go , in a sort of 
 friendly way , the people round we would have make it unable to 
 continue . their view of the relation of man and woman be limited , 
 as be prove by their expel I from the school . their philosophy 
 only recognize relation base on animal desire . the wide field 
 of strong attachment where desire play , at least , only a secondary 
 part , be ignore by they - the part of - who be it ? - Venus Urania . " 
 her be able to talk learnedly show that she be mistress of 
 herself again ; and before they part she have almost regain she 
 vivacious glance , her reciprocity of tone , her gay manner , and her 
 second - thought attitude of critical largeness towards other of her 
 age and sex . 
 he could speak more freely now . " there be several reason against 
 my tell you rashly . one be what I have say ; another , that 
 it be always impress upon I that I ought not to marry - that 
 I belong to an odd and peculiar family - the wrong breed for 
 marriage . " 
 " ah - who use to say that to you ? " 
 " my great - aunt . she say it always end badly with we Fawleys . " 
 " that be strange . my father use to say the same to I ! " 
 they stand possess by the same thought , ugly enough , even as an 
 assumption : that a union between they , have such be possible , would 
 have mean a terrible intensification of unfitness - two bitter in 
 one dish . 
 " oh , but there can not   be anything in it ! " she say with nervous 
 lightness . " our family have be unlucky of late year in choose 
 mate - that be all . " 
 and then they pretend to persuade themselves that all that have 
 happen be of no consequence , and that they could still be cousin 
 and friend and warm correspondent , and have happy genial time 
 when they meet , even if they meet less frequently than before . their 
 parting be in good friendship , and yet Jude 's last look into her 
 eye be ting with inquiry , for he feel that he do not even now 
 quite know her mind . 
 VII 
 tiding from Sue a day or two after pass across Jude like a 
 wither blast . 
 before read the letter he be lead to suspect that its content 
 be of a somewhat serious kind by catch sight of the 
 signature - which be in her full name , never use in her 
 correspondence with he since her first note : 
 MY DEAR JUDE , - I have something to tell you which perhaps 
 you will not be surprised to hear , though certainly it may 
 strike you as be accelerate   as the railway company 
 say of their train . Mr. Phillotson and I be to be marry 
 quite soon - in three or four week . we have intend , as you 
 know , to wait till I have go through my course of training 
 and obtain my certificate , so as to assist he , if 
 necessary , in the teaching . but he generously say he do 
 not see any object in wait , now I be not at the training 
 school . it be so good of he , because the awkwardness of my 
 situation have really come about by my fault in get 
 expel . 
 wish I joy . remember I say you be to , and you must not 
 refuse ! - your affectionate cousin , 
 SUSANNA FLORENCE MARY BRIDEHEAD . 
 Jude stagger under the news ; could eat no breakfast ; and keep on 
 drink tea because his mouth be so dry . then presently he go 
 back to his work and laugh the usual bitter laugh of a man so 
 confront . everything seem turn to satire . and yet , what 
 could the poor girl do ? he ask himself : and feel bad than 
 shed tear . 
 " o Susanna Florence Mary ! " he say as he work . " you do not   know 
 what marriage mean ! " 
 could it be possible that his announcement of his own marriage have 
 prick she on to this , just as his visit to she when in liquor may 
 have prick she on to her engagement ? to be sure , there seem to 
 exist these other and sufficient reason , practical and social , for 
 her decision ; but Sue be not a very practical or calculate person ; 
 and he be compel to think that a pique at have his secret 
 sprung upon she have move she to give way to Phillotson 's probable 
 representation , that the good course to prove how unfounded be the 
 suspicion of the school authority would be to marry he off - hand , 
 as in fulfilment of an ordinary engagement . Sue have , in fact , be 
 place in an awkward corner . poor Sue ! 
 he determine to play the Spartan ; to make the good of it , and 
 support she ; but he could not write the request good wish for a 
 day or two . meanwhile there come another note from his impatient 
 little dear : 
 Jude , will you give I away ? I have nobody else who could 
 do it so conveniently as you , be the only married relation 
 I have here on the spot , even if my father be friendly 
 enough to be willing , which he be not . I hope you will not   think 
 it a trouble ? I have be look at the marriage service in 
 the prayer - book , and it seem to I very humiliating that a 
 giver - away should be require at all . accord to the 
 ceremony as there print , my bridegroom choose I of his 
 own will and pleasure ; but I do not   choose he . somebody 
 give I to he , like a she - ass or she - goat , or any other 
 domestic animal . bless your exalt view of woman , O 
 churchman ! but I forget : I be no long privileged to tease 
 you . - ever , 
 SUSANNA FLORENCE MARY BRIDEHEAD . 
 Jude screw himself up to heroic key ; and reply : 
 MY DEAR SUE , - of course I wish you joy ! and also of course 
 I will give you away . what I suggest be that , as you have 
 no house of your own , you do not marry from your school 
 friend 's , but from mine . it would be more proper , I think , 
 since I be , as you say , the person near relate to you in 
 this part of the world . 
 I do not   see why you sign your letter in such a new and 
 terribly formal way ? surely you care a bit about I 
 still ! - ever your affectionate , 
 JUDE . 
 what have jar on he even more than the signature be a little 
 sting he have be silent on - the phrase " married relation " - what an 
 idiot it make he seem as her lover ! if Sue have write that in 
 satire , he could hardly forgive she ; if in suffer - ah , that be 
 another thing ! 
 his offer of his lodging must have commend itself to Phillotson 
 at any rate , for the schoolmaster send he a line of warm thank , 
 accept the convenience . Sue also thank he . Jude immediately 
 move into more commodious quarter , as much to escape the espionage 
 of the suspicious landlady who have be one cause of Sue 's unpleasant 
 experience as for the sake of room . 
 then Sue write to tell he the day fix for the wedding ; and Jude 
 decide , after inquiry , that she should come into residence on the 
 following Saturday , which would allow of a ten day ' stay in the city 
 prior to the ceremony , sufficiently represent a nominal residence 
 of fifteen . 
 she arrive by the ten o'clock train on the day aforesaid , Jude not 
 go to meet she at the station , by her special request , that he 
 should not lose a morning 's work and pay , she say   if this be 
 her true reason . but so well by this time do he know Sue that the 
 remembrance of their mutual sensitiveness at emotional crisis might , 
 he think , have weigh with she in this . when he come home to 
 dinner she have take possession of her apartment . 
 she live in the same house with he , but on a different floor , and 
 they see each other little , an occasional supper be the only meal 
 they take together , when Sue 's manner be something like that of a 
 scared child . what she feel he do not know ; their conversation be 
 mechanical , though she do not look pale or ill . Phillotson come 
 frequently , but mostly when Jude be absent . on the morning of the 
 wedding , when Jude have give himself a holiday , Sue and her cousin 
 have breakfast together for the first and last time during this 
 curious interval ; in his room - the parlour - which he have hire for 
 the period of Sue 's residence . see , as woman do , how helpless he 
 be in make the place comfortable , she bustle about . 
 " what be the matter , Jude ? " she say suddenly . 
 he be lean with his elbow on the table and his chin on his 
 hand , look into a futurity which seem to be sketch out on the 
 tablecloth . 
 " oh - nothing ! " 
 " you be ' father ' , you know . that be what they call the man who give 
 you away . " 
 Jude could have say " Phillotson 's age entitle he to be call 
 that ! " but he would not annoy she by such a cheap retort . 
 she talk incessantly , as if she dread his indulgence in 
 reflection , and before the meal be over both he and she wish they 
 have not put such confidence in their new view of thing , and have 
 take breakfast apart . what oppress Jude be the thought that , 
 have do a wrong thing of this sort himself , he be aid and 
 abet the woman he love in do a like wrong thing , instead of 
 implore and warn she against it . it be on his tongue to say , 
 " you have quite make up your mind ? " 
 after breakfast they go out on an errand together move by a mutual 
 thought that it be the last opportunity they would have of indulge 
 in unceremonious companionship . by the irony of fate , and the 
 curious trick in Sue 's nature of tempt Providence at critical 
 time , she take his arm as they walk through the muddy street - a 
 thing she have never do before in her life - and on turn the 
 corner they find themselves close to a grey perpendicular church 
 with a low - pitch roof - the church of St. Thomas . 
 " that be the church , " say Jude . 
 " where I be go to be marry ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " indeed ! " she exclaim with curiosity . " how I should like to go in 
 and see what the spot be like where I be so soon to kneel and do it . " 
 again he say to himself , " she do not realize what marriage mean ! " 
 he passively acquiesce in her wish to go in , and they enter by 
 the western door . the only person inside the gloomy building be 
 a charwoman cleaning . Sue still hold Jude 's arm , almost as if she 
 love he . cruelly sweet , indeed , she have be to he that morning ; 
 but his thought of a penance in store for she be temper by an 
 ache : 
 ... I can find no way 
 how a blow should fall , such as fall on man , 
 nor prove too much for your womanhood ! 
 they stroll undemonstratively up the nave towards the altar 
 railing , which they stand against in silence , turn then and 
 walk down the nave again , her hand still on his arm , precisely 
 like a couple just married . the too suggestive incident , entirely 
 of her making , nearly break down Jude . 
 " I like to do thing like this , " she say in the delicate voice of an 
 epicure in emotion , which leave no doubt that she speak the truth . 
 " I know you do ! " say Jude . 
 " they be interesting , because they have probably never be do 
 before . I shall walk down the church like this with my husband in 
 about two hour , shall not   I ! " 
 " no doubt you will ! " 
 " be it like this when you be marry ? " 
 " good God , Sue - do not   be so awfully merciless ! ... there , dear one , 
 I do not   mean it ! " 
 " ah - you be vex ! " she say regretfully , as she blink away an 
 access of eye moisture . " and I promise never to vex you ! ... I 
 suppose I ought not to have ask you to bring I in here . oh , I 
 ought not ! I see it now . my curiosity to hunt up a new sensation 
 always lead I into these scrape . forgive I ! ... you will , will not 
 you , Jude ? " 
 the appeal be so remorseful that Jude 's eye be even wet than 
 her as he press her hand for Yes . 
 " now we will hurry away , and I will not   do it any more ! " she continue 
 humbly ; and they come out of the building , Sue intend to go 
 on to the station to meet Phillotson . but the first person they 
 encounter on enter the main street be the schoolmaster himself , 
 whose train have arrive soon than Sue expect . there be nothing 
 really to demur to in she lean on Jude 's arm ; but she withdraw she 
 hand , and Jude think that Phillotson have look surprised . 
 " we have be do such a funny thing ! " say she , smile candidly . 
 " we have   be to the church , rehearse as it be . have not   we , Jude ? " 
 " how ? " say Phillotson curiously . 
 Jude inwardly deplore what he think to be unnecessary frankness ; 
 but she have go too far not to explain all , which she accordingly 
 do , tell he how they have march up to the altar . 
 see how puzzled Phillotson seem , Jude say as cheerfully as he 
 could , " I be go to buy she another little present . will you both 
 come to the shop with I ? " 
 " no , " say Sue , " I will go on to the house with he " ; and request 
 her lover not to be a long time she depart with the schoolmaster . 
 Jude soon join they at his room , and shortly after they prepare 
 for the ceremony . Phillotson 's hair be brush to a painful 
 extent , and his shirt collar appear stiff than it have be for 
 the previous twenty year . beyond this he look dignified and 
 thoughtful , and altogether a man of whom it be not unsafe to predict 
 that he would make a kind and considerate husband . that he adore 
 Sue be obvious ; and she could almost be see to feel that she be 
 undeserve his adoration . 
 although the distance be so short he have hire a fly from the Red 
 Lion , and six or seven woman and child have gather by the door 
 when they come out . the schoolmaster and Sue be unknown , though 
 Jude be get to be recognize as a citizen ; and the couple be 
 judge to be some relation of his from a distance , nobody suppose 
 Sue to have be a recent pupil at the training school . 
 in the carriage Jude take from his pocket his extra little 
 wedding - present , which turn out to be two or three yard of white 
 tulle , which he throw over her bonnet and all , as a veil . 
 " it look so odd over a bonnet , " she say . " I will take the bonnet 
 off . " 
 " oh no - let it stay , " say Phillotson . and she obey . 
 when they have pass up the church and be stand in their place 
 Jude find that the antecedent visit have certainly take off the edge 
 of this performance , but by the time they be half - way on with the 
 service he wish from his heart that he have not undertake the 
 business of give she away . how could Sue have have the temerity to 
 ask he to do it - a cruelty possibly to herself as well as to he ? 
 woman be different from man in such matter . be it that they 
 be , instead of more sensitive , as repute , more callous , and less 
 romantic ; or be they more heroic ? or be Sue simply so perverse 
 that she wilfully give herself and he pain for the odd and mournful 
 luxury of practise long - suffering in her own person , and of be 
 touch with tender pity for he at have make he practise it ? he 
 could perceive that her face be nervously set , and when they reach 
 the try ordeal of Jude give she to Phillotson she could hardly 
 command herself ; rather , however , as it seem , from her knowledge of 
 what her cousin must feel , whom she need not have have there at all , 
 than from self - consideration . possibly she would go on inflict 
 such pain again and again , and grieve for the sufferer again and 
 again , in all her colossal inconsistency . 
 Phillotson seem not to notice , to be surround by a mist which 
 prevent his see the emotion of other . as soon as they have 
 sign their name and come away , and the suspense be over , Jude 
 feel relieve . 
 the meal at his lodging be a very simple affair , and at two o'clock 
 they go off . in cross the pavement to the fly she look back ; 
 and there be a frightened light in her eye . could it be that Sue 
 have act with such unusual foolishness as to plunge into she know 
 not what for the sake of assert her independence of he , of 
 retaliate on he for his secrecy ? perhaps Sue be thus venturesome 
 with man because she be childishly ignorant of that side of their 
 nature which wear out woman 's heart and life . 
 when her foot be on the carriage - step she turn round , say that 
 she have forget something . Jude and the landlady offer to get 
 it . 
 " no , " she say , run back . " it be my handkerchief . I know where 
 I leave it . " 
 Jude follow she back . she have find it , and come hold it in her 
 hand . she look into his eye with her own tearful one , and her 
 lip suddenly part as if she be go to avow something . but she 
 go on ; and whatever she have mean to say remain unspoken . 
 VIII 
 Jude wonder if she have really leave her handkerchief behind ; or 
 whether it be that she have miserably wish to tell he of a love 
 that at the last moment she could not bring herself to express . 
 he could not stay in his silent lodging when they be go , and 
 fear that he might be tempt to drown his misery in alcohol he 
 go upstairs , change his dark clothe for his white , his thin boot 
 for his thick , and proceed to his customary work for the afternoon . 
 but in the cathedral he seem to hear a voice behind he , and to 
 be possess with an idea that she would come back . she could not 
 possibly go home with Phillotson , he fancy . the feeling grow and 
 stir . the moment that the clock strike the last of his working 
 hour he throw down his tool and rush homeward . " have anybody be 
 for I ? " he ask . 
 nobody have be there . 
 as he could claim the downstair sit - room till twelve o'clock 
 that night he sit in it all the evening ; and even when the clock have 
 strike eleven , and the family have retire , he could not shake off 
 the feeling that she would come back and sleep in the little room 
 adjoin his own in which she have sleep so many previous day . her 
 action be always unpredictable : why should she not come ? gladly 
 would he have compound for the denial of she as a sweetheart and 
 wife by have she live thus as a fellow - lodger and friend , even on 
 the most distant term . his supper still remain spread , and go 
 to the front door , and softly set it open , he return to the 
 room and sit as watcher sit on Old - Midsummer eve , expect the 
 phantom of the Beloved . but she do not come . 
 have indulge in this wild hope he go upstairs , and look out of 
 the window , and picture she through the evening journey to London , 
 whither she and Phillotson have go for their holiday ; their rattle 
 along through the damp night to their hotel , under the same sky of 
 rib cloud as that he beheld , through which the moon show its 
 position rather than its shape , and one or two of the large star 
 make themselves visible as faint nebulae only . it be a new 
 beginning of Sue 's history . he project his mind into the future , 
 and see she with child more or less in her own likeness around 
 she . but the consolation of regard they as a continuation of 
 her identity be deny to he , as to all such dreamer , by the 
 wilfulness of Nature in not allow issue from one parent alone . 
 every desire renewal of an existence be debase by be half alloy . 
 " if at the estrangement or death of my lost love , I could go and see 
 her child - her solely - there would be comfort in it ! " say Jude . 
 and then he again uneasily see , as he have latterly see with more and 
 more frequency , the scorn of Nature for man 's fine emotion , and her 
 lack of interest in his aspiration . 
 the oppressive strength of his affection for Sue show itself on 
 the morrow and follow day yet more clearly . he could no long 
 endure the light of the Melchester lamp ; the sunshine be as drab 
 paint , and the blue sky as zinc . then he receive news that his old 
 aunt be dangerously ill at Marygreen , which intelligence almost 
 coincide with a letter from his former employer at Christminster , 
 who offer he permanent work of a good class if he would come back . 
 the letter be almost a relief to he . he start to visit Aunt 
 Drusilla , and resolve to go onward to Christminster to see what 
 worth there might be in the builder 's offer . 
 Jude find his aunt even bad than the communication from the Widow 
 Edlin have lead he to expect . there be every possibility of she 
 linger on for week or month , though little likelihood . he write 
 to Sue inform she of the state of her aunt , and suggest that 
 she might like to see her aged relative alive . he would meet she at 
 Alfredston Road , the follow evening , Monday , on his way back from 
 Christminster , if she could come by the up - train which cross his 
 down - train at that station . next morning , accord , he go on to 
 Christminster , intend to return to Alfredston soon enough to keep 
 the suggest appointment with Sue . 
 the city of learning wear an estranged look , and he have lose all 
 feeling for its association . yet as the sun make vivid light 
 and shade of the mullioned architecture of the facade , and draw 
 pattern of the crinkle battlement on the young turf of the 
 quadrangle , Jude think he have never see the place look more 
 beautiful . he come to the street in which he have first behold Sue . 
 the chair she have occupy when , lean over her ecclesiastical 
 scroll , a hog - hair brush in her hand , her girlish figure have 
 arrest the gaze of his inquire eye , stand precisely in its 
 former spot , empty . it be as if she be dead , and nobody have be 
 find capable of succeed she in that artistic pursuit . Hers be 
 now the city phantom , while those of the intellectual and devotional 
 worthy who have once move he to emotion be no long able to 
 assert their presence there . 
 however , here he be ; and in fulfilment of his intention he go on 
 to his former lodging in " Beersheba , " near the ritualistic church of 
 St. Silas . the old landlady who open the door seem glad to see 
 he again , and bring some lunch inform he that the builder who 
 have employ he have call to inquire his address . 
 Jude go on to the stone - yard where he have work . but the old 
 shed and banker be distasteful to he ; he feel it impossible to 
 engage himself to return and stay in this place of vanish dream . 
 he long for the hour of the homeward train to Alfredston , where he 
 might probably meet Sue . 
 then , for one ghastly half - hour of depression cause by these scene , 
 there return upon he that feeling which have be his undo more 
 than once - that he be not worth the trouble of be take care of 
 either by himself or other ; and during this half - hour he meet Tinker 
 Taylor , the bankrupt ecclesiastical ironmonger , at fourway , who 
 propose that they should adjourn to a bar and drink together . 
 they walk along the street till they stand before one of the 
 great palpitating centre of Christminster life , the inn wherein he 
 formerly have respond to the challenge to rehearse the Creed in 
 Latin - now a popular tavern with a spacious and invite entrance , 
 which give admittance to a bar that have be entirely renovate and 
 refit in modern style since Jude 's residence here . 
 Tinker Taylor drink off his glass and depart , say it be too 
 stylish a place now for he to feel at home in unless he be drunker 
 than he have money to be just then . Jude be long finish his , 
 and stand abstractedly silent in the , for the minute , almost empty 
 place . the bar have be gutte and newly arrange throughout , 
 mahogany fixture have take the place of the old paint 
 one , while at the back of the standing - space there be stuff 
 sofa - bench . the room be divide into compartment in the approve 
 manner , between which be screen of ground glass in mahogany 
 framing , to prevent toper in one compartment be put to the blush 
 by the recognition of those in the next . on the inside of the 
 counter two barmaid leant over the white - handle beer - engine , 
 and the row of little silver tap inside , drip into a pewter 
 trough . 
 feel tired , and have nothing more to do till the train leave , 
 Jude sit down on one of the sofas . at the back of the barmaid rise 
 bevel - edge mirror , with glass shelf run along their front , 
 on which stand precious liquid that Jude do not know the name 
 of , in bottle of topaz , sapphire , ruby and amethyst . the moment 
 be enliven by the entrance of some customer into the next 
 compartment , and the starting of the mechanical tell - tale of monie 
 receive , which emit a ting - ting every time a coin be put in . 
 the barmaid attend to this compartment be invisible to Jude 's 
 direct glance , though a reflection of she back in the glass behind 
 she be occasionally catch by his eye . he have only observe this 
 listlessly , when she turn her face for a moment to the glass to set 
 her hair tidy . then he be amazed to discover that the face be 
 Arabella 's . 
 if she have come on to his compartment she would have see he . 
 but she do not , this be preside over by the maiden on the other 
 side . Abby be in a black gown , with white linen cuff and a broad 
 white collar , and her figure , more developed than formerly , be 
 accentuate by a bunch of daffodil that she wear on her left bosom . 
 in the compartment she serve stand an electro - plat fountain of 
 water over a spirit - lamp , whose blue flame send a steam from the top , 
 all this be visible to he only in the mirror behind she ; which 
 also reflect the face of the man she be attend to - one of they 
 a handsome , dissipate young fellow , possibly an undergraduate , who 
 have be relate to she an experience of some humorous sort . 
 " oh , Mr. Cockman , now ! how can you tell such a tale to I in my 
 innocence ! " she cry gaily . " Mr. Cockman , what do you use to make 
 your moustache curl so beautiful ? " as the young man be clean shaven 
 the retort provoke a laugh at his expense . 
 " come ! " say he , " I will have a curacao ; and a light , please . " 
 she serve the liqueur from one of the lovely bottle and strike 
 a match hold it to his cigarette with minister archness while he 
 whiff . 
 " well , have you hear from your husband lately , my dear ? " he ask . 
 " not a sound , " say she . 
 " where be he ? " 
 " I leave he in Australia ; and I suppose he be there still . " 
 Jude 's eye grow rounder . 
 " what make you part from he ? " 
 " do not   you ask question , and you will not   hear lie . " 
 " come then , give I my change , which you have   be keep from I for 
 the last quarter of an hour ; and I will romantically vanish up the 
 street of this picturesque city . " 
 she hand the change over the counter , in take which he catch she 
 finger and hold they . there be a slight struggle and titter , and 
 he bid her good - bye and left . 
 Jude have look on with the eye of a daze philosopher . it be 
 extraordinary how far removed from his life Arabella now seem to 
 be . he could not realize their nominal closeness . and , this be 
 the case , in his present frame of mind he be indifferent to the fact 
 that Arabella be his wife indeed . 
 the compartment that she serve empty itself of visitor , and 
 after a brief thought he enter it , and go forward to the counter . 
 Arabella do not recognize he for a moment . then their glance meet . 
 she start ; till a humorous impudence sparkle in her eye , and she 
 speak . 
 " well , I be blest ! I think you be underground year ago ! " 
 " oh ! " 
 " I never hear anything of you , or I do not   know that I should 
 have come here . but never mind ! what shall I treat you to this 
 afternoon ? a Scotch and soda ? come , anything that the house will 
 afford , for old acquaintance ' sake ! " 
 " thank , Arabella , " say Jude without a smile . " but I do not   want 
 anything more than I have   have . " the fact be that her unexpected 
 presence there have destroy at a stroke his momentary taste for 
 strong liquor as completely as if it have whisk he back to his 
 milk - feed infancy . 
 " that be a pity , now you could get it for nothing . " 
 " how long have you be here ? " 
 " about six week . I return from Sydney three month ago . I always 
 like this business , you know . " 
 " I wonder you come to this place ! " 
 " well , as I say , I think you be go to glory , and be in 
 London I see the situation in an advertisement . nobody be likely to 
 know I here , even if I have mind , for I be never in Christminster 
 in my grow up . " 
 " why do you return from Australia ? " 
 " oh , I have my reason ... then you be not a don yet ? " 
 " no . " 
 " not even a reverend ? " 
 " no . " 
 " nor so much as a rather reverend dissent gentleman ? " 
 " I be as I be . " 
 " true - you look so . " she idly allow her finger to rest on the 
 pull of the beer - engine as she inspect he critically . he observe 
 that her hand be small and whiter than when he have live with 
 she , and that on the hand which pull the engine she wear an 
 ornamental ring set with what seem to be real sapphire - which they 
 be , indeed , and be much admire as such by the young man who 
 frequent the bar . 
 " so you pass as have a live husband , " he continue . 
 " yes . I think it might be awkward if I call myself a widow , as I 
 should have like . " 
 " true . I be know here a little . " 
 " I do not   mean on that account - for as I say I do not   expect you . 
 it be for other reason . " 
 " what be they ? " 
 " I do not   care to go into they , " she reply evasively . " I make a 
 very good living , and I do not   know that I want your company . " 
 here a chappie with no chin , and a moustache like a lady 's eyebrow , 
 come and ask for a curiously compound drink , and Arabella be 
 oblige to go and attend to he . " we can not   talk here , " she say , 
 step back a moment . " can not   you wait till nine ? say yes , and 
 do not   be a fool . I can get off duty two hour soon than usual , if 
 I ask . I be not live in the house at present . " 
 he reflect and say gloomily , " I will come back . I suppose we would 
 well arrange something . " 
 " oh , bother arrange ! I be not go to arrange anything ! " 
 " but I must know a thing or two ; and , as you say , we can not   talk here . 
 very well ; I will call for you . " 
 deposit his unemptied glass he go out and walk up and down the 
 street . here be a rude flounce into the pellucid sentimentality of 
 his sad attachment to Sue . though Arabella 's word be absolutely 
 untrustworthy , he think there might be some truth in her 
 implication that she have not wish to disturb he , and have really 
 suppose he dead . however , there be only one thing now to be do , 
 and that be to play a straightforward part , the law be the law , 
 and the woman between whom and himself there be no more unity than 
 between east and west be in the eye of the Church one person with 
 he . 
 have to meet Arabella here , it be impossible to meet Sue at 
 Alfredston as he have promise . at every thought of this a pang 
 have go through he ; but the conjuncture could not be help . 
 Arabella be perhaps an intended intervention to punish he for his 
 unauthorized love . pass the evening , therefore , in a desultory 
 wait about the town wherein he avoid the precinct of every 
 cloister and hall , because he could not bear to behold they , he 
 repair to the tavern bar while the hundred and one stroke be 
 resound from the Great Bell of Cardinal College , a coincidence 
 which seem to he gratuitous irony . the inn be now brilliantly 
 light up , and the scene be altogether more brisk and gay . the 
 face of the barmaiden have rise in colour , each have a pink 
 flush on her cheek ; their manner be still more vivacious than 
 before - more abandon , more excited , more sensuous , and they 
 express their sentiment and desire less euphemistically , laugh 
 in a lackadaisical tone , without reserve . 
 the bar have be crowd with man of all sort during the previous 
 hour , and he have hear from without the hubbub of their voice ; but 
 the customer be few at last . he nod to Arabella , and tell 
 she that she would find he outside the door when she come away . 
 " but you must have something with I first , " she say with great 
 good humour . " just an early night - cap : I always do . then you can 
 go out and wait a minute , as it be good we should not be see go 
 together . " she draw a couple of liqueur glass of brandy ; and 
 though she have evidently , from her countenance , already take in 
 enough alcohol either by drink or , more probably , from the 
 atmosphere she have breathe for so many hour , she finish her 
 quickly . he also drink his , and go outside the house . 
 in a few minute she come , in a thick jacket and a hat with a black 
 feather . " I live quite near , " she say , take his arm , " and can let 
 myself in by a latch - key at any time . what arrangement do you want 
 to come to ? " 
 " oh - none in particular , " he answer , thoroughly sick and tired , his 
 thought again revert to Alfredston , and the train he do not go 
 by ; the probable disappointment of Sue that he be not there when 
 she arrive , and the miss pleasure of her company on the long and 
 lonely climb by starlight up the hill to Marygreen . " I ought to 
 have go back really ! my aunt be on her deathbed , I fear . " 
 " I will go over with you to - morrow morning . I think I could get a day 
 off . " 
 there be something particularly uncongenial in the idea of Arabella , 
 who have no more sympathy than a tigress with his relation or he , 
 come to the bedside of his die aunt , and meet Sue . yet he 
 say , " of course , if you would like to , you can . " 
 " well , that we will consider ... now , until we have come to some 
 agreement it be awkward our be together here - where you be know , 
 and I be get know , though without any suspicion that I have 
 anything to do with you . as we be go towards the station , 
 suppose we take the nine - forty train to Aldbrickham ? we shall be 
 there in little more than half an hour , and nobody will know we for 
 one night , and we shall be quite free to act as we choose till we 
 have make up our mind whether we will make anything public or not . " 
 " as you like . " 
 " then wait till I get two or three thing . this be my lodging . 
 sometimes when late I sleep at the hotel where I be engage , so 
 nobody will think anything of my stay out . " 
 she speedily return , and they go on to the railway , and make the 
 half - hour 's journey to Aldbrickham , where they enter a third - rate 
 inn near the station in time for a late supper . 
 IX 
 on the morrow between nine and half - past they be journey back 
 to Christminster , the only two occupant of a compartment in a 
 third - class railway - carriage . have , like Jude , make rather a 
 hasty toilet to catch the train , Arabella look a little frowsy , 
 and her face be very far from possess the animation which have 
 characterize it at the bar the night before . when they come out of 
 the station she find that she still have half an hour to spare before 
 she be due at the bar . they walk in silence a little way out of 
 the town in the direction of Alfredston . Jude look up the far 
 highway . 
 " ah ... poor feeble I ! " he murmur at last . 
 " what ? " say she . 
 " this be the very road by which I come into Christminster year ago 
 full of plan ! " 
 " well , whatever the road be I think my time be nearly up , as I have 
 to be in the bar by eleven o'clock . and as I say , I shall not   ask for 
 the day to go with you to see your aunt . so perhaps we have well 
 part here . I would soon not walk up Chief Street with you , since we have 
 come to no conclusion at all . " 
 " very well . but you say when we be get up this morning that 
 you have something you wish to tell I before I leave ? " 
 " so I have - two thing - one in particular . but you would not   promise 
 to keep it a secret . I will tell you now if you promise ? as an honest 
 woman I wish you to know it ... it be what I begin tell you 
 in the night - about that gentleman who manage the Sydney hotel . " 
 Arabella speak somewhat hurriedly for she . " you will keep it close ? " 
 " yes - yes - I promise ! " say Jude impatiently . " of course I do not 
 want to reveal your secret . " 
 " whenever I meet he out for a walk , he use to say that he be much 
 take with my look , and he keep press I to marry he . I never 
 think of come back to England again ; and be out there in 
 Australia , with no home of my own after leave my father , I at last 
 agree , and do . " 
 " what - marry he ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " regularly - legally - in church ? " 
 " yes . and live with he till shortly before I leave . it be stupid , 
 I know ; but I do ! there , now I have   tell you . do not   round upon I ! 
 he talk of come back to England , poor old chap . but if he do , 
 he will not   be likely to find I . " 
 Jude stand pale and fix . 
 " why the devil do not   you tell I last , night ! " he say . 
 " well - I do not ... will not   you make it up with I , then ? " 
 " so in talk of ' your husband ' to the bar gentleman you mean he , 
 of course - not I ! " 
 " of course ... come , do not   fuss about it . " 
 " I have nothing more to say ! " reply Jude . " I have nothing at all 
 to say about the - crime - you have   confess to ! " 
 " Crime ! Pooh . they do not   think much of such as that over there ! 
 lot of them do it ... well , if you take it like that I shall go back 
 to he ! he be very fond of I , and we live honourable enough , and 
 as respectable as any married couple in the colony ! how do I know 
 where you be ? " 
 " I will not   go blame you . I could say a good deal ; but perhaps it 
 would be misplace . what do you wish I to do ? " 
 " nothing . there be one thing more I want to tell you ; but I fancy 
 we have   see enough of one another for the present ! I shall think over 
 what you say about your circumstance , and let you know . " 
 thus they part . Jude watch she disappear in the direction of 
 the hotel , and enter the railway station close by . find that 
 it want three - quarter of an hour of the time at which he could 
 get a train back to Alfredston , he stroll mechanically into the 
 city as far as to the Fourways , where he stand as he have so often 
 stand before , and survey Chief Street stretch ahead , with its 
 college after college , in picturesqueness unrivalle except by such 
 continental vista as the Street of Palaces in Genoa ; the line 
 of the building be as distinct in the morning air as in an 
 architectural drawing . but Jude be far from see or criticize 
 these thing ; they be hide by an indescribable consciousness of 
 Arabella 's midnight contiguity , a sense of degradation at his revive 
 experience with she , of her appearance as she lie asleep at dawn , 
 which set upon his motionless face a look as of one accurst . if he 
 could only have feel resentment towards she he would have be less 
 unhappy ; but he pity while he contemn she . 
 Jude turn and retrace his step . draw again towards the 
 station he start at hear his name pronounce - less at the name 
 than at the voice . to his great surprise no other than Sue stand 
 like a vision before he - her look bodeful and anxious as in a dream , 
 her little mouth nervous , and her strained eye speak reproachful 
 inquiry . 
 " oh , Jude - I be so glad - to meet you like this ! " she say in quick , 
 uneven accent not far from a sob . then she flush as she observe 
 his thought that they have not meet since her marriage . 
 they look away from each other to hide their emotion , take each 
 other 's hand without further speech , and go on together awhile , 
 till she glance at he with furtive solicitude . " I arrive at 
 Alfredston station last night , as you ask I to , and there be 
 nobody to meet I ! but I reach Marygreen alone , and they tell I 
 Aunt be a trifle well . I sit up with she , and as you do not come 
 all night I be frightened about you - I think that perhaps , when 
 you find yourself back in the old city , you be upset at - at 
 think I be - married , and not there as I use to be ; and that you 
 have nobody to speak to ; so you have try to drown your gloom - as you 
 do at that former time when you be disappoint about enter as 
 a student , and have forget your promise to I that you never would 
 again . and this , I think , be why you have not   come to meet I ! " 
 " and you come to hunt I up , and deliver I , like a good angel ! " 
 " I think I would come by the morning train and try to find you - in 
 case - in case - " 
 " I do think of my promise to you , dear , continually ! I shall never 
 break out again as I do , I be sure . I may have be do nothing 
 well , but I be not do that - I loathe the thought of it . " 
 " I be glad your staying have nothing to do with that . but , " she say , 
 the faint pout enter into her tone , " you do not   come back last 
 night and meet I , as you engage to ! " 
 " I do not   - I be sorry to say . I have an appointment at nine 
 o'clock - too late for I to catch the train that would have meet 
 your , or to get home at all . " 
 look at his love one as she appear to he now , in his tender 
 think the sweetest and most disinterested comrade that he have ever 
 have , live largely in vivid imagining , so ethereal a creature 
 that her spirit could be see tremble through her limb , he feel 
 heartily ashamed of his earthliness in spend the hour he have 
 spend in Arabella 's company . there be something rude and immoral 
 in thrust these recent fact of his life upon the mind of one who , 
 to he , be so uncarnate as to seem at time impossible as a human 
 wife to any average man . and yet she be Phillotson 's . how she have 
 become such , how she live as such , pass his comprehension as he 
 regard she to - day . 
 " you will go back with I ? " he say . " there be a train just now . I 
 wonder how my aunt be by this time ... and so , Sue , you really come 
 on my account all this way ! at what an early time you must have 
 start , poor thing ! " 
 " yes . sit up watch alone make I all nerve for you , and 
 instead of go to bed when it get light I start . and now you 
 will not   frighten I like this again about your moral for nothing ? " 
 he be not so sure that she have be frighten about his moral for 
 nothing . he release her hand till they have enter the train , - it 
 seem the same carriage he have lately get out of with another - where 
 they sit down side by side , Sue between he and the window . he 
 regard the delicate line of her profile , and the small , tight , 
 applelike convexity of her bodice , so different from Arabella 's 
 amplitude . though she know he be look at she she do not turn 
 to he , but keep her eye forward , as if afraid that by meet his 
 own some troublous discussion would be initiate . 
 " Sue - you be marry now , you know , like I ; and yet we have be in 
 such a hurry that we have not say a word about it ! " 
 " there be no necessity , " she quickly return . 
 " oh well - perhaps not ... but I wish " 
 " Jude - do not   talk about ME - I wish you would not ! " she entreat . 
 " it distress I , rather . forgive my say it ! ... where do you 
 stay last night ? " 
 she have ask the question in perfect innocence , to change the topic . 
 he know that , and say merely , " at an inn , " though it would have be 
 a relief to tell she of his meeting with an unexpected one . but the 
 latter 's final announcement of her marriage in Australia bewilder 
 he lest what he might say should do his ignorant wife an injury . 
 their talk proceed but awkwardly till they reach Alfredston . 
 that Sue be not as she have be , but be label " Phillotson , " 
 paralyze Jude whenever he want to commune with she as an 
 individual . yet she seem unaltered - he could not say why . 
 there remain the five - mile extra journey into the country , which 
 it be just as easy to walk as to drive , the great part of it be 
 uphill . Jude have never before in his life go that road with Sue , 
 though he have with another . it be now as if he carry a bright 
 light which temporarily banish the shady association of the 
 early time . 
 Sue talk ; but Jude notice that she still keep the conversation 
 from herself . at length he inquire if her husband be well . 
 " o yes , " she say . " he be oblige to be in the school all the day , 
 or he would have come with I . he be so good and kind that to 
 accompany I he would have dismiss the school for once , even 
 against his principle - for he be strongly opposed to give casual 
 holiday - only I would not   let he . I feel it would be well to come 
 alone . Aunt Drusilla , I know , be so very eccentric ; and his being 
 almost a stranger to she now would have make it irksome to both . 
 since it turn out that she be hardly conscious I be glad I do not 
 ask he . " 
 Jude have walk moodily while this praise of Phillotson be be 
 express . " Mr. Phillotson oblige you in everything , as he ought , " 
 he say . 
 " of course . " 
 " you ought to be a happy wife . " 
 " and of course I be . " 
 " Bride , I might almost have say , as yet . it be not so many week 
 since I give you to he , and - " 
 " yes , I know ! I know ! " there be something in her face which belie 
 her late assure word , so strictly proper and so lifelessly speak 
 that they might have be take from a list of model speech in " The 
 Wife 's Guide to conduct . " Jude know the quality of every vibration 
 in Sue 's voice , could read every symptom of her mental condition ; and 
 he be convince that she be unhappy , although she have not be a 
 month marry . but her rush away thus from home , to see the last 
 of a relative whom she have hardly know in her life , prove nothing ; 
 for Sue naturally do such thing as those . 
 " well , you have my good wish now as always , Mrs. Phillotson . " 
 she reproach he by a glance . 
 " no , you be not Mrs. Phillotson , " murmur Jude . " you be dear , 
 free Sue Bridehead , only you do not   know it ! Wifedom have not yet 
 squash up and digest you in its vast maw as an atom which have no 
 further individuality . " 
 Sue put on a look of be offend , till she answer , " nor have 
 husbandom you , so far as I can see ! " 
 " but it have ! " he say , shake his head sadly . 
 when they reach the lone cottage under the fir , between the 
 Brown House and Marygreen , in which Jude and Arabella have live and 
 quarrel , he turn to look at it . a squalid family live there 
 now . he could not help say to Sue : " that be the house my wife and 
 I occupy the whole of the time we live together . I bring she 
 home to that house . " 
 she look at it . " that to you be what the school - house at Shaston 
 be to I . " 
 " yes ; but I be not very happy there as you be in your . " 
 she close her lip in retortive silence , and they walk some way 
 till she glance at he to see how he be take it . " of course I 
 may have exaggerate your happiness - one never know , " he continue 
 blandly . 
 " do not   think that , Jude , for a moment , even though you may have say 
 it to ste I ! he be as good to I as a man can be , and give I 
 perfect liberty - which elderly husband do not   do in general ... if 
 you think I be not happy because he be too old for I , you be wrong . " 
 " I do not   think anything against he - to you dear . " 
 " and you will not   say thing to distress I , will you ? " 
 " I will not . " 
 he say no more , but he know that , from some cause or other , in 
 take Phillotson as a husband , Sue feel that she have do what she 
 ought not to have do . 
 they plunge into the concave field on the other side of which rise 
 the village - the field wherein Jude have receive a thrashing from 
 the farmer many year early . on ascend to the village and 
 approach the house they find Mrs. Edlin stand at the door , who 
 at sight of they lift her hand deprecatingly . " she be downstair , 
 if you will believe I ! " cry the widow . " out o ' bed she get , and 
 nothing could turn she . what will come o't I do not know ! " 
 on enter , there indeed by the fireplace sit the old woman , wrap 
 in blanket , and turn upon they a countenance like that of 
 Sebastiano 's Lazarus . they must have look their amazement , for she 
 say in a hollow voice : 
 " ah - sceere ye , have I ! I be not   go to bide up there no long , 
 to please nobody ! ' tis more than flesh and blood can bear , to be 
 order to do this and that by a feller that do not   know half as well 
 as you do yourself ! ... ah - you will rue this marrying as well as 
 he ! " she add , turn to Sue . " all our family do - and nearly all 
 everybody else 's . you should have do as I do , you simpleton ! and 
 Phillotson the schoolmaster , of all man ! what make ' ee marry he ? " 
 " what make most woman marry , Aunt ? " 
 " ah ! you mean to say you love the man ! " 
 " I do not   mean to say anything definite . " 
 " do ye love un ? " 
 " do not   ask I , Aunt . " 
 " I can mind the man very well . a very civil , honourable liver ; but 
 Lord ! - I do not   want to wownd your feeling , but - there be certain man 
 here and there that no woman of any niceness can stomach . I should 
 have say he be one . I do not   say so now , since you must ha ' know 
 well than I - but that be what I should have say ! " 
 Sue jump up and go out . Jude follow she , and find she in the 
 outhouse , cry . 
 " do not   cry , dear ! " say Jude in distress . " she mean well , but be 
 very crusty and queer now , you know . " 
 " oh no - it be not   that ! " say Sue , try to dry her eye . " I do not 
 mind her roughness one bit . " 
 " what be it , then ? " 
 " it be that what she say be - be true ! " 
 " God - what - you do not   like he ? " ask Jude . 
 " I do not   mean that ! " she say hastily . " that I ought - perhaps I 
 ought not to have marry ! " 
 he wonder if she have really be go to say that at first . 
 they go back , and the subject be smooth over , and her aunt take 
 rather kindly to Sue , tell she that not many young woman newly 
 married would have come so far to see a sick old crone like she . 
 in the afternoon Sue prepare to depart , Jude hire a neighbour to 
 drive she to Alfredston . 
 " I will go with you to the station , if you would like ? " he say . 
 she would not let he . the man come round with the trap , and Jude 
 help she into it , perhaps with unnecessary attention , for she 
 look at he prohibitively . 
 " I suppose - I may come to see you some day , when I be back again at 
 Melchester ? " he half - crossly observe . 
 she bend down and say softly : " no , dear - you be not to come yet . 
 I do not   think you be in a good mood . " 
 " very well , " say Jude . " good - bye ! " 
 " good - bye ! " she wave her hand and be go . 
 " she be right ! I will not   go ! " he murmur . 
 he pass the evening and follow day in mortifying by every 
 possible mean his wish to see she , nearly starve himself in 
 attempt to extinguish by fast his passionate tendency to love 
 she . he read sermon on discipline , and hunt up passage in Church 
 history that treat of the ascetic of the second century . before 
 he have return from Marygreen to Melchester there arrive a letter 
 from Arabella . the sight of it revive a strong feeling of 
 self - condemnation for his brief return to her society than for his 
 attachment to Sue . 
 the letter , he perceive , bear a London postmark instead of the 
 Christminster one . Arabella inform he that a few day after their 
 parting in the morning at Christminster , she have be surprise by an 
 affectionate letter from her australian husband , formerly manager of 
 the hotel in Sydney . he have come to England on purpose to find she ; 
 and have take a free , fully - license public , in Lambeth , where he 
 wish she to join he in conduct the business , which be likely 
 to be a very thriving one , the house be situate in an excellent , 
 densely populate , gin - drink neighbourhood , and already do a 
 trade of L200 a month , which could be easily double . 
 as he have say that he love she very much still , and implore she to 
 tell he where she be , and as they have only part in a slight tiff , 
 and as her engagement in Christminster be only temporary , she have 
 just go to join he as he urge . she could not help feel that 
 she belong to he more than to Jude , since she have properly marry 
 he , and have live with he much long than with her first husband . 
 in thus wish Jude good - bye she bear he no ill - will , and trust 
 he would not turn upon she , a weak woman , and inform against she , 
 and bring she to ruin now that she have a chance of improve her 
 circumstance and lead a genteel life . 
 x 
 Jude return to Melchester , which have the questionable 
 recommendation of be only a dozen and a half mile from his Sue 's 
 now permanent residence . at first he feel that this nearness be a 
 distinct reason for not go southward at all ; but Christminster 
 be too sad a place to bear , while the proximity of Shaston to 
 Melchester might afford he the glory of worst the Enemy in a 
 close engagement , such as be deliberately seek by the priest and 
 virgin of the early Church , who , disdain an ignominious flight 
 from temptation , become even chamber - partner with impunity . 
 Jude do not pause to remember that , in the laconic word of the 
 historian , " insult Nature sometimes vindicate her right " in such 
 circumstance . 
 he now return with feverish desperation to his study for the 
 priesthood - in the recognition that the single - mindedness of his 
 aim , and his fidelity to the cause , have be more than questionable 
 of late . his passion for Sue trouble his soul ; yet his lawful 
 abandonment to the society of Arabella for twelve hour seem 
 instinctively a bad thing - even though she have not tell he of her 
 Sydney husband till afterwards . he have , he verily believe , overcome 
 all tendency to fly to liquor - which , indeed , he have never do from 
 taste , but merely as an escape from intolerable misery of mind . yet 
 he perceive with despondency that , take all round , he be a man of 
 too many passion to make a good clergyman ; the utmost he could hope 
 for be that in a life of constant internal warfare between flesh and 
 spirit the former might not always be victorious . 
 as a hobby , auxiliary to his reading in divinity , he develop his 
 slight skill in church - music and thorough - bass , till he could join in 
 part - singing from notation with some accuracy . a mile or two from 
 Melchester there be a restore village church , to which Jude have 
 originally go to fix the new column and capital . by this mean 
 he have become acquainted with the organist , and the ultimate result 
 be that he join the choir as a bass voice . 
 he walk out to this parish twice every Sunday , and sometimes in the 
 week . one evening about Easter the choir meet for practice , and a new 
 hymn which Jude have hear of as be by a Wessex composer be to be 
 try and prepare for the following week . it turn out to be a 
 strangely emotional composition . as they all sing it over and over 
 again its harmony grow upon Jude , and move he exceedingly . 
 when they have finish he go round to the organist to make 
 inquiry . the score be in manuscript , the name of the composer 
 be at the head , together with the title of the hymn : " the foot 
 of the Cross . " 
 " yes , " say the organist . " he be a local man . he be a professional 
 musician at Kennetbridge - between here and Christminster . the 
 vicar know he . he be bring up and educate in Christminster 
 tradition , which account for the quality of the piece . I think he 
 play in the large church there , and have a surplice choir . he come 
 to Melchester sometimes , and once try to get the cathedral organ 
 when the post be vacant . the hymn be get about everywhere this 
 Easter . " 
 as he walk hum the air on his way home , Jude fall to musing 
 on its composer , and the reason why he compose it . what a man of 
 sympathy he must be ! perplexed and harass as he himself be 
 about Sue and Arabella , and trouble as be his conscience by the 
 complication of his position , how he would like to know that man ! 
 " he of all man would understand my difficulty , " say the impulsive 
 Jude . if there be any person in the world to choose as a 
 confidant , this composer would be the one , for he must have suffer , 
 and throb , and yearned . 
 in brief , ill as he could afford the time and money for the journey , 
 Fawley resolve , like the child that he be , to go to Kennetbridge 
 the very next Sunday . he duly start , early in the morning , for it 
 be only by a series of crooked railway that he could get to the 
 town . about mid - day he reach it , and cross the bridge into the 
 quaint old borough he inquire for the house of the composer . 
 they tell he it be a red brick building some little way far on . 
 also that the gentleman himself have just pass along the street not 
 five minute before . 
 " which way ? " ask Jude with alacrity . 
 " straight along homeward from church . " 
 Jude hasten on , and soon have the pleasure of observe a man in a 
 black coat and a black slouched feel hat no considerable distance 
 ahead . stretch out his leg yet more widely he stalk after . 
 " a hungry soul in pursuit of a full soul ! " he say . " I must speak 
 to that man ! " 
 he could not , however , overtake the musician before he have enter 
 his own house , and then arise the question if this be an expedient 
 time to call . whether or not he decide to do so there and then , now 
 that he have get here , the distance home be too great for he to 
 wait till late in the afternoon . this man of soul would understand 
 scant ceremony , and might be quite a perfect adviser in a case in 
 which an earthly and illegitimate passion have cunningly obtain 
 entrance into his heart through the opening afford for religion . 
 Jude accordingly ring the bell , and be admit . 
 the musician come to he in a moment , and be respectably dress , 
 good - look , and frank in manner , Jude obtain a favourable 
 reception . he be nevertheless conscious that there would be a 
 certain awkwardness in explain his errand . 
 " I have be sing in the choir of a little church near 
 Melchester , " he say . " and we have this week practise ' the foot 
 of the Cross , ' which I understand , sir , that you compose ? " 
 " I do - a year or so ago . " 
 " I - like it . I think it supremely beautiful ! " 
 " ah well - other people have say so too . yes , there be money in 
 it , if I could only see about get it publish . I have other 
 composition to go with it , too ; I wish I could bring they out ; for 
 I have not   make a five - pound note out of any of they yet . these 
 publish people - they want the copyright of an obscure composer 's 
 work , such as mine be , for almost less than I should have to pay a 
 person for make a fair manuscript copy of the score . the one you 
 speak of I have lend to various friend about here and Melchester , 
 and so it have get to be sing a little . but music be a poor staff to 
 lean on - I be give it up entirely . you must go into trade if you 
 want to make money nowadays . the wine business be what I be think 
 of . this be my forthcoming list - it be not issue yet - but you can 
 take one . " 
 he hand Jude an advertisement list of several page in booklet 
 shape , ornamentally margine with a red line , in which be set forth 
 the various claret , champagne , port , sherry , and other wine 
 with which he purpose to initiate his new venture . it take Jude 
 more than by surprise that the man with the soul be thus and thus ; 
 and he feel that he could not open up his confidence . 
 they talk a little long , but constrainedly , for when the musician 
 find that Jude be a poor man his manner change from what it have 
 be while Jude 's appearance and address deceive he as to his 
 position and pursuit . Jude stammer out something about his 
 feeling in wish to congratulate the author on such an exalted 
 composition , and take an embarrassed leave . 
 all the way home by the slow Sunday train , sit in the fireless 
 waiting - room on this cold spring day , he be depressed enough at 
 his simplicity in take such a journey . but no soon do he reach 
 his Melchester lodge than he find await he a letter which have 
 arrive that morning a few minute after he have leave the house . it 
 be a contrite little note from Sue , in which she say , with sweet 
 humility , that she feel she have be horrid in tell he he 
 be not to come to see she , that she despise herself for have 
 be so conventional ; and that he be to be sure to come by the 
 eleven - forty - five train that very Sunday , and have dinner with they 
 at half - past one . 
 Jude almost tear his hair at have miss this letter till it be 
 too late to act upon its content ; but he have chasten himself 
 considerably of late , and at last his chimerical expedition 
 to Kennetbridge really do seem to have be another special 
 intervention of Providence to keep he away from temptation . but a 
 grow impatience of faith , which he have notice in himself more 
 than once of late , make he pass over in ridicule the idea that God 
 send people on fool ' errand . he long to see she ; he be angry 
 at have miss she : and he write instantly , tell she what have 
 happen , and say he have not enough patience to wait till the 
 follow Sunday , but would come any day in the week that she like 
 to name . 
 since he write a little over - ardently , Sue , as her manner be , 
 delay her reply till Thursday before Good Friday , when she say he 
 might come that afternoon if he wish , this be the early day 
 on which she could welcome he , for she be now assistant - teacher in 
 her husband 's school . Jude therefore get leave from the cathedral 
 work at the trifling expense of a stoppage of pay , and go . 
 Part Fourth 
 AT SHASTON 
 " whoso prefer either Matrimony or other Ordinance before 
 the Good of Man and the plain Exigence of Charity , let 
 he profess Papist , or protestant , or what he will , he 
 be no well than a Pharisee . " - J. MILTON . 
 I 
 Shaston , the ancient British Palladour , 
 from whose foundation first such strange report 
 arise , 
  as Drayton sing it , be , and be , in itself the city of a dream . 
 Vague imagining of its castle , its three mint , its magnificent 
 apsidal abbey , the chief glory of South Wessex , its twelve church , 
 its shrine , chantry , hospital , its gable freestone mansion - all 
 now ruthlessly sweep away - throw the visitor , even against his will , 
 into a pensive melancholy , which the stimulate atmosphere and 
 limitless landscape around he can scarcely dispel . the spot be the 
 burial - place of a king and a queen , of abbot and abbess , saint 
 and bishop , knight and squire . the bone of King Edward " the 
 Martyr , " carefully remove hither for holy preservation , bring 
 Shaston a renown which make it the resort of pilgrim from every part 
 of Europe , and enable it to maintain a reputation extend far 
 beyond english shore . to this fair creation of the great Middle - Age 
 the Dissolution be , as historian tell we , the death - knell . with 
 the destruction of the enormous abbey the whole place collapse in a 
 general ruin : the Martyr 's bone meet with the fate of the sacred pile 
 that hold they , and not a stone be now leave to tell where they lie . 
 the natural picturesqueness and singularity of the town still remain ; 
 but strange to say these quality , which be note by many writer 
 in age when scenic beauty be say to have be unappreciate , be 
 pass over in this , and one of the queer and quaint spot in 
 England stand virtually unvisited to - day . 
 it have a unique position on the summit of a steep and impose scarp , 
 rise on the north , south , and west side of the borough out of 
 the deep alluvial Vale of Blackmoor , the view from the Castle Green 
 over three county of verdant pasture - South , Mid , and Nether 
 Wessex - being as sudden a surprise to the unexpectant traveller 's 
 eye as the medicinal air be to his lung . impossible to a railway , 
 it can well be reach on foot , next well by light vehicle ; and 
 it be hardly accessible to these but by a sort of isthmus on the 
 north - east , that connect it with the high chalk table - land on that 
 side . 
 such be , and such be , the now world - forget Shaston or Palladour . 
 its situation render water the great want of the town ; and within 
 living memory , horse , donkey and man may have be see toil 
 up the wind way to the top of the height , laden with tub and 
 barrel fill from the well beneath the mountain , and hawker 
 retail their content at the price of a halfpenny a bucketful . 
 this difficulty in the water supply , together with two other odd 
 fact , namely , that the chief graveyard slop up as steeply as a 
 roof behind the church , and that in former time the town pass 
 through a curious period of corruption , conventual and domestic , give 
 rise to the saying that Shaston be remarkable for three consolation 
 to man , such as the world afford not elsewhere . it be a place 
 where the churchyard lie nearer heaven than the church steeple , where 
 beer be more plentiful than water , and where there be more wanton 
 woman than honest wife and maid . it be also say that after the 
 Middle Ages the inhabitant be too poor to pay their priest , 
 and hence be compel to pull down their church , and refrain 
 altogether from the public worship of God ; a necessity which they 
 bemoan over their cup in the settle of their inn on Sunday 
 afternoon . in those day the Shastonians be apparently not 
 without a sense of humour . 
 there be another peculiarity - this a modern one - which Shaston 
 appear to owe to its site . it be the resting - place and 
 headquarters of the proprietor of wander van , show , 
 shooting - gallery , and other itinerant concern , whose business 
 lie largely at fair and market . as strange wild bird be see 
 assemble on some lofty promontory , meditatively pause for long 
 flight , or to return by the course they follow thither , so here , 
 in this cliff - town , stand in stultify silence the yellow and green 
 caravan bear name not local , as if surprise by a change in the 
 landscape so violent as to hinder their further progress ; and here 
 they usually remain all the winter till they turn to seek again 
 their old track in the following spring . 
 it be to this breezy and whimsical spot that Jude ascend from the 
 near station for the first time in his life about four o'clock one 
 afternoon , and enter on the summit of the peak after a toilsome 
 climb , pass the first house of the aerial town ; and draw towards 
 the school - house . the hour be too early ; the pupil be still in 
 school , hum small , like a swarm of gnat ; and he withdraw a few 
 step along Abbey Walk , whence he regard the spot which fate have 
 make the home of all he love well in the world . in front of the 
 school , which be extensive and stone - build , grow two enormous 
 beech with smooth mouse - colour trunk , as such tree will only 
 grow on chalk upland . within the mullioned and transome window he 
 could see the black , brown , and flaxen crown of the scholar over 
 the sill , and to pass the time away he walk down to the level 
 terrace where the abbey garden once have spread , his heart throb 
 in spite of he . 
 unwilling to enter till the child be dismiss he remain here 
 till young voice could be hear in the open air , and girl in white 
 pinafore over red and blue frock appear dance along the path 
 which the abbess , prioress , subprioress , and fifty nun have demurely 
 pace three century early . retrace his step he find that he 
 have wait too long , and that Sue have go out into the town at the 
 heel of the last scholar , Mr. Phillotson have be absent all the 
 afternoon at a teacher ' meeting at Shottsford . 
 Jude go into the empty schoolroom and sit down , the girl who be 
 sweep the floor have inform he that Mrs. Phillotson would be 
 back again in a few minute . a piano stand near - actually the old 
 piano that Phillotson have possess at Marygreen - and though the dark 
 afternoon almost prevent he see the note Jude touch they in 
 his humble way , and could not help modulate into the hymn which have 
 so affect he in the previous week . 
 a figure move behind he , and think it be still the girl with 
 the broom Jude take no notice , till the person come close and lay 
 her finger lightly upon his bass hand . the impose hand be a 
 little one he seem to know , and he turn . 
 " do not   stop , " say Sue . " I like it . I learn it before I leave 
 Melchester . they use to play it in the training school . " 
 " I can not   strum before you ! play it for I . " 
 " oh well - I do not   mind . " 
 Sue sit down , and her rendering of the piece , though not remarkable , 
 seem divine as compare with his own . she , like he , be evidently 
 touch - to her own surprise - by the recall air ; and when she 
 have finish , and he move his hand towards her , it meet his own 
 half - way . Jude grasp it - just as he have do before her marriage . 
 " it be odd , " she say , in a voice quite change , " that I should care 
 about that air ; because - " 
 " because what ? " 
 " I be not that sort - quite . " 
 " not easily move ? " 
 " I do not   quite mean that . " 
 " oh , but you be one of that sort , for you be just like I at 
 heart ! " 
 " but not at head . " 
 she play on and suddenly turn round ; and by an unpremeditated 
 instinct each clasp the other 's hand again . 
 she utter a force little laugh as she relinquish his quickly . 
 " how funny ! " she say . " I wonder what we both do that for ? " 
 " I suppose because we be both alike , as I say before . " 
 " not in our thought ! perhaps a little in our feeling . " 
 " and they rule thought ... be not   it enough to make one blaspheme 
 that the composer of that hymn be one of the most commonplace man I 
 ever meet ! " 
 " what - you know he ? " 
 " I go to see he . " 
 " oh , you goose - to do just what I should have do ! why do you ? " 
 " because we be not alike , " he say drily . 
 " now we will have some tea , " say Sue . " shall we have it here instead 
 of in my house ? it be no trouble to get the kettle and thing 
 bring in . we do not   live at the school you know , but in that 
 ancient dwelling across the way call Old - Grove Place . it be so 
 antique and dismal that it depress I dreadfully . such house be 
 very well to visit , but not to live in - I feel crush into the earth 
 by the weight of so many previous life there spend . in a new place 
 like these school there be only your own life to support . sit down , 
 and I will tell Ada to bring the tea - thing across . " 
 he wait in the light of the stove , the door of which she fling open 
 before go out , and when she return , follow by the maiden with 
 tea , they sit down by the same light , assist by the blue ray of a 
 spirit - lamp under the brass kettle on the stand . 
 " this be one of your wedding - present to I , " she say , signify 
 the latter . 
 " yes , " say Jude . 
 the kettle of his gift sing with some satire in its note , to his 
 mind ; and to change the subject he say , " do you know of any good 
 readable edition of the uncanonical book of the New Testament ? you 
 do not   read they in the school I suppose ? " 
 " oh dear no ! - ' twould alarm the neighbourhood ... yes , there be one . 
 I be not familiar with it now , though I be interested in it when my 
 former friend be alive . Cowper 's Apocryphal Gospels . " 
 " that sound like what I want . " his thought , however revert with 
 a twinge to the " former friend " - by whom she mean , as he know , the 
 university comrade of her early day . he wonder if she talk of 
 he to Phillotson . 
 " the Gospel of Nicodemus be very nice , " she go on to keep he from 
 his jealous thought , which she read clearly , as she always do . 
 indeed when they talk on an indifferent subject , as now , there be 
 ever a second silent conversation pass between their emotion , 
 so perfect be the reciprocity between they . " it be quite like the 
 genuine article . all cut up into verse , too ; so that it be like 
 one of the other evangelist read in a dream , when thing be the 
 same , yet not the same . but , Jude , do you take an interest in those 
 question still ? be you get up Apologetica ? " 
 " yes . I be read Divinity hard than ever . " 
 she regard he curiously . 
 " why do you look at I like that ? " say Jude . 
 " oh - why do you want to know ? " 
 " I be sure you can tell I anything I may be ignorant of in that 
 subject . you must have learn a lot of everything from your dear 
 dead friend ! " 
 " we will not   get on to that now ! " she coax . " will you be carve out 
 at that church again next week , where you learn the pretty hymn ? " 
 " yes , perhaps . " 
 " that will be very nice . shall I come and see you there ? it be in 
 this direction , and I could come any afternoon by train for half an 
 hour ? " 
 " no . do not   come ! " 
 " what - be not   we go to be friend , then , any long , as we use to 
 be ? " 
 " no . " 
 " I do not   know that . I think you be always go to be kind to 
 I ! " 
 " no , I be not . " 
 " what have I do , then ? I be sure I think we two - " the 
  tremolo in her voice cause she to break off . 
 " Sue , I sometimes think you be a flirt , " say he abruptly . 
 there be a momentary pause , till she suddenly jump up ; and to his 
 surprise he see by the kettle - flame that her face be flushed . 
 " I can not   talk to you any long , Jude ! " she say , the tragic 
 contralto note have come back as of old . " it be get too dark 
 to stay together like this , after play morbid Good Friday tune 
 that make one feel what one should not ! ... we must not   sit and talk 
 in this way any more . yes - you must go away , for you mistake I ! I 
 be very much the reverse of what you say so cruelly - oh , Jude , it be 
 cruel to say that ! yet I can not   tell you the truth - I should shock 
 you by let you know how I give way to my impulse , and how much I 
 feel that I should not   have be provide with attractiveness unless 
 it be mean to be exercise ! some woman 's love of be love be 
 insatiable ; and so , often , be their love of love ; and in the last 
 case they may find that they can not   give it continuously to the 
 chamber - officer appoint by the bishop 's licence to receive it . 
 but you be so straightforward , Jude , that you can not   understand 
 I ! ... now you must go . I be sorry my husband be not at home . " 
 " be you ? " 
 " I perceive I have say that in mere convention ! honestly I do not 
 think I be sorry . it do not matter , either way , sad to say ! " 
 as they have overdo the grasp of hand some time soon , she touch 
 his finger but lightly when he go out now . he have hardly go 
 from the door when , with a dissatisfied look , she jump on a form 
 and open the iron casement of a window beneath which he be pass 
 in the path without . " when do you leave here to catch your train , 
 Jude ? " she ask . 
 he look up in some surprise . " the coach that run to meet it go 
 in three - quarter of an hour or so . " 
 " what will you do with yourself for the time ? " 
 " oh - wander about , I suppose . perhaps I shall go and sit in the old 
 church . " 
 " it do seem hard of I to pack you off so ! you have think enough 
 of church , Heaven know , without go into one in the dark . stay 
 there . " 
 " where ? " 
 " where you be . I can talk to you well like this than when you 
 be inside ... it be so kind and tender of you to give up half 
 a day 's work to come to see I ! ... you be Joseph the dreamer of 
 dream , dear Jude . and a tragic Don Quixote . and sometimes you 
 be St. Stephen , who , while they be stone he , could see Heaven 
 open . oh , my poor friend and comrade , you will suffer yet ! " 
 now that the high window - sill be between they , so that he could not 
 get at she , she seem not to mind indulge in a frankness she have 
 fear at close quarter . 
 " I have be think , " she continue , still in the tone of one 
 brimful of feeling , " that the social mould civilization fit we into 
 have no more relation to our actual shape than the conventional 
 shape of the constellation have to the real star - pattern . I 
 be call Mrs. Richard Phillotson , live a calm wed life with 
 my counterpart of that name . but I be not really Mrs. Richard 
 Phillotson , but a woman toss about , all alone , with aberrant 
 passion , and unaccountable antipathy ... now you must not   wait 
 long , or you will lose the coach . come and see I again . you 
 must come to the house then . " 
 " yes ! " say Jude . " when shall it be ? " 
 " to - morrow week . good - bye - good - bye ! " she stretch out her hand 
 and stroke his forehead pitifully - just once . Jude say good - bye , 
 and go away into the darkness . 
 pass along Bimport Street he think he hear the wheel of the 
 coach departing , and , truly enough , when he reach the Duke 's arm 
 in the Market Place the coach have go . it be impossible for he 
 to get to the station on foot in time for this train , and he settle 
 himself perforce to wait for the next - the last to Melchester that 
 night . 
 he wander about awhile , obtain something to eat ; and then , have 
 another half - hour on his hand , his foot involuntarily take he 
 through the venerable graveyard of Trinity Church , with its avenue 
 of lime , in the direction of the school again . they be entirely 
 in darkness . she have say she live over the way at Old - Grove 
 Place , a house which he soon discover from her description of its 
 antiquity . 
 a glimmering candlelight shine from a front window , the shutter 
 be yet unclosed . he could see the interior clearly - the floor 
 sink a couple of step below the road without , which have become 
 raise during the century since the house be build . Sue , 
 evidently just come in , be stand with her hat on in this front 
 parlour or sitting - room , whose wall be line with wainscote 
 of panel oak reach from floor to ceiling , the latter be 
 cross by huge mould beam only a little way above her head . the 
 mantelpiece be of the same heavy description , carve with Jacobean 
 pilaster and scroll - work . the century do , indeed , ponderously 
 overhang a young wife who pass her time here . 
 she have open a rosewood work - box , and be look at a photograph . 
 have contemplate it a little while she press it against her 
 bosom , and put it again in its place . 
 then become aware that she have not obscure the window she come 
 forward to do so , candle in hand . it be too dark for she to see 
 Jude without , but he could see her face distinctly , and there be an 
 unmistakable tearfulness about the dark , long - lash eye . 
 she close the shutter , and Jude turn away to pursue his solitary 
 journey home . " whose photograph be she look at ? " he say . he 
 have once give she his ; but she have other , he know . yet it be his , 
 surely ? 
 he know he should go to see she again , accord to her invitation . 
 those earnest man he read of , the saint , whom Sue , with gentle 
 irreverence , call his demi - god , would have shun such encounter 
 if they doubt their own strength . but he could not . he might fast 
 and pray during the whole interval , but the human be more powerful 
 in he than the Divine . 
 II 
 however , if God dispose not , woman do . the next morning but one 
 bring he this note from she : 
 do not   come next week . on your own account do not ! we be 
 too free , under the influence of that morbid hymn and the 
 twilight . think no more than you can help of 
 SUSANNA FLORENCE MARY . 
 the disappointment be keen . he know her mood , the look of her face , 
 when she subscribe herself at length thus . but whatever her mood he 
 could not say she be wrong in her view . he reply : 
 I acquiesce . you be right . it be a lesson in 
 renunciation which I suppose I ought to learn at this 
 season . 
 JUDE . 
 he despatch the note on Easter Eve , and there seem a finality 
 in their decision . but other force and law than theirs be in 
 operation . on Easter Monday morning he receive a message from the 
 Widow Edlin , whom he have direct to telegraph if anything serious 
 happen : 
 your aunt be sink . come at once . 
 he throw down his tool and go . three and a half hour later he 
 be cross the down about Marygreen , and presently plunge into 
 the concave field across which the short cut be make to the village . 
 as he ascend on the other side a labour man , who have be 
 watch his approach from a gate across the path , move uneasily , 
 and prepare to speak . " I can see in his face that she be dead , " 
 say Jude . " Poor Aunt Drusilla ! " 
 it be as he have suppose , and Mrs. Edlin have send out the man to 
 break the news to he . 
 " she would not   have know ' ee . she lie like a doll wi ' glass eye ; 
 so it do not   matter that you be not   here , " say he . 
 Jude go on to the house , and in the afternoon , when everything be 
 do , and the layer - out have finish their beer , and go , he sit 
 down alone in the silent place . it be absolutely necessary to 
 communicate with Sue , though two or three day early they have 
 agree to mutual severance . he write in the brief term : 
 Aunt Drusilla be dead , have be take almost suddenly . 
 the funeral be on Friday afternoon . 
 he remain in and about Marygreen through the intervene day , 
 go out on Friday morning to see that the grave be finish , and 
 wonder if Sue would come . she have not write , and that seem to 
 signify rather that she would come than that she would not . have 
 time she by her only possible train , he lock the door about 
 mid - day , and cross the hollow field to the verge of the upland by 
 the Brown House , where he stand and look over the vast prospect 
 northward , and over the near landscape in which Alfredston stand . 
 two mile behind it a jet of white steam be travel from the left 
 to the right of the picture . 
 there be a long time to wait , even now , till he would know if she 
 have arrive . he do wait , however , and at last a small hire vehicle 
 pull up at the bottom of the hill , and a person alight , the 
 conveyance go back , while the passenger begin ascend the 
 hill . he know she ; and she look so slender to - day that it seem 
 as if she might be crush in the intensity of a too passionate 
 embrace - such as it be not for he to give . two - third of the way 
 up her head suddenly take a solicitous poise , and he know that she 
 have at that moment recognize he . her face soon begin a pensive 
 smile , which last till , have descend a little way , he meet she . 
 " I think , " she begin with nervous quickness , " that it would be 
 so sad to let you attend the funeral alone ! and so - at the last 
 moment - I come . " 
 " dear faithful Sue ! " murmur Jude . 
 with the elusiveness of her curious double nature , however , Sue do 
 not stand still for any further greeting , though it want some 
 time to the burial . a pathos so unusually compound as that which 
 attach to this hour be unlikely to repeat itself for year , if 
 ever , and Jude would have pause , and meditate , and converse . but 
 Sue either see it not at all , or , see it more than he , would not 
 allow herself to feel it . 
 the sad and simple ceremony be soon over , their progress to the 
 church be almost at a trot , the bustling undertaker have a more 
 important funeral an hour later , three mile off . Drusilla be put 
 into the new ground , quite away from her ancestor . Sue and Jude 
 have go side by side to the grave , and now sit down to tea in the 
 familiar house ; their life unite at least in this last attention 
 to the dead . 
 " she be oppose to marriage , from first to last , you say ? " murmur 
 Sue . 
 " yes . particularly for member of our family . " 
 her eye meet his , and remain on he awhile . 
 " we be rather a sad family , do not   you think , Jude ? " 
 " she say we make bad husband and wife . certainly we make unhappy 
 one . at all event , I do , for one ! " 
 Sue be silent . " be it wrong , Jude , " she say with a tentative 
 tremor , " for a husband or wife to tell a third person that they be 
 unhappy in their marriage ? if a marriage ceremony be a religious 
 thing , it be possibly wrong ; but if it be only a sordid contract , 
 base on material convenience in householding , rating , and tax , 
 and the inheritance of land and money by child , make it 
 necessary that the male parent should be know - which it seem to 
 be - why surely a person may say , even proclaim upon the housetop , 
 that it hurt and grieve he or she ? " 
 " I have say so , anyhow , to you . " 
 presently she go on : " be there many couple , do you think , where 
 one dislike the other for no definite fault ? " 
 " yes , I suppose . if either care for another person , for instance . " 
 " but even apart from that ? would not   the woman , for example , be very 
 bad - natured if she do not   like to live with her husband ; merely " - her 
 voice undulate , and he guess thing - " merely because she have a 
 personal feeling against it - a physical objection - a fastidiousness , 
 or whatever it may be call - although she might respect and be 
 grateful to he ? I be merely put a case . ought she to try to 
 overcome her prudery ? " 
 Jude throw a troubled look at she . he say , look away : " it would 
 be just one of those case in which my experience go contrary to my 
 dogma . speak as an order - love man - which I hope I be , though 
 I fear I be not - I should say , yes . speak from experience and 
 unbiased nature , I should say , no .... Sue , I believe you be not 
 happy ! " 
 " of course I be ! " she contradict . " how can a woman be unhappy who 
 have only be marry eight week to a man she choose freely ? " 
 " ' choose freely ! ' " 
 " why do you repeat it ? ... but I have to go back by the six o'clock 
 train . you will be stay on here , I suppose ? " 
 " for a few day to wind up Aunt 's affair . this house be go now . 
 shall I go to the train with you ? " 
 a little laugh of objection come from Sue . " I think not . you may 
 come part of the way . " 
 " but stop - you can not   go to - night ! that train will not   take you to 
 Shaston . you must stay and go back to - morrow . Mrs. Edlin have plenty 
 of room , if you do not   like to stay here ? " 
 " very well , " she say dubiously . " I do not   tell he I would come for 
 certain . " 
 Jude go to the widow 's house adjoining , to let she know ; and 
 return in a few minute sit down again . 
 " it be horrible how we be circumstanced , Sue - horrible ! " he say 
 abruptly , with his eye bent to the floor . 
 " no ! why ? " 
 " I can not   tell you all my part of the gloom . your part be that you 
 ought not to have marry he . I see it before you have do it , but 
 I think I must not   interfere . I be wrong . I ought to have ! " 
 " but what make you assume all this , dear ? " 
 " because - I can see you through your feather , my poor little bird ! " 
 her hand lie on the table , and Jude put his upon it . Sue draw her 
 away . 
 " that be absurd , Sue , " cry he , " after what we have   be talk about ! 
 I be more strict and formal than you , if it come to that ; and that 
 you should object to such an innocent action show that you be 
 ridiculously inconsistent ! " 
 " perhaps it be too prudish , " she say repentantly . " only I have 
 fancy it be a sort of trick of our - too frequent perhaps . there , 
 you may hold it as much as you like . be that good of I ? " 
 " yes ; very . " 
 " but I must tell he . " 
 " who ? " 
 " Richard . " 
 " oh - of course , if you think it necessary . but as it mean nothing 
 it may be bother he needlessly . " 
 " well - be you sure you mean it only as my cousin ? " 
 " absolutely sure . I have no feeling of love leave in I . " 
 " that 's news . how have it come to be ? " 
 " I have   see Arabella . " 
 she wince at the hit ; then say curiously , " when do you see she ? " 
 " when I be at Christminster . " 
 " so she be come back ; and you never tell I ! I suppose you will live 
 with she now ? " 
 " of course - just as you live with your husband . " 
 she look at the window pot with the geranium and cactus , 
 wither for want of attention , and through they at the outer 
 distance , till her eye begin to grow moist . " what be it ? " say 
 Jude , in a softened tone . 
 " why should you be so glad to go back to she if - if what you use to 
 say to I be still true - I mean if it be true then ! of course it 
 be not now ! how could your heart go back to Arabella so soon ? " 
 " a special providence , I suppose , help it on its way . " 
 " ah - it be not   true ! " she say with gentle resentment . " you be 
 tease I - that be all - because you think I be not happy ! " 
 " I do not   know . I do not   wish to know . " 
 " if I be unhappy it would be my fault , my wickedness ; not that 
 I should have a right to dislike he ! he be considerate to I in 
 everything ; and he be very interesting , from the amount of general 
 knowledge he have acquire by read everything that come in his 
 way .... do you think , Jude , that a man ought to marry a woman his 
 own age , or one young than himself - eighteen year - as I be than 
 he ? " 
 " it depend upon what they feel for each other . " 
 he give she no opportunity of self - satisfaction , and she have to go on 
 unaided , which she do in a vanquished tone , verge on tear : 
 " I - I think I must be equally honest with you as you have be with 
 I . perhaps you have see what it be I want to say ? - that though I 
 like Mr. Phillotson as a friend , I do not   like he - it be a torture to 
 I to - live with he as a husband ! - there , now I have let it out - I 
 could not   help it , although I have be - pretend I be happy . - now 
 you will have a contempt for I for ever , I suppose ! " she bent down 
 her face upon her hand as they lie upon the cloth , and silently 
 sob in little jerk that make the fragile three - legged table 
 quiver . 
 " I have only be marry a month or two ! " she go on , still 
 remain bent upon the table , and sob into her hand . " and it 
 be say that what a woman shrink from - in the early day of her 
 marriage - she shake down to with comfortable indifference in half a 
 dozen year . but that be much like say that the amputation of a 
 limb be no affliction , since a person get comfortably accustomed to 
 the use of a wooden leg or arm in the course of time ! " 
 Jude could hardly speak , but he say , " I think there be something 
 wrong , Sue ! oh , I think there be ! " 
 " but it be not as you think ! - there be nothing wrong except my own 
 wickedness , I suppose you would call it - a repugnance on my part , for a 
 reason I can not disclose , and what would not be admit as one by 
 the world in general ! ... what torture I so much be the necessity 
 of be responsive to this man whenever he wish , good as he be 
 morally ! - the dreadful contract to feel in a particular way in a 
 matter whose essence be its voluntariness ! ... I wish he would beat 
 I , or be faithless to I , or do some open thing that I could talk 
 about as a justification for feeling as I do ! but he do nothing , 
 except that he have grow a little cold since he have find out how I 
 feel . that be why he do not   come to the funeral ... oh , I be very 
 miserable - I do not   know what to do ! ... do not   come near I , Jude , 
 because you must not . do not   - do not ! " 
 but he have jump up and put his face against her - or rather against 
 her ear , her face be inaccessible . 
 " I tell you not to , Jude ! " 
 " I know you do - I only wish to - console you ! it all arise through 
 my be marry before we meet , do not   it ? you would have be my 
 wife , Sue , would not   you , if it have not   be for that ? " 
 instead of reply she rise quickly , and say she be go to 
 walk to her aunt 's grave in the churchyard to recover herself , go 
 out of the house . Jude do not follow she . twenty minute later he 
 see she cross the village green towards Mrs. Edlin 's , and soon she 
 send a little girl to fetch her bag , and tell he she be too tired 
 to see he again that night . 
 in the lonely room of his aunt 's house , Jude sit watch the 
 cottage of the Widow Edlin as it disappear behind the night shade . 
 he know that Sue be sit within its wall equally lonely and 
 dishearten ; and again question his devotional motto that all be 
 for the good . 
 he retire to rest early , but his sleep be fitful from the sense 
 that Sue be so near at hand . at some time near two o'clock , when 
 he be begin to sleep more soundly , he be arouse by a shrill 
 squeak that have be familiar enough to he when he live regularly 
 at Marygreen . it be the cry of a rabbit catch in a gin . as be 
 the little creature 's habit , it do not soon repeat its cry ; and 
 probably would not do so more than once or twice ; but would remain 
 bear its torture till the morrow when the trapper would come and 
 knock it on the head . 
 he who in his childhood have save the life of the earthworm now 
 begin to picture the agony of the rabbit from its lacerated leg . 
 if it be a " bad catch " by the hind - leg , the animal would tug 
 during the ensue six hour till the iron tooth of the trap have 
 strip the leg - bone of its flesh , when , should a weak - spring 
 instrument enable it to escape , it would die in the field from the 
 mortification of the limb . if it be a " good catch , " namely , by the 
 fore - leg , the bone would be break and the limb nearly tear in two in 
 attempt at an impossible escape . 
 almost half an hour pass , and the rabbit repeat its cry . Jude 
 could rest no long till he have put it out of its pain , so dress 
 himself quickly he descend , and by the light of the moon go 
 across the green in the direction of the sound . he reach the hedge 
 border the widow 's garden , when he stand still . the faint click 
 of the trap as drag about by the writhing animal guide he now , 
 and reach the spot he strike the rabbit on the back of the neck 
 with the side of his palm , and it stretch itself out dead . 
 he be turn away when he see a woman look out of the open 
 casement at a window on the ground floor of the adjacent cottage . 
 " Jude ! " say a voice timidly - Sue 's voice . " it be you - be it not ? " 
 " yes , dear ! " 
 " I have not   be able to sleep at all , and then I hear the rabbit , 
 and could not   help think of what it suffer , till I feel I must 
 come down and kill it ! but I be so glad you get there first ... they 
 ought not to be allow to set these steel trap , ought they ! " 
 Jude have reach the window , which be quite a low one , so that she 
 be visible down to her waist . she let go the casement - stay and put 
 her hand upon his , her moonlit face regard he wistfully . 
 " do it keep you awake ? " he say . 
 " no - I be awake . " 
 " how be that ? " 
 " oh , you know - now ! I know you , with your religious doctrine , think 
 that a married woman in trouble of a kind like mine commit a mortal 
 sin in make a man the confidant of it , as I do you . I wish I 
 have not , now ! " 
 " do not   wish it , dear , " he say . " that may have be my view ; but my 
 doctrine and I begin to part company . " 
 " I know it - I know it ! and that be why I vow I would not   disturb 
 your belief . but - I be so glad to see you ! - and , oh , I do not   mean 
 to see you again , now the last tie between we , Aunt Drusilla , be 
 dead ! " 
 Jude seize her hand and kiss it . " there be a strong one leave ! " 
 he say . " I will never care about my doctrine or my religion any 
 more ! let they go ! let I help you , even if I do love you , and even 
 if you ... " 
 " do not   say it ! - I know what you mean ; but I can not   admit so much as 
 that . there ! guess what you like , but do not   press I to answer 
 question ! " 
 " I wish you be happy , whatever I may be ! " 
 " I can't be ! so few could enter into my feeling - they would say 
 ' twa my fanciful fastidiousness , or something of that sort , and 
 condemn I ... it be none of the natural tragedy of love that be 
 love 's usual tragedy in civilized life , but a tragedy artificially 
 manufacture for people who in a natural state would find relief in 
 parting ! ... it would have be wrong , perhaps , for I to tell my 
 distress to you , if I have be able to tell it to anybody else . but 
 I have nobody . and I must tell somebody ! Jude , before I marry 
 he I have never think out fully what marriage mean , even though I 
 know . it be idiotic of I - there be no excuse . I be old enough , 
 and I think I be very experienced . so I rush on , when I have get 
 into that training school scrape , with all the cock - sureness of the 
 fool that I be ! ... I be certain one ought to be allow to undo 
 what one have do so ignorantly ! I daresay it happen to lot of 
 woman , only they submit , and I kick ... when people of a later age 
 look back upon the barbarous custom and superstition of the time 
 that we have the unhappiness to live in , what will they say ! " 
 " you be very bitter , darle Sue ! how I wish - I wish - " 
 " you must go in now ! " 
 in a moment of impulse she bent over the sill , and lay her face upon 
 his hair , weeping , and then imprint a scarcely perceptible little 
 kiss upon the top of his head , withdraw quickly , so that he could 
 not put his arm round she , as otherwise he unquestionably would have 
 do . she shut the casement , and he return to his cottage . 
 III 
 Sue 's distressful confession recur to Jude 's mind all the night as 
 be a sorrow indeed . 
 the morning after , when it be time for she to go , the neighbour see 
 her companion and herself disappear on foot down the hill path 
 which lead into the lonely road to Alfredston . an hour pass before 
 he return along the same route , and in his face there be a look of 
 exaltation not unmixe with recklessness . an incident have occur . 
 they have stand part in the silent highway , and their tense and 
 passionate mood have lead to bewildered inquiry of each other on how 
 far their intimacy ought to go ; till they have almost quarrel , and 
 she say tearfully that it be hardly proper of he as a parson in 
 embryo to think of such a thing as kiss she even in farewell as he 
 now wish to do . then she have concede that the fact of the kiss 
 would be nothing : all would depend upon the spirit of it . if give 
 in the spirit of a cousin and a friend she see no objection : if in 
 the spirit of a lover she could not permit it . " will you swear that 
 it will not be in that spirit ? " she have say . 
 no : he would not . and then they have turn from each other in 
 estrangement , and go their several way , till at a distance 
 of twenty or thirty yard both have look round simultaneously . 
 that look behind be fatal to the reserve hitherto more or less 
 maintain . they have quickly run back , and meet , and embrace most 
 unpremeditatedly , kiss close and long . when they part for good 
 it be with flushed cheek on her side , and a beat heart on his . 
 the kiss be a turning - point in Jude 's career . back again in the 
 cottage , and leave to reflection , he see one thing : that though 
 his kiss of that aerial being have seem the pure moment of his 
 faultful life , as long as he nourish this unlicensed tenderness it 
 be glaringly inconsistent for he to pursue the idea of become the 
 soldier and servant of a religion in which sexual love be regard 
 as at its good a frailty , and at its bad damnation . what Sue 
 have say in warmth be really the cold truth . when to defend 
 his affection tooth and nail , to persist with headlong force in 
 impassioned attention to she , be all he think of , he be 
 condemn ipso facto as a professor of the accepted school of 
 moral . he be as unfit , obviously , by nature , as he have be by 
 social position , to fill the part of a propounder of accredited 
 dogma . 
 strange that his first aspiration - towards academical 
 proficiency - have be check by a woman , and that his second 
 aspiration - towards apostleship - have also be check by a woman . 
 " be it , " he say , " that the woman be to blame ; or be it the 
 artificial system of thing , under which the normal sex - impulse be 
 turn into devilish domestic gin and spring to noose and hold back 
 those who want to progress ? " 
 it have be his stand desire to become a prophet , however humble , 
 to his struggle fellow - creature , without any thought of personal 
 gain . yet with a wife live away from he with another husband , and 
 himself in love erratically , the love one 's revolt against her state 
 be possibly on his account , he have sink to be barely respectable 
 accord to regulation view . 
 it be not for he to consider far : he have only to confront the 
 obvious , which be that he have make himself quite an impostor as a 
 law - abide religious teacher . 
 at dusk that evening he go into the garden and dig a shallow hole , 
 to which he bring out all the theological and ethical work that 
 he possess , and have store here . he know that , in this country of 
 true believer , most of they be not saleable at a much high price 
 than waste - paper value , and prefer to get rid of they in his own 
 way , even if he should sacrifice a little money to the sentiment of 
 thus destroy they . light some loose pamphlet to begin with , 
 he cut the volume into piece as well as he could , and with a 
 three - pronged fork shake they over the flame . they kindle , and 
 light up the back of the house , the pigsty , and his own face , till 
 they be more or less consume . 
 though he be almost a stranger here now , pass cottager talk to 
 he over the garden hedge . 
 " burn up your awld aunt 's rubbidge , I suppose ? ay ; a lot get 
 heap up in nook and corner when you have   live eighty year in one 
 house . " 
 it be nearly one o'clock in the morning before the leaf , cover , 
 and bind of Jeremy Taylor , Butler , Doddridge , Paley , Pusey , Newman 
 and the rest have go to ash , but the night be quiet , and as he 
 turn and turn the paper shred with the fork , the sense of be 
 no long a hypocrite to himself afford his mind a relief which 
 give he calm . he might go on believe as before , but he profess 
 nothing , and no long own and exhibit engine of faith which , 
 as their proprietor , he might naturally be suppose to exercise on 
 himself first of all . in his passion for Sue he could not stand as 
 an ordinary sinner , and not as a white sepulchre . 
 meanwhile Sue , after part from he early in the day , have go 
 along to the station , with tear in her eye for have run back and 
 let he kiss she . Jude ought not to have pretend that he be not a 
 lover , and make she give way to an impulse to act unconventionally , 
 if not wrongly . she be inclined to call it the latter ; for Sue 's 
 logic be extraordinarily compound , and seem to maintain that 
 before a thing be do it might be right to do , but that be do 
 it become wrong ; or , in other word , that thing which be right in 
 theory be wrong in practice . 
 " I have be too weak , I think ! " she jerk out as she prance on , 
 shake down tear - drop now and then . " it be burn , like a 
 lover 's - oh , it be ! and I will not   write to he any more , or at least 
 for a long time , to impress he with my dignity ! and I hope it will 
 hurt he very much - expect a letter to - morrow morning , and the 
 next , and the next , and no letter come . he will suffer then with 
 suspense - will not   he , that be all ! - and I be very glad of it ! " - Tears 
 of pity for Jude 's approach suffering at her hand mingle with 
 those which have surge up in pity for herself . 
 then the slim little wife of a husband whose person be disagreeable 
 to she , the ethereal , fine - nerved , sensitive girl , quite unfit by 
 temperament and instinct to fulfil the condition of the matrimonial 
 relation with Phillotson , possibly with scarce any man , walk 
 fitfully along , and pant , and bring weariness into her eye by 
 gaze and worry hopelessly . 
 Phillotson meet she at the arrival station , and , see that she be 
 troubled , think it must be owe to the depressing effect of her 
 aunt 's death and funeral . he begin tell she of his day 's doing , 
 and how his friend Gillingham , a neighbouring schoolmaster whom he 
 have not see for year , have call upon he . while ascend to the 
 town , seat on the top of the omnibus beside he , she say suddenly 
 and with an air of self - chastisement , regard the white road and 
 its border bush of hazel : 
 " Richard - I let Mr. Fawley hold my hand a long while . I do not   know 
 whether you think it wrong ? " 
 he , wake apparently from thought of far different mould , say 
 vaguely , " oh , do you ? what do you do that for ? " 
 " I do not   know . he want to , and I let he . " 
 " I hope it please he . I should think it be hardly a novelty . " 
 they lapse into silence . have this be a case in the court of an 
 omniscient judge , he might have enter on his note the curious fact 
 that Sue have place the minor for the major indiscretion , and have not 
 say a word about the kiss . 
 after tea that evening Phillotson sit balance the school register . 
 she remain in an unusually silent , tense , and restless condition , 
 and at last , say she be tired , go to bed early . when 
 Phillotson arrive upstairs , weary with the drudgery of the 
 attendance - number , it be a quarter to twelve o'clock . enter 
 their chamber , which by day command a view of some thirty or forty 
 mile over the Vale of Blackmoor , and even into Outer Wessex , he go 
 to the window , and , press his face against the pane , gaze with 
 hard - breathing fixity into the mysterious darkness which now cover 
 the far - reach scene . he be musing , " I think , " he say at last , 
 without turn his head , " that I must get the committee to change 
 the school - stationer . all the copybook be send wrong this time . " 
 there be no reply . think Sue be doze he go on : 
 " and there must be a rearrangement of that ventilator in the 
 class - room . the wind blow down upon my head unmercifully and give 
 I the ear - ache . " 
 as the silence seem more absolute than ordinarily he turn round . 
 the heavy , gloomy oak wainscot , which extend over the wall 
 upstairs and down in the dilapidated " Old - Grove Place , " and the 
 massive chimney - piece reach to the ceiling , stand in odd contrast 
 to the new and shining brass bedstead , and the new suite of birch 
 furniture that he have buy for she , the two style seem to nod 
 to each other across three century upon the shake floor . 
 " Soo ! " he say   this be the way in which he pronounce her name . 
 she be not in the bed , though she have apparently be there - the 
 clothe on her side be fling back . think she might have 
 forget some kitchen detail and go downstairs for a moment to 
 see to it , he pull off his coat and idle quietly enough for a 
 few minute , when , find she do not come , he go out upon the 
 landing , candle in hand , and say again " Soo ! " 
 " yes ! " come back to he in her voice , from the distant kitchen 
 quarter . 
 " what be you do down there at midnight - tire yourself out for 
 nothing ! " 
 " I be not sleepy ; I be read ; and there be a large fire here . " 
 he go to bed . some time in the night he awake . she be not there , 
 even now . light a candle he hastily step out upon the landing , 
 and again call her name . 
 she answer " yes ! " as before , but the tone be small and confine , 
 and whence they come he could not at first understand . under the 
 staircase be a large clothe - closet , without a window ; they seem 
 to come from it . the door be shut , but there be no lock or other 
 fastening . Phillotson , alarmed , go towards it , wonder if she 
 have suddenly become derange . 
 " what be you do in there ? " he ask . 
 " not to disturb you I come here , as it be so late . " 
 " but there be no bed , be there ? and no ventilation ! why , you will be 
 suffocated if you stay all night ! " 
 " oh no , I think not . do not   trouble about I . " 
 " but - " Phillotson seize the knob and pull at the door . she have 
 fasten it inside with a piece of string , which break at his pull . 
 there be no bedstead she have fling down some rug and make a 
 little nest for herself in the very cramped quarter the closet 
 afford . 
 when he look in upon she she spring out of her lair , great - eyed and 
 trembling . 
 " you ought not to have pull open the door ! " she cry excitedly . 
 " it be not become in you ! oh , will you go away ; please will you ! " 
 she look so pitiful and plead in her white nightgown against the 
 shadowy lumber - hole that he be quite worried . she continue to 
 beseech he not to disturb she . 
 he say : " I have   be kind to you , and give you every liberty ; and it 
 be monstrous that you should feel in this way ! " 
 " yes , " say she , weeping . " I know that ! it be wrong and wicked of 
 I , I suppose ! I be very sorry . but it be not I altogether that be 
 to blame ! " 
 " who be then ? be I ? " 
 " no - I do not   know ! the universe , I suppose - thing in general , 
 because they be so horrid and cruel ! " 
 " well , it be no use talk like that . make a man 's house so 
 unseemly at this time o ' night ! Eliza will hear if we do not   mind . " 
  he mean the servant .   " just think if either of the parson in this 
 town be to see we now ! I hate such eccentricity , Sue . there be no 
 order or regularity in your sentiment ! ... but I will not   intrude on 
 you far ; only I would advise you not to shut the door too tight , 
 or I shall find you stifle to - morrow . " 
 on rise the next morning he immediately look into the closet , but 
 Sue have already go downstairs . there be a little nest where she 
 have lie , and spider ' webs hang overhead . " what must a woman 's 
 aversion be when it be strong than her fear of spider ! " he say 
 bitterly . 
 he find she sit at the breakfast - table , and the meal begin 
 almost in silence , the burgher walk past upon the pavement - or 
 rather roadway , pavement be scarce here - which be two or three 
 foot above the level of the parlour floor . they nod down to the 
 happy couple their morning greeting , as they go on . 
 " Richard , " she say all at once ; " would you mind my living away from 
 you ? " 
 " away from I ? why , that be what you be do when I marry you . 
 what then be the meaning of marry at all ? " 
 " you would not   like I any the well for tell you . " 
 " I do not   object to know . " 
 " because I think I could do nothing else . you have get my promise a 
 long time before that , remember . then , as time go on , I regret 
 I have promise you , and be try to see an honourable way to break 
 it off . but as I could not   I become rather reckless and careless 
 about the convention . then you know what scandal be spread , and 
 how I be turn out of the training school you have take such time 
 and trouble to prepare I for and get I into ; and this frighten 
 I and it seem then that the one thing I could do would be to let 
 the engagement stand . of course I , of all people , ought not to have 
 care what be say , for it be just what I fancy I never do care 
 for . but I be a coward - as so many woman be - and my theoretic 
 unconventionality break down . if that have not enter into the case 
 it would have be well to have hurt your feeling once for all 
 then , than to marry you and hurt they all my life after ... and you 
 be so generous in never give credit for a moment to the rumour . " 
 " I be bind in honesty to tell you that I weigh its probability and 
 inquire of your cousin about it . " 
 " ah ! " she say with pained surprise . 
 " I do not   doubt you . " 
 " but you inquire ! " 
 " I take his word . " 
 her eye have fill . " he would not   have inquire ! " she say . 
 " but you have not   answer I . will you let I go away ? I know how 
 irregular it be of I to ask it - " 
 " it be irregular . " 
 " but I do ask it ! domestic law should be make accord to 
 temperament , which should be classify . if people be at all 
 peculiar in character they have to suffer from the very rule that 
 produce comfort in other ! ... will you let I ? " 
 " but we marry - " 
 " what be the use of thinking of law and ordinance , " she burst out , 
 " if they make you miserable when you know you be commit no sin ? " 
 " but you be commit a sin in not like I . " 
 " I do like you ! but I do not   reflect it would be - that it would be 
 so much more than that ... for a man and woman to live on intimate 
 term when one feel as I do be adultery , in any circumstance , 
 however legal . there - I have   say it ! ... will you let I , Richard ? " 
 " you distress I , Susanna , by such importunity ! " 
 " why can not   we agree to free each other ? we make the compact , and 
 surely we can cancel it - not legally of course ; but we can morally , 
 especially as no new interest , in the shape of child , have arise 
 to be look after . then we might be friend , and meet without pain 
 to either . oh Richard , be my friend and have pity ! we shall both be 
 dead in a few year , and then what will it matter to anybody that you 
 relieve I from constraint for a little while ? I daresay you think 
 I eccentric , or super - sensitive , or something absurd . well - why 
 should I suffer for what I be bear to be , if it do not   hurt other 
 people ? " 
 " but it do - it hurt I ! and you vow to love I . " 
 " yes - that be it ! I be in the wrong . I always be ! it be as culpable 
 to bind yourself to love always as to believe a creed always , and as 
 silly as to vow always to like a particular food or drink ! " 
 " and do you mean , by live away from I , live by yourself ? " 
 " well , if you insist , yes . but I mean live with Jude . " 
 " as his wife ? " 
 " as I choose . " 
 Phillotson writhe . 
 Sue continue : " she , or he , ' who let the world , or his own portion 
 of it , choose his plan of life for he , have no need of any other 
 faculty than the apelike one of imitation . ' J. S. Mill 's word , 
 those be . I have be read it up . why can not   you act upon they ? 
 I wish to , always . " 
 " what do I care about J. S. Mill ! " moan he . " I only want to lead 
 a quiet life ! do you mind my saying that I have guess what never 
 once occur to I before our marriage - that you be in love , and 
 be in love , with Jude Fawley ! " 
 " you may go on guess that I be , since you have begin . but do you 
 suppose that if I have be I should have ask you to let I go and 
 live with he ? " 
 the ringing of the school bell save Phillotson from the necessity of 
 reply at present to what apparently do not strike he as be 
 such a convincing argumentum ad verecundiam as she , in her loss of 
 courage at the last moment , mean it to appear . she be begin to 
 be so puzzling and unstateable that he be ready to throw in with she 
 other little peculiarity the extreme request which a wife could 
 make . 
 they proceed to the school that morning as usual , Sue enter 
 the class - room , where he could see the back of her head through the 
 glass partition whenever he turn his eye that way . as he go on 
 give and hear lesson his forehead and eyebrow twitch from 
 concentrated agitation of thought , till at length he tear a scrap 
 from a sheet of scribble paper and write : 
 your request prevent my attend to work at all . I do not 
 know what I be do ! be it seriously make ? 
 he fold the piece of paper very small , and give it to a little 
 boy to take to Sue . the child toddle off into the class - room . 
 Phillotson see his wife turn and take the note , and the bend of she 
 pretty head as she read it , her lip slightly crisp , to prevent 
 undue expression under fire of so many young eye . he could not see 
 her hand , but she change her position , and soon the child return , 
 bring nothing in reply . in a few minute , however , one of Sue 's 
 class appear , with a little note similar to his own . these word 
 only be pencil therein : 
 I be sincerely sorry to say that it be seriously make . 
 Phillotson look more disturbed than before , and the meeting - place 
 of his brow twitch again . in ten minute he call up the child 
 he have just send to she , and dispatch another missive : 
 God know I do not   want to thwart you in any reasonable way . 
 my whole thought be to make you comfortable and happy . but 
 I can not agree to such a preposterous notion as your go 
 to live with your lover . you would lose everybody 's respect 
 and regard ; and so should I ! 
 after an interval a similar part be enact in the class - room , and 
 an answer come : 
 I know you mean my good . but I do not   want to be respectable ! 
 to produce " human development in its rich diversity "   to 
 quote your Humboldt   be to my mind far above respectability . 
 no doubt my taste be low - in your view - hopelessly low ! 
 if you win t let I go to he , will you grant I this one 
 request - allow I to live in your house in a separate way ? 
 to this he return no answer . 
 she write again : 
 I know what you think . but can not you have pity on I ? I beg 
 you to ; I implore you to be merciful ! I would not ask if I 
 be not almost compel by what I can not   bear ! no poor woman 
 have ever wish more than I that Eve have not fall , so that 
  as the primitive Christians believe   some harmless mode of 
 vegetation might have people Paradise . but I will not   trifle ! 
 be kind to I - even though I have not be kind to you ! I 
 will go away , go abroad , anywhere , and never trouble you . 
 nearly an hour pass , and then he return an answer : 
 I do not wish to pain you . how well you know I do not ! give I 
 a little time . I be disposed to agree to your last request . 
 one line from she : 
 thank you from my heart , Richard . I do not deserve your 
 kindness . 
 all day Phillotson bend a daze regard upon she through the glaze 
 partition ; and he feel as lonely as when he have not know she . 
 but he be as good as his word , and consent to she live apart 
 in the house . at first , when they meet at meal , she have seem 
 more compose under the new arrangement ; but the irksomeness of 
 their position work on her temperament , and the fibre of her 
 nature seem strained like harp - string . she talk vaguely and 
 indiscriminately to prevent his talk pertinently . 
 IV 
 Phillotson be sit up late , as be often his custom , try to 
 get together the material for his long - neglect hobby of roman 
 antiquity . for the first time since revive the subject he feel a 
 return of his old interest in it . he forget time and place , and when 
 he remember himself and ascend to rest it be nearly two o'clock . 
 his preoccupation be such that , though he now sleep on the other 
 side of the house , he mechanically go to the room that he and his 
 wife have occupy when he first become a tenant of Old - Grove Place , 
 which since his difference with Sue have be hers exclusively . 
 he enter , and unconsciously begin to undress . 
 there be a cry from the bed , and a quick movement . before the 
 schoolmaster have realize where he be he perceive Sue start up 
 half - awake , star wildly , and spring out upon the floor on the 
 side away from he , which be towards the window . this be somewhat 
 hide by the canopy of the bedstead , and in a moment he hear she 
 fling up the sash . before he have think that she mean to do 
 more than get air she have mount upon the sill and leapt out . she 
 disappear in the darkness , and he hear she fall below . 
 Phillotson , horrify , run downstairs , strike himself sharply 
 against the newel in his haste . open the heavy door he ascend 
 the two or three step to the level of the ground , and there on the 
 gravel before he lie a white heap . Phillotson seize it in his 
 arm , and bring Sue into the hall seat she on a chair , where he 
 gaze at she by the flap light of the candle which he have set 
 down in the draught on the bottom stair . 
 she have certainly not break her neck . she look at he with eye 
 that seem not to take he in ; and though not particularly large in 
 general they appear so now . she press her side and rub she 
 arm , as if conscious of pain ; then stand up , avert her face , in 
 evident distress at his gaze . 
 " thank God - you be not kill ! though it be not for want of 
 try - not much hurt I hope ? " 
 her fall , in fact , have not be a serious one , probably owe to the 
 lowness of the old room and to the high level of the ground without . 
 beyond a scrap elbow and a blow in the side she have apparently 
 incur little harm . 
 " I be asleep , I think ! " she begin , her pale face still turn away 
 from he . " and something frighten I - a terrible dream - I think 
 I see you - " the actual circumstance seem to come back to she , 
 and she be silent . 
 her cloak be hang at the back of the door , and the wretched 
 Phillotson fling it round she . " shall I help you upstairs ? " he ask 
 drearily ; for the significance of all this sicken he of himself 
 and of everything . 
 " no thank you , Richard . I be very little hurt . I can walk . " 
 " you ought to lock your door , " he mechanically say , as if lecture 
 in school . " then no one could intrude even by accident . " 
 " I have try - it will not   lock . all the door be out of order . " 
 the aspect of thing be not improve by her admission . she ascend 
 the staircase slowly , the wave light of the candle shin on she . 
 Phillotson do not approach she , or attempt to ascend himself till he 
 hear she enter her room . then he fasten up the front door , and 
 return , sit down on the low stair , hold the newel with one 
 hand , and bow his face into the other . thus he remain for a 
 long long time - a pitiable object enough to one who have see he ; 
 till , raise his head and sigh a sigh which seem to say that 
 the business of his life must be carry on , whether he have a wife or 
 no , he take the candle and go upstairs to his lonely room on the 
 other side of the landing . 
 no further incident touch the matter between they occur till 
 the follow evening , when , immediately school be over , Phillotson 
 walk out of Shaston , say he require no tea , and not inform 
 Sue where he be go . he descend from the town level by a steep 
 road in a north - westerly direction , and continue to move downwards 
 till the soil change from its white dryness to a tough brown clay . 
 he be now on the low alluvial bed 
 where Duncliffe be the traveller 's mark , 
 and cloty Stour 's a - roll dark . 
 More than once he look back in the increase obscurity of evening . 
 against the sky be Shaston , dimly visible 
 on the grey - topp'd height 
 of Paladore , as pale day wear 
 away ...   William Barnes . 
 the new - light light from its window burn with a steady shine as if 
 watch he , one of which window be his own . above it he could 
 just discern the pinnacled tower of Trinity Church . the air down 
 here , temper by the thick damp bed of tenacious clay , be not as it 
 have be above , but soft and relaxing , so that when he have walk a 
 mile or two he be oblige to wipe his face with his handkerchief . 
 leave Duncliffe Hill on the left he proceed without hesitation 
 through the shade , as a man go on , night or day , in a district over 
 which he have play as a boy . he have walk altogether about four 
 and a half mile 
 where Stour receive her strength , 
 from six cleere fountain feed ,   Drayton . 
 when he cross a tributary of the Stour , and reach Leddenton - a 
 little town of three or four thousand inhabitant - where he go 
 on to the boy ' school , and knock at the door of the master 's 
 residence . 
 a boy pupil - teacher open it , and to Phillotson 's inquiry if Mr. 
 Gillingham be at home reply that he be , go at once off to his 
 own house , and leave Phillotson to find his way in as he could . he 
 discover his friend put away some book from which he have be 
 give evening lesson . the light of the paraffin lamp fall on 
 Phillotson 's face - pale and wretche by contrast with his friend 's , 
 who have a cool , practical look . they have be schoolmate in 
 boyhood , and fellow - student at Wintoncester Training College , many 
 year before this time . 
 " glad to see you , Dick ! but you do not   look well ? nothing the 
 matter ? " 
 Phillotson advance without reply , and Gillingham close the 
 cupboard and pull up beside his visitor . 
 " why you have not   be here - let I see - since you be marry ? 
 I call , you know , but you be out ; and upon my word it be such a 
 climb after dark that I have be wait till the day be long 
 before lumpere up again . I be glad you do not   wait , however . " 
 though well - train and even proficient master , they occasionally 
 use a dialect - word of their boyhood to each other in private . 
 " I have   come , George , to explain to you my reason for take a step 
 that I be about to take , so that you , at least , will understand my 
 motif if other people question they anywhen - as they may , indeed 
 certainly will ... but anything be well than the present condition 
 of thing . God forbid that you should ever have such an experience 
 as mine ! " 
 " sit down . you do not   mean - anything wrong between you and Mrs. 
 Phillotson ? " 
 " I do ... my wretched state be that I have   a wife I love who not 
 only do not love I , but - but - well , I will not   say . I know she 
 feeling ! I should prefer hatred from she ! " 
 " Ssh ! " 
 " and the sad part of it be that she be not so much to blame as I. She 
 be a pupil - teacher under I , as you know , and I take advantage of 
 her inexperience , and tole she out for walk , and get she to agree 
 to a long engagement before she well know her own mind . afterwards 
 she see somebody else , but she blindly fulfil her engagement . " 
 " love the other ? " 
 " yes ; with a curious tender solicitude seemingly ; though her exact 
 feeling for he be a riddle to I - and to he too , I think - possibly 
 to herself . she be one of the oddest creature I ever meet . however , 
 I have be strike with these two fact ; the extraordinary sympathy , 
 or similarity , between the pair . he be her cousin , which perhaps 
 account for some of it . they seem to be one person split in two ! 
 and with her unconquerable aversion to myself as a husband , even 
 though she may like I as a friend , ' tis too much to bear long . 
 she have conscientiously struggle against it , but to no purpose . 
 I can not bear it - I can not ! I can not   answer her argument - she have 
 read ten time as much as I. her intellect sparkle like diamond , 
 while mine smoulder like brown paper ... she be one too many for I ! " 
 " she will get over it , good - now ? " 
 " never ! it be - but I will not   go into it - there be reason why she 
 never will . at last she calmly and firmly ask if she might leave 
 I and go to he . the climax come last night , when , owe to my 
 enter her room by accident , she jump out of window - so strong 
 be her dread of I ! she pretend it be a dream , but that be 
 to soothe I . now when a woman jump out of window without care 
 whether she break her neck or no , she be not to be mistake ; and this 
 be the case I have come to a conclusion : that it be wrong to so 
 torture a fellow - creature any long ; and I will not   be the inhuman 
 wretch to do it , cost what it may ! " 
 " what - you will let she go ? and with her lover ? " 
 " whom with be her matter . I shall let she go ; with he certainly , 
 if she wish . I know I may be wrong - I know I can not   logically , 
 or religiously , defend my concession to such a wish of her , or 
 harmonize it with the doctrine I be bring up in . only I know one 
 thing : something within I tell I I be do wrong in refuse 
 she . I , like other man , profess to hold that if a husband get such 
 a so - call preposterous request from his wife , the only course that 
 can possibly be regard as right and proper and honourable in he be 
 to refuse it , and put she virtuously under lock and key , and murder 
 her lover perhaps . but be that essentially right , and proper , and 
 honourable , or be it contemptibly mean and selfish ? I do not   profess 
 to decide . I simply be go to act by instinct , and let principle 
 take care of themselves . if a person who have blindly walk into a 
 quagmire cry for help , I be inclined to give it , if possible . " 
 " but - you see , there be the question of neighbour and society - what 
 will happen if everybody - " 
 " oh , I be not go to be a philosopher any long ! I only see 
 what be under my eye . " 
 " well - I do not   agree with your instinct , Dick ! " say Gillingham 
 gravely . " I be quite amazed , to tell the truth , that such a sedate , 
 plod fellow as you should have entertain such a craze for a 
 moment . you say when I call that she be puzzle and peculiar : 
 I think you be ! " 
 " have you ever stand before a woman whom you know to be intrinsically 
 a good woman , while she have plead for release - be the man she have 
 kneel to and implored indulgence of ? " 
 " I be thankful to say I have not . " 
 " then I do not   think you be in a position to give an opinion . I 
 have be that man , and it make all the difference in the world , if 
 one have any manliness or chivalry in he . I have not the remotest 
 idea - live apart from woman as I have do for so many year - that 
 merely take a woman to church and put a ring upon her finger 
 could by any possibility involve one in such a daily , continuous 
 tragedy as that now share by she and I ! " 
 " well , I could admit some excuse for let she leave you , provide 
 she keep to herself . but to go attend by a cavalier - that make a 
 difference . " 
 " not a bit . suppose , as I believe , she would rather endure she 
 present misery than be make to promise to keep apart from he ? 
 all that be a question for herself . it be not the same thing at 
 all as the treachery of live on with a husband and play he 
 false ... however , she have not distinctly imply live with he 
 as wife , though I think she mean to ... and to the good of my 
 understanding it be not an ignoble , merely animal , feel between 
 the two : that be the bad of it ; because it make I think their 
 affection will be endure . I do not mean to confess to you that in 
 the first jealous week of my marriage , before I have come to my right 
 mind , I hide myself in the school one evening when they be together 
 there , and I hear what they say . I be ashamed of it now , though 
 I suppose I be only exercise a legal right . I find from their 
 manner that an extraordinary affinity , or sympathy , enter into 
 their attachment , which somehow take away all flavour of grossness . 
 their supreme desire be to be together - to share each other 's 
 emotion , and fancy , and dream . " 
 " platonic ! " 
 " well no . Shelleyan would be near to it . they remind I of - what 
 be their name - Laon and Cythna . also of Paul and Virginia a 
 little . the more I reflect , the more ENTIRELY I be on their side ! " 
 " but if people do as you want to do , there would be a general domestic 
 disintegration . the family would no long be the social unit . " 
 " yes - I be all abroad , I suppose ! " say Phillotson sadly . " I be 
 never a very bright reasoner , you remember .... and yet , I do not   see 
 why the woman and the child should not be the unit without the 
 man . " 
 " by the Lord Harry ! - Matriarchy ! ... do she say all this too ? " 
 " oh no . she little think I have out - sue Sue in this - all in the 
 last twelve hour ! " 
 " it will upset all receive opinion hereabout . good God - what will 
 Shaston say ! " 
 " I do not   say that it will not . I do not   know - I do not   know ! ... as I 
 say , I be only a feeler , not a reasoner . " 
 " now , " say Gillingham , " let we take it quietly , and have something 
 to drink over it . " he go under the stair , and produce a bottle 
 of cider - wine , of which they drink a rummer each . " I think you be 
 raft , and not yourself , " he continue . " do go back and make up 
 your mind to put up with a few whim . but keep she . I hear on all 
 side that she be a charming young thing . " 
 " ah yes ! that be the bitterness of it ! well , I will not   stay . I have a 
 long walk before I . " 
 Gillingham accompany his friend a mile on his way , and at parting 
 express his hope that this consultation , singular as its subject 
 be , would be the renewal of their old comradeship . " Stick to she ! " 
 be his last word , fling into the darkness after Phillotson ; from 
 which his friend answer " Aye , aye ! " 
 but when Phillotson be alone under the cloud of night , and no 
 sound be audible but that of the purl tributary of the Stour , 
 he say , " so Gillingham , my friend , you have no strong argument 
 against it than those ! " 
 " I think she ought to be smack , and bring to her sens - that be 
 what I think ! " murmur Gillingham , as he walk back alone . 
 the next morning come , and at breakfast Phillotson tell Sue : 
 " you may go - with whom you will . I absolutely and unconditionally 
 agree . " 
 have once come to this conclusion it seem to Phillotson more 
 and more indubitably the true one . his mild serenity at the sense 
 that he be do his duty by a woman who be at his mercy almost 
 overpower his grief at relinquish she . 
 some day pass , and the evening of their last meal together have 
 come - a cloudy evening with wind - which indeed be very seldom absent 
 in this elevated place . how permanently it be imprint upon his 
 vision ; that look of she as she glide into the parlour to tea ; 
 a slim flexible figure ; a face , strain from its roundness , and 
 mark by the pallor of restless day and night , suggest tragic 
 possibility quite at variance with her time of buoyancy ; a trying 
 of this morsel and that , and an inability to eat either . her nervous 
 manner , beget of a fear lest he should be injure by her course , 
 might have be interpret by a stranger as displeasure that 
 Phillotson intrude his presence on she for the few brief minute 
 that remain . 
 " you have well have a slice of ham or an egg , or something with your 
 tea ? you can not   travel on a mouthful of bread and butter . " 
 she take the slice he help she to ; and they discuss as they sit 
 trivial question of housekeeping , such as where he would find the 
 key of this or that cupboard , what little bill be pay , and what 
 not . 
 " I be a bachelor by nature , as you know , Sue , " he say , in a heroic 
 attempt to put she at her ease . " so that be without a wife will 
 not really be irksome to I , as it might be to other man who have 
 have one a little while . I have , too , this grand hobby in my head of 
 write ' the roman Antiquities of Wessex , ' which will occupy all my 
 spare hour . " 
 " if you will send I some of the manuscript to copy at any time , 
 as you use to , I will do it with so much pleasure ! " she say with 
 amenable gentleness . " I should much like to be some help to you 
 still - as a - friend . " 
 Phillotson muse , and say : " no , I think we ought to be really 
 separate , if we be to be at all . and for this reason , that I do not 
 wish to ask you any question , and particularly wish you not to give 
 me information as to your movement , or even your address ... now , 
 what money do you want ? you must have some , you know . " 
 " oh , of course , Richard , I could not   think of have any of your money 
 to go away from you with ! I do not   want any either . I have enough of 
 my own to last I for a long while , and Jude will let I have - " 
 " I would rather not know anything about he , if you do not   mind . 
 you be free , absolutely ; and your course be your own . " 
 " very well . but I will just say that I have pack only a change or 
 two of my own personal clothing , and one or two little thing besides 
 that be my very own . I wish you would look into my trunk before it 
 be close . besides that I have only a small parcel that will go into 
 Jude 's portmanteau . " 
 " of course I shall do no such thing as examine your luggage ! I wish 
 you would take three - quarter of the household furniture . I do not 
 want to be bother with it . I have a sort of affection for a little 
 of it that belong to my poor mother and father . but the rest you 
 be welcome to whenever you like to send for it . " 
 " that I shall never do . " 
 " you go by the six - thirty train , do not   you ? it be now a quarter to 
 six . " 
 " you ... you do not   seem very sorry I be go , Richard ! " 
 " oh no - perhaps not . " 
 " I like you much for how you have behave . it be a curious thing 
 that directly I have begin to regard you as not my husband , but as 
 my old teacher , I like you . I will not   be so affected as to say I love 
 you , because you know I do not , except as a friend . but you do seem 
 that to I ! " 
 Sue be for a few moment a little tearful at these reflection , and 
 then the station omnibus come round to take she up . Phillotson see 
 her thing put on the top , hand she in , and be oblige to make an 
 appearance of kiss she as he wish her good - bye , which she quite 
 understand and imitate . from the cheerful manner in which they 
 part the omnibus - man have no other idea than that she be go for 
 a short visit . 
 when Phillotson get back into the house he go upstairs and open 
 the window in the direction the omnibus have take . soon the noise of 
 its wheel die away . he come down then , his face compress like 
 that of one bear pain ; he put on his hat and go out , follow 
 by the same route for nearly a mile . suddenly turn round he come 
 home . 
 he have no soon enter than the voice of his friend Gillingham 
 greet he from the front room . 
 " I could make nobody hear ; so find your door open I walk in , and 
 make myself comfortable . I say I would call , you remember . " 
 " yes . I be much oblige to you , Gillingham , particularly for come 
 to - night . " 
 " how be Mrs. - " 
 " she be quite well . she be go - just go . that be her tea - cup , 
 that she drink out of only an hour ago . and that be the plate 
 she - " Phillotson 's throat get choke up , and he could not go on . 
 he turn and push the tea - thing aside . 
 " have you have any tea , by the by ? " he ask presently in a renew 
 voice . 
 " no - yes - never mind , " say Gillingham , preoccupy . " Gone , you say 
 she be ? " 
 " yes ... I would have die for she ; but I would not   be cruel to she 
 in the name of the law . she be , as I understand , go to join she 
 lover . what they be go to do I can not say . whatever it may be 
 she have my full consent to . " 
 there be a stability , a ballast , in Phillotson 's pronouncement which 
 restrain his friend 's comment . " shall I - leave you ? " he ask . 
 " no , no . it be a mercy to I that you have come . I have some 
 article to arrange and clear away . would you help I ? " 
 Gillingham assent ; and have go to the upper room the 
 schoolmaster open drawer , and begin take out all Sue 's thing 
 that she have leave behind , and lay they in a large box . " she 
 would not   take all I want she to , " he continue . " but when I make 
 up my mind to she go to live in her own way I do make up my 
 mind . " 
 " some man would have stop at an agreement to separate . " 
 " I have   go into all that , and do not   wish to argue it . I be , and 
 be , the most old - fashioned man in the world on the question of 
 marriage - in fact I have never think critically about its ethic 
 at all . but certain fact star I in the face , and I could not   go 
 against they . " 
 they go on with the packing silently . when it be do Phillotson 
 close the box and turn the key . 
 " there , " he say . " to adorn she in somebody 's eye ; never again in 
 mine ! " 
 V 
 four - and - twenty hour before this time Sue have write the follow 
 note to Jude : 
 it be as I tell you ; and I be leave to - morrow evening . 
 Richard and I think it could be do with less 
 obtrusiveness after dark . I feel rather frightened , and 
 therefore ask you to be sure you be on the Melchester 
 platform to meet I . I arrive at a little to seven . I 
 know you will , of course , dear Jude ; but I feel so timid 
 that I can not   help beg you to be punctual . he have 
 be so very kind to I through it all ! 
 now to our meeting ! 
 S. 
 as she be carry by the omnibus far and far down from 
 the mountain town - the single passenger that evening - she regard 
 the recede road with a sad face . but no hesitation be apparent 
 therein . 
 the up - train by which she be depart stop by signal only . to 
 Sue it seem strange that such a powerful organization as a railway 
 train should be bring to a stand - still on purpose for she - a 
 fugitive from her lawful home . 
 the twenty minute ' journey draw towards its close , and Sue begin 
 gather her thing together to alight . at the moment that the 
 train come to a stand - still by the Melchester platform a hand be 
 lay on the door and she behold Jude . he enter the compartment 
 promptly . he have a black bag in his hand , and be dress in 
 the dark suit he wear on Sundays and in the evening after work . 
 altogether he look a very handsome young fellow , his ardent 
 affection for she burn in his eye . 
 " oh Jude ! " she clasp his hand with both her , and her tense state 
 cause she to simmer over in a little succession of dry sob . " I - I 
 be so glad ! I get out here ? " 
 " no . I get in , dear one ! I have   pack . besides this bag I have   only a 
 big box which be label . " 
 " but do not   I get out ? be not   we go to stay here ? " 
 " we could not   possibly , do not   you see . we be know here - I , at any 
 rate , be well know . I have   book for Aldbrickham ; and here be your 
 ticket for the same place , as you have only one to here . " 
 " I think we should have stay here , " she repeat . 
 " it would not   have do at all . " 
 " ah ! perhaps not . " 
 " there be not   time for I to write and say the place I have decide 
 on . Aldbrickham be a much big town - sixty or seventy thousand 
 inhabitant - and nobody know anything about we there . " 
 " and you have give up your cathedral work here ? " 
 " yes . it be rather sudden - your message come unexpectedly . 
 strictly , I might have be make to finish out the week . but I 
 plead urgency and I be let off . I would have desert any day at 
 your command , dear Sue . I have desert more than that for you ! " 
 " I fear I be do you a lot of harm . ruin your prospect of the 
 Church ; ruin your progress in your trade ; everything ! " 
 " the Church be no more to I . let it lie ! I be not to be one of 
 the soldier - saint who , row on row , 
 burn upward each to his point of bliss , 
 if any such there be ! my point of bliss be not upward , but here . " 
 " oh I seem so bad - upset man 's course like this ! " say she , 
 take up in her voice the emotion that have begin in his . but she 
 recover her equanimity by the time they have travel a dozen 
 mile . 
 " he have be so good in let I go , " she resume . " and here be a 
 note I find on my dressing - table , address to you . " 
 " yes . he be not an unworthy fellow , " say Jude , glance at the note . 
 " and I be ashamed of myself for hat he because he marry you . " 
 " accord to the rule of woman 's whim I suppose I ought to suddenly 
 love he , because he have let I go so generously and unexpectedly , " 
 she answer smile . " but I be so cold , or devoid of gratitude , or 
 so something , that even this generosity have not   make I love he , or 
 repent , or want to stay with he as his wife ; although I do feel I 
 like his large - mindedness , and respect he more than ever . " 
 " it may not work so well for we as if he have be less kind , and you 
 have run away against his will , " murmur Jude . 
 " that I never would have do . " 
 Jude 's eye rest musingly on her face . then he suddenly kiss 
 she ; and be go to kiss she again . " no - only once now - please , 
 Jude ! " 
 " that be rather cruel , " he answer ; but acquiesce . " such a strange 
 thing have happen to I , " Jude continue after a silence . " Arabella 
 have actually write to ask I to get a divorce from she - in kindness 
 to she , she say . she want to honestly and legally marry that man 
 she have already marry virtually ; and beg I to enable she to do 
 it . " 
 " what have you do ? " 
 " I have agree . I think at first I could not   do it without get 
 she into trouble about that second marriage , and I do not   want to 
 injure she in any way . perhaps she be no bad than I be , after all ! 
 but nobody know about it over here , and I find it will not be a 
 difficult proceeding at all . if she want to start afresh I have 
 only too obvious reason for not hinder she . " 
 " then you will be free ? " 
 " yes , I shall be free . " 
 " where be we book for ? " she ask , with the discontinuity that 
 mark her to - night . 
 " Aldbrickham , as I say . " 
 " but it will be very late when we get there ? " 
 " yes . I think of that , and I wire for a room for we at the 
 Temperance Hotel there . " 
 " one ? " 
 " yes - one . " 
 she look at he . " oh Jude ! " Sue bend her forehead against the 
 corner of the compartment . " I think you might do it ; and that I 
 be deceive you . but I do not   mean that ! " 
 in the pause which follow , Jude 's eye fix themselves with 
 a stultified expression on the opposite seat . " well ! " he 
 say ... " well ! " 
 he remain in silence ; and see how discomfited he be she put she 
 face against his cheek , murmuring , " do not   be vex , dear ! " 
 " oh - there be no harm do , " he say . " but - I understand it like 
 that ... be this a sudden change of mind ? " 
 " you have no right to ask I such a question ; and I shall not   answer ! " 
 she say , smile . 
 " my dear one , your happiness be more to I than anything - although we 
 seem to verge on quarrel so often ! - and your will be law to I . 
 I be something more than a mere - selfish fellow , I hope . have it as 
 you wish ! " on reflection his brow show perplexity . " but perhaps 
 it be that you do not   love I - not that you have become conventional ! 
 much as , under your teaching , I hate convention , I hope it be that , 
 not the other terrible alternative ! " 
 even at this obvious moment for candour Sue could not be quite candid 
 as to the state of that mystery , her heart . " put it down to my 
 timidity , " she say with hurried evasiveness ; " to a woman 's natural 
 timidity when the crisis come . I may feel as well as you that I 
 have a perfect right to live with you as you think - from this 
 moment . I may hold the opinion that , in a proper state of society , 
 the father of a woman 's child will be as much a private matter of 
 her as the cut of her underlinen , on whom nobody will have any 
 right to question she . but partly , perhaps , because it be by his 
 generosity that I be now free , I would rather not be other than a 
 little rigid . if there have be a rope - ladder , and he have run after 
 we with pistol , it would have seem different , and I may have act 
 otherwise . but do not   press I and criticize I , Jude ! assume that 
 I have not   the courage of my opinion . I know I be a poor miserable 
 creature . my nature be not so passionate as yours ! " 
 he repeat simply ! " I think - what I naturally think . but if we 
 be not lover , we be not . Phillotson think so , I be sure . see , 
 here be what he have write to I . " he open the letter she have 
 bring , and read : 
 " I make only one condition - that you be tender and kind to she . I 
 know you love she . but even love may be cruel at time . you be 
 make for each other : it be obvious , palpable , to any unbiased old 
 person . you be all along ' the shadowy third ' in my short life with 
 she . I repeat , take care of Sue . " 
 " he be a good fellow , be not   he ! " she say with latent tear . on 
 reconsideration she add , " he be very resign to let I 
 go - too resign almost ! I never be so near be in love with he 
 as when he make such thoughtful arrangement for my be comfortable 
 on my journey , and offer to provide money . yet I be not . if I 
 love he ever so little as a wife , I would go back to he even now . " 
 " but you do not , do you ? " 
 " it be true - oh so terribly true ! - I do not . " 
 " nor I neither , I half - fear ! " he say pettishly . " nor anybody 
 perhaps ! Sue , sometimes , when I be vex with you , I think you be 
 incapable of real love . " 
 " that be not good and loyal of you ! " she say , and draw away from 
 he as far as she could , look severely out into the darkness . she 
 add in hurt tone , without turn round : " my liking for you be 
 not as some woman 's perhaps . but it be a delight in be with you , 
 of a supremely delicate kind , and I do not   want to go far and risk 
 it by - an attempt to intensify it ! I quite realize that , as woman 
 with man , it be a risk to come . but , as I with you , I resolve to 
 trust you to set my wish above your gratification . do not   discuss 
 it far , dear Jude ! " 
 " of course , if it would make you reproach yourself ... but you do 
 like I very much , Sue ? say you do ! say that you do a quarter , a 
 tenth , as much as I do you , and I will be content ! " 
 " I have   let you kiss I , and that tell enough . " 
 " just once or so ! " 
 " well - do not   be a greedy boy . " 
 he leant back , and do not look at she for a long time . that 
 episode in her past history of which she have tell he - of the poor 
 Christminster graduate whom she have handle thus , return to Jude 's 
 mind ; and he see himself as a possible second in such a torturing 
 destiny . 
 " this be a queer elopement ! " he murmur . " perhaps you be make 
 a cat 's paw of I with Phillotson all this time . upon my word it 
 almost seem so - to see you sit up there so prim ! " 
 " now you must not   be angry - I will not   let you ! " she coax , turn and 
 move near to he . " you do kiss I just now , you know ; and I 
 do not   dislike you to , I own it , Jude . only I do not   want to let you 
 do it again , just yet - consider how we be circumstance , do not 
 you see ! " 
 he could never resist she when she plead   as she well know . and 
 they sit side by side with joined hand , till she arouse herself at 
 some thought . 
 " I can not   possibly go to that Temperance Inn , after your telegraphing 
 that message ! " 
 " why not ? " 
 " you can see well enough ! " 
 " very well ; there will be some other one open , no doubt . I have 
 sometimes think , since your marry Phillotson because of a stupid 
 scandal , that under the affectation of independent view you be as 
 enslave to the social code as any woman I know ! " 
 " not mentally . but I have not   the courage of my view , as I say 
 before . I do not   marry he altogether because of the scandal . 
 but sometimes a woman 's love of be love get the well of her 
 conscience , and though she be agonize at the thought of treat a 
 man cruelly , she encourage he to love she while she do not   love 
 he at all . then , when she see he suffering , her remorse set in , 
 and she do what she can to repair the wrong . " 
 " you simply mean that you flirt outrageously with he , poor old 
 chap , and then repent , and to make reparation , marry he , though 
 you torture yourself to death by do it . " 
 " well - if you will put it brutally ! - it be a little like that - that 
 and the scandal together - and your conceal from I what you ought 
 to have tell I before ! " 
 he could see that she be distressed and tearful at his criticism , 
 and soothe she , say : " there , dear ; do not   mind ! crucify I , if 
 you will ! you know you be all the world to I , whatever you do ! " 
 " I be very bad and unprincipled - I know you think that ! " she say , 
 try to blink away her tear . 
 " I think and know you be my dear Sue , from whom neither length nor 
 breadth , nor thing present nor thing to come , can divide I ! " 
 though so sophisticated in many thing she be such a child in other 
 that this satisfy she , and they reach the end of their journey 
 on the good of term . it be about ten o'clock when they arrive at 
 Aldbrickham , the county town of North Wessex . as she would not go 
 to the Temperance Hotel because of the form of his telegram , Jude 
 inquire for another ; and a youth who volunteer to find one wheel 
 their luggage to the George far on , which prove to be the inn at 
 which Jude have stay with Arabella on that one occasion of their 
 meeting after their division for year . 
 owing , however , to their now enter it by another door , and to his 
 preoccupation , he do not at first recognize the place . when they 
 have engage their respective room they go down to a late supper . 
 during Jude 's temporary absence the waiting - maid speak to Sue . 
 " I think , ma'am , I remember your relation , or friend , or whatever he 
 be , come here once before - late , just like this , with his wife - a 
 lady , at any rate , that be not   you by no manner of mean - jest as me 
 be with you now . " 
 " oh do you ? " say Sue , with a certain sickness of heart . " though I 
 think you must be mistake ! how long ago be it ? " 
 " about a month or two . a handsome , full - figured woman . they have 
 this room . " 
 when Jude come back and sit down to supper Sue seem mop and 
 miserable . " Jude , " she say to he plaintively , at their parting 
 that night upon the landing , " it be not so nice and pleasant as it 
 use to be with we ! I do not   like it here - I can not   bear the place ! 
 and I do not   like you so well as I do ! " 
 " how fidgeted you seem , dear ! why do you change like this ? " 
 " because it be cruel to bring I here ! " 
 " why ? " 
 " you be lately here with Arabella . there , now I have say it ! " 
 " dear I , why - " say Jude look round he . " yes - it be the same ! 
 I really do not   know it , Sue . well - it be not cruel , since we have 
 come as we have - two relation stay together . " 
 " how long ago be it you be here ? tell I , tell I ! " 
 " the day before I meet you in Christminster , when we go back to 
 Marygreen together . I tell you I have meet she . " 
 " yes , you say you have meet she , but you do not   tell I all . your 
 story be that you have meet as estranged people , who be not husband 
 and wife at all in Heaven 's sight - not that you have make it up with 
 she . " 
 " we do not   make it up , " he say sadly . " I can not   explain , Sue . " 
 " you have   be false to I ; you , my last hope ! and I shall never 
 forget it , never ! " 
 " but by your own wish , dear Sue , we be only to be friend , not 
 lover ! it be so very inconsistent of you to - " 
 " friend can be jealous ! " 
 " I do not   see that . you concede nothing to I and I have to concede 
 everything to you . after all , you be on good term with your 
 husband at that time . " 
 " no , I be not , Jude . oh how can you think so ! and you have take I 
 in , even if you do not   intend to . " she be so mortified that he be 
 oblige to take she into her room and close the door lest the people 
 should hear . " be it this room ? yes it be - I see by your look it 
 be ! I will not   have it for mine ! oh it be treacherous of you to have 
 she again ! I jump out of the window ! " 
 " but Sue , she be , after all , my legal wife , if not - " 
 slip down on her knee Sue bury her face in the bed and wept . 
 " I never know such an unreasonable - such a dog - in - the - manger 
 feeling , " say Jude . " I be not to approach you , nor anybody else ! " 
 " oh do not   you understand my feeling ! why do not   you ! why be you so 
 gross ! I jump out of the window ! " 
 " jump out of window ? " 
 " I can not   explain ! " 
 it be true that he do not understand her feeling very well . but 
 he do a little ; and begin to love she none the less . 
 " I - I think you care for nobody - desire nobody in the world but 
 I at that time - and ever since ! " continue Sue . 
 " it be true . I do not , and do not   now ! " say Jude , as distressed as 
 she . 
 " but you must have think much of she ! or - " 
 " no - I need not - you do not   understand I either - woman never do ! why 
 should you get into such a tantrum about nothing ? " 
 look up from the quilt she pout provokingly : " if it have not   be 
 for that , perhaps I would have go on to the Temperance Hotel , after 
 all , as you propose ; for I be begin to think I do belong to 
 you ! " 
 " oh , it be of no consequence ! " say Jude distantly . 
 " I think , of course , that she have never be really your wife since 
 she leave you of her own accord year and year ago ! my sense of it 
 be , that a parting such as your from she , and mine from he , end 
 the marriage . " 
 " I can not   say more without speak against she , and I do not   want 
 to do that , " say he . " yet I must tell you one thing , which would 
 settle the matter in any case . she have marry another man - really 
 marry he ! I know nothing about it till after the visit we make 
 here . " 
 " married another ? ... it be a crime - as the world treat it , but 
 do not believe . " 
 " there - now you be yourself again . yes , it be a crime - as you do not 
 hold , but would fearfully concede . but I shall never inform against 
 she ! and it be evidently a prick of conscience in she that have lead 
 she to urge I to get a divorce , that she may remarry this man 
 legally . so you perceive I shall not be likely to see she again . " 
 " and you do not   really know anything of this when you see she ? " say 
 Sue more gently , as she rise . 
 " I do not . consider all thing , I do not   think you ought to be 
 angry , darling ! " 
 " I be not . but I shall not   go to the Temperance Hotel ! " 
 he laugh . " never mind ! " he say . " so that I be near you , I be 
 comparatively happy . it be more than this earthly wretch call I 
 deserve - you spirit , you disembody creature , you dear , sweet , 
 tantalize phantom - hardly flesh at all ; so that when I put my arm 
 round you I almost expect they to pass through you as through air ! 
 forgive I for be gross , as you call it ! remember that our 
 call cousin when really stranger be a snare . the enmity of our 
 parent give a piquancy to you in my eye that be intenser even than 
 the novelty of ordinary new acquaintance . " 
 " say those pretty line , then , from Shelley 's ' epipsychidion ' as if 
 they mean I ! " she solicit , slant up close to he as they 
 stand . " do not   you know they ? " 
 " I know hardly any poetry , " he reply mournfully . 
 " do not   you ? these be some of they : 
 there be a be whom my spirit oft 
 Met on its visioned wandering far aloft . 
         
 a seraph of Heaven , too gentle to be human , 
 veil beneath that radiant form of woman ... 
 oh it be too flattering , so I will not   go on ! but say it be I ! say 
 it be I ! " 
 " it be you , dear ; exactly like you ! " 
 " now I forgive you ! and you shall kiss I just once there - not very 
 long . " she put the tip of her finger gingerly to her cheek ; and he 
 do as command . " you do care for I very much , do not   you , in spite 
 of my not - you know ? " 
 " yes , sweet ! " he say with a sigh ; and bade her good - night . 
 VI 
 in return to his native town of Shaston as schoolmaster Phillotson 
 have win the interest and awaken the memory of the inhabitant , 
 who , though they do not honour he for his miscellaneous aquirement 
 as he would have be honour elsewhere , retain for he a sincere 
 regard . when , shortly after his arrival , he bring home a pretty 
 wife - awkwardly pretty for he , if he do not take care , they 
 say - they be glad to have she settle among they . 
 for some time after her flight from that home Sue 's absence do not 
 excite comment . her place as monitor in the school be take by 
 another young woman within a few day of she vacate it , which 
 substitution also pass without remark , Sue 's service have be 
 of a provisional nature only . when , however , a month have pass , and 
 Phillotson casually admit to an acquaintance that he do not know 
 where his wife be stay , curiosity begin to be arouse ; till , 
 jump to conclusion , people venture to affirm that Sue have play 
 he false and run away from he . the schoolmaster 's grow languor 
 and listlessness over his work give countenance to the idea . 
 Though Phillotson have hold his tongue as long as he could , except to 
 his friend Gillingham , his honesty and directness would not allow he 
 to do so when misapprehension as to Sue 's conduct spread abroad . 
 on a Monday morning the chairman of the school committee call , and 
 after attend to the business of the school draw Phillotson aside 
 out of earshot of the child . 
 " you will excuse my asking , Phillotson , since everybody be talk of 
 it : be this true as to your domestic affair - that your wife 's go 
 away be on no visit , but a secret elopement with a lover ? if so , I 
 condole with you . " 
 " do not , " say Phillotson . " there be no secret about it . " 
 " she have go to visit friend ? " 
 " no . " 
 " then what have happen ? " 
 " she have go away under circumstance that usually call for 
 condolence with the husband . but I give my consent . " 
 the chairman look as if he have not apprehend the remark . 
 " what I say be quite true , " Phillotson continue testily . " she ask 
 leave to go away with her lover , and I let she . why should not   I ? a 
 woman of full age , it be a question of her own conscience - not for 
 I . I be not her gaoler . I can not   explain any far . I do not 
 wish to be question . " 
 the child observe that much seriousness mark the face of 
 the two man , and go home and tell their parent that something 
 new have happen about Mrs. Phillotson . then Phillotson 's little 
 maidservant , who be a schoolgirl just out of her standard , say 
 that Mr. Phillotson have help in his wife 's packing , have offer 
 she what money she require , and have write a friendly letter to 
 her young man , tell he to take care of she . the chairman of 
 committee think the matter over , and talk to the other manager 
 of the school , till a request come to Phillotson to meet they 
 privately . the meeting last a long time , and at the end the 
 school - master come home , look as usual pale and wear . Gillingham 
 be sit in his house await he . 
 " well ; it be as you say , " observe Phillotson , fling himself 
 down wearily in a chair . " they have request I to send in my 
 resignation on account of my scandalous conduct in give my tortured 
 wife her liberty - or , as they call it , condone her adultery . but I 
 shall not   resign ! " 
 " I think I would . " 
 " I will not . it be no business of theirs . it do not   affect I in my 
 public capacity at all . they may expel I if they like . " 
 " if you make a fuss it will get into the paper , and you will never get 
 appoint to another school . you see , they have to consider what 
 you do as do by a teacher of youth - and its effect as such upon 
 the moral of the town ; and , to ordinary opinion , your position be 
 indefensible . you must let I say that . " 
 to this good advice , however , Phillotson would not listen . 
 " I do not   care , " he say . " I do not   go unless I be turn out . and 
 for this reason ; that by resign I acknowledge I have act wrongly 
 by she ; when I be more and more convinced every day that in the sight 
 of Heaven and by all natural , straightforward humanity , I have act 
 rightly . " 
 Gillingham see that his rather headstrong friend would not be able to 
 maintain such a position as this ; but he say nothing far , and 
 in due time - indeed , in a quarter of an hour - the formal letter of 
 dismissal arrive , the manager have remain behind to write it 
 after Phillotson 's withdrawal . the latter reply that he should not 
 accept dismissal ; and call a public meeting , which he attend , 
 although he look so weak and ill that his friend implore he to 
 stay at home . when he stand up to give his reason for contest 
 the decision of the manager he advance they firmly , as he have 
 do to his friend , and contend , moreover , that the matter be a 
 domestic theory which do not concern they . this they over - rule , 
 insist that the private eccentricity of a teacher come quite 
 within their sphere of control , as it touch the moral of those he 
 teach . Phillotson reply that he do not see how an act of natural 
 charity could injure moral . 
 all the respectable inhabitant and well - to - do fellow - native of 
 the town be against Phillotson to a man . but , somewhat to his 
 surprise , some dozen or more champion rise up in his defence as from 
 the ground . 
 it have be state that Shaston be the anchorage of a curious and 
 interesting group of itinerant , who frequent the numerous fair 
 and market hold up and down Wessex during the summer and autumn 
 month . although Phillotson have never speak to one of these 
 gentleman they now nobly lead the forlorn hope in his defence . 
 the body include two cheap jack , a shooting - gallery proprietor 
 and the lady who load the gun , a pair of boxing - master , a 
 steam - roundabout manager , two travel broom - maker , who call 
 themselves widow , a gingerbread - stall keeper , a swing - boat owner , 
 and a " test - your - strength " man . 
 this generous phalanx of supporter , and a few other of independent 
 judgment , whose own domestic experience have be not without 
 vicissitude , come up and warmly shake hand with Phillotson ; after 
 which they express their thought so strongly to the meeting that 
 issue be join , the result be a general scuffle , wherein a black 
 board be split , three pane of the school window be break , 
 an inkbottle be spill over a town - councillor 's shirt front , 
 a churchwarden be deal such a topper with the map of Palestine 
 that his head go right through Samaria , and many black eye and 
 bleed nose be give , one of which , to everybody 's horror , be 
 the venerable incumbent 's , owe to the zeal of an emancipate 
 chimney - sweep , who take the side of Phillotson 's party . when 
 Phillotson see the blood run down the rector 's face he deplore 
 almost in groan the untoward and degrading circumstance , regret 
 that he have not resign when call upon , and go home so ill that 
 next morning he could not leave his bed . 
 the farcical yet melancholy event be the beginning of a serious 
 illness for he ; and he lie in his lonely bed in the pathetic state 
 of mind of a middle - aged man who perceive at length that his 
 life , intellectual and domestic , be tend to failure and gloom . 
 Gillingham come to see he in the evening , and on one occasion 
 mention Sue 's name . 
 " she do not   care anything about I ! " say Phillotson . " why should 
 she ? " 
 " she do not   know you be ill . " 
 " so much the well for both of we . " 
 " where be her lover and she live ? " 
 " at Melchester - I suppose ; at least he be live there some time 
 ago . " 
 when Gillingham reach home he sit and reflect , and at last write 
 an anonymous line to Sue , on the bare chance of its reach she , 
 the letter be enclose in an envelope address to Jude at the 
 diocesan capital . arrive at that place it be forward to 
 Marygreen in North Wessex , and thence to Aldbrickham by the only 
 person who know his present address - the widow who have nurse his 
 aunt . 
 three day later , in the evening , when the sun be go down in 
 splendour over the lowland of Blackmoor , and make the Shaston 
 window like tongue of fire to the eye of the rustic in that vale , 
 the sick man fancy that he hear somebody come to the house , and a 
 few minute after there be a tap at the bedroom door . phillotson 
 do not speak ; the door be hesitatingly open , and there 
 enter - Sue . 
 she be in light spring clothing , and her advent seem ghostly - like 
 the flitting in of a moth . he turn his eye upon she , and flush ; 
 but appear to check his primary impulse to speak . 
 " I have no business here , " she say , bend she frightened face to 
 he . " but I hear you be ill - very ill ; and - and as I know that 
 you recognize other feeling between man and woman than physical 
 love , I have come . " 
 " I be not very ill , my dear friend . only unwell . " 
 " I do not   know that ; and I be afraid that only a severe illness would 
 have justify my coming ! " 
 " yes ... yes . and I almost wish you have not come ! it be a little 
 too soon - that be all I mean . still , let we make the good of it . you 
 have not   hear about the school , I suppose ? " 
 " no - what about it ? " 
 " only that I be go away from here to another place . the manager 
 and I do not   agree , and we be go to part - that be all . " 
 Sue do not for a moment , either now or later , suspect what trouble 
 have result to he from let she go ; it never once seem to 
 cross her mind , and she have receive no news whatever from Shaston . 
 they talk on slight and ephemeral subject , and when his tea be 
 bring up he tell the amazed little servant that a cup be to be set 
 for Sue . that young person be much more interested in their history 
 than they suppose , and as she descend the stair she lift she 
 eye and hand in grotesque amazement . while they sip Sue go 
 to the window and thoughtfully say , " it be such a beautiful sunset , 
 Richard . " 
 " they be mostly beautiful from here , owe to the ray cross the 
 mist of the vale . but I lose they all , as they do not   shine into this 
 gloomy corner where I lie . " 
 " would not   you like to see this particular one ? it be like heaven 
 open . " 
 " ah yes ! but I can not . " 
 " I will help you to . " 
 " no - the bedstead can not   be shift . " 
 " but see how I mean . " 
 she go to where a swing - glass stand , and take it in her hand 
 carry it to a spot by the window where it could catch the sunshine , 
 move the glass till the beam be reflect into Phillotson 's 
 face . 
 " there - you can see the great red sun now ! " she say . " and I be 
 sure it will cheer you - I do so hope it will ! " she speak with a 
 childlike , repentant kindness , as if she could not do too much for 
 he . 
 Phillotson smile sadly . " you be an odd creature ! " he murmur as 
 the sun glow in his eye . " the idea of your come to see I after 
 what have pass ! " 
 " do not   let we go back upon that ! " she say quickly . " I have to catch 
 the omnibus for the train , as Jude do not   know I have come ; he be 
 out when I start ; so I must return home almost directly . Richard , 
 I be so very glad you be well . you do not   hate I , do you ? you 
 have be such a kind friend to I ! " 
 " I be glad to know you think so , " say Phillotson huskily . " no . 
 I do not   hate you ! " 
 it grow dusk quickly in the gloomy room during their intermittent 
 chat , and when candle be bring and it be time to leave she put 
 her hand in his or rather allow it to flit through his ; for she be 
 significantly light in touch . she have nearly close the door when he 
 say , " Sue ! " he have notice that , in turn away from he , tear 
 be on her face and a quiver in her lip . 
 it be bad policy to recall she - he know it while he pursue it . 
 but he could not help it . she come back . 
 " Sue , " he murmur , " do you wish to make it up , and stay ? I will 
 forgive you and condone everything ! " 
 " oh you can not , you can not ! " she say hastily . " you can not   condone it 
 now ! " 
 " he be your husband now , in effect , you mean , of course ? " 
 " you may assume it . he be obtain a divorce from his wife 
 Arabella . " 
 " his wife ! it be altogether news to I that he have a wife . " 
 " it be a bad marriage . " 
 " like your . " 
 " like mine . he be not do it so much on his own account as on 
 her . she write and tell he it would be a kindness to she , since 
 then she could marry and live respectably . and Jude have agree . " 
 " a wife ... a kindness to she . ah , yes ; a kindness to she to release 
 she altogether ... but I do not   like the sound of it . I can forgive , 
 Sue . " 
 " no , no ! you can not   have I back now I have be so wicked - as to do 
 what I have do ! " 
 there have arise in Sue 's face that incipient fright which show 
 itself whenever he change from friend to husband , and which make she 
 adopt any line of defence against marital feeling in he . " I must go 
 now . I will come again - may I ? " 
 " I do not   ask you to go , even now . I ask you to stay . " 
 " I thank you , Richard ; but I must . as you be not so ill as I 
 think , I CANNOT stay ! " 
 " she be his - his from lip to heel ! " say Phillotson ; but so faintly 
 that in close the door she do not hear it . the dread of a 
 reactionary change in the schoolmaster 's sentiment , couple , 
 perhaps , with a faint shamefacedness at let even he know 
 what a slipshod lack of thoroughness , from a man 's point of view , 
 characterize her transfer allegiance , prevent she tell he 
 of she , thus far , incomplete relation with Jude ; and Phillotson lie 
 writhing like a man in hell as he picture the prettily dress , 
 madden compound of sympathy and averseness who bear his name , 
 return impatiently to the home of her lover . 
 Gillingham be so interested in Phillotson 's affair , and so 
 seriously concerned about he , that he walk up the hill - side to 
 Shaston two or three time a week , although , there and back , it be 
 a journey of nine mile , which have to be perform between tea and 
 supper , after a hard day 's work in school . when he call on the 
 next occasion after Sue 's visit his friend be downstairs , and 
 Gillingham notice that his restless mood have be supplant by a 
 more fixed and compose one . 
 " she be be here since you call last , " say Phillotson . 
 " not Mrs. Phillotson ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " ah ! you have make it up ? " 
 " no ... she just come , pat my pillow with her little white hand , 
 play the thoughtful nurse for half an hour , and go away . " 
 " well - I be hang ! a little hussy ! " 
 " what do you say ? " 
 " oh - nothing ! " 
 " what do you mean ? " 
 " I mean , what a tantalizing , capricious little woman ! if she be 
 not your wife - " 
 " she be not ; she be another man 's except in name and law . and I have 
 be think - it be suggest to I by a conversation I have with 
 she - that , in kindness to she , I ought to dissolve the legal tie 
 altogether ; which , singularly enough , I think I can do , now she have 
 be back , and refuse my request to stay after I say I have forgive 
 she . I believe that fact would afford I opportunity of do it , 
 though I do not see it at the moment . what be the use of keep 
 she chain on to I if she do not   belong to I ? I know - I feel 
 absolutely certain - that she would welcome my take such a step as 
 the great charity to she . for though as a fellow - creature she 
 sympathize with , and pity I , and even weep for I , as a husband 
 she can not endure I - she loathe I - there be no use in mince 
 word - she loathe I , and my only manly , and dignified , and merciful 
 course be to complete what I have begin ... and for worldly reason , 
 too , it will be well for she to be independent . I have hopelessly 
 ruin my prospect because of my decision as to what be good for 
 we , though she do not know it ; I see only dire poverty ahead from 
 my foot to the grave ; for I can be accept as teacher no more . I 
 shall probably have enough to do to make both end meet during the 
 remainder of my life , now my occupation 's go ; and I shall be 
 well able to bear it alone . I may as well tell you that what have 
 suggest my let she go be some news she bring I - the news 
 that Fawley be do the same . " 
 " oh - he have a spouse , too ? a queer couple , these lover ! " 
 " well - I do not   want your opinion on that . what I be go to say be 
 that my liberate she can do she no possible harm , and will open up 
 a chance of happiness for she which she have never dream of hitherto . 
 for then they will be able to marry , as they ought to have do at 
 first . " 
 Gillingham do not hurry to reply . " I may disagree with your 
 motive , " he say gently , for he respected view he could not share . 
 " but I think you be right in your determination - if you can carry it 
 out . I doubt , however , if you can . " 
 Part Fifth 
 AT ALDBRICKHAM and ELSEWHERE 
 " thy aerial part , and all the fiery part which be 
 mingle in thee , though by nature they have an upward 
 tendency , still in obedience to the disposition of the 
 universe they be over - powered here in the compound 
 mass the body . " - M. ANTONINUS   long . 
 I 
 how Gillingham 's doubt be dispose of will most quickly appear by 
 pass over the series of dreary month and incident that follow 
 the event of the last chapter , and come on to a Sunday in the 
 February of the year follow . 
 Sue and Jude be live in Aldbrickham , in precisely the same 
 relation that they have establish between themselves when she 
 leave Shaston to join he the year before . the proceeding in the 
 law - court have reach their consciousness , but as a distant sound 
 and an occasional missive which they hardly understand . 
 they have meet , as usual , to breakfast together in the little house 
 with Jude 's name on it , that he have take at fifteen pound a year , 
 with three - pound - ten extra for rate and taxis , and furnish with 
 his aunt 's ancient and lumber good , which have cost he about 
 their full value to bring all the way from Marygreen . Sue kept 
 house , and manage everything . 
 as he enter the room this morning Sue hold up a letter she have just 
 receive . 
 " well ; and what be it about ? " he say after kiss she . 
 " that the decree nisi in the case of Phillotson versus Phillotson 
 and Fawley , pronounce six month ago , have just be make absolute . " 
 " ah , " say Jude , as he sit down . 
 the same concluding incident in Jude 's suit against Arabella have 
 occur about a month or two early . both case have be too 
 insignificant to be report in the paper , far than by name in 
 a long list of other undefended case . 
 " now then , Sue , at any rate , you can do what you like ! " he look at 
 his sweetheart curiously . 
 " be we - you and I - just as free now as if we have never marry at 
 all ? " 
 " just as free - except , I believe , that a clergyman may object 
 personally to remarry you , and hand the job on to somebody else . " 
 " but I wonder - do you think it be really so with we ? I know it be 
 generally . but I have an uncomfortable feeling that my freedom have 
 be obtain under false pretence ! " 
 " how ? " 
 " well - if the truth about we have be know , the decree would not   have 
 be pronounce . it be only , be it , because we have make no defence , 
 and have lead they into a false supposition ? therefore be my freedom 
 lawful , however proper it may be ? " 
 " well - why do you let it be under false pretence ? you have only 
 yourself to blame , " he say mischievously . 
 " Jude - do not ! you ought not to be touchy about that still . you must 
 take I as I be . " 
 " very well , darling : so I will . perhaps you be right . as to your 
 question , we be not oblige to prove anything . that be their 
 business . anyhow we be live together . " 
 " yes . though not in their sense . " 
 " one thing be certain , that however the decree may be bring 
 about , a marriage be dissolve when it be dissolve . there be this 
 advantage in be poor obscure people like we - that these thing be 
 do for we in a rough and ready fashion . it be the same with I 
 and Arabella . I be afraid her criminal second marriage would have 
 be discover , and she punish ; but nobody take any interest in 
 her - nobody inquire , nobody suspect it . if we have be patent 
 nobility we should have have infinite trouble , and day and week 
 would have be spend in investigation . " 
 by degree Sue acquire her lover 's cheerfulness at the sense of 
 freedom , and propose that they should take a walk in the field , 
 even if they have to put up with a cold dinner on account of it . 
 Jude agree , and Sue go up - stair and prepare to start , put 
 on a joyful coloured gown in observance of her liberty ; see which 
 Jude put on a light tie . 
 " now we will strut arm and arm , " he say , " like any other engaged 
 couple . we have   a legal right to . " 
 they ramble out of the town , and along a path over the low - lie 
 land that border it , though these be frosty now , and the 
 extensive seed - field be bare of colour and produce . the pair , 
 however , be so absorb in their own situation that their 
 surrounding be little in their consciousness . 
 " well , my dearest , the result of all this be that we can marry after 
 a decent interval . " 
 " yes ; I suppose we can , " say Sue , without enthusiasm . 
 " and be not   we go to ? " 
 " I do not   like to say no , dear Jude ; but I feel just the same about 
 it now as I have do all along . I have just the same dread lest an 
 iron contract should extinguish your tenderness for I , and mine for 
 you , as it do between our unfortunate parent . " 
 " still , what can we do ? I do love you , as you know , Sue . " 
 " I know it abundantly . but I think I would much rather go on live 
 always as lover , as we be live now , and only meet by day . it 
 be so much sweet - for the woman at least , and when she be sure of 
 the man . and henceforward we need not   be so particular as we have 
 be about appearance . " 
 " our experience of matrimony with other have not be encouraging , 
 I own , " say he with some gloom ; " either owe to our own 
 dissatisfied , unpractical nature , or by our misfortune . but we 
 two - " 
 " should be two dissatisfied one link together , which would be 
 twice as bad as before ... I think I should begin to be afraid of 
 you , Jude , the moment you have contract to cherish I under a 
 Government stamp , and I be license to be love on the premise by 
 you - Ugh , how horrible and sordid ! although , as you be , free , I 
 trust you more than any other man in the world . " 
 " no , no - do not   say I should change ! " he expostulate ; yet there be 
 misgive in his own voice also . 
 " apart from ourselves , and our unhappy peculiarity , it be foreign 
 to a man 's nature to go on love a person when he be tell that 
 he must and shall be that person 's lover . there would be a much 
 likeli chance of his do it if he be tell not to love . if the 
 marriage ceremony consist in an oath and sign contract between 
 the party to cease love from that day forward , in consideration 
 of personal possession be give , and to avoid each other 's society 
 as much as possible in public , there would be more loving couple 
 than there be now . Fancy the secret meeting between the perjure 
 husband and wife , the denial of have see each other , the 
 clambering in at bedroom window , and the hiding in closet ! there would 
 be little cool then . " 
 " yes ; but admit this , or something like it , to be true , you be 
 not the only one in the world to see it , dear little Sue . People go 
 on marry because they can not   resist natural force , although many 
 of they may know perfectly well that they be possibly buy a 
 month 's pleasure with a life 's discomfort . no doubt my father and 
 mother , and your father and mother , see it , if they at all resemble 
 we in habit of observation . but then they go and marry just the 
 same , because they have ordinary passion . but you , Sue , be such a 
 phantasmal , bodiless creature , one who - if you will allow I to say 
 it - have so little animal passion in you , that you can act upon reason 
 in the matter , when we poor unfortunate wretch of gross substance 
 can not . " 
 " well , " she sigh , " you have   own that it would probably end in 
 misery for we . and I be not so exceptional a woman as you think . 
 few woman like marriage than you suppose , only they enter into it 
 for the dignity it be assume to confer , and the social advantage 
 it gain they sometimes - a dignity and an advantage that I be quite 
 willing to do without . " 
 Jude fall back upon his old complaint - that , intimate as they be , 
 he have never once have from she an honest , candid declaration that she 
 love or could love he . " I really fear sometimes that you can not , " 
 he say , with a dubiousness approach anger . " and you be so 
 reticent . I know that woman be teach by other woman that they 
 must never admit the full truth to a man . but the high form of 
 affection be base on full sincerity on both side . not be man , 
 these woman do not   know that in look back on those he have have 
 tender relation with , a man 's heart return close to she who 
 be the soul of truth in her conduct . the well class of man , 
 even if catch by airy affectation of dodge and parrying , be not 
 retain by they . a Nemesis attend the woman who play the game of 
 elusiveness too often , in the utter contempt for she that , soon 
 or later , her old admirer feel ; under which they allow she to go 
 unlamented to her grave . " 
 Sue , who be regard the distance , have acquire a guilty look ; and 
 she suddenly reply in a tragic voice : " I do not   think I like you 
 to - day so well as I do , Jude ! " 
 " do not   you ? why ? " 
 " oh , well - you be not nice - too sermony . though I suppose I be so 
 bad and worthless that I deserve the utmost rigour of lecturing ! " 
 " no , you be not bad . you be a dear . but as slippery as an eel 
 when I want to get a confession from you . " 
 " oh yes I be bad , and obstinate , and all sort ! it be no use your 
 pretend I be not ! People who be good do not   want scold as I 
 do ... but now that I have nobody but you , and nobody to defend I , 
 it be very hard that I must not   have my own way in decide how I will 
 live with you , and whether I will be marry or no ! " 
 " Sue , my own comrade and sweetheart , I do not   want to force you either 
 to marry or to do the other thing - of course I do not ! it be too 
 wicked of you to be so pettish ! now we will not   say any more about it , 
 and go on just the same as we have do ; and during the rest of our 
 walk we will talk of the meadow only , and the flood , and the prospect 
 of the farmer this coming year . " 
 after this the subject of marriage be not mention by they for 
 several day , though live as they be with only a landing between 
 they it be constantly in their mind . Sue be assist Jude very 
 materially now : he have latterly occupy himself on his own account 
 in work and letter headstone , which he keep in a little yard 
 at the back of his little house , where in the interval of domestic 
 duty she mark out the letter full size for he , and black they 
 in after he have cut they . it be a low class of handicraft than 
 be his former performance as a cathedral mason , and his only 
 patron be the poor people who live in his own neighbourhood , 
 and know what a cheap man this " Jude Fawley : Monumental Mason " 
  as he call himself on his front door   be to employ for the 
 simple memorial they require for their dead . but he seem more 
 independent than before , and it be the only arrangement under which 
 Sue , who particularly wish to be no burden on he , could render any 
 assistance . 
 II 
 it be an evening at the end of the month , and Jude have just return 
 home from hear a lecture on ancient history in the public hall not 
 far off . when he enter , Sue , who have be keep indoor during 
 his absence , lay out supper for he . contrary to custom she do not 
 speak . Jude have take up some illustrate paper , which he peruse 
 till , raise his eye , he see that her face be troubled . 
 " be you depressed , Sue ? " he say . 
 she pause a moment . " I have a message for you , " she answer . 
 " somebody have call ? " 
 " yes . a woman . " Sue 's voice quaver as she speak , and she suddenly 
 sit down from her preparation , lay her hand in her lap , and look 
 into the fire . " I do not   know whether I do right or not ! " she 
 continue . " I say you be not at home , and when she say she would 
 wait , I say I think you might not be able to see she . " 
 " why do you say that , dear ? I suppose she want a headstone . be 
 she in mourning ? " 
 " no . she be not   in mourning , and she do not   want a headstone ; and I 
 think you could not   see she . " Sue look critically and imploringly 
 at he . 
 " but who be she ? do not   she say ? " 
 " no . she would not   give her name . but I know who she be - I think I 
 do ! it be arabella ! " 
 " Heaven save we ! what should Arabella come for ? what make you think 
 it be she ? " 
 " oh , I can hardly tell . but I know it be ! I feel perfectly certain 
 it be - by the light in her eye as she look at I . she be a 
 fleshy , coarse woman . " 
 " well - I should not have call Arabella coarse exactly , except in 
 speech , though she may be get so by this time under the duty of 
 the public house . she be rather handsome when I know she . " 
 " handsome ! but yes ! - so she be ! " 
 " I think I hear a quiver in your little mouth . well , waive that , 
 as she be nothing to I , and virtuously marry to another man , why 
 should she come trouble we ? " 
 " be you sure she be marry ? have you definite news of it ? " 
 " no - not definite news . but that be why she ask I to release 
 she . she and the man both want to lead a proper life , as I 
 understand . " 
 " oh Jude - it be , it be arabella ! " cry Sue , cover her eye 
 with her hand . " and I be so miserable ! it seem such an ill oman , 
 whatever she may have come for . you could not possibly see she , 
 could you ? " 
 " I do not   really think I could . it would be so very painful to talk 
 to she now - for she as much as for I . however , she be go . do she 
 say she would come again ? " 
 " no . but she go away very reluctantly . " 
 Sue , whom the least thing upset , could not eat any supper , and when 
 Jude have finish his he prepare to go to bed . he have no soon 
 rake out the fire , fasten the door , and get to the top of the 
 stair than there come a knock . Sue instantly emerge from her room , 
 which she have but just enter . 
 " there she be again ! " Sue whisper in appalled accent . 
 " how do you know ? " 
 " she knock like that last time . " 
 they listen , and the knocking come again . no servant be keep in 
 the house , and if the summon be to be respond to one of they 
 would have to do it in person . " I will open a window , " say Jude . 
 " whoever it be can not be expect to be let in at this time . " 
 he accordingly go into his bedroom and lift the sash . the lonely 
 street of early retire workpeople be empty from end to end save of 
 one figure - that of a woman walk up and down by the lamp a few 
 yard off . 
 " who be there ? " he ask . 
 " be that Mr. Fawley ? " come up from the woman , in a voice which be 
 unmistakably Arabella 's . 
 Jude reply that it be . 
 " be it she ? " ask Sue from the door , with lip apart . 
 " yes , dear , " say Jude . " what do you want , arabella ? " he inquire . 
 " I beg your pardon , Jude , for disturb you , " say Arabella humbly . 
 " but I call early - I want particularly to see you to - night , if 
 I could . I be in trouble , and have nobody to help I ! " 
 " in trouble , be you ? " 
 " yes . " 
 there be a silence . an inconvenient sympathy seem to be rise in 
 Jude 's breast at the appeal . " but be not   you marry ? " he say . 
 Arabella hesitate . " no , Jude , I be not , " she return . " he 
 would not , after all . and I be in great difficulty . I hope to get 
 another situation as barmaid soon . but it take time , and I really 
 be in great distress because of a sudden responsibility that be be 
 spring upon I from Australia ; or I would not   trouble you - believe I 
 I would not . I want to tell you about it . " 
 Sue remain at gaze , in painful tension , hear every word , but 
 speak none . 
 " you be not really in want of money , Arabella ? " he ask , in a 
 distinctly soften tone . 
 " I have enough to pay for the night 's lodge I have obtain , but 
 barely enough to take I back again . " 
 " where be you live ? " 
 " in London still . " she be about to give the address , but she 
 say , " I be afraid somebody may hear , so I do not   like to call out 
 particular of myself so loud . if you could come down and walk 
 a little way with I towards the Prince Inn , where I be stay 
 to - night , I would explain all . you may as well , for old time 's 
 sake ! " 
 " poor thing ! I must do she the kindness of hear what be the 
 matter , I suppose , " say Jude in much perplexity . " as she be go 
 back to - morrow it can not   make much difference . " 
 " but you can go and see she to - morrow , Jude ! do not   go now , Jude ! " 
 come in plaintive accent from the doorway . " oh , it be only to 
 entrap you , I know it be , as she do before ! do not   go , dear ! she be 
 such a low - passione woman - I can see it in her shape , and hear it in 
 her voice ! 
 " but I shall go , " say Jude . " do not   attempt to detain I , Sue . God 
 know I love her little enough now , but I do not   want to be cruel to 
 she . " he turn to the stair . 
 " but she be not your wife ! " cry Sue distractedly . " and I - " 
 " and you be not either , dear , yet , " say Jude . 
 " oh , but be you go to she ? do not ! stay at home ! please , please 
 stay at home , Jude , and not go to she , now she be not your wife any 
 more than I ! " 
 " well , she be , rather more than you , come to that , " he say , take 
 his hat determinedly . " I have   want you to be , and I have   wait with 
 the patience of Job , and I do not   see that I have   get anything by my 
 self - denial . I shall certainly give she something , and hear what it 
 be she be so anxious to tell I ; no man could do less ! " 
 there be that in his manner which she know it would be futile to 
 oppose . she say no more , but , turn to her room as meekly as a 
 martyr , hear he go downstairs , unbolt the door , and close it 
 behind he . with a woman 's disregard of her dignity when in the 
 presence of nobody but herself , she also trot down , sob 
 articulately as she go . she listen . she know exactly how far 
 it be to the inn that Arabella have name as her lodge . it would 
 occupy about seven minute to get there at an ordinary walking pace ; 
 seven to come back again . if he do not return in fourteen minute 
 he would have linger . she look at the clock . it be twenty - five 
 minute to eleven . he might enter the inn with Arabella , as they 
 would reach it before closing time ; she might get he to drink with 
 she ; and Heaven only know what disaster would befall he then . 
 in a still suspense she wait on . it seem as if the whole time 
 have nearly elapse when the door be open again , and Jude appear . 
 Sue give a little ecstatic cry . " oh , I know I could trust you ! - how 
 good you be ! " - she begin . 
 " I can not   find she anywhere in this street , and I go out in my 
 slipper only . she have walk on , think I have   be so hard - hearted 
 as to refuse her request entirely , poor woman . I have   come back for 
 my boot , as it be begin to rain . " 
 " oh , but why should you take such trouble for a woman who have serve 
 you so badly ! " say Sue in a jealous burst of disappointment . 
 " but , Sue , she be a woman , and I once care for she ; and one can not   be 
 a brute in such circumstance . " 
 " she be not   your wife any long ! " exclaim Sue , passionately 
 excited . " you MUSTN'T go out to find she ! it be not   right ! you 
 can't join she , now she be a stranger to you . how can you forget such 
 a thing , my dear , dear one ! " 
 " she seem much the same as ever - an erring , careless , unreflecte 
 fellow - creature , " he say , continue to pull on his boot . " what 
 those legal fellow have be play at in London make no 
 difference in my real relation to she . if she be my wife while 
 she be away in Australia with another husband she be my wife now . " 
 " but she be not ! that be just what I hold ! there be the absurdity ! - 
 well - you will come straight back , after a few minute , will not   you , 
 dear ? she be too low , too coarse for you to talk to long , Jude , and 
 be always ! " 
 " perhaps I be coarse too , bad luck ! I have the germ of every 
 human infirmity in I , I verily believe - that be why I see it be 
 so preposterous of I to think of be a curate . I have cure 
 myself of drunkenness I think ; but I never know in what new form a 
 suppress vice will break out in I ! I do love you , Sue , though I 
 have dance attendance on you so long for such poor return ! all 
 that be good and noblest in I love you , and your freedom from 
 everything that be gross have elevate I , and enable I to do what 
 I should never have dream myself capable of , or any man , a year 
 or two ago . it be all very well to preach about self - control , and 
 the wickedness of coerce a woman . but I should just like a few 
 virtuous people who have condemn I in the past , about Arabella 
 and other thing , to have be in my tantalizing position with 
 you through these late week ! - they would believe , I think , that I 
 have exercise some little restraint in always give in to your 
 wish - live here in one house , and not a soul between we . " 
 " yes , you have be good to I , Jude ; I know you have , my dear 
 protector . " 
 " well - Arabella have appeal to I for help . I must go out and speak 
 to she , Sue , at least ! " 
 " I can not   say any more ! - oh , if you must , you must ! " she say , 
 burst out into sob that seem to tear her heart . " I have 
 nobody but you , Jude , and you be desert I ! I do not   know you 
 be like this - I can not   bear it , I can not ! if she be yours it 
 would be different ! " 
 " or if you be . " 
 " very well then - if I must I must . since you will have it so , I 
 agree ! I will be . only I do not   mean to ! and I do not   want to 
 marry again , either ! ... but , yes - I agree , I agree ! I do love you . 
 I ought to have know that you would conquer in the long run , live 
 like this ! " 
 she run across and fling her arm round his neck . " I be not a 
 cold - natured , sexless creature , be I , for keep you at such a 
 distance ? I be sure you do not   think so ! wait and see ! I do belong 
 to you , do not   I ? I give in ! " 
 " and I will arrange for our marriage to - morrow , or as soon as ever you 
 wish . " 
 " yes , Jude . " 
 " then I will let she go , " say he , embrace Sue softly . " I do feel 
 that it would be unfair to you to see she , and perhaps unfair to she . 
 she be not like you , my darling , and never be : it be only bare 
 justice to say that . do not   cry any more . there ; and there ; and 
 there ! " he kiss she on one side , and on the other , and in the 
 middle , and rebolte the front door . 
 the next morning it be wet . 
 " now , dear , " say Jude gaily at breakfast ; " as this be Saturday 
 I mean to call about the bann at once , so as to get the first 
 publishing do to - morrow , or we shall lose a week . bann will do ? 
 we shall save a pound or two . " 
 Sue absently agree to bann . but her mind for the moment be 
 run on something else . a glow have pass away from she , and 
 depression sit upon her feature . 
 " I feel I be wickedly selfish last night ! " she murmur . " it be 
 sheer unkindness in I - or bad - to treat Arabella as I do . I 
 do not   care about she be in trouble , and what she wish to tell 
 you ! perhaps it be really something she be justify in tell 
 you . that be some more of my badness , I suppose ! Love have its own 
 dark morality when rivalry enter in - at least , mine have , if other 
 people 's have not ... I wonder how she get on ? I hope she reach the 
 inn all right , poor woman . " 
 " oh yes : she get on all right , " say Jude placidly . 
 " I hope she be not   shut out , and that she have not   to walk the street 
 in the rain . do you mind my putting on my waterproof and go to 
 see if she get in ? I have   be think of she all the morning . " 
 " well - be it necessary ? you have not   the least idea how Arabella be 
 able to shift for herself . still , darling , if you want to go and 
 inquire you can . " 
 there be no limit to the strange and unnecessary penance which Sue 
 would meekly undertake when in a contrite mood ; and this go to 
 see all sort of extraordinary person whose relation to she be 
 precisely of a kind that would have make other people shun they be 
 her instinct ever , so that the request do not surprise he . 
 " and when you come back , " he add , " I will be ready to go about the 
 bann . you will come with I ? " 
 Sue agree , and go off under cloak and umbrella let Jude kiss 
 she freely , and return his kiss in a way she have never do 
 before . time have decidedly change . " the little bird be catch at 
 last ! " she say , a sadness show in her smile . 
 " no - only nest , " he assure she . 
 she walk along the muddy street till she reach the public house 
 mention by Arabella , which be not so very far off . she be 
 inform that Arabella have not yet leave , and in doubt how to announce 
 herself so that her predecessor in Jude 's affection would recognize 
 she , she send up word that a friend from Spring Street have call , 
 name the place of Jude 's residence . she be ask to step 
 upstairs , and on be show into a room find that it be Arabella 's 
 bedroom , and that the latter have not yet rise . she halt on the 
 turn of her toe till Arabella cry from the bed , " come in and shut 
 the door , " which Sue accordingly do . 
 Arabella lie face the window , and do not at once turn her head : 
 and Sue be wicked enough , despite her penitence , to wish for a 
 moment that Jude could behold her forerunner now , with the daylight 
 full upon she . she may have seem handsome enough in profile under 
 the lamp , but a frowsiness be apparent this morning ; and the sight 
 of her own fresh charm in the look - glass make Sue 's manner 
 bright , till she reflect what a meanly sexual emotion this be in 
 she , and hat herself for it . 
 " I have   just look in to see if you get back comfortably last night , 
 that be all , " she say gently . " I be afraid afterwards that you 
 might have meet with any mishap ? " 
 " oh - how stupid this be ! I think my visitor be - your friend - your 
 husband - Mrs. Fawley , as I suppose you call yourself ? " say Arabella , 
 fling her head back upon the pillow with a disappointed toss , and 
 cease to retain the dimple she have just take the trouble to 
 produce . 
 " indeed I do not , " say Sue . 
 " oh , I think you might have , even if he be not really your . 
 Decency be decency , any hour of the twenty - four . " 
 " I do not   know what you mean , " say Sue stiffly . " he be mine , if you 
 come to that ! " 
 " he be not   yesterday . " 
 Sue colour roseate , and say , " how do you know ? " 
 " from your manner when you talk to I at the door . well , my dear , 
 you have   be quick about it , and I expect my visit last night help 
 it on - ha - ha ! but I do not   want to get he away from you . " 
 Sue look out at the rain , and at the dirty toilet - cover , and at the 
 detach tail of Arabella 's hair hang on the look - glass , just 
 as it have do in Jude 's time ; and wish she have not come . in the 
 pause there be a knock at the door , and the chambermaid bring in a 
 telegram for " Mrs. Cartlett . " 
 Arabella open it as she lay , and her ruffled look disappear . 
 " I be much oblige to you for your anxiety about I , " she say 
 blandly when the maid have go ; " but it be not necessary you should 
 feel it . my man find he can not   do without I after all , and agree 
 to stand by the promise to marry again over here that he have make I 
 all along . see here ! this be in answer to one from I . " she hold 
 out the telegram for Sue to read , but Sue do not take it . " he ask 
 I to come back . his little corner public in Lambeth would go to 
 piece without I , he say . but he be not   go to knock I about 
 when he have have a drop , any more after we be splice by english law 
 than before ! ... as for you , I should coax Jude to take I before 
 the parson straight off , and have do with it , if I be in your 
 place . I say it as a friend , my dear . " 
 " he be wait to , any day , " return Sue , with frigid pride . 
 " then let he , in Heaven 's name . life with a man be more 
 businesslike after it , and money matter work well . and then , you 
 see , if you have row , and he turn you out of door , you can get the 
 law to protect you , which you can not   otherwise , unless he half - run 
 you through with a knife , or crack your noddle with a poker . and 
 if he bolt away from you - I say it friendly , as woman to woman , for 
 there be never any know what a man me do - you will have the stick 
 o ' furniture , and will not   be look upon as a thief . I shall marry my 
 man over again , now he be willing , as there be a little flaw in the 
 first ceremony . in my telegram last night which this be an answer 
 to , I tell he I have almost make it up with Jude ; and that frighten 
 he , I expect ! perhaps I should quite have do it if it have not   be 
 for you , " she say laugh ; " and then how different our history 
 might have be from to - day ! never such a tender fool as Jude be if 
 a woman seem in trouble , and coax he a bit ! just as he use to 
 be about bird and thing . however , as it happen , it be just as 
 well as if I have make it up , and I forgive you . and , as I say , I would 
 advise you to get the business legally do as soon as possible . 
 you will find it an awful bother later on if you do not . " 
 " I have tell you he be ask I to marry he - to make our natural 
 marriage a legal one , " say Sue , with yet more dignity . " it be 
 quite by my wish that he do not   the moment I be free . " 
 " ah , yes - you be a oneyer too , like myself , " say Arabella , eye 
 her visitor with humorous criticism . " bolt from your first , do not 
 you , like I ? " 
 " good morning ! - I must go , " say Sue hastily . 
 " and I , too , must up and off ! " reply the other , spring out of 
 bed so suddenly that the soft part of her person shake . Sue jump 
 aside in trepidation . " Lord , I be only a woman - not a six - foot 
 sojer ! ... just a moment , dear , " she continue , put her hand on 
 Sue 's arm . " I really do want to consult Jude on a little matter of 
 business , as I tell he . I come about that more than anything else . 
 would he run up to speak to I at the station as I be go ? you 
 think not . well , I will write to he about it . I do not   want to write 
 it , but never mind - I will . " 
 III 
 when Sue reach home Jude be await she at the door to take the 
 initial step towards their marriage . she clasp his arm , and they 
 go along silently together , as true comrade oft - time do . he see 
 that she be preoccupy , and forbore to question she . 
 " oh Jude - I have   be talk to she , " she say at last . " I wish I 
 have not ! and yet it be good to be remind of thing . " 
 " I hope she be civil . " 
 " yes . I - I can not   help like she - just a little bit ! she be not 
 an ungenerous nature ; and I be so glad her difficulty have all 
 suddenly end . " she explain how Arabella have be summon back , 
 and would be enable to retrieve her position . " I be refer 
 to our old question . what Arabella have be say to I have make 
 I feel more than ever how hopelessly vulgar an institution legal 
 marriage be - a sort of trap to catch a man - I can not   bear to think 
 of it . I wish I have not   promise to let you put up the bann this 
 morning ! " 
 " oh , do not   mind I . any time will do for I . I think you might 
 like to get it over quickly , now . " 
 " indeed , I do not   feel any more anxious now than I do before . 
 perhaps with any other man I might be a little anxious ; but among the 
 very few virtue possess by your family and mine , dear , I think I 
 may set staunchness . so I be not a bit frightened about lose you , 
 now I really be yours and you really be mine . in fact , I be easy 
 in my mind than I be , for my conscience be clear about Richard , who 
 now have a right to his freedom . I feel we be deceive he 
 before . " 
 " Sue , you seem when you be like this to be one of the woman of some 
 grand old civilization , whom I use to read about in my bygone , 
 waste , classical day , rather than a denizen of a mere Christian 
 country . I almost expect you to say at these time that you have 
 just be talk to some friend whom you meet in the Via Sacra , 
 about the late news of Octavia or Livia ; or have be listen to 
 Aspasia 's eloquence , or have be watch Praxiteles chisel away 
 at his late Venus , while Phryne make complaint that she be tired 
 of pose . " 
 they have now reach the house of the parish clerk . Sue stand back , 
 while her lover go up to the door . his hand be raise to knock 
 when she say : " Jude ! " 
 he look round . 
 " wait a minute , would you mind ? " 
 he come back to she . 
 " just let we think , " she say timidly . " I have such a horrid dream 
 one night ! ... and Arabella - " 
 " what do Arabella say to you ? " he ask . 
 " oh , she say that when people be tie up you could get 
 the law of a man well if he beat you - and how when couple 
 quarrel ... Jude , do you think that when you must have I with 
 you by law , we shall be so happy as we be now ? the man and woman 
 of our family be very generous when everything depend upon their 
 goodwill , but they always kick against compulsion . do not   you 
 dread the attitude that insensibly arise out of legal obligation ? 
 do not   you think it be destructive to a passion whose essence be its 
 gratuitousness ? " 
 " upon my word , love , you be begin to frighten I , too , with all 
 this foreboding ! well , let us go back and think it over . " 
 her face brighten . " yes - so we will ! " say she . and they turn 
 from the clerk 's door , Sue take his arm and murmur as they 
 walk on homeward : 
 can you keep the bee from range , 
 or the ring - dove 's neck from change ? 
 no ! nor fetter'd love ... 
 they think it over , or postpone thinking . certainly they 
 postpone action , and seem to live on in a dreamy paradise . 
 at the end of a fortnight or three week matter remain unadvanced , 
 and no bann be announce to the ear of any Aldbrickham 
 congregation . 
 whilst they be postpone and postpone thus a letter and a 
 newspaper arrive before breakfast one morning from Arabella . 
 see the handwriting Jude go up to Sue 's room and tell she , 
 and as soon as she be dress she hasten down . Sue open the 
 newspaper ; Jude the letter . after glance at the paper she hold 
 across the first page to he with her finger on a paragraph ; but he 
 be so absorb in his letter that he do not turn awhile . 
 " look ! " say she . 
 he look and read . the paper be one that circulate in South 
 London only , and the marked advertisement be simply the announcement 
 of a marriage at St. John 's Church , Waterloo Road , under the name , 
 " cartlett - donn " ; the united pair be Arabella and the inn - keeper . 
 " well , it be satisfactory , " say Sue complacently . " though , after 
 this , it seem rather low to do likewise , and I be glad . however , 
 she be provide for now in a way , I suppose , whatever her fault , 
 poor thing . it be nice that we be able to think that , than to be 
 uneasy about she . I ought , too , to write to Richard and ask he how 
 he be get on , perhaps ? " 
 but Jude 's attention be still absorb . have merely glance 
 at the announcement he say in a disturbed voice : " listen to this 
 letter . what shall I say or do ? " 
 the three HORNS , LAMBETH . 
 DEAR JUDE   I will not   be so distant as to call you Mr. 
 Fawley , - I send to - day a newspaper , from which useful 
 document you will learn that I be married over again to 
 Cartlett last Tuesday . so that business be settle right 
 and tight at last . but what I write about more particular 
 be that private affair I want to speak to you on when I 
 come down to Aldbrickham . I could not   very well tell it to 
 your lady friend , and should much have like to let you 
 know it by word of mouth , as I could have explain well 
 than by letter . the fact be , Jude , that , though I have 
 never inform you before , there be a boy bear of our 
 marriage , eight month after I leave you , when I be at 
 Sydney , live with my father and mother . all that be 
 easily provable . as I have separate from you before I 
 think such a thing be go to happen , and I be over 
 there , and our quarrel have be sharp , I do not think it 
 convenient to write about the birth . I be then look 
 out for a good situation , so my parent take the child , 
 and he have be with they ever since . that be why I do 
 not mention it when I meet you in Christminster , nor at 
 the law proceeding . he be now of an intelligent age , of 
 course , and my mother and father have lately write to 
 say that , as they have rather a hard struggle over there , 
 and I be settle comfortably here , they do not   see why 
 they should be encumber with the child any long , his 
 parent be alive . I would have he with I here in 
 a moment , but he be not old enough to be of any use in 
 the bar nor will be for year and year , and naturally 
 Cartlett might think he in the way . they have , however , 
 pack he off to I in charge of some friend who 
 happen to be come home , and I must ask you to take 
 he when he arrive , for I do not   know what to do with he . 
 he be lawfully your , that I solemnly swear . if anybody 
 say he be not , call they brimstone liar , for my sake . 
 whatever I may have do before or afterwards , I be 
 honest to you from the time we be married till I go 
 away , and I remain , your ,   c. , 
 ARABELLA CARTLETT . 
 Sue 's look be one of dismay . " what will you do , dear ? " she ask 
 faintly . 
 Jude do not reply , and Sue watch he anxiously , with heavy 
 breath . 
 " it hit I hard ! " say he in an under - voice . " it may be true ! 
 I can not   make it out . certainly , if his birth be exactly when 
 she say , he be mine . I can not think why she do not   tell I when 
 I meet she at Christminster , and come on here that evening with 
 she ! ... ah - I do remember now that she say something about have 
 a thing on her mind that she would like I to know , if ever we live 
 together again . " 
 " the poor child seem to be want by nobody ! " Sue reply , and her 
 eye fill . 
 Jude have by this time come to himself . " what a view of life he 
 must have , mine or not mine ! " he say . " I must say that , if I be 
 well off , I should not stop for a moment to think whose he might 
 be . I would take he and bring he up . the beggarly question of 
 parentage - what be it , after all ? what do it matter , when you come 
 to think of it , whether a child be your by blood or not ? all the 
 little one of our time be collectively the child of we adult of 
 the time , and entitle to our general care . that excessive regard of 
 parent for their own child , and their dislike of other people 's , 
 be , like class - feeling , patriotism , save - your - own - soul - ism , and other 
 virtue , a mean exclusiveness at bottom . " 
 Sue jump up and kiss Jude with passionate devotion . " yes - so 
 it be , dear ! and we will have he here ! and if he be not   yours it 
 make it all the well . I do hope he be not   - though perhaps I ought 
 not to feel quite that ! if he be not , I should like so much for we 
 to have he as an adopt child ! " 
 " well , you must assume about he what be most pleasing to you , my 
 curious little comrade ! " he say . " I feel that , anyhow , I do not   like 
 to leave the unfortunate little fellow to neglect . just think of 
 his life in a Lambeth pothouse , and all its evil influence , with a 
 parent who do not   want he , and have , indeed , hardly see he , and 
 a stepfather who do not   know he . ' let the day perish wherein I 
 be bear , and the night in which it be say , there be a man child 
 conceive ! ' that be what the boy - my boy , perhaps , will find himself 
 say before long ! " 
 " oh no ! " 
 " as I be the petitioner , I be really entitle to his custody , I 
 suppose . " 
 " whether or no , we must have he . I see that . I will do the good I 
 can to be a mother to he , and we can afford to keep he somehow . 
 I will work hard . I wonder when he will arrive ? " 
 " in the course of a few week , I suppose . " 
 " I wish - when shall we have courage to marry , Jude ? " 
 " whenever you have it , I think I shall . it remain with you 
 entirely , dear . only say the word , and it be do . " 
 " before the boy come ? " 
 " certainly . " 
 " it would make a more natural home for he , perhaps , " she murmur . 
 Jude thereupon write in purely formal term to request that the boy 
 should be send on to they as soon as he arrive , make no remark 
 whatever on the surprising nature of Arabella 's information , nor 
 vouchsafe a single word of opinion on the boy 's paternity , nor on 
 whether , have he know all this , his conduct towards she would have 
 be quite the same . 
 in the down - train that be time to reach Aldbrickham station about 
 ten o'clock the next evening , a small , pale child 's face could 
 be see in the gloom of a third - class carriage . he have large , 
 frightened eye , and wear a white woollen cravat , over which a 
 key be suspend round his neck by a piece of common string : the 
 key attract attention by its occasional shine in the lamplight . 
 in the band of his hat his half - ticket be stick . his eye 
 remain mostly fix on the back of the seat opposite , and never 
 turn to the window even when a station be reach and call . 
 on the other seat be two or three passenger , one of they a work 
 woman who hold a basket on her lap , in which be a tabby kitten . 
 the woman open the cover now and then , whereupon the kitten would 
 put out its head , and indulge in playful antic . at these the 
 fellow - passenger laugh , except the solitary boy bear the key 
 and ticket , who , regard the kitten with his saucer eye , seem 
 mutely to say : " all laughing come from misapprehension . rightly 
 look at there be no laughable thing under the sun . " 
 occasionally at a stoppage the guard would look into the compartment 
 and say to the boy , " all right , my man . your box be safe in the 
 van . " the boy would say , " yes , " without animation , would try to 
 smile , and fail . 
 he be age masquerade as Juvenility , and do it so badly that 
 his real self show through crevice . a ground - swell from ancient 
 year of night seem now and then to lift the child in this his 
 morning - life , when his face take a back view over some great Atlantic 
 of Time , and appear not to care about what it see . 
 when the other traveller close their eye , which they do one by 
 one - even the kitten curl itself up in the basket , weary of its 
 too circumscribe play - the boy remain just as before . he then 
 seem to be doubly awake , like an enslaved and dwarfed divinity , 
 sit passive and regard his companion as if he see their whole 
 rounded life rather than their immediate figure . 
 this be Arabella 's boy . with her usual carelessness she have 
 postpone write to Jude about he till the eve of his landing , 
 when she could absolutely postpone no long , though she have know 
 for week of his approach arrival , and have , as she truly say , 
 visit Aldbrickham mainly to reveal the boy 's existence and his near 
 home - come to Jude . this very day on which she have receive she 
 former husband 's answer at some time in the afternoon , the child 
 reach the London Docks , and the family in whose charge he have come , 
 have put he into a cab for Lambeth and direct the cabman to his 
 mother 's house , bid he good - bye , and go their way . 
 on his arrival at the Three Horns , Arabella have look he over with 
 an expression that be as good as say , " you be very much what I 
 expect you to be , " have give he a good meal , a little money , and , 
 late as it be get , dispatch he to Jude by the next train , 
 wish her husband Cartlett , who be out , not to see he . 
 the train reach Aldbrickham , and the boy be deposit on the 
 lonely platform beside his box . the collector take his ticket and , 
 with a meditative sense of the unfitness of thing , ask he where 
 he be go by himself at that time of night . 
 " go to Spring Street , " say the little one impassively . 
 " why , that be a long way from here ; a'most out in the country ; and the 
 folk will be go to bed . " 
 " I have   get to go there . " 
 " you must have a fly for your box . " 
 " no . I must walk . " 
 " oh well : you would well leave your box here and send for it . there be 
 a ' bus go half - way , but you will have to walk the rest . " 
 " I be not afraid . " 
 " why do not   your friend come to meet ' ee ? " 
 " I suppose they do not   know I be come . " 
 " who be your friend ? " 
 " Mother do not   wish I to say . " 
 " all I can do , then , be to take charge of this . now walk as fast as 
 you can . " 
 say nothing far the boy come out into the street , look 
 round to see that nobody follow or observe he . when he 
 have walk some little distance he ask for the street of his 
 destination . he be tell to go straight on quite into the outskirt 
 of the place . 
 the child fall into a steady mechanical creep which have in it an 
 impersonal quality - the movement of the wave , or of the breeze , or 
 of the cloud . he follow his direction literally , without an 
 inquire gaze at anything . it could have be see that the boy 's 
 idea of life be different from those of the local boy . child 
 begin with detail , and learn up to the general ; they begin with the 
 contiguous , and gradually comprehend the universal . the boy seem 
 to have begin with the general of life , and never to have concern 
 himself with the particular . to he the house , the willow , 
 the obscure field beyond , be apparently regard not as brick 
 residence , pollard , meadow ; but as human dwelling in the 
 abstract , vegetation , and the wide dark world . 
 he find the way to the little lane , and knock at the door of 
 Jude 's house . Jude have just retire to bed , and Sue be about to 
 enter her chamber adjoining when she hear the knock and come down . 
 " be this where Father live ? " ask the child . 
 " who ? " 
 " Mr. Fawley , that be his name . " 
 Sue run up to Jude 's room and tell he , and he hurry down as soon 
 as he could , though to her impatience he seem long . 
 " what - be it he - so soon ? " she ask as Jude come . 
 she scrutinize the child 's feature , and suddenly go away into the 
 little sit - room adjoining . Jude lift the boy to a level with 
 himself , keenly regard he with gloomy tenderness , and tell he 
 he would have be meet if they have know of his come so soon , set 
 he provisionally in a chair whilst he go to look for Sue , whose 
 supersensitiveness be disturb , as he know . he find she in the 
 dark , bend over an arm - chair . he enclose she with his arm , and 
 put his face by her , whisper , " what be the matter ? " 
 " what Arabella say be true - true ! I see you in he ! " 
 " well : that be one thing in my life as it should be , at any rate . " 
 " but the other half of he be - SHE ! and that be what I can not   bear ! 
 but I ought to - I will try to get use to it ; yes , I ought ! " 
 " jealous little Sue ! I withdraw all remark about your sexlessness . 
 never mind ! time may right thing ... and Sue , darling ; I have an 
 idea ! we will educate and train he with a view to the university . 
 what I could not   accomplish in my own person perhaps I can carry out 
 through he ? they be make it easy for poor student now , you 
 know . " 
 " oh you dreamer ! " say she , and hold his hand return to the 
 child with he . the boy look at she as she have look at he . 
 " be it you who be my real mother at last ? " he inquire . 
 " why ? do I look like your father 's wife ? " 
 " well , yes ; ' cept he seem fond of you , and you of he . can I call 
 you Mother ? " 
 then a yearn look come over the child and he begin to cry . Sue 
 thereupon could not refrain from instantly do likewise , be a 
 harp which the least wind of emotion from another 's heart could make 
 to vibrate as readily as a radical stir in her own . 
 " you may call I Mother , if you wish to , my poor dear ! " she say , 
 bend her cheek against his to hide her tear . 
 " what be this round your neck ? " ask Jude with affected calmness . 
 " the key of my box that be at the station . " 
 they bustle about and get he some supper , and make he up a 
 temporary bed , where he soon fall asleep . both go and look at 
 he as he lay . 
 " he call you Mother two or three time before he drop off , " 
 murmur Jude . " be not   it odd that he should have want to ! " 
 " well - it be significant , " say Sue . " there be more for we to think 
 about in that one little hungry heart than in all the star of the 
 sky ... I suppose , dear , we must pluck up courage , and get that 
 ceremony over ? it be no use struggle against the current , and I 
 feel myself get intertwine with my kind . oh Jude , you will love 
 I dearly , will not   you , afterwards ! I do want to be kind to this 
 child , and to be a mother to he ; and our add the legal form to 
 our marriage might make it easy for I . " 
 IV 
 their next and second attempt thereat be more deliberately make , 
 though it be begin on the morning follow the singular child 's 
 arrival at their home . 
 he they find to be in the habit of sit silent , his quaint and 
 weird face set , and his eye rest on thing they do not see in 
 the substantial world . 
 " his face be like the tragic mask of Melpomene , " say Sue . " what be 
 your name , dear ? do you tell we ? " 
 " little Father Time be what they always call I . it be a nickname ; 
 because I look so aged , they say . " 
 " and you talk so , too , " say Sue tenderly . " it be strange , Jude , 
 that these preternaturally old boy almost always come from new 
 country . but what be you christen ? " 
 " I never be . " 
 " why be that ? " 
 " because , if I die in damnation , ' twould save the expense of a 
 christian funeral . " 
 " oh - your name be not Jude , then ? " say his father with some 
 disappointment . 
 the boy shake his head . " never heerd on it . " 
 " of course not , " say Sue quickly ; ' since she be hat you all the 
 time ! " 
 " we will have he christen , " say Jude ; and privately to Sue : " the 
 day we be marry . " yet the advent of the child disturb he . 
 their position lend they shyness , and have an impression that a 
 marriage at a superintendent registrar 's office be more private than 
 an ecclesiastical one , they decide to avoid a church this time . 
 both Sue and Jude together go to the office of the district to give 
 notice : they have become such companion that they could hardly do 
 anything of importance except in each other 's company . 
 Jude Fawley sign the form of notice , Sue look over his shoulder 
 and watch his hand as it trace the word . as she read the 
 four - square undertaking , never before see by she , into which 
 her own and Jude 's name be insert , and by which that very 
 volatile essence , their love for each other , be suppose to be 
 make permanent , her face seem to grow painfully apprehensive . 
 " Names and Surnames of the Parties " -   they be to be party now , 
 not lover , she think . " condition " -   a horrid idea   - " rank or 
 Occupation " - " Age " - " dwell at " - " Length of Residence " - " Church or 
 Building in which the marriage be to be solemnize " - " District and 
 County in which the Parties respectively dwell . " 
 " it spoil the sentiment , do not   it ! " she say on their way home . 
 " it seem make a more sordid business of it even than sign the 
 contract in a vestry . there be a little poetry in a church . but 
 we will try to get through with it , dearest , now . " 
 " we will . ' for what man be he that hath betroth a wife and hath 
 not take she ? let he go and return unto his house , lest he 
 die in the battle , and another man take she . ' so say the jewish 
 law - giver . " 
 " how you know the scripture , Jude ! you really ought to have be a 
 parson . I can only quote profane writer ! " 
 during the interval before the issuing of the certificate Sue , in she 
 housekeeping errand , sometimes walk past the office , and furtively 
 glance in saw affix to the wall the notice of the purposed clinch 
 to their union . she could not bear its aspect . come after her 
 previous experience of matrimony , all the romance of their attachment 
 seem to be starve away by place her present case in the same 
 category . she be usually lead little Father Time by the hand , 
 and fancy that people think he her , and regard the intended 
 ceremony as the patching up of an old error . 
 meanwhile Jude decide to link his present with his past in some 
 slight degree by invite to the wedding the only person remain on 
 earth who be associate with his early life at Marygreen - the aged 
 widow Mrs. Edlin , who have be his great - aunt 's friend and nurse in 
 her last illness . he hardly expect that she would come ; but she 
 do , bring singular present , in the form of apple , jam , brass 
 snuffer , an ancient pewter dish , a warming - pan , and an enormous bag 
 of goose feather towards a bed . she be allot the spare room in 
 Jude 's house , whither she retire early , and where they could hear 
 she through the ceiling below , honestly say the Lord 's Prayer in 
 a loud voice , as the Rubric direct . 
 as , however , she could not sleep , and discover that Sue and Jude 
 be still sit up - it be in fact only ten o'clock - she dress 
 herself again and come down , and they all sit by the fire till a late 
 hour - Father Time include ; though , as he never speak , they be 
 hardly conscious of he . 
 " well , I bain't   set against marrying as your great - aunt be , " say 
 the widow . " and I hope ' twill be a jocund wedding for ye in all 
 respect this time . nobody can hope it more , know what I do 
 of your family , which be more , I suppose , than anybody else now 
 live . for they have be unlucky that way , God know . " 
 Sue breathe uneasily . 
 " they be always good - hearted people , too - would not   kill a fly if 
 they know it , " continue the wedding guest . " but thing happen 
 to thwart them , and if everything be not   vitty they be upset . no 
 doubt that be how he that the tale be tell of come to do what ' a 
 do - if he be one of your family . " 
 " what be that ? " say Jude . 
 " well - that tale , ye know ; he that be gibbet just on the brow of 
 the hill by the Brown House - not far from the milestone between 
 Marygreen and Alfredston , where the other road branch off . but 
 Lord , ' twa in my grandfather 's time ; and it medn ' have be one of 
 your folk at all . " 
 " I know where the gibbet be say to have stand , very well , " murmur 
 Jude . " but I never hear of this . what - do this man - my ancestor 
 and Sue 's - kill his wife ? " 
 " ' twer not that exactly . she run away from he , with their child , 
 to her friend ; and while she be there the child die . he want 
 the body , to bury it where his people lay , but she would not   give it 
 up . her husband then come in the night with a cart , and break into 
 the house to steal the coffin away ; but he be catch , and be 
 obstinate , would not   tell what he break in for . they bring it in 
 burglary , and that be why he be hang and gibbet on Brown House 
 Hill . his wife go mad after he be dead . but it medn't   be true 
 that he belong to ye more than to I . " 
 a small slow voice rise from the shade of the fireside , as if out of 
 the earth : " if I be you , Mother , I would not   marry Father ! " it come 
 from little Time , and they start , for they have forget he . 
 " oh , it be only a tale , " say Sue cheeringly . 
 after this exhilarating tradition from the widow on the eve of 
 the solemnization they rise , and , wish their guest good - night , 
 retire . 
 the next morning Sue , whose nervousness intensify with the 
 hour , take Jude privately into the sitting - room before start . 
 " Jude , I want you to kiss I , as a lover , incorporeally , " she say , 
 tremulously nestle up to he , with damp lash . " it will not   be ever 
 like this any more , will it ! I wish we have not   begin the business . 
 but I suppose we must go on . how horrid that story be last night ! 
 it spoil my thought of to - day . it make I feel as if a tragic doom 
 overhang our family , as it do the house of Atreus . " 
 " or the house of Jeroboam , " say the quondam theologian . 
 " yes . and it seem awful temerity in we two to go marry ! I be 
 go to vow to you in the same word I vow in to my other husband , 
 and you to I in the same as you use to your other wife ; regardless 
 of the deterrent lesson we be teach by those experiment ! " 
 " if you be uneasy I be make unhappy , " say he . " I have hop you 
 would feel quite joyful . but if you do not , you do not . it be no use 
 pretend . it be a dismal business to you , and that make it so to 
 I ! " 
 " it be unpleasantly like that other morning - that be all , " she 
 murmur . " let we go on now . " 
 they start arm in arm for the office aforesaid , no witness 
 accompany they except the Widow Edlin . the day be chilly and 
 dull , and a clammy fog blow through the town from " Royal - tower'd 
 Thame . " on the step of the office there be the muddy foot - mark 
 of people who have enter , and in the entry be damp umbrella 
 within the office several person be gather , and our couple 
 perceive that a marriage between a soldier and a young woman be 
 just in progress . Sue , Jude , and the widow stand in the background 
 while this be go on , Sue read the notice of marriage on the 
 wall . the room be a dreary place to two of their temperament , 
 though to its usual frequenter it doubtless seem ordinary enough . 
 law - book in musty calf cover one wall , and elsewhere be 
 post - office directory , and other book of reference . paper in 
 packet tie with red tape be pigeon - hole around , and some iron 
 safe fill a recess , while the bare wood floor be , like the 
 door - step , stain by previous visitor . 
 the soldier be sullen and reluctant : the bride sad and timid ; she 
 be soon , obviously , to become a mother , and she have a black eye . 
 their little business be soon do , and the twain and their friend 
 straggle out , one of the witness say casually to Jude and Sue 
 in pass , as if he have know they before : " see the couple just 
 come in ? ha , ha ! that fellow be just out of gaol this morning . 
 she meet he at the gaol gate , and bring he straight here . she be 
 pay for everything . " 
 Sue turn her head and see an ill - favour man , closely crop , 
 with a broad - faced , pock - mark woman on his arm , ruddy with liquor 
 and the satisfaction of be on the brink of a gratified desire . 
 they jocosely salute the outgoing couple , and go forward in front 
 of Jude and Sue , whose diffidence be increase . the latter draw 
 back and turn to her lover , her mouth shape itself like that of 
 a child about to give way to grief : 
 " Jude - I do not   like it here ! I wish we have not   come ! the place give 
 I the horror : it seem so unnatural as the climax of our love ! 
 I wish it have be at church , if it have to be at all . it be not so 
 vulgar there ! " 
 " dear little girl , " say Jude . " how troubled and pale you look ! " 
 " it must be perform here now , I suppose ? " 
 " no - perhaps not necessarily . " 
 he speak to the clerk , and come back . " no - we need not marry here or 
 anywhere , unless we like , even now , " he say . " we can be marry in 
 a church , if not with the same certificate with another he will give 
 we , I think . anyhow , let we go out till you be calm , dear , and I 
 too , and talk it over . " 
 they go out stealthily and guiltily , as if they have commit a 
 misdemeanour , close the door without noise , and tell the widow , 
 who have remain in the entry , to go home and await they ; that they 
 would call in any casual passer as witness , if necessary . when 
 in the street they turn into an unfrequented side alley where they 
 walk up and down as they have do long ago in the market - house at 
 Melchester . 
 " now , darling , what shall we do ? we be make a mess of it , it 
 strike I . still , anything that please you will please I . " 
 " but Jude , dearest , I be worry you ! you want it to be there , 
 do not   you ? " 
 " well , to tell the truth , when I get inside I feel as if I do not 
 care much about it . the place depress I almost as much as it 
 do you - it be ugly . and then I think of what you have say this 
 morning as to whether we ought . " 
 they walk on vaguely , till she pause , and her little voice begin 
 anew : " it seem so weak , too , to vacillate like this ! and yet how 
 much well than to act rashly a second time ... how terrible that 
 scene be to I ! the expression in that flabby woman 's face , lead 
 she on to give herself to that gaol - bird , not for a few hour , as she 
 would , but for a lifetime , as she must . and the other poor soul - to 
 escape a nominal shame which be owe to the weakness of her 
 character , degrade herself to the real shame of bondage to a tyrant 
 who scorn she - a man whom to avoid for ever be her only chance of 
 salvation ... this be our parish church , be not   it ? this be where 
 it would have to be , if we do it in the usual way ? a service or 
 something seem to be go on . " 
 Jude go up and look in at the door . " why - it be a wedding here 
 too , " he say . " everybody seem to be on our tack to - day . " 
 Sue say she suppose it be because Lent be just over , when there 
 be always a crowd of marriage . " let we listen , " she say , " and 
 find how it feel to we when perform in a church . " 
 they step in , and enter a back seat , and watch the proceeding 
 at the altar . the contracting couple appear to belong to the 
 well - to - do middle class , and the wedding altogether be of ordinary 
 prettiness and interest . they could see the flower tremble in the 
 bride 's hand , even at that distance , and could hear her mechanical 
 murmur of word whose mean her brain seem to gather not at all 
 under the pressure of her self - consciousness . Sue and Jude listen , 
 and severally see themselves in time past go through the same form 
 of self - committal . 
 " it be not the same to she , poor thing , as it would be to I do it 
 over again with my present knowledge , " Sue whisper . " you see , they 
 be fresh to it , and take the proceeding as a matter of course . 
 but have be awaken to its awful solemnity as we have , or at 
 least as I have , by experience , and to my own too squeamish feeling 
 perhaps sometimes , it really do seem immoral in I to go and 
 undertake the same thing again with open eye . come in here and 
 see this have frighten I from a church wedding as much as the 
 other do from a registry one ... we be a weak , tremulous pair , 
 Jude , and what other may feel confident in I feel doubt of - my 
 be proof against the sordid condition of a business contract 
 again ! " 
 then they try to laugh , and go on debate in whisper the 
 object - lesson before they . and Jude say he also think they be 
 both too thin - skinned - that they ought never to have be bear - much 
 less have come together for the most preposterous of all joint 
 venture for THEM - matrimony . 
 his betrothed shudder ; and ask he earnestly if he indeed 
 feel that they ought not to go in cold blood and sign that 
 life - undertaking again ? " it be awful if you think we have find 
 ourselves not strong enough for it , and know this , be propose 
 to perjure ourselves , " she say . 
 " I fancy I do think it - since you ask I , " say Jude . " remember I will 
 do it if you wish , own darling . " while she hesitate he go on to 
 confess that , though he think they ought to be able to do it , he 
 feel check by the dread of incompetency just as she do - from their 
 peculiarity , perhaps , because they be unlike other people . " we 
 be horribly sensitive ; that be really what be the matter with we , 
 Sue ! " he declare . 
 " I fancy more be like we than we think ! " 
 " well , I do not   know . the intention of the contract be good , and 
 right for many , no doubt ; but in our case it may defeat its own end 
 because we be the queer sort of people we be - folk in whom domestic 
 tie of a forced kind snuff out cordiality and spontaneousness . " 
 Sue still hold that there be not much queer or exceptional in they : 
 that all be so . " everybody be get to feel as we do . we be 
 a little beforehand , that be all . in fifty , a hundred , year the 
 descendant of these two will act and feel bad than we . they 
 will see welter humanity still more vividly than we do now , as 
 shape like our own self hideously multiply , 
 and will be afraid to reproduce they . " 
 " what a terrible line of poetry ! ... though I have feel it myself 
 about my fellow - creature , at morbid time . " 
 thus they murmur on , till Sue say more brightly : 
 " well - the general question be not our business , and why should we 
 plague ourselves about it ? however different our reason be we come 
 to the same conclusion ; that for we particular two , an irrevocable 
 oath be risky . then , Jude , let we go home without kill our dream ! 
 yes ? how good you be , my friend : you give way to all my whim ! " 
 " they accord very much with my own . " 
 he give she a little kiss behind a pillar while the attention of 
 everybody present be take up in observe the bridal procession 
 enter the vestry ; and then they come outside the building . by the 
 door they wait till two or three carriage , which have go away for 
 a while , return , and the new husband and wife come into the open 
 daylight . Sue sigh . 
 " the flower in the bride 's hand be sadly like the garland which 
 deck the heifer of sacrifice in old time ! " 
 " still , Sue , it be no bad for the woman than for the man . that be 
 what some woman fail to see , and instead of protest against the 
 condition they protest against the man , the other victim ; just as a 
 woman in a crowd will abuse the man who crush against she , when he 
 be only the helpless transmitter of the pressure put upon he . " 
 " yes - some be like that , instead of unite with the man against 
 the common enemy , coercion . " the bride and bridegroom have by this 
 time drive off , and the two move away with the rest of the idler . 
 " no - do not   let us do it , " she continue . " at least just now . " 
 they reach home , and pass the window arm in arm see the widow 
 look out at they . " well , " cry their guest when they enter , " I 
 say to myself when I zeed ye come so love up to the door , ' they 
 make up their mind at last , then ! ' " 
 they briefly hint that they have not . 
 " what - and ha'n't   ye really do it ? Chok ' it all , that I should 
 have live to see a good old saying like ' marry in haste and repent 
 at leisure ' spoil like this by you two ! ' tis time I get back again 
 to marygreen - sake if tidden - if this be what the new notion be 
 lead we to ! nobody think o ' be afeard o ' matrimony in my 
 time , nor of much else but a cannon - ball or empty cupboard ! why when 
 I and my poor man be marry we think no more o't than of a game 
 o ' dibs ! " 
 " do not   tell the child when he come in , " whisper Sue nervously . 
 " he will think it have all go on right , and it will be well that he 
 should not be surprised and puzzle . of course it be only put off 
 for reconsideration . if we be happy as we be , what do it matter 
 to anybody ? " 
 V 
 the purpose of a chronicler of mood and deed do not require he 
 to express his personal view upon the grave controversy above give . 
 that the twain be happy - between their time of sadness - be 
 indubitable . and when the unexpected apparition of Jude 's child 
 in the house have show itself to be no such disturbing event as it 
 have look , but one that bring into their life a new and tender 
 interest of an ennobling and unselfish kind , it rather help than 
 injure their happiness . 
 to be sure , with such pleasing anxious being as they be , the boy 's 
 come also bring with it much thought for the future , particularly 
 as he seem at present to be singularly deficient in all the usual 
 hope of childhood . but the pair try to dismiss , for a while at 
 least , a too strenuously forward view . 
 there be in Upper Wessex an old town of nine or ten thousand soul ; 
 the town may be call Stoke - Barehills . it stand with its gaunt , 
 unattractive , ancient church , and its new red brick suburb , amid 
 the open , chalk - soil cornland , near the middle of an imaginary 
 triangle which have for its three corner the town of Aldbrickham 
 and Wintoncester , and the important military station of Quartershot . 
 the great western highway from London pass through it , near a point 
 where the road branch into two , merely to unite again some twenty 
 mile far westward . out of this bifurcation and reunion there 
 use to arise among wheeled traveller , before railway day , endless 
 question of choice between the respective way . but the question 
 be now as dead as the scot - and - lot freeholder , the road waggoner , 
 and the mail coachman who dispute it ; and probably not a single 
 inhabitant of Stoke - Barehills be now even aware that the two road 
 which part in his town ever meet again ; for nobody now drive up and 
 down the great western highway dally . 
 the most familiar object in Stoke - Barehills nowadays be its cemetery , 
 stand among some picturesque mediaeval ruin beside the railway ; 
 the modern chapel , modern tomb , and modern shrub have a look of 
 intrusiveness amid the crumbling and ivy - cover decay of the ancient 
 wall . 
 on a certain day , however , in the particular year which have now be 
 reach by this narrative - the month be early June - the feature 
 of the town excite little interest , though many visitor arrive by 
 the train ; some down - train , in especial , nearly empty themselves 
 here . it be the week of the Great Wessex Agricultural Show , whose 
 vast encampment spread over the open outskirt of the town like 
 the tent of an invest army . row of marquee , hut , booth , 
 pavilion , arcade , portico - every kind of structure short of 
 a permanent one - cover the green field for the space of a square 
 half - mile , and the crowd of arrival walk through the town in 
 a mass , and make straight for the exhibition ground . the way 
 thereto be line with show , stall , and hawker on foot , who make 
 a market - place of the whole roadway to the show proper , and lead 
 some of the improvident to lighten their pocket appreciably before 
 they reach the gate of the exhibition they come expressly to see . 
 it be the popular day , the shill day , and of the fast arrive 
 excursion train two from different direction enter the two 
 contiguous railway station at almost the same minute . one , like 
 several which have precede it , come from London : the other by a 
 cross - line from Aldbrickham ; and from the London train alight a 
 couple ; a short , rather bloated man , with a globular stomach and 
 small leg , resemble a top on two peg , accompany by a woman of 
 rather fine figure and rather red face , dress in black material , 
 and cover with bead from bonnet to skirt , that make she glisten 
 as if clothe in chain - mail . 
 they cast their eye around . the man be about to hire a fly as some 
 other have do , when the woman say , " do not   be in such a hurry , 
 Cartlett . it be not   so very far to the show - yard . let we walk down 
 the street into the place . perhaps I can pick up a cheap bit of 
 furniture or old china . it be year since I be here - never since 
 I live as a girl at Aldbrickham , and use to come across for a trip 
 sometimes with my young man . " 
 " you can not   carry home furniture by excursion train , " say , in a thick 
 voice , her husband , the landlord of the Three Horns , Lambeth ; for 
 they have both come down from the tavern in that " excellent , densely 
 populate , gin - drink neighbourhood , " which they have occupy ever 
 since the advertisement in those word have attract they thither . 
 the configuration of the landlord show that he , too , like his 
 customer , be become affect by the liquor he retail . 
 " then I will get it send , if I see any worth have , " say his wife . 
 they saunter on , but have barely enter the town when her attention 
 be attract by a young couple lead a child , who have come out 
 from the second platform , into which the train from Aldbrickham have 
 steam . they be walk just in front of the inn - keeper . 
 " sake alive ! " say Arabella . 
 " what be that ? " say Cartlett . 
 " who do you think that couple be ? do not   you recognize the man ? " 
 " no . " 
 " not from the photo I have show you ? " 
 " be it Fawley ? " 
 " yes - of course . " 
 " oh , well . I suppose he be incline for a little sight - seeing like 
 the rest of we . " Cartlett 's interest in Jude whatever it might have 
 be when Arabella be new to he , have plainly flag since her 
 charm and her idiosyncrasy , her supernumerary hair - coil , and her 
 optional dimple , be become as a tale that be tell . 
 Arabella so regulate her pace and her husband 's as to keep just in 
 the rear of the other three , which it be easy to do without notice 
 in such a stream of pedestrian . her answer to Cartlett 's remark 
 be vague and slight , for the group in front interested her more 
 than all the rest of the spectacle . 
 " they be rather fond of one another and of their child , seemingly , " 
 continue the publican . 
 " their child ! ' tisn't   their child , " say Arabella with a curious , 
 sudden covetousness . " they have not   be marry long enough for it 
 to be theirs ! " 
 but although the smoulder maternal instinct be strong enough 
 in she to lead she to quash her husband 's conjecture , she be not 
 dispose on second thought to be more candid than necessary . Mr. 
 Cartlett have no other idea than that his wife 's child by her first 
 husband be with his grandparent at the Antipodes . 
 " oh I suppose not . she look quite a girl . " 
 " they be only lover , or lately married , and have the child in 
 charge , as anybody can see . " 
 all continue to move ahead . the unwitting Sue and Jude , the couple 
 in question , have determine to make this agricultural exhibition 
 within twenty mile of their own town the occasion of a day 's 
 excursion which should combine exercise and amusement with 
 instruction , at small expense . not regardful of themselves alone , 
 they have take care to bring Father Time , to try every mean of 
 make he kindle and laugh like other boy , though he be to 
 some extent a hindrance to the delightfully unreserved intercourse 
 in their pilgrimage which they so much enjoy . but they soon 
 cease to consider he an observer , and go along with that tender 
 attention to each other which the shy can scarcely disguise , and 
 which these , among entire stranger as they imagine , take less 
 trouble to disguise than they might have do at home . Sue , in her 
 new summer clothe , flexible and light as a bird , her little thumb 
 stick up by the stem of her white cotton sunshade , go along as if 
 she hardly touch ground , and as if a moderately strong puff of wind 
 would float she over the hedge into the next field . Jude , in his 
 light grey holiday - suit , be really proud of her companionship , not 
 more for her external attractiveness than for her sympathetic word 
 and way . that complete mutual understanding , in which every glance 
 and movement be as effectual as speech for convey intelligence 
 between they , make they almost the two part of a single whole . 
 the pair with their charge pass through the turnstile , Arabella 
 and her husband not far behind they . when inside the enclosure the 
 publican 's wife could see that the two ahead begin to take trouble 
 with the youngster , point out and explain the many object of 
 interest , alive and dead ; and a pass sadness would touch their 
 face at their every failure to disturb his indifference . 
 " how she stick to he ! " say Arabella . " oh no - I fancy they be not 
 marry , or they would not   be so much to one another as that ... I 
 wonder ! " 
 " but I think you say he do marry she ? " 
 " I hear he be go to - that be all , go to make another attempt , 
 after put it off once or twice ... as far as they themselves be 
 concerned they be the only two in the show . I should be ashamed of 
 make myself so silly if I be he ! " 
 " I do not   see as how there be anything remarkable in their behaviour . 
 I should never have notice their be in love , if you have not   say 
 so . " 
 " you never see anything , " she rejoin . nevertheless Cartlett 's view 
 of the lover ' or married pair 's conduct be undoubtedly that of the 
 general crowd , whose attention seem to be in no way attract by 
 what Arabella 's sharpen vision discern . 
 " he be charm by she as if she be some fairy ! " continue Arabella . 
 " see how he look round at she , and let his eye rest on she . I be 
 inclined to think that she do not   care for he quite so much as he 
 do for she . she be not a particular warm - hearted creature to my 
 thinking , though she care for he pretty middling much - as much as 
 she be able to ; and he could make her heart ache a bit if he like to 
 try - which he be too simple to do . there - now they be go across 
 to the cart - horse shed . come along . " 
 " I do not   want to see the cart - horse . it be no business of our to 
 follow these two . if we have come to see the show let we see it in 
 our own way , as they do in theirs . " 
 " well - suppose we agree to meet somewhere in an hour 's time - say at 
 that refreshment tent over there , and go about independent ? then you 
 can look at what you choose to , and so can i. " 
 Cartlett be not loath to agree to this , and they part - he 
 proceed to the shed where malting process be be exhibit , 
 and Arabella in the direction take by Jude and Sue . before , 
 however , she have regain their wake a laugh face meet her own , 
 and she be confront by Anny , the friend of her girlhood . 
 Anny have burst out in hearty laughter at the mere fact of the chance 
 encounter . " I be still live down there , " she say , as soon as 
 she be compose . " I be soon go to be marry , but my intend 
 could not   come up here to - day . but there be lot of we come by 
 excursion , though I have   lose the rest of them for the present . " 
 " have you meet Jude and his young woman , or wife , or whatever she be ? 
 I see them by now . " 
 " no . not a glimpse of un for year ! " 
 " well , they be close by here somewhere . yes - there they be - by 
 that grey horse ! " 
 " oh , that be his present young woman - wife do you say ? have he 
 marry again ? " 
 " I do not   know . " 
 " she be pretty , be not   she ! " 
 " yes - nothing to complain of ; or jump at . not much to depend on , 
 though ; a slim , fidgety little thing like that . " 
 " he be a nice - look chap , too ! you ought to ha ' stuck to un , 
 Arabella . " 
 " I do not   know but I ought , " murmur she . 
 Anny laugh . " that be you , Arabella ! always want another man 
 than your own . " 
 " well , and what woman do not   I should like to know ? as for that body 
 with he - she do not   know what love be - at least what I call love ! I 
 can see in her face she do not . " 
 " and perhaps , Abby dear , you do not   know what she call love . " 
 " I be sure I do not   wish to ! ... ah - they be make for the art 
 department . I should like to see some picture myself . suppose 
 we go that way ? - why , if all Wessex be not   here , I verily believe ! 
 there be Dr. Vilbert . have not   see he for year , and he be not 
 look a day old than when I use to know he . how do you do , 
 Physician ? I be just say that you do not   look a day old than 
 when you know I as a girl . " 
 " simply the result of take my own pill regular , ma'am . only two 
 and threepence a box - warrant efficacious by the Government stamp . 
 now let I advise you to purchase the same immunity from the ravage 
 of time by follow my example ? only two - and - three . " 
 the physician have produce a box from his waistcoat pocket , and 
 Arabella be induce to make the purchase . 
 " at the same time , " continue he , when the pill be pay for , " you 
 have the advantage of I , Mrs. - Surely not Mrs. Fawley , once Miss 
 Donn , of the vicinity of Marygreen ? " 
 " yes . but Mrs. Cartlett now . " 
 " ah - you lose he , then ? promise young fellow ! a pupil of mine , 
 you know . I teach he the dead language . and believe I , he soon 
 know nearly as much as I. " 
 " I lose he ; but not as you think , " say Arabella dryly . " the 
 lawyer untie we . there he be , look , alive and lusty ; along with 
 that young woman , enter the art exhibition . " 
 " ah - dear I ! Fond of she , apparently . " 
 " they say they be cousin . " 
 " cousinship be a great convenience to their feeling , I should say ? " 
 " yes . so her husband think , no doubt , when he divorce 
 she ... shall we look at the picture , too ? " 
 the trio follow across the green and enter . Jude and Sue , with 
 the child , unaware of the interest they be exciting , have go 
 up to a model at one end of the building , which they regard 
 with considerable attention for a long while before they go 
 on . Arabella and her friend come to it in due course , and the 
 inscription it bear be : " Model of Cardinal College , Christminster ; 
 by J. Fawley and S. F. M. Bridehead . " 
 " admire their own work , " say Arabella . " how like Jude - always 
 thinking of college and Christminster , instead of attend to his 
 business ! " 
 they glance cursorily at the picture , and proceed to the 
 band - stand . when they have stand a little while listen to the 
 music of the military performer , Jude , Sue , and the child come up on 
 the other side . Arabella do not care if they should recognize she ; 
 but they be too deeply absorb in their own life , as translate 
 into emotion by the military band , to perceive she under her beaded 
 veil . she walk round the outside of the listen throng , pass 
 behind the lover , whose movement have an unexpected fascination for 
 her to - day . scrutinize they narrowly from the rear she notice 
 that Jude 's hand seek Sue 's as they stand , the two stand close 
 together so as to conceal , as they suppose , this tacit expression 
 of their mutual responsiveness . 
 " silly fool - like two child ! " Arabella whisper to herself 
 morosely , as she rejoin her companion , with whom she preserve a 
 preoccupied silence . 
 Anny meanwhile have jokingly remark to Vilbert on Arabella 's 
 hanker interest in her first husband . 
 " now , " say the physician to Arabella , apart ; " do you want anything 
 such as this , Mrs. Cartlett ? it be not compound out of my regular 
 pharmacopoeia , but I be sometimes ask for such a thing . " he 
 produce a small phial of clear liquid . " a love - philtre , such as be 
 use by the ancient with great effect . I find it out by study of 
 their writing , and have never know it to fail . " 
 " what be it make of ? " ask Arabella curiously . 
 " well - a distillation of the juice of dove ' heart - otherwise 
 pigeon ' - be one of the ingredient . it take nearly a hundred heart 
 to produce that small bottle full . " 
 " how do you get pigeon enough ? " 
 " to tell a secret , I get a piece of rock - salt , of which pigeon be 
 inordinately fond , and place it in a dovecot on my roof . in a few 
 hour the bird come to it from all point of the compass - east , 
 west , north , and south - and thus I secure as many as I require . 
 you use the liquid by contrive that the desire man shall take 
 about ten drop of it in his drink . but remember , all this be tell 
 you because I gather from your question that you mean to be a 
 purchaser . you must keep faith with I ? " 
 " very well - I do not   mind a bottle - to give some friend or other to 
 try it on her young man . " she produce five shilling , the price 
 ask , and slip the phial in her capacious bosom . say 
 presently that she be due at an appointment with her husband she 
 saunter away towards the refreshment bar , Jude , his companion , and 
 the child have go on to the horticultural tent , where Arabella 
 catch a glimpse of they stand before a group of rose in bloom . 
 she wait a few minute observe they , and then proceed to join 
 her spouse with no very amiable sentiment . she find he seat on 
 a stool by the bar , talk to one of the gaily dress maid who have 
 serve he with spirit . 
 " I should think you have enough of this business at home ! " arabella 
 remark gloomily . " surely you do not   come fifty mile from your own 
 bar to stick in another ? come , take I round the show , as other man 
 do their wife ! Dammy , one would think you be a young bachelor , 
 with nobody to look after but yourself ! " 
 " but we agree to meet here ; and what could I do but wait ? " 
 " well , now we have meet , come along , " she return , ready to quarrel 
 with the sun for shin on she . and they leave the tent together , 
 this pot - belly man and florid woman , in the antipathetic , 
 recriminatory mood of the average husband and wife of Christendom . 
 in the meantime the more exceptional couple and the boy still 
 linger in the pavilion of flower - an enchant palace to their 
 appreciative taste - Sue 's usually pale cheek reflect the pink of 
 the tinted rose at which she gaze ; for the gay sight , the air , the 
 music , and the excitement of a day 's outing with Jude have quicken 
 her blood and make her eye sparkle with vivacity . she adore rose , 
 and what Arabella have witness be Sue detain Jude almost against 
 his will while she learn the name of this variety and that , and put 
 her face within an inch of their bloom to smell they . 
 " I should like to push my face quite into they - the dear ! " she have 
 say . " but I suppose it be against the rule to touch they - be not 
 it , Jude ? " 
 " yes , you baby , " say he : and then playfully give she a little push , 
 so that her nose go among the petal . 
 " the policeman will be down on we , and I shall say it be my 
 husband 's fault ! " 
 then she look up at he , and smile in a way that tell so much to 
 Arabella . 
 " happy ? " he murmur . 
 she nod . 
 " why ? because you have come to the great Wessex Agricultural 
 Show - or because we have come ? " 
 " you be always try to make I confess to all sort of 
 absurdity . because I be improve my mind , of course , by see 
 all these steam - plough , and thresh - machine , and chaff - cutter , 
 and cow , and pig , and sheep . " 
 Jude be quite content with a baffle from his ever evasive companion . 
 but when he have forget that he have put the question , and because 
 he no long wish for an answer , she go on : " I feel that we have 
 return to greek joyousness , and have blind ourselves to sickness 
 and sorrow , and have forget what twenty - five century have teach 
 the race since their time , as one of your Christminster luminary 
 say ... there be one immediate shadow , however - only one . " and 
 she look at the aged child , whom , though they have take he to 
 everything likely to attract a young intelligence , they have utterly 
 fail to interest . 
 he know what they be say and think . " I be very , very sorry , 
 Father and Mother , " he say . " but please do not   mind ! - I can not   help 
 it . I should like the flower very very much , if I do not   keep on 
 think they would be all wither in a few day ! " 
 VI 
 the unnoticed life that the pair have hitherto lead begin , from the 
 day of the suspend wedding onwards , to be observe and discuss by 
 other person than Arabella . the society of Spring Street and the 
 neighbourhood generally do not understand , and probably could not 
 have be make to understand , Sue and Jude 's private mind , emotion , 
 position , and fear . the curious fact of a child come to they 
 unexpectedly , who call Jude " Father , " and Sue " Mother , " and a hitch 
 in a marriage ceremony intend for quietness to be perform at a 
 registrar 's office , together with rumour of the undefended case in 
 the law - court , bear only one translation to plain mind . 
 little time - for though he be formally turn into " Jude , " the apt 
 nickname stick to he - would come home from school in the evening , 
 and repeat inquiry and remark that have be make to he by the 
 other boy ; and cause Sue , and Jude when he hear they , a great deal 
 of pain and sadness . 
 the result be that shortly after the attempt at the registrar 's the 
 pair go off - to London it be believe - for several day , hire 
 somebody to look to the boy . when they come back they let it be 
 understand indirectly , and with total indifference and weariness 
 of mien , that they be legally marry at last . Sue , who have 
 previously be call Mrs. Bridehead now openly adopt the name of 
 Mrs. Fawley . her dull , cow , and listless manner for day seem 
 to substantiate all this . 
 but the mistake   as it be call   of their go away so secretly 
 to do the business , keep up much of the mystery of their life ; and 
 they find that they make not such advance with their neighbour as 
 they have expect to do thereby . a live mystery be not much less 
 interesting than a dead scandal . 
 the baker 's lad and the grocer 's boy , who at first have use to lift 
 their hat gallantly to Sue when they come to execute their errand , 
 in these day no long take the trouble to render she that homage , 
 and the neighbouring artizan ' wife look straight along the 
 pavement when they encounter she . 
 nobody molest they , it be true ; but an oppressive atmosphere begin 
 to encircle their soul , particularly after their excursion to the 
 show , as if that visit have bring some evil influence to bear on 
 they . and their temperament be precisely of a kind to suffer from 
 this atmosphere , and to be indispose to lighten it by vigorous and 
 open statement . their apparent attempt at reparation have come too 
 late to be effective . 
 the headstone and epitaph order fall off : and two or three month 
 later , when autumn come , Jude perceive that he would have to return 
 to journey - work again , a course all the more unfortunate just now , 
 in that he have not as yet clear off the debt he have unavoidably 
 incur in the payment of the law - cost of the previous year . 
 one evening he sit down to share the common meal with Sue and the 
 child as usual . " I be think , " he say to she , " that I will hold on 
 here no long . the life suit we , certainly ; but if we could get 
 away to a place where we be unknown , we should be lighter hearted , 
 and have a well chance . and so I be afraid we must break it up 
 here , however awkward for you , poor dear ! " 
 Sue be always much affect at a picture of herself as an object of 
 pity , and she sadden . 
 " well - I be not sorry , " say she presently . " I be much depressed 
 by the way they look at I here . and you have be keep on this 
 house and furniture entirely for I and the boy ! you do not   want 
 it yourself , and the expense be unnecessary . but whatever we do , 
 wherever we go , you will not   take he away from I , Jude dear ? I could 
 not let he go now ! the cloud upon his young mind make he so 
 pathetic to I ; I do hope to lift it some day ! and he love I so . 
 you will not   take he away from I ? " 
 " certainly I will not , dear little girl ! we will get nice lodging , 
 wherever we go . I shall be move about probably - get a job 
 here and a job there . " 
 " I shall do something too , of course , till - till - well , now I can not 
 be useful in the lettering it behove I to turn my hand to something 
 else . " 
 " do not   hurry about get employment , " he say regretfully . " I 
 do not   want you to do that . I wish you would not , Sue . the boy and 
 yourself be enough for you to attend to . " 
 there be a knock at the door , and Jude answer it . Sue could hear 
 the conversation : 
 " be Mr. Fawley at home ? ... bile and Willis the building 
 contractor send I to know if you will undertake the relettering 
 of the ten commandment in a little church they have   be restore 
 lately in the country near here . " 
 Jude reflect , and say he could undertake it . 
 " it be not a very artistic job , " continue the messenger . " the 
 clergyman be a very old - fashioned chap , and he have refuse to let 
 anything more be do to the church than clean and repair . " 
 " excellent old man ! " say Sue to herself , who be sentimentally 
 oppose to the horror of over - restoration . 
 " the ten Commandments be fix to the east end , " the messenger go 
 on , " and they want do up with the rest of the wall there , since 
 he will not   have they cart off as old material belong to the 
 contractor in the usual way of the trade . " 
 a bargain as to term be strike , and Jude come indoor . " there , you 
 see , " he say cheerfully . " one more job yet , at any rate , and you 
 can help in it - at least you can try . we shall have all the church 
 to ourselves , as the rest of the work be finish . " 
 next day Jude go out to the church , which be only two mile 
 off . he find that what the contractor 's clerk have say be true . 
 the table of the jewish law tower sternly over the utensil of 
 christian grace , as the chief ornament of the chancel end , in the 
 fine dry style of the last century . and as their framework be 
 construct of ornamental plaster they could not be take down for 
 repair . a portion , crumble by damp , require renewal ; and when 
 this have be do , and the whole cleanse , he begin to renew the 
 lettering . on the second morning Sue come to see what assistance 
 she could render , and also because they like to be together . 
 the silence and emptiness of the building give her confidence , and , 
 stand on a safe low platform erect by Jude , which she be 
 nevertheless timid at mount , she begin paint in the letter 
 of the first table while he set about mend a portion of the 
 second . she be quite pleased at her power ; she have acquire they 
 in the day she paint illumined text for the church - fit shop 
 at Christminster . nobody seem likely to disturb they ; and the 
 pleasant twitter of bird , and rustle of October leafage , come in 
 through an open window , and mingle with their talk . 
 they be not , however , to be leave thus snug and peaceful for long . 
 about half - past twelve there come footstep on the gravel without . 
 the old vicar and his churchwarden enter , and , come up to see 
 what be be do , seem surprised to discover that a young woman 
 be assist . they pass on into an aisle , at which time the door 
 again open , and another figure enter - a small one , that of little 
 Time , who be cry . Sue have tell he where he might find she 
 between school - hour , if he wish . she come down from her perch , 
 and say , " what be the matter , my dear ? " 
 " I could not   stay to eat my dinner in school , because they say - " 
 he describe how some boy have taunt he about his nominal mother , 
 and Sue , grieve , express her indignation to Jude aloft . the child 
 go into the churchyard , and Sue return to her work . meanwhile 
 the door have open again , and there shuffle in with a businesslike 
 air the white - aprone woman who clean the church . Sue recognize 
 she as one who have friend in Spring Street , whom she visit . the 
 church - cleaner look at Sue , gap , and lift her hand ; she have 
 evidently recognize Jude 's companion as the latter have recognize 
 she . next come two lady , and after talk to the charwoman they 
 also move forward , and as Sue stand reach upward , watch she 
 hand trace the letter , and critically regard her person in 
 relief against the white wall , till she grow so nervous that she 
 tremble visibly . 
 they go back to where the other be stand , talk in 
 undertone : and one say - Sue could not hear which - " she be his wife , 
 I suppose ? " 
 " some say yes : some say no , " be the reply from the charwoman . 
 " not ? then she ought to be , or somebody be - that be very clear ! " 
 " they have   only be marry a very few week , whether or no . " 
 " a strange pair to be paint the two Tables ! I wonder Biles and 
 Willis could think of such a thing as hire those ! " 
 the churchwarden suppose that Biles and Willis know of nothing 
 wrong , and then the other , who have be talk to the old woman , 
 explain what she mean by call they strange people . 
 the probable drift of the subdue conversation which follow be 
 make plain by the churchwarden break into an anecdote , in a voice 
 that everybody in the church could hear , though obviously suggest 
 by the present situation : 
 " well , now , it be a curious thing , but my grandfather tell I a 
 strange tale of a most immoral case that happen at the painting of 
 the Commandments in a church out by Gaymead - which be quite within a 
 walk of this one . in they day commandment be mostly do in gilt 
 letter on a black ground , and that be how they be out where I say , 
 before the owld church be rebuild . it must have be somewhere 
 about a hundred year ago that they Commandments want do up just 
 as ours do here , and they have to get man from Aldbrickham to do them . 
 now they wish to get the job finish by a particular Sunday , so 
 the man have to work late Saturday night , against their will , for 
 overtime be not pay then as ' tis now . there be no true religion 
 in the country at that date , neither among pa'son , clerk , nor 
 people , and to keep the man up to their work the vicar have to let them 
 have plenty of drink during the afternoon . as evening draw on they 
 send for some more themselves ; rum , by all account . it get later and 
 later , and they get more and more fuddle , till at last they go 
 a - put their rum - bottle and rummer upon the communion table , and 
 draw up a trestle or two , and sate round comfortable and pour 
 out again right hearty bumper . no soon have they toss off their 
 glass than , so the story go they fall down senseless , one and 
 all . how long they bode so they do not   know , but when they come 
 to themselves there be a terrible thunder - storm a - rag , and 
 they seem to see in the gloom a dark figure with very thin leg 
 and a curious voot , a - standing on the ladder , and finish their 
 work . when it get daylight they could see that the work be really 
 finish , and could not   at all mind finish it themselves . they 
 go home , and the next thing they hear be that a great scandal have 
 be cause in the church that Sunday morning , for when the people 
 come and service begin , all see that the Ten Commandments wez paint 
 with the ' not ' leave out . decent people would not   attend service 
 there for a long time , and the Bishop have to be send for to 
 reconsecrate the church . that be the tradition as I use to hear it 
 as a child . you must take it for what it be wo'th , but this case 
 to - day have remind I o't , as I say . " 
 the visitor give one more glance , as if to see whether Jude and 
 Sue have leave the " not " out likewise , and then severally leave the 
 church , even the old woman at last . Sue and Jude , who have not 
 stop work , send back the child to school , and remain without 
 speaking ; till , look at she narrowly , he find she have be cry 
 silently . 
 " never mind , comrade ! " he say . " I know what it be ! " 
 " I can not   bear that they , and everybody , should think people wicke 
 because they may have choose to live their own way ! it be really 
 these opinion that make the good intentione people reckless , and 
 actually become immoral ! " 
 " never be cast down ! it be only a funny story . " 
 " ah , but we suggest it ! I be afraid I have do you mischief , 
 Jude , instead of help you by come ! " 
 to have suggest such a story be certainly not very exhilarating , 
 in a serious view of their position . however , in a few minute Sue 
 seem to see that their position this morning have a ludicrous side , 
 and wipe her eye she laugh . 
 " it be droll , after all , " she say , " that we two , of all people , 
 with our queer history , should happen to be here paint the 
 Ten Commandments ! you a reprobate , and i - in my condition ... O 
 dear ! " ... and with her hand over her eye she laugh again 
 silently and intermittently , till she be quite weak . 
 " that be well , " say Jude gaily . " now we be right again , be not 
 we , little girl ! " 
 " oh but it be serious , all the same ! " she sigh as she take up the 
 brush and right herself . " but do you see they do not   think we be 
 married ? they won't believe it ! it be extraordinary ! " 
 " I do not   care whether they think so or not , " say Jude . " I shall not 
 take any more trouble to make they . " 
 they sit down to lunch - which they have bring with they not to 
 hinder time - and have eat it be about to set to work anew when 
 a man enter the church , and Jude recognize in he the contractor 
 Willis . he beckon to Jude , and speak to he apart . 
 " here - I have   just have a complaint about this , " he say , with rather 
 breathless awkwardness . " I do not   wish to go into the matter - as of 
 course I do not   know what be go on - but I be afraid I must ask 
 you and she to leave off , and let somebody else finish this ! it be 
 good , to avoid all unpleasantness . I will pay you for the week , all 
 the same . " 
 Jude be too independent to make any fuss ; and the contractor pay 
 he , and leave . Jude pick up his tool , and Sue cleanse her brush . 
 then their eye meet . 
 " how could we be so simple as to suppose we might do this ! " say 
 she , drop to her tragic note . " of course we ought not - I ought 
 not - to have come ! " 
 " I have no idea that anybody be go to intrude into such a lonely 
 place and see we ! " Jude return . " well , it can not   be help , dear ; 
 and of course I would not   wish to injure Willis 's trade - connection by 
 stay . " they sit down passively for a few minute , proceed out 
 of the church , and overtake the boy pursue their thoughtful way 
 to Aldbrickham . 
 Fawley have still a pretty zeal in the cause of education , and , as be 
 natural with his experience , he be active in further " equality 
 of opportunity " by any humble mean open to he . he have join an 
 Artizans ' Mutual Improvement Society establish in the town about 
 the time of his arrival there ; its member be young man of all 
 creed and denomination , include Churchmen , Congregationalists , 
 Baptists , Unitarians , Positivists , and other - agnostic have scarcely 
 be hear of at this time - their one common wish to enlarge their 
 mind form a sufficiently close bond of union . the subscription 
 be small , and the room homely ; and Jude 's activity , uncustomary 
 acquirement , and above all , singular intuition on what to read 
 and how to set about it - begotten of his year of struggle against 
 malignant star - have lead to his be place on the committee . 
 a few evening after his dismissal from the church repair , and 
 before he have obtain any more work to do , he go to attend a 
 meeting of the aforesaid committee . it be late when he arrive : all 
 the other have come , and as he enter they look dubiously at he , 
 and hardly utter a word of greeting . he guess that something 
 bearing on himself have be either discuss or moot . some 
 ordinary business be transact , and it be disclose that the 
 number of subscription have show a sudden fall off for that 
 quarter . one member - a really well - mean and upright man - begin 
 speak in enigma about certain possible cause : that it behove 
 they to look well into their constitution ; for if the committee be 
 not respect , and have not at least , in their difference , a common 
 standard of CONDUCT , they would bring the institution to the ground . 
 nothing far be say in Jude 's presence , but he know what this 
 mean ; and turn to the table write a note resign his office 
 there and then . 
 thus the supersensitive couple be more and more impel to go 
 away . and then bill be send in , and the question arise , what 
 could Jude do with his great - aunt 's heavy old furniture , if he leave 
 the town to travel he know not whither ? this , and the necessity of 
 ready money , compel he to decide on an auction , much as he would 
 have prefer to keep the venerable good . 
 the day of the sale come on ; and Sue for the last time cook she 
 own , the child 's , and Jude 's breakfast in the little house he have 
 furnish . it chance to be a wet day ; moreover Sue be unwell , and 
 not wish to desert her poor Jude in such gloomy circumstance , 
 for he be compel to stay awhile , she act on the suggestion of 
 the auctioneer 's man , and ensconce herself in an upper room , which 
 could be empty of its effect , and so keep close to the bidder . 
 here Jude discover she ; and with the child , and their few trunk , 
 basket , and bundle , and two chair and a table that be not in 
 the sale , the two sit in meditative talk . 
 footstep begin stamp up and down the bare stair , the comer 
 inspect the good , some of which be of so quaint and ancient a 
 make as to acquire an adventitious value as art . their door be 
 try once or twice , and to guard themselves against intrusion Jude 
 write " private " on a scrap of paper , and stick it upon the panel . 
 they soon find that , instead of the furniture , their own personal 
 history and past conduct begin to be discuss to an unexpected 
 and intolerable extent by the intend bidder . it be not till 
 now that they really discover what a fool ' paradise of suppose 
 unrecognition they have be live in of late . Sue silently take 
 her companion 's hand , and with eye on each other they hear these 
 pass remark - the quaint and mysterious personality of Father 
 Time be a subject which form a large ingredient in the hint and 
 innuendo . at length the auction begin in the room below , whence 
 they could hear each familiar article knock down , the highly prize 
 one cheaply , the unconsidered at an unexpected price . 
 " People do not   understand we , " he sigh heavily . " I be glad we have 
 decide to go . " 
 " the question be , where to ? " 
 " it ought to be to London . there one can live as one choose . " 
 " no - not London , dear ! I know it well . we should be unhappy there . " 
 " why ? " 
 " can not   you think ? " 
 " because Arabella be there ? " 
 " that be the chief reason . " 
 " but in the country I shall always be uneasy lest there should be 
 some more of our late experience . and I do not   care to lessen it by 
 explain , for one thing , all about the boy 's history . to cut he 
 off from his past I have determine to keep silence . I be sickened 
 of ecclesiastical work now ; and I should not   like to accept it , if 
 offer I ! " 
 " you ought to have learn classic . Gothic be barbaric art , after 
 all . Pugin be wrong , and Wren be right . remember the interior of 
 Christminster Cathedral - almost the first place in which we look 
 in each other 's face . under the picturesqueness of those Norman 
 detail one can see the grotesque childishness of uncouth people 
 try to imitate the vanish roman form , remember by dim 
 tradition only . " 
 " yes - you have half - convert I to that view by what you have say 
 before . but one can work , and despise what one do . I must do 
 something , if not church - gothic . " 
 " I wish we could both follow an occupation in which personal 
 circumstance do not   count , " she say , smile up wistfully . " I be 
 as disqualify for teaching as you be for ecclesiastical art . you 
 must fall back upon railway station , bridge , theatre , music - hall , 
 hotel - everything that have no connection with conduct . " 
 " I be not skilled in those ... I ought to take to bread - baking . I 
 grow up in the baking business with aunt , you know . but even a baker 
 must be conventional , to get customer . " 
 " unless he keep a cake and gingerbread stall at market and fair , 
 where people be gloriously indifferent to everything except the 
 quality of the good . " 
 their thought be divert by the voice of the auctioneer : " now 
 this antique oak settle - a unique example of old english furniture , 
 worthy the attention of all collector ! " 
 " that be my great - grandfather 's , " say Jude . " I wish we could have 
 keep the poor old thing ! " 
 one by one the article go , and the afternoon pass away . Jude 
 and the other two be get tired and hungry , but after the 
 conversation they have hear they be shy of go out while the 
 purchaser be in their line of retreat . however , the later lot 
 draw on , and it become necessary to emerge into the rain soon , to 
 take on Sue 's thing to their temporary lodging . 
 " now the next lot : two pair of pigeon , all alive and plump - a nice 
 pie for somebody for next Sunday 's dinner ! " 
 the impending sale of these bird have be the most trying suspense 
 of the whole afternoon . they be Sue 's pet , and when it be find 
 that they could not possibly be keep , more sadness be cause than by 
 parting from all the furniture . Sue try to think away her tear 
 as she hear the trifling sum that her dear be deem to be worth 
 advance by small stage to the price at which they be finally 
 knock down . the purchaser be a neighbouring poulterer , and they 
 be unquestionably doom to die before the next market day . 
 note her dissemble distress Jude kiss she , and say it be time 
 to go and see if the lodging be ready . he would go on with the 
 boy , and fetch she soon . 
 when she be leave alone she wait patiently , but Jude do not come 
 back . at last she start , the coast be clear , and on pass the 
 poulterer 's shop , not far off , she see her pigeon in a hamper by the 
 door . an emotion at sight of they , assist by the grow dusk of 
 evening , cause she to act on impulse , and first look around she 
 quickly , she pull out the peg which fasten down the cover , and 
 go on . the cover be lift from within , and the pigeon fly 
 away with a clatter that bring the chagrined poulterer cursing and 
 swearing to the door . 
 Sue reach the lodging trembling , and find Jude and the boy make 
 it comfortable for she . " do the buyer pay before they bring away 
 the thing ? " she ask breathlessly . 
 " yes , I think . why ? " 
 " because , then , I have   do such a wicked thing ! " and she explain , 
 in bitter contrition . 
 " I shall have to pay the poulterer for they , if he do not   catch 
 they , " say Jude . " but never mind . do not   fret about it , dear . " 
 " it be so foolish of I ! oh why should Nature 's law be mutual 
 butchery ! " 
 " be it so , Mother ? " ask the boy intently . 
 " yes ! " say Sue vehemently . 
 " well , they must take their chance , now , poor thing , " say Jude . 
 " as soon as the sale - account be wind up , and our bill pay , we go . " 
 " where do we go to ? " ask Time , in suspense . 
 " we must sail under seal order , that nobody may trace we ... we 
 must not   go to Alfredston , or to Melchester , or to Shaston , or to 
 Christminster . apart from those we may go anywhere . " 
 " why must not   we go there , Father ? " 
 " because of a cloud that have gather over we ; though ' we have 
 wrong no man , corrupt no man , defraud no man ! ' though perhaps 
 we have ' do that which be right in our own eye . ' " 
 VII 
 from that week Jude Fawley and Sue walk no more in the town of 
 Aldbrickham . 
 Whither they have go nobody know , chiefly because nobody care 
 to know . any one sufficiently curious to trace the step of such 
 an obscure pair might have discover without great trouble that 
 they have take advantage of his adaptive craftsmanship to enter 
 on a shifting , almost nomadic , life , which be not without its 
 pleasantness for a time . 
 Wherever Jude hear of free - stone work to be do , thither he go , 
 choose by preference place remote from his old haunt and Sue 's . 
 he labour at a job , long or briefly , till it be finish ; and 
 then move on . 
 two whole year and a half pass thus . sometimes he might have 
 be find shape the mullion of a country mansion , sometimes 
 set the parapet of a town - hall , sometimes ashlare an hotel at 
 Sandbourne , sometimes a museum at Casterbridge , sometimes as far down 
 as Exonbury , sometimes at Stoke - Barehills . later still he be at 
 Kennetbridge , a thrive town not more than a dozen mile south of 
 Marygreen , this be his near approach to the village where he 
 be know ; for he have a sensitive dread of be question as to his 
 life and fortune by those who have be acquaint with he during 
 his ardent young manhood of study and promise , and his brief and 
 unhappy married life at that time . 
 at some of these place he would be detain for month , at other 
 only a few week . his curious and sudden antipathy to ecclesiastical 
 work , both episcopal and noncomformist , which have rise in he when 
 suffer under a smarting sense of misconception , remain with he 
 in cold blood , less from any fear of renew censure than from an 
 ultra - conscientiousness which would not allow he to seek a living 
 out of those who would disapprove of his way ; also , too , from a 
 sense of inconsistency between his former dogma and his present 
 practice , hardly a shred of the belief with which he have first 
 go up to Christminster now remain with he . he be mentally 
 approach the position which Sue have occupy when he first meet 
 she . 
 on a Saturday evening in May , nearly three year after Arabella 's 
 recognition of Sue and himself at the agricultural show , some of 
 those who there encounter each other meet again . 
 it be the spring fair at Kennetbridge , and , though this ancient 
 trade - meeting have much dwindle from its dimension of former time , 
 the long straight street of the borough present a lively scene 
 about midday . at this hour a light trap , among other vehicle , 
 be drive into the town by the north road , and up to the door of 
 a temperance inn . there alight two woman , one the driver , an 
 ordinary country person , the other a finely build figure in the deep 
 mourning of a widow . her sombre suit , of pronounce cut , cause 
 she to appear a little out of place in the medley and bustle of a 
 provincial fair . 
 " I will just find out where it be , anny , " say the widow - lady to her 
 companion , when the horse and cart have be take by a man who come 
 forward : " and then I will come back , and meet you here ; and we will go 
 in and have something to eat and drink . I begin to feel quite a 
 sinking . " 
 " with all my heart , " say the other . " though I would soon have 
 put up at the Chequers or the Jack . you can not   get much at these 
 temperance house . " 
 " now , do not   you give way to gluttonous desire , my child , " say the 
 woman in weed reprovingly . " this be the proper place . very well : 
 we will meet in half an hour , unless you come with I to find out where 
 the site of the new chapel be ? " 
 " I do not   care to . you can tell I . " 
 the companion then go their several way , the one in crape walk 
 firmly along with a mien of disconnection from her miscellaneous 
 surrounding . make inquiry she come to a hoarding , within which 
 be excavation denote the foundation of a building ; and on 
 the board without one or two large poster announce that the 
 foundation - stone of the chapel about to be erect would be lay that 
 afternoon at three o'clock by a London preacher of great popularity 
 among his body . 
 have ascertain thus much the immensely weed widow retrace she 
 step , and give herself leisure to observe the movement of the fair . 
 by and by her attention be arrest by a little stall of cake and 
 ginger - bread , stand between the more pretentious erection of 
 trestle and canvas . it be cover with an immaculate cloth , and 
 tend by a young woman apparently unused to the business , she be 
 accompany by a boy with an octogenarian face , who assist she . 
 " upon my - sens ! " murmur the widow to herself . " his wife Sue - if 
 she be so ! " she draw near to the stall . " how do you do , Mrs. 
 Fawley ? " she say blandly . 
 Sue change colour and recognize Arabella through the crape veil . 
 " how be you , Mrs. Cartlett ? " she say stiffly . and then perceive 
 Arabella 's garb her voice grow sympathetic in spite of herself . 
 " what ? - you have lose - " 
 " my poor husband . yes . he die suddenly , six week ago , leave I 
 none too well off , though he be a kind husband to I . but whatever 
 profit there be in public - house keeping go to they that brew the 
 liquor , and not to they that retail them ... and you , my little old 
 man ! you do not   know I , I expect ? " 
 " yes , I do . you be the woman I think wer my mother for a bit , till 
 I find you be not , " reply Father Time , who have learn to use the 
 Wessex tongue quite naturally by now . 
 " all right . never mind . I be a friend . " 
 " Juey , " say Sue suddenly , " go down to the station platform with this 
 tray - there be another train come in , I think . " 
 when he be go Arabella continue : " he will never be a beauty , will 
 he , poor chap ! do he know I be his mother really ? " 
 " no . he think there be some mystery about his parentage - that be all . 
 Jude be go to tell he when he be a little old . " 
 " but how do you come to be do this ? I be surprised . " 
 " it be only a temporary occupation - a fancy of our while we be in a 
 difficulty . " 
 " then you be live with he still ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " married ? " 
 " of course . " 
 " any child ? " 
 " Two . " 
 " and another come soon , I see . " 
 Sue writhe under the hard and direct questioning , and her tender 
 little mouth begin to quiver . 
 " Lord - I mean goodness gracious - what be there to cry about ? some 
 folk would be proud enough ! " 
 " it be not that I be ashamed - not as you think ! but it seem 
 such a terribly tragic thing to bring being into the world - so 
 presumptuous - that I question my right to do it sometimes ! " 
 " take it easy , my dear ... but you do not   tell I why you do such a 
 thing as this ? Jude use to be a proud sort of chap - above any 
 business almost , leave alone keep a standing . " 
 " perhaps my husband have alter a little since then . I be sure he 
 be not proud now ! " and Sue 's lip quiver again . " I be do this 
 because he catch a chill early in the year while put up some 
 stonework of a music - hall , at Quartershot , which he have to do in the 
 rain , the work have to be execute by a fix day . he be well 
 than he be ; but it have be a long , weary time ! we have have an old 
 widow friend with we to help we through it ; but she be leave soon . " 
 " well , I be respectable too , thank God , and of a serious way of 
 think since my loss . why do you choose to sell gingerbread ? " 
 " that be a pure accident . he be bring up to the baking business , 
 and it occur to he to try his hand at these , which he can make 
 without come out of door . we call they Christminster cake . 
 they be a great success . " 
 " I never see any like them . why , they be window and tower , and 
 pinnacle ! and upon my word they be very nice . " she have help 
 herself , and be unceremoniously munch one of the cake . 
 " yes . they be reminiscence of the Christminster Colleges . 
 traceried window , and cloister , you see . it be a whim of his 
 to do they in pastry . " 
 " still harp on Christminster - even in his cake ! " laugh 
 Arabella . " just like Jude . a rule passion . what a queer fellow 
 he be , and always will be ! " 
 Sue sigh , and she look her distress at hear he criticize . 
 " do not   you think he be ? come now ; you do , though you be so fond of 
 he ! " 
 " of course Christminster be a sort of fix vision with he , which 
 I suppose he will never be cure of believe in . he still think it 
 a great centre of high and fearless thought , instead of what it be , 
 a nest of commonplace schoolmaster whose characteristic be timid 
 obsequiousness to tradition . " 
 Arabella be quiz Sue with more regard of how she be speak 
 than of what she be say . " how odd to hear a woman sell 
 cake talk like that ! " she say . " why do not   you go back to 
 school - keeping ? " 
 she shake her head . " they will not   have I . " 
 " because of the divorce , I suppose ? " 
 " that and other thing . and there be no reason to wish it . we 
 give up all ambition , and be never so happy in our life till his 
 illness come . " 
 " where be you live ? " 
 " I do not   care to say . " 
 " here in Kennetbridge ? " 
 Sue 's manner show Arabella that her random guess be right . 
 " here come the boy back again , " continue Arabella . " my boy and 
 Jude 's ! " 
 Sue 's eye dart a spark . " you need not   throw that in my face ! " she 
 cry . 
 " very well - though I half - feel as if I should like to have he with 
 I ! ... but Lord , I do not   want to take he from ' ee - ever I should 
 sin to speak so profane - though I should think you must have enough 
 of your own ! he be in very good hand , that I know ; and I be not the 
 woman to find fault with what the Lord have ordain . I have   reach a 
 more resigned frame of mind . " 
 " indeed ! I wish I have be able to do so . " 
 " you should try , " reply the widow , from the serene height of a 
 soul conscious not only of spiritual but of social superiority . 
 " I make no boast of my awakening , but I be not what I be . after 
 Cartlett 's death I be pass the chapel in the street next our , 
 and go into it for shelter from a shower of rain . I feel a need 
 of some sort of support under my loss , and , as ' twa righter than 
 gin , I take to go there regular , and find it a great comfort . 
 but I have   leave London now , you know , and at present I be live at 
 Alfredston , with my friend Anny , to be near my own old country . I be 
 not come here to the fair to - day . there be to be the foundation - stone 
 of a new chapel lay this afternoon by a popular London preacher , and 
 I drive over with Anny . now I must go back to meet she . " 
 then Arabella wish Sue good - bye , and go on . 
 VIII 
 in the afternoon Sue and the other people bustle about Kennetbridge 
 fair could hear sing inside the placard hoarding far down 
 the street . those who peep through the opening see a crowd of 
 person in broadcloth , with hymn - book in their hand , stand round 
 the excavation for the new chapel - wall . Arabella Cartlett and her 
 weed stand among they . she have a clear , powerful voice , which could 
 be distinctly hear with the rest , rise and fall to the tune , 
 her inflated bosom be also see do likewise . 
 it be two hour later on the same day that Anny and Mrs. Cartlett , 
 have have tea at the Temperance Hotel , start on their return 
 journey across the high and open country which stretch between 
 Kennetbridge and Alfredston . Arabella be in a thoughtful mood ; but 
 her thought be not of the new chapel , as Anny at first surmise . 
 " no - it be something else , " at last say Arabella sullenly . " I 
 come here to - day never think of anybody but poor Cartlett , or of 
 anything but spread the Gospel by mean of this new tabernacle 
 they have   begin this afternoon . but something have happen to turn my 
 mind another way quite . anny , I have   hear of un again , and I have   see 
 she ! " 
 " who ? " 
 " I have   hear of Jude , and I have   see his wife . and ever since , do what 
 I will , and though I sing the hymn wi ' all my strength , I have not 
 be able to help think about ' n ; which I have   no right to do as a 
 chapel member . " 
 " can not   ye fix your mind upon what be say by the London preacher 
 to - day , and try to get rid of your wandering fancy that way ? " 
 " I do . but my wicked heart will ramble off in spite of myself ! " 
 " well - I know what it be to have a wanton mind o ' my own , too ! if 
 you on'y know what I do dream sometimes o ' night quite against my 
 wish , you would say I have my struggle ! "   Anny , too , have grow rather 
 serious of late , her lover have jilt she . 
 " what shall I do about it ? " urge Arabella morbidly . 
 " you could take a lock of your late - lose husband 's hair , and have it 
 make into a mourning brooch , and look at it every hour of the day . " 
 " I have not   a morsel ! - and if I have ' twould be no good ... after all 
 that be say about the comfort of this religion , I wish I have Jude 
 back again ! " 
 " you must fight valiant against the feeling , since he be another 's . 
 and I have   hear that another good thing for it , when it afflict 
 volupshious widow , be to go to your husband 's grave in the dusk of 
 evening , and stand a long while a - bow down . " 
 " Pooh ! I know as well as you what I should do ; only I do not   do it ! " 
 they drive in silence along the straight road till they be within 
 the horizon of Marygreen , which lie not far to the left of their 
 route . they come to the junction of the highway and the cross - lane 
 lead to that village , whose church - tower could be see athwart the 
 hollow . when they get yet far on , and be pass the lonely 
 house in which Arabella and Jude have live during the first month of 
 their marriage , and where the pig - killing have take place , she could 
 control herself no long . 
 " he be more mine than her ! " she burst out . " what right have she to 
 he , I should like to know ! I would take he from she if I could ! " 
 " Fie , Abby ! and your husband only six week go ! pray against it ! " 
 " be damned if I do ! feeling be feeling ! I will not   be a creep 
 hypocrite any long - so there ! " 
 Arabella have hastily draw from her pocket a bundle of tract which 
 she have bring with she to distribute at the fair , and of which she 
 have give away several . as she speak she fling the whole remainder 
 of the packet into the hedge . " I have   try that sort o ' physic and 
 have fail wi ' it . I must be as I be bear ! " 
 " Hush ! you be excited , dear ! now you come along home quiet , and 
 have a cup of tea , and do not   let we talk about un no more . we will not 
 come out this road again , as it lead to where he be , because it 
 inflame ' ee so . you will be all right again soon . " 
 Arabella do calm herself down by degree ; and they cross the 
 ridge - way . when they begin to descend the long , straight hill , they 
 see plod along in front of they an elderly man of spare stature 
 and thoughtful gait . in his hand he carry a basket ; and there be 
 a touch of slovenliness in his attire , together with that indefinable 
 something in his whole appearance which suggest one who be his 
 own housekeeper , purveyor , confidant , and friend , through possess 
 nobody else at all in the world to act in those capacity for he . 
 the remainder of the journey be down - hill , and guess he to be 
 go to Alfredston they offer he a lift , which he accept . 
 Arabella look at he , and look again , till at length she speak . 
 " if I do not   mistake I be talk to Mr. Phillotson ? " 
 the wayfarer face round and regard she in turn . " yes ; my name be 
 Phillotson , " he say . " but I do not   recognize you , ma'am . " 
 " I remember you well enough when you use to be schoolmaster out at 
 Marygreen , and I one of your scholar . I use to walk up there from 
 Cresscombe every day , because we have only a mistress down at our 
 place , and you teach well . but you would not   remember I as I 
 should you ? - Arabella Donn . " 
 he shake his head . " no , " he say politely , " I do not   recall the name . 
 and I should hardly recognize in your present portly self the slim 
 school child no doubt you be then . " 
 " well , I always have plenty of flesh on my bone . however , I be 
 stay down here with some friend at present . you know , I suppose , 
 who I marry ? " 
 " no . " 
 " Jude Fawley - also a scholar of yours - at least a night scholar - for 
 some little time I think ? and know to you afterwards , if I be not 
 mistaken . " 
 " dear I , dear I , " say Phillotson , start out of his stiffness . 
 " YOU Fawley 's wife ? to be sure - he have a wife ! and he - I 
 understand - " 
 " divorced she - as you do yours - perhaps for well reason . " 
 " indeed ? " 
 " well - he me have be right in do it - right for both ; for I soon 
 marry again , and all go pretty straight till my husband die 
 lately . but you - you be decidedly wrong ! " 
 " no , " say Phillotson , with sudden testiness . " I would rather not 
 talk of this , but - I be convinced I do only what be right , and 
 just , and moral . I have suffer for my act and opinion , but I hold 
 to they ; though her loss be a loss to I in more way than one ! " 
 " you lose your school and good income through she , do you not ? " 
 " I do not   care to talk of it . I have recently come back here - to 
 Marygreen . I mean . " 
 " you be keep the school there again , just as formerly ? " 
 the pressure of a sadness that would out unseal he . " I be there , " 
 he reply . " just as formerly , no . merely on sufferance . it be 
 a last resource - a small thing to return to after my move upwards , 
 and my long indulge hope - a return to zero , with all its 
 humiliation . but it be a refuge . I like the seclusion of the 
 place , and the vicar have know I before my so - call eccentric 
 conduct towards my wife have ruin my reputation as a schoolmaster , 
 he accept my service when all other school be close against 
 I . however , although I take fifty pound a year here after take 
 above two hundred elsewhere , I prefer it to run the risk of 
 have my old domestic experience rake up against I , as I should 
 do if I try to make a move . " 
 " right you be . a contented mind be a continual feast . she have do 
 no well . " 
 " she be not do well , you mean ? " 
 " I meet she by accident at Kennetbridge this very day , and she be 
 anything but thrive . her husband be ill , and she anxious . you 
 make a fool of a mistake about she , I tell ' ee again , and the harm 
 you do yourself by dirte your own nest serve you right , excuse 
 the liberty . " 
 " how ? " 
 " she be innocent . " 
 " but nonsense ! they do not even defend the case ! " 
 " that be because they do not   care to . she be quite innocent of 
 what obtain you your freedom , at the time you obtain it . I see 
 she just afterwards , and prove it to myself completely by talk to 
 she . " 
 Phillotson grasp the edge of the spring - cart , and appear to be 
 much stress and worry by the information . " still - she want to 
 go , " he say . 
 " yes . but you should not   have let she . that be the only way with 
 these fanciful woman that chaw high - innocent or guilty . she would have 
 come round in time . we all do ! custom do it ! it be all the same 
 in the end ! however , I think she be fond of her man still - whatever 
 he me be of she . you be too quick about she . I should not 
 have let she go ! I should have keep she chain on - her spirit for 
 kicking would have be break soon enough ! there be nothing like 
 bondage and a stone - deaf taskmaster for tame we woman . besides , 
 you have   get the law on your side . Moses know . do not   you call to 
 mind what he say ? " 
 " not for the moment , ma'am , I regret to say . " 
 " call yourself a schoolmaster ! I use to think o't when they read 
 it in church , and I be carry on a bit . ' then shall the man be 
 guiltless ; but the woman shall bear her iniquity . ' damn rough on we 
 woman ; but we must grin and put up wi ' it ! haw haw ! well ; she be get 
 her desert now . " 
 " yes , " say Phillotson , with bite sadness . " Cruelty be the law 
 pervade all nature and society ; and we can not   get out of it if we 
 would ! " 
 " well - do not   you forget to try it next time , old man . " 
 " I can not answer you , madam . I have never know much of womankind . " 
 they have now reach the low level border Alfredston , and pass 
 through the outskirt approach a mill , to which Phillotson say his 
 errand lead he ; whereupon they draw up , and he alight , bid they 
 good - night in a preoccupied mood . 
 in the meantime Sue , though remarkably successful in her cake - sell 
 experiment at Kennetbridge fair , have lose the temporary brightness 
 which have begin to sit upon her sadness on account of that success . 
 when all her " Christminster " cake have be dispose of she take 
 upon her arm the empty basket , and the cloth which have cover the 
 standing she have hire , and give the other thing to the boy leave 
 the street with he . they follow a lane to a distance of half a 
 mile , till they meet an old woman carry a child in short clothe , 
 and lead a toddler in the other hand . 
 Sue kiss the child , and say , " how be he now ? " 
 " still well ! " return Mrs. Edlin cheerfully . " before you be 
 upstairs again your husband will be well enough - do not   ' ee trouble . " 
 they turn , and come to some old , dun - tile cottage with garden 
 and fruit - tree . into one of these they enter by lift the latch 
 without knock , and be at once in the general living - room . here 
 they greet Jude , who be sit in an arm - chair , the increase 
 delicacy of his normally delicate feature , and the childishly 
 expectant look in his eye , be alone sufficient to show that he 
 have be pass through a severe illness . 
 " what - you have sell they all ? " he say , a gleam of interest lighting 
 up his face . 
 " yes . Arcades , gable , east window and all . " she tell he the 
 pecuniary result , and then hesitate . at last , when they be leave 
 alone , she inform he of the unexpected meeting with Arabella , and 
 the latter 's widowhood . 
 Jude be discompose . " what - be she live here ? " he say . 
 " no ; at Alfredston , " say Sue . 
 Jude 's countenance remain clouded . " I think I have well tell 
 you ? " she continue , kiss he anxiously . 
 " yes ... dear I ! arabella not in the depth of London , but down 
 here ! it be only a little over a dozen mile across the country to 
 Alfredston . what be she do there ? " 
 she tell he all she know . " she have take to chapel - go , " Sue 
 add ; " and talk accordingly . " 
 " well , " say Jude , " perhaps it be for the good that we have almost 
 decide to move on . I feel much well to - day , and shall be well 
 enough to leave in a week or two . then Mrs. Edlin can go home 
 again - dear faithful old soul - the only friend we have in the world ! " 
 " where do you think to go to ? " Sue ask , a troublousness in her 
 tone . 
 then Jude confess what be in his mind . he say it would surprise 
 she , perhaps , after his have resolutely avoid all the old place 
 for so long . but one thing and another have make he think a great 
 deal of Christminster lately , and , if she do not   mind , he would like 
 to go back there . why should they care if they be know ? it be 
 oversensitive of they to mind so much . they could go on sell 
 cake there , for that matter , if he could not   work . he have no sense 
 of shame at mere poverty ; and perhaps he would be as strong as ever 
 soon , and able to set up stone - cutting for himself there . 
 " why should you care so much for Christminster ? " she say pensively . 
 " christminster care nothing for you , poor dear ! " 
 " well , I do , I can not   help it . I love the place - although I know 
 how it hat all man like I - the so - call self - teach - how it 
 scorn our laboured acquisition , when it should be the first 
 to respect they ; how it sneer at our false quantity and 
 mispronunciation , when it should say , I see you want help , my poor 
 friend ! ... nevertheless , it be the centre of the universe to I , 
 because of my early dream : and nothing can alter it . perhaps it will 
 soon wake up , and be generous . I pray so ! ... I should like to go 
 back to live there - perhaps to die there ! in two or three week I 
 might , I think . it will then be June , and I should like to be there 
 by a particular day . " 
 his hope that he be recover prove so far well ground that 
 in three week they have arrive in the city of many memory ; be 
 actually tread its pavement , receive the reflection of the 
 sunshine from its waste wall . 
 Part Sixth 
 AT CHRISTMINSTER again 
 " ... and she humble her body greatly , and all the place 
 of her joy she fill with her torn hair . " - ESTHER   Apoc . . 
 " there be two who decline , a woman and I , 
 and enjoy our death in the darkness here . " 
  - R. BROWNING . 
 I 
 on their arrival the station be lively with straw - hat young man , 
 welcome young girl who bear a remarkable family likeness to their 
 welcomer , and who be dress up in the bright and light of 
 raiment . 
 " the place seem gay , " say Sue . " why - it be remembrance 
 Day ! - Jude - how sly of you - you come to - day on purpose ! " 
 " yes , " say Jude quietly , as he take charge of the small child , and 
 tell Arabella 's boy to keep close to they , Sue attend to their own 
 eld . " I think we might as well come to - day as on any other . " 
 " but I be afraid it will depress you ! " she say , look anxiously at 
 he up and down . 
 " oh , I must not   let it interfere with our business ; and we have a good 
 deal to do before we shall be settle here . the first thing be 
 lodging . " 
 have leave their luggage and his tool at the station they proceed 
 on foot up the familiar street , the holiday people all drift in 
 the same direction . reach the fourway they be about to turn 
 off to where accommodation be likely to be find when , look at 
 the clock and the hurrying crowd , Jude say : " let we go and see the 
 procession , and never mind the lodging just now ? we can get they 
 afterwards . " 
 " ought not   we to get a house over our head first ? " she ask . 
 but his soul seem full of the anniversary , and together they go 
 down Chief Street , their small child in Jude 's arm , Sue lead 
 her little girl , and Arabella 's boy walk thoughtfully and silently 
 beside they . crowd of pretty sister in airy costume , and meekly 
 ignorant parent who have know no college in their youth , be under 
 convoy in the same direction by brother and son bear the opinion 
 write large on they that no properly qualified human being have 
 live on earth till they come to grace it here and now . 
 " my failure be reflect on I by every one of those young 
 fellow , " say Jude . " a lesson on presumption be await I 
 to - day ! - humiliation Day for I ! ... if you , my dear darling , have not 
 come to my rescue , I should have go to the dog with despair ! " 
 she see from his face that he be get into one of his 
 tempestuous , self - harrow mood . " it would have be well if we 
 have go at once about our own affair , dear , " she answer . " I be 
 sure this sight will awaken old sorrow in you , and do no good ! " 
 " well - we be near ; we will see it now , " say he . 
 they turn in on the left by the church with the italian porch , 
 whose helical column be heavily drape with creeper , and pursue 
 the lane till there arise on Jude 's sight the circular theatre with 
 that well - know lantern above it , which stand in his mind as the sad 
 symbol of his abandon hope , for it be from that outlook that he 
 have finally survey the City of Colleges on the afternoon of his 
 great meditation , which convince he at last of the futility of his 
 attempt to be a son of the university . 
 to - day , in the open space stretching between this building and the 
 near college , stand a crowd of expectant people . a passage be 
 keep clear through their midst by two barrier of timber , extend 
 from the door of the college to the door of the large building 
 between it and the theatre . 
 " here be the place - they be just go to pass ! " cry Jude in 
 sudden excitement . and push his way to the front he take up a 
 position close to the barrier , still hug the young child in 
 his arm , while Sue and the other keep immediately behind he . 
 the crowd fill in at their back , and fall to talk , joke , and 
 laugh as carriage after carriage draw up at the low door of 
 the college , and solemn stately figure in blood - red robe begin to 
 alight . the sky have grow overcast and livid , and thunder rumble 
 now and then . 
 Father Time shudder . " it do seem like the Judgment Day ! " he 
 whisper . 
 " they be only learn doctor , " say Sue . 
 while they wait big drop of rain fall on their head and 
 shoulder , and the delay grow tedious . Sue again wish not to stay . 
 " they will not   be long now , " say Jude , without turn his head . 
 but the procession do not come forth , and somebody in the crowd , to 
 pass the time , look at the facade of the near college , and say 
 he wonder what be mean by the latin inscription in its midst . 
 Jude , who stand near the inquirer , explain it , and find that 
 the people all round he be listen with interest , go on to 
 describe the carving of the frieze   which he have study year 
 before , and to criticize some detail of masonry in other college 
 front about the city . 
 the idle crowd , include the two policeman at the door , star like 
 the Lycaonians at Paul , for Jude be apt to get too enthusiastic over 
 any subject in hand , and they seem to wonder how the stranger 
 should know more about the building of their town than they 
 themselves do ; till one of they say : " why , I know that man ; he use 
 to work here year ago - Jude Fawley , that be his name ! do not   you mind 
 he use to be nickname Tutor of St. Slums , d'ye mind ? - because he 
 aim at that line o ' business ? he be married , I suppose , then , and 
 that be his child he be carry . Taylor would know he , as he know 
 everybody . " 
 the speaker be a man name Jack Stagg , with whom Jude have formerly 
 work in repair the college masonry ; Tinker Taylor be see to 
 be stand near . have his attention call the latter cry 
 across the barrier to Jude : " you have   honour we by come back 
 again , my friend ! " 
 Jude nod . 
 " An ' you do not   seem to have do any great thing for yourself by 
 go away ? " 
 Jude assent to this also . 
 " except find more mouth to fill ! " this come in a new voice , and 
 Jude recognize its owner to be Uncle Joe , another mason whom he have 
 know . 
 Jude reply good - humouredly that he could not dispute it ; and from 
 remark to remark something like a general conversation arise between 
 he and the crowd of idler , during which Tinker Taylor ask Jude if 
 he remember the apostle ' Creed in Latin still , and the night of 
 the challenge in the public house . 
 " but Fortune do not   lie that way ? " throw in Joe . " yer power be not 
 enough to carry ' ee through ? " 
 " do not   answer they any more ! " entreat Sue . 
 " I do not   think I like Christminster ! " murmur little Time 
 mournfully , as he stand submerge and invisible in the crowd . 
 but find himself the centre of curiosity , quizzing , and comment , 
 Jude be not inclined to shrink from open declaration of what he 
 have no great reason to be ashamed of ; and in a little while be 
 stimulate to say in a loud voice to the listen throng generally : 
 " it be a difficult question , my friend , for any young man - that 
 question I have to grapple with , and which thousand be weigh 
 at the present moment in these uprising time - whether to follow 
 uncritically the track he find himself in , without consider his 
 aptness for it , or to consider what his aptness or bent may be , and 
 re - shape his course accordingly . I try to do the latter , and I 
 fail . but I do not   admit that my failure prove my view to be a 
 wrong one , or that my success would have make it a right one ; though 
 that be how we appraise such attempt nowadays - I mean , not by their 
 essential soundness , but by their accidental outcome . if I have 
 end by become like one of these gentleman in red and black that 
 we see drop in here by now , everybody would have say : ' see how 
 wise that young man be , to follow the bent of his nature ! ' but 
 have end no well than I begin they say : ' see what a fool that 
 fellow be in follow a freak of his fancy ! ' 
 " however it be my poverty and not my will that consent to be 
 beat . it take two or three generation to do what I try to do 
 in one ; and my impulse - affection - vice perhaps they should be 
 call - be too strong not to hamper a man without advantage ; who 
 should be as cold - blooded as a fish and as selfish as a pig to have a 
 really good chance of be one of his country 's worthy . you may 
 ridicule I - I be quite willing that you should - I be a fit subject , 
 no doubt . but I think if you know what I have go through these 
 last few year you would rather pity I . and if they know " - he 
 nod towards the college at which the don be severally 
 arrive - " it be just possible they would do the same . " 
 " he do look ill and wear - out , it be true ! " say a woman . 
 Sue 's face grow more emotional ; but though she stand close to Jude 
 she be screen . 
 " I may do some good before I be dead - be a sort of success as a 
 frightful example of what not to do ; and so illustrate a moral 
 story , " continue Jude , begin to grow bitter , though he have 
 open serenely enough . " I be , perhaps , after all , a paltry victim 
 to the spirit of mental and social restlessness that make so many 
 unhappy in these day ! " 
 " do not   tell they that ! " whisper Sue with tear , at perceive 
 Jude 's state of mind . " you be not   that . you struggle nobly to 
 acquire knowledge , and only the mean soul in the world would 
 blame you ! " 
 Jude shift the child into a more easy position on his arm , and 
 conclude : " and what I appear , a sick and poor man , be not the bad 
 of I . I be in a chaos of principle - groping in the dark - act by 
 instinct and not after example . eight or nine year ago when I come 
 here first , I have a neat stock of fix opinion , but they drop 
 away one by one ; and the further I get the less sure I be . I doubt 
 if I have anything more for my present rule of life than follow 
 inclination which do I and nobody else any harm , and actually give 
 pleasure to those I love well . there , gentleman , since you want to 
 know how I be get on , I have tell you . much good may it do you ! 
 I can not explain far here . I perceive there be something wrong 
 somewhere in our social formula : what it be can only be discover 
 by man or woman with great insight than mine - if , indeed , they ever 
 discover it - at least in our time . ' for who knoweth what be good for 
 man in this life ? - and who can tell a man what shall be after he 
 under the sun ? ' " 
 " hear , hear , " say the populace . 
 " well preach ! " say Tinker Taylor . and privately to his 
 neighbour : " why , one of they job pa'son swarm about here , 
 that take the service when our head reverend want a holiday , 
 would not   ha ' discourse such doctrine for less than a guinea down ? 
 hey ? I will take my oath not one o ' them would ! and then he must have 
 have it write down for ' n. and this only a working - man ! " 
 as a sort of objective commentary on Jude 's remark there drive up 
 at this moment with a belated doctor , rob and panting , a cab whose 
 horse fail to stop at the exact point require for set down the 
 hirer , who jump out and enter the door . the driver , alight , 
 begin to kick the animal in the belly . 
 " if that can be do , " say Jude , " at college gate in the most 
 religious and educational city in the world , what shall we say as to 
 how far we have   get ? " 
 " Order ! " say one of the policeman , who have be engage with a 
 comrade in open the large door opposite the college . " keep yer 
 tongue quiet , my man , while the procession pass . " the rain come on 
 more heavily , and all who have umbrella open they . Jude be not 
 one of these , and Sue only possess a small one , half sunshade . she 
 have grow pale , though Jude do not notice it then . 
 " let we go on , dear , " she whisper , endeavour to shelter he . 
 " we have not   any lodging yet , remember , and all our thing be at the 
 station ; and you be by no mean well yet . I be afraid this wet will 
 hurt you ! " 
 " they be come now . just a moment , and I will go ! " say he . 
 a peal of six bell strike out , human face begin to crowd the 
 window around , and the procession of head of house and new doctor 
 emerge , their red and black gown form pass across the field of 
 Jude 's vision like inaccessible planet across an object glass . 
 as they go their name be call by know informant , and when 
 they reach the old round theatre of Wren a cheer rise high . 
 " let us go that way ! " cry Jude , and though it now rain steadily 
 he seem not to know it , and take they round to the theatre . here 
 they stand upon the straw that be lay to drown the discordant noise 
 of wheel , where the quaint and frost - eat stone bust encircle 
 the building look with pallid grimness on the proceeding , and in 
 particular at the bedraggle Jude , Sue , and their child , as at 
 ludicrous person who have no business there . 
 " I wish I could get in ! " he say to she fervidly . " listen - I may 
 catch a few word of the latin speech by stay here ; the window 
 be open . " 
 however , beyond the peal of the organ , and the shout and hurrah 
 between each piece of oratory , Jude 's standing in the wet do not 
 bring much Latin to his intelligence more than , now and then , a 
 sonorous word in um or ibus . 
 " well - I be an outsider to the end of my day ! " he sigh after a 
 while . " now I will go , my patient Sue . how good of you to wait in the 
 rain all this time - to gratify my infatuation ! I will never care any 
 more about the infernal curse place , upon my soul I will not ! but what 
 make you tremble so when we be at the barrier ? and how pale you 
 be , Sue ! " 
 " I see Richard amongst the people on the other side . " 
 " ah - do you ! " 
 " he be evidently come up to Jerusalem to see the festival like the 
 rest of we : and on that account be probably live not so very far 
 away . he have the same hankering for the university that you have , in 
 a milder form . I do not   think he see I , though he must have hear 
 you speak to the crowd . but he seem not to notice . " 
 " well - suppose he do . your mind be free from worry about he now , 
 my Sue ? " 
 " yes , I suppose so . but I be weak . although I know it be all right 
 with our plan , I feel a curious dread of he ; an awe , or terror , of 
 convention I do not   believe in . it come over I at time like a 
 sort of creep paralysis , and make I so sad ! " 
 " you be get tired , Sue . oh - I forgot , darling ! yes , we will go 
 on at once . " 
 they start in quest of the lodging , and at last find something 
 that seem to promise well , in Mildew Lane - a spot which to Jude be 
 irresistible - though to Sue it be not so fascinating - a narrow lane 
 close to the back of a college , but have no communication with 
 it . the little house be darken to gloom by the high collegiate 
 building , within which life be so far remove from that of the 
 people in the lane as if it have be on opposite side of the globe ; 
 yet only a thickness of wall divide they . two or three of the 
 house have notice of room to let , and the newcomer knock at the 
 door of one , which a woman open . 
 " ah - listen ! " say Jude suddenly , instead of address she . 
 " what ? " 
 " why the bell - what church can that be ? the tone be familiar . " 
 another peal of bell have begin to sound out at some distance off . 
 " I do not   know ! " say the landlady tartly . " do you knock to ask 
 that ? " 
 " no ; for lodging , " say Jude , come to himself . 
 the householder scrutinize Sue 's figure a moment . " we have not   any 
 to let , " say she , shut the door . 
 Jude look discomfited , and the boy distress . " now , Jude , " say 
 Sue , " let I try . you do not   know the way . " 
 they find a second place hard by ; but here the occupier , observe 
 not only Sue , but the boy and the small child , say civilly , " I be 
 sorry to say we do not   let where there be child " ; and also close 
 the door . 
 the small child square its mouth and cry silently , with an 
 instinct that trouble loom . the boy sigh . " I do not   like 
 Christminster ! " he say . " be the great old house gaol ? " 
 " no ; college , " say Jude ; " which perhaps you will study in some day . " 
 " I would rather not ! " the boy rejoin . 
 " now we will try again , " say Sue . " I will pull my cloak more round 
 I ... leave Kennetbridge for this place be like come from 
 Caiaphas to Pilate ! ... how do I look now , dear ? " 
 " nobody would notice it now , " say Jude . 
 there be one other house , and they try a third time . the woman 
 here be more amiable ; but she have little room to spare , and could 
 only agree to take in Sue and the child if her husband could go 
 elsewhere . this arrangement they perforce adopt , in the stress 
 from delay their search till so late . they come to term with 
 she , though her price be rather high for their pocket . but they 
 could not afford to be critical till Jude have time to get a more 
 permanent abode ; and in this house Sue take possession of a back room 
 on the second floor with an inner closet - room for the child . Jude 
 stay and have a cup of tea ; and be pleased to find that the window 
 command the back of another of the college . kiss all four he 
 go to get a few necessary and look for lodging for himself . 
 when he be go the landlady come up to talk a little with Sue , and 
 gather something of the circumstance of the family she have take in . 
 Sue have not the art of prevarication , and , after admit several 
 fact as to their late difficulty and wandering , she be startle 
 by the landlady say suddenly : 
 " be you really a married woman ? " 
 Sue hesitate ; and then impulsively tell the woman that her husband 
 and herself have each be unhappy in their first marriage , after 
 which , terrify at the thought of a second irrevocable union , and 
 lest the condition of the contract should kill their love , yet 
 wish to be together , they have literally not find the courage 
 to repeat it , though they have attempt it two or three time . 
 therefore , though in her own sense of the word she be a married 
 woman , in the landlady 's sense she be not . 
 the housewife look embarrassed , and go downstairs . Sue sit by 
 the window in a reverie , watch the rain . her quiet be break by 
 the noise of someone enter the house , and then the voice of a 
 man and woman in conversation in the passage below . the landlady 's 
 husband have arrive , and she be explain to he the incoming of 
 the lodger during his absence . 
 his voice rise in sudden anger . " now who want such a woman here ? 
 and perhaps a confinement ! ... besides , do not   I say I would not   have 
 child ? the hall and stair fresh paint , to be kick about by 
 they ! you must have know all be not straight with them - come like 
 that . take in a family when I say a single man . " 
 the wife expostulate , but , as it seem , the husband insist on 
 his point ; for presently a tap come to Sue 's door , and the woman 
 appear . 
 " I be sorry to tell you , ma'am , " she say , " that I can not   let you have 
 the room for the week after all . my husband object ; and therefore 
 I must ask you to go . I do not   mind your stay over to - night , as 
 it be get late in the afternoon ; but I shall be glad if you can 
 leave early in the morning . " 
 though she know that she be entitle to the lodging for a week , Sue 
 do not wish to create a disturbance between the wife and husband , 
 and she say she would leave as request . when the landlady have 
 go Sue look out of the window again . find that the rain have 
 cease she propose to the boy that , after put the little one 
 to bed , they should go out and search about for another place , and 
 bespeak it for the morrow , so as not to be so hard - driven then as 
 they have be that day . 
 therefore , instead of unpack her box , which have just be send 
 on from the station by Jude , they sally out into the damp though 
 not unpleasant street , Sue resolve not to disturb her husband 
 with the news of her notice to quit while he be perhaps worried 
 in obtain a lodging for himself . in the company of the boy she 
 wander into this street and into that ; but though she try a dozen 
 different house she fare far worse alone than she have fare in 
 Jude 's company , and could get nobody to promise she a room for the 
 follow day . every householder look askance at such a woman and 
 child inquire for accommodation in the gloom . 
 " I ought not to be bear , ought I ? " say the boy with misgiving . 
 thoroughly tired at last Sue return to the place where she be 
 not welcome , but where at least she have temporary shelter . in her 
 absence Jude have leave his address ; but know how weak he still be 
 she adhere to her determination not to disturb he till the next 
 day . 
 II 
 Sue sit look at the bare floor of the room , the house be little 
 more than an old intramural cottage , and then she regard the scene 
 outside the uncurtained window . at some distance opposite , the outer 
 wall of Sarcophagus College - silent , black , and windowless - throw 
 their four century of gloom , bigotry , and decay into the little 
 room she occupy , shut out the moonlight by night and the sun by 
 day . the outline of Rubric College also be discernible beyond the 
 other , and the tower of a third far off still . she think of 
 the strange operation of a simple - minded man 's rule passion , that 
 it should have lead Jude , who love she and the child so tenderly , 
 to place they here in this depressing purlieu , because he be still 
 haunt by his dream . even now he do not distinctly hear the 
 freeze negative that those scholare wall have echo to his 
 desire . 
 the failure to find another lodging , and the lack of room in this 
 house for his father , have make a deep impression on the boy - a 
 brood undemonstrative horror seem to have seize he . the 
 silence be break by his saying : " Mother , what shall we do 
 to - morrow ! " 
 " I do not   know ! " say Sue despondently . " I be afraid this will 
 trouble your father . " 
 " I wish Father be quite well , and there have be room for he ! 
 then it would not   matter so much ! Poor Father ! " 
 " it would not ! " 
 " can I do anything ? " 
 " no ! all be trouble , adversity , and suffering ! " 
 " Father go away to give we child room , do not   he ? " 
 " partly . " 
 " it would be well to be out o ' the world than in it , would not   it ? " 
 " it would almost , dear . " 
 " ' tis because of we child , too , be not   it , that you can not   get a 
 good lodging ? " 
 " well - people do object to child sometimes . " 
 " then if child make so much trouble , why do people have them ? " 
 " oh - because it be a law of nature . " 
 " but we do not   ask to be bear ? " 
 " no indeed . " 
 " and what make it bad with I be that you be not my real mother , 
 and you need not   have have I unless you like . I ought not   to have 
 come to ' ee - that be the real truth ! I trouble them in Australia , 
 and I trouble folk here . I wish I have not   be bear ! " 
 " you could not   help it , my dear . " 
 " I think that whenever child be bear that be not want they 
 should be kill directly , before their soul come to them , and not 
 allow to grow big and walk about ! " 
 Sue do not reply . she be doubtfully ponder how to treat this 
 too reflective child . 
 she at last conclude that , so far as circumstance permit , she 
 would be honest and candid with one who enter into her difficulty 
 like an aged friend . 
 " there be go to be another in our family soon , " she hesitatingly 
 remark . 
 " how ? " 
 " there be go to be another baby . " 
 " what ! " the boy jump up wildly . " oh God , Mother , you have   never 
 a - send for another ; and such trouble with what you have   get ! " 
 " yes , I have , I be sorry to say ! " murmur Sue , her eye glisten 
 with suspend tear . 
 the boy burst out weeping . " oh you do not   care , you do not   care ! " he 
 cry in bitter reproach . " how ever could you , Mother , be so wicked 
 and cruel as this , when you need not   have do it till we be well 
 off , and Father well ! to bring we all into MORE trouble ! no room 
 for we , and Father a - force to go away , and we turn out to - morrow ; 
 and yet you be go to have another of we soon ! ... ' tis do o ' 
 purpose ! - ' tis - ' tis ! " he walk up and down sob . 
 " Y - you must forgive I , little Jude ! " she plead , her bosom heaving 
 now as much as the boy 's . " I can not   explain - I will when you be 
 old . it do seem - as if I have do it on purpose , now we be in 
 these difficulty ! I can not   explain , dear ! but it - be not quite on 
 purpose - I can not   help it ! " 
 " yes it be - it must be ! for nobody would interfere with we , like 
 that , unless you agree ! I will not   forgive you , ever , ever ! I will 
 never believe you care for I , or Father , or any of we any more ! " 
 he get up , and go away into the closet adjoin her room , in which 
 a bed have be spread on the floor . there she hear he say : " if we 
 child be go there would be no trouble at all ! " 
 " do not   think that , dear , " she cry , rather peremptorily . " but go to 
 sleep ! " 
 the follow morning she awake at a little past six , and decide 
 to get up and run across before breakfast to the inn which Jude have 
 inform she to be his quarter , to tell he what have happen before 
 he go out . she arise softly , to avoid disturb the child , 
 who , as she know , must be fatigue by their exertion of yesterday . 
 she find Jude at breakfast in the obscure tavern he have choose as a 
 counterpoise to the expense of her lodge : and she explain to he 
 her homelessness . he have be so anxious about she all night , he 
 say . somehow , now it be morning , the request to leave the lodging 
 do not seem such a depressing incident as it have seem the night 
 before , nor do even her failure to find another place affect she so 
 deeply as at first . Jude agree with she that it would not be worth 
 while to insist upon her right to stay a week , but to take immediate 
 step for removal . 
 " you must all come to this inn for a day or two , " he say . " it be 
 a rough place , and it will not be so nice for the child , but we 
 shall have more time to look round . there be plenty of lodging in 
 the suburb - in my old quarter of Beersheba . have breakfast with I 
 now you be here , my bird . you be sure you be well ? there will 
 be plenty of time to get back and prepare the child 's meal before 
 they wake . in fact , I will go with you . " 
 she join Jude in a hasty meal , and in a quarter of an hour they 
 start together , resolve to clear out from Sue 's too respectable 
 lodge immediately . on reach the place and go upstairs she 
 find that all be quiet in the child 's room , and call to the 
 landlady in timorous tone to please bring up the tea - kettle and 
 something for their breakfast . this be perfunctorily do , and 
 produce a couple of egg which she have bring with she she put 
 they into the boiling kettle , and summon Jude to watch they for the 
 youngster , while she go to call they , it be now about half - past 
 eight o'clock . 
 Jude stand bend over the kettle , with his watch in his hand , 
 time the egg , so that his back be turn to the little inner 
 chamber where the child lay . a shriek from Sue suddenly cause 
 he to start round . he see that the door of the room , or rather 
 closet - which have seem to go heavily upon its hinge as she push 
 it back - be open , and that Sue have sink to the floor just within it . 
 hasten forward to pick she up he turn his eye to the little 
 bed spread on the board ; no child be there . he look in 
 bewilderment round the room . at the back of the door be fix 
 two hook for hang garment , and from these the form of the two 
 young child be suspend , by a piece of box - cord round each 
 of their neck , while from a nail a few yard off the body of little 
 Jude be hang in a similar manner . an overturned chair be near 
 the eld boy , and his glazed eye be slant into the room ; but 
 those of the girl and the baby boy be close . 
 half - paralyze by the strange and consummate horror of the scene he 
 let Sue lie , cut the cord with his pocket - knife and throw the three 
 child on the bed ; but the feel of their body in the momentary 
 handling seem to say that they be dead . he catch up Sue , who 
 be in fainting fit , and put she on the bed in the other room , after 
 which he breathlessly summon the landlady and run out for a doctor . 
 when he get back Sue have come to herself , and the two helpless 
 woman , bend over the child in wild effort to restore they , 
 and the triplet of little corps , form a sight which overthrow 
 his self - command . the near surgeon come in , but , as Jude have 
 infer , his presence be superfluous . the child be past 
 saving , for though their body be still barely cold it be 
 conjecture that they have be hang more than an hour . the 
 probability hold by the parent later on , when they be able to 
 reason on the case , be that the eld boy , on wake , look into 
 the outer room for Sue , and , find her absent , be throw into a 
 fit of aggravated despondency that the event and information of the 
 evening before have induce in his morbid temperament . moreover a 
 piece of paper be find upon the floor , on which be write , in 
 the boy 's hand , with the bit of lead pencil that he carry : 
  do because we be too menny . 
 at sight of this Sue 's nerve utterly give way , an awful conviction 
 that her discourse with the boy have be the main cause of the 
 tragedy , throw she into a convulsive agony which know no 
 abatement . they carry she away against her wish to a room on the 
 low floor ; and there she lay , her slight figure shake with she 
 gasp , and her eye star at the ceiling , the woman of the house 
 vainly try to soothe she . 
 they could hear from this chamber the people move about above , and 
 she implore to be allow to go back , and be only keep from do 
 so by the assurance that , if there be any hope , her presence might 
 do harm , and the reminder that it be necessary to take care of 
 herself lest she should endanger a come life . her inquiry be 
 incessant , and at last Jude come down and tell she there be no hope . 
 as soon as she could speak she inform he what she have say to the 
 boy , and how she think herself the cause of this . 
 " no , " say Jude . " it be in his nature to do it . the doctor say 
 there be such boy spring up amongst us - boy of a sort unknown 
 in the last generation - the outcome of new view of life . they seem 
 to see all its terror before they be old enough to have stay 
 power to resist they . he say it be the beginning of the come 
 universal wish not to live . he be an advanced man , the doctor : but 
 he can give no consolation to - " 
 Jude have keep back his own grief on account of she ; but he now 
 break down ; and this stimulate Sue to effort of sympathy which in 
 some degree distract she from her poignant self - reproach . when 
 everybody be go , she be allow to see the child . 
 the boy 's face express the whole tale of their situation . on 
 that little shape have converge all the inauspiciousness and shadow 
 which have darken the first union of Jude , and all the accident , 
 mistake , fear , error of the last . he be their nodal point , their 
 focus , their expression in a single term . for the rashness of those 
 parent he have groan , for their ill assortment he have quake , and 
 for the misfortune of these he have die . 
 when the house be silent , and they could do nothing but await the 
 coroner 's inquest , a subdue , large , low voice spread into the air of 
 the room from behind the heavy wall at the back . 
 " what be it ? " say Sue , her spasmodic breathing suspend . 
 " the organ of the college chapel . the organist practising I suppose . 
 it be the anthem from the seventy - third Psalm ; ' truly God be love 
 unto Israel . ' " 
 she sob again . " oh , oh my baby ! they have do no harm ! why 
 should they have be take away , and not I ! " 
 there be another stillness - break at last by two person in 
 conversation somewhere without . 
 " they be talk about we , no doubt ! " moan Sue . " ' we be make a 
 spectacle unto the world , and to angel , and to man ! ' " 
 Jude listen - " no - they be not talk of we , " he say . " they 
 be two clergyman of different view , argue about the eastward 
 position . good God - the eastward position , and all creation 
 groaning ! " 
 then another silence , till she be seize with another uncontrollable 
 fit of grief . " there be something external to we which say , ' you 
 shall not ! ' first it say , ' you shall not   learn ! ' then it say , ' you 
 shall not   labour ! ' now it say , ' you shall not   love ! ' " 
 he try to soothe she by say , " that be bitter of you , darling . " 
 " but it be true ! " 
 thus they wait , and she go back again to her room . the baby 's 
 frock , shoe , and sock , which have be lie on a chair at the time 
 of his death , she would not now have remove , though Jude would fain 
 have get they out of her sight . but whenever he touch they she 
 implore he to let they lie , and burst out almost savagely at the 
 woman of the house when she also attempt to put they away . 
 Jude dread her dull apathetic silence almost more than her 
 paroxysm . " why do not   you speak to I , Jude ? " she cry out , after 
 one of these . " do not   turn away from I ! I can not   bear the loneliness 
 of be out of your look ! " 
 " there , dear ; here I be , " he say , put his face close to her . 
 " yes ... oh , my comrade , our perfect union - our two - in - oneness - be 
 now stain with blood ! " 
 " shadow by death - that be all . " 
 " ah ; but it be I who incite he really , though I do not   know I be 
 do it ! I talk to the child as one should only talk to people of 
 mature age . I say the world be against we , that it be well to 
 be out of life than in it at this price ; and he take it literally . 
 and I tell he I be go to have another child . it upset he . oh 
 how bitterly he upbraid I ! " 
 " why do you do it , Sue ? " 
 " I can not   tell . it be that I want to be truthful . I could not 
 bear deceive he as to the fact of life . and yet I be not 
 truthful , for with a false delicacy I tell he too obscurely . - why 
 be I half - wise than my fellow - woman ? and not entirely wiser ! why 
 do not   I tell he pleasant untruth , instead of half - reality ? it 
 be my want of self - control , so that I could neither conceal thing 
 nor reveal they ! " 
 " your plan might have be a good one for the majority of case ; only 
 in our peculiar case it chance to work badly perhaps . he must have 
 know soon or later . " 
 " and I be just make my baby darle a new frock ; and now I shall 
 never see he in it , and never talk to he any more ! ... my eye be 
 so swollen that I can scarcely see ; and yet little more than a year 
 ago I call myself happy ! we go about love each other too 
 much - indulge ourselves to utter selfishness with each other ! we 
 say - do you remember ? - that we would make a virtue of joy . I say 
 it be Nature 's intention , Nature 's law and raison d'etre that we 
 should be joyful in what instinct she afford we - instinct which 
 civilization have take upon itself to thwart . what dreadful thing I 
 say ! and now Fate have give we this stab in the back for be such 
 fool as to take Nature at her word ! " 
 she sink into a quiet contemplation , till she say , " it be good , 
 perhaps , that they should be go . - yes - I see it be ! well that 
 they should be pluck fresh than stay to wither away miserably ! " 
 " yes , " reply Jude . " some say that the elder should rejoice when 
 their child die in infancy . " 
 " but they do not   know ! ... oh my baby , my baby , could you be 
 alive now ! you may say the boy wish to be out of life , or he 
 would not   have do it . it be not unreasonable for he to die : it 
 be part of his incurably sad nature , poor little fellow ! but then 
 the other - my own child and your ! " 
 again Sue look at the hang little frock and at the sock and 
 shoe ; and her figure quiver like a string . " I be a pitiable 
 creature , " she say , " good neither for earth nor heaven any more ! 
 I be drive out of my mind by thing ! what ought to be do ? " 
 she star at Jude , and tightly hold his hand . 
 " nothing can be do , " he reply . " thing be as they be , and will 
 be bring to their destine issue . " 
 she pause . " yes ! who say that ? " she ask heavily . 
 " it come in the chorus of the Agamemnon . it have be in my mind 
 continually since this happen . " 
 " my poor Jude - how you have   miss everything ! - you more than I , for 
 I do get you ! to think you should know that by your unassisted 
 reading , and yet be in poverty and despair ! " 
 after such momentary diversion her grief would return in a wave . 
 the jury duly come and view the body , the inquest be hold ; and 
 next arrive the melancholy morning of the funeral . account in 
 the newspaper have bring to the spot curious idler , who stand 
 apparently count the window - pane and the stone of the wall . 
 doubt of the real relation of the couple add zest to their 
 curiosity . Sue have declare that she would follow the two little 
 one to the grave , but at the last moment she give way , and the 
 coffin be quietly carry out of the house while she be lie 
 down . Jude get into the vehicle , and it drive away , much to the 
 relief of the landlord , who now have only Sue and her luggage 
 remain on his hand , which he hop to be also clear of later on 
 in the day , and so to have free his house from the exasperating 
 notoriety it have acquire during the week through his wife 's unlucky 
 admission of these stranger . in the afternoon he privately 
 consult with the owner of the house , and they agree that if any 
 objection to it arise from the tragedy which have occur there they 
 would try to get its number change . 
 when Jude have see the two little box - one contain little Jude , 
 and the other the two smallest - deposited in the earth he hasten 
 back to Sue , who be still in her room , and he therefore do not 
 disturb she just then . feel anxious , however , he go again 
 about four o'clock . the woman think she be still lie down , but 
 return to he to say that she be not in her bedroom after all . 
 her hat and jacket , too , be miss : she have go out . Jude 
 hurry off to the public house where he be sleep . she have not 
 be there . then bethink himself of possibility he go along 
 the road to the cemetery , which he enter , and cross to where the 
 interment have recently take place . the idler who have follow to 
 the spot by reason of the tragedy be all go now . a man with a 
 shovel in his hand be attempt to earth in the common grave of 
 the three child , but his arm be hold back by an expostulate 
 woman who stand in the half - fill hole . it be Sue , whose colour 
 clothing , which she have never think of change for the mourning he 
 have buy , suggest to the eye a deep grief than the conventional 
 garb of bereavement could express . 
 " he be fill they in , and he shall not   till I have   see my little one 
 again ! " she cry wildly when she see Jude . " I want to see they once 
 more . oh Jude - please Jude - I want to see they ! I do not   know you 
 would let they be take away while I be asleep ! you say perhaps I 
 should see they once more before they be screw down ; and then you 
 do not , but take they away ! oh Jude , you be cruel to I too ! " 
 " she be be want I to dig out the grave again , and let she get 
 to the coffin , " say the man with the spade . " she ought to be take 
 home , by the look o ' she . she be hardly responsible , poor thing , 
 seemingly . can not   dig them up again now , ma'am . do ye go home with 
 your husband , and take it quiet , and thank God that there will be 
 another soon to swage yer grief . " 
 but Sue keep ask piteously : " can not   I see they once more - just 
 once ! can not   I ? only just one little minute , Jude ? it would not 
 take long ! and I should be so glad , Jude ! I will be so good , and 
 not disobey you ever any more , Jude , if you will let I ? I would go 
 home quietly afterwards , and not want to see they any more ! can not   I ? 
 why can not   I ? " 
 thus she go on . Jude be throw into such acute sorrow that he 
 almost feel he would try to get the man to accede . but it could 
 do no good , and might make she still bad ; and he see that it 
 be imperative to get her home at once . so he coax she , and 
 whisper tenderly , and put his arm round she to support she ; till 
 she helplessly give in , and be induce to leave the cemetery . 
 he wish to obtain a fly to take she back in , but economy be so 
 imperative she deprecate his do so , and they walk along slowly , 
 Jude in black crape , she in brown and red clothing . they be to 
 have go to a new lodging that afternoon , but Jude see that it be 
 not practicable , and in course of time they enter the now hat 
 house . Sue be at once get to bed , and the doctor send for . 
 Jude wait all the evening downstairs . at a very late hour the 
 intelligence be bring to he that a child have be prematurely 
 bear , and that it , like the other , be a corpse . 
 III 
 Sue be convalescent , though she have hop for death , and Jude have 
 again obtain work at his old trade . they be in other lodging 
 now , in the direction of Beersheba , and not far from the Church of 
 Ceremonies - Saint Silas . 
 they would sit silent , more bodeful of the direct antagonism of 
 thing than of their insensate and stolid obstructiveness . vague 
 and quaint imagining have haunt Sue in the day when her intellect 
 scintillate like a star , that the world resemble a stanza or melody 
 compose in a dream ; it be wonderfully excellent to the half - arouse 
 intelligence , but hopelessly absurd at the full waking ; that the 
 first cause work automatically like a somnambulist , and not 
 reflectively like a sage ; that at the framing of the terrestrial 
 condition there seem never to have be contemplate such 
 a development of emotional perceptiveness among the creature 
 subject to those condition as that reach by think and 
 educate humanity . but affliction make oppose force loom 
 anthropomorphous ; and those idea be now exchange for a sense of 
 Jude and herself flee from a persecutor . 
 " we must conform ! " she say mournfully . " all the ancient wrath of 
 the Power above we have be vent upon we , his poor creature , and 
 we must submit . there be no choice . we must . it be no use fight 
 against God ! " 
 " it be only against man and senseless circumstance , " say Jude . 
 " true ! " she murmur . " what have I be think of ! I be get 
 as superstitious as a savage ! ... but whoever or whatever our foe 
 may be , I be cow into submission . I have no more fighting strength 
 left ; no more enterprise . I be beat , beat ! ... ' we be make a 
 spectacle unto the world , and to angel , and to man ! ' I be always 
 say that now . " 
 " I feel the same ! " 
 " what shall we do ? you be in work now ; but remember , it may 
 only be because our history and relation be not absolutely 
 know ... possibly , if they know our marriage have not be formalize they 
 would turn you out of your job as they do at Aldbrickham ! " 
 " I hardly know . perhaps they would hardly do that . however , I think 
 that we ought to make it legal now - as soon as you be able to go 
 out . " 
 " you think we ought ? " 
 " certainly . " 
 and Jude fall into thought . " I have seem to myself lately , " 
 he say , " to belong to that vast band of man shun by the 
 virtuous - the man call seducer . it amaze I when I think of it ! 
 I have not be conscious of it , or of any wrongdoing towards you , 
 whom I love more than myself . yet I be one of those man ! I wonder 
 if any other of they be the same purblind , simple creature as 
 I ? ... yes , Sue - that be what I be . I seduce you ... you be a 
 distinct type - a refined creature , intend by Nature to be leave 
 intact . but I could not   leave you alone ! " 
 " no , no , Jude ! " she say quickly . " do not   reproach yourself with 
 be what you be not . if anybody be to blame it be I. " 
 " I support you in your resolve to leave Phillotson ; and without I 
 perhaps you would not   have urge he to let you go . " 
 " I should have , just the same . as to ourselves , the fact of our not 
 have enter into a legal contract be the save feature in our 
 union . we have thereby avoid insulting , as it be , the solemnity 
 of our first marriage . " 
 " solemnity ? " Jude look at she with some surprise , and grow 
 conscious that she be not the Sue of their early time . 
 " yes , " she say , with a little quiver in her word , " I have have 
 dreadful fear , a dreadful sense of my own insolence of action . 
 I have think - that I be still his wife ! " 
 " Whose ? " 
 " Richard 's . " 
 " Good God , dearest ! - why ? " 
 " oh I can not   explain ! only the thought come to I . " 
 " it be your weakness - a sick fancy , without reason or meaning ! 
 do not   let it trouble you . " 
 Sue sigh uneasily . 
 as a set - off against such discussion as these there have come 
 an improvement in their pecuniary position , which early in 
 their experience would have make they cheerful . Jude have quite 
 unexpectedly find good employment at his old trade almost directly 
 he arrive , the summer weather suit his fragile constitution ; and 
 outwardly his day go on with that monotonous uniformity which 
 be in itself so grateful after vicissitude . People seem to have 
 forget that he have ever show any awkward aberrancy : and he 
 daily mount to the parapet and coping of college he could never 
 enter , and renew the crumble freestone of mullione window he 
 would never look from , as if he have know no wish to do otherwise . 
 there be this change in he ; that he do not often go to any service 
 at the church now . one thing trouble he more than any other ; 
 that Sue and himself have mentally travel in opposite direction 
 since the tragedy : event which have enlarge his own view of life , 
 law , custom , and dogma , have not operate in the same manner on 
 Sue 's . she be no long the same as in the independent day , when 
 her intellect play like lambent lightning over convention and 
 formality which he at that time respect , though he do not now . 
 on a particular Sunday evening he come in rather late . she be 
 not at home , but she soon return , when he find her silent and 
 meditative . 
 " what be you think of , little woman ? " he ask curiously . 
 " oh I can not   tell clearly ! I have think that we have be selfish , 
 careless , even impious , in our course , you and i. our life have be 
 a vain attempt at self - delight . but self - abnegation be the high 
 road . we should mortify the flesh - the terrible flesh - the curse of 
 Adam ! " 
 " Sue ! " he murmur . " what have come over you ? " 
 " we ought to be continually sacrifice ourselves on the altar of 
 duty ! but I have always strive to do what have please I . I well 
 deserve the scourging I have get ! I wish something would take the 
 evil right out of I , and all my monstrous error , and all my sinful 
 way ! " 
 " Sue - my own too suffer dear ! - there be no evil woman in you . your 
 natural instinct be perfectly healthy ; not quite so impassioned , 
 perhaps , as I could wish ; but good , and dear , and pure . and as I 
 have often say , you be absolutely the most ethereal , least sensual 
 woman I ever know to exist without inhuman sexlessness . why do you 
 talk in such a change way ? we have not be selfish , except when no 
 one could profit by our be otherwise . you use to say that human 
 nature be noble and long - suffering , not vile and corrupt , and at 
 last I think you speak truly . and now you seem to take such a much 
 low view ! " 
 " I want a humble heart ; and a chastened mind ; and I have never have 
 they yet ! " 
 " you have be fearless , both as a thinker and as a feeler , and you 
 deserve more admiration than I give . I be too full of narrow 
 dogma at that time to see it . " 
 " do not   say that , Jude ! I wish my every fearless word and thought 
 could be root out of my history . self - renunciation - that be 
 everything ! I can not humiliate myself too much . I should like to 
 prick myself all over with pin and blee out the badness that be in 
 I ! " 
 " hush ! " he say , press her little face against his breast as if 
 she be an infant . " it be bereavement that have bring you to this ! 
 such remorse be not for you , my sensitive plant , but for the wicked 
 one of the earth - who never feel it ! " 
 " I ought not to stay like this , " she murmur , when she have remain 
 in the position a long while . 
 " why not ? " 
 " it be indulgence . " 
 " still on the same tack ! but be there anything well on earth than 
 that we should love one another ? " 
 " yes . it depend on the sort of love ; and yours - ours - be the 
 wrong . " 
 " I will not   have it , Sue ! Come , when do you wish our marriage to be 
 sign in a vestry ? " 
 she pause , and look up uneasily . " never , " she whisper . 
 not know the whole of she meaning he take the objection serenely , 
 and say nothing . several minute elapse , and he think she have 
 fall asleep ; but he speak softly , and find that she be wide awake 
 all the time . she sit upright and sigh . 
 " there be a strange , indescribable perfume or atmosphere about you 
 to - night , Sue , " he say . " I mean not only mentally , but about your 
 clothe , also . a sort of vegetable scent , which I seem to know , yet 
 can not remember . " 
 " it be incense . " 
 " incense ? " 
 " I have be to the service at St. Silas ' , and I be in the fume of 
 it . " 
 " oh - St. Silas . " 
 " yes . I go there sometimes . " 
 " indeed . you go there ! " 
 " you see , Jude , it be lonely here in the weekday morning , when you 
 be at work , and I think and think of - of my - " she stop till she 
 could control the lumpiness of her throat . " and I have take to go 
 in there , as it be so near . " 
 " oh well - of course , I say nothing against it . only it be odd , for 
 you . they little think what sort of chiel be amang they ! " 
 " what do you mean , Jude ? " 
 " well - a sceptic , to be plain . " 
 " how can you pain I so , dear Jude , in my trouble ! yet I know you 
 do not   mean it . but you ought not to say that . " 
 " I will not . but I be much surprised ! " 
 " well - I want to tell you something else , Jude . you will not   be angry , 
 will you ? I have think of it a good deal since my baby die . 
 I do not   think I ought to be your wife - or as your wife - any long . " 
 " what ? ... but you be ! " 
 " from your point of view ; but - " 
 " of course we be afraid of the ceremony , and a good many other 
 would have be in our place , with such strong reason for fear . 
 but experience have prove how we misjudge ourselves , and overrate 
 our infirmity ; and if you be begin to respect rite and 
 ceremony , as you seem to be , I wonder you do not   say it shall be 
 carry out instantly ? you certainly be my wife , Sue , in all but 
 law . what do you mean by what you say ? " 
 " I do not   think I be ! " 
 " not ? but suppose we had go through the ceremony ? would you feel 
 that you be then ? " 
 " no . I should not feel even then that I be . I should feel bad 
 than I do now . " 
 " why so - in the name of all that be perverse , my dear ? " 
 " because I be Richard 's . " 
 " ah - you hint that absurd fancy to I before ! " 
 " it be only an impression with I then ; I feel more and more 
 convince as time go on that - I belong to he , or to nobody . " 
 " my good heaven - how we be change place ! " 
 " yes . perhaps so . " 
 some few day later , in the dusk of the summer evening , they be 
 sit in the same small room downstairs , when a knock come to the 
 front door of the carpenter 's house where they be lodge , and in a 
 few moment there be a tap at the door of their room . before they 
 could open it the comer do so , and a woman 's form appear . 
 " be Mr. Fawley here ? " 
 Jude and Sue start as he mechanically reply in the affirmative , 
 for the voice be Arabella 's . 
 he formally request she to come in , and she sit down in the window 
 bench , where they could distinctly see her outline against the light ; 
 but no characteristic that enable they to estimate her general 
 aspect and air . yet something seem to denote that she be not 
 quite so comfortably circumstanced , nor so bouncingly attire , as she 
 have be during Cartlett 's lifetime . 
 the three attempt an awkward conversation about the tragedy , of 
 which Jude have feel it to be his duty to inform she immediately , 
 though she have never reply to his letter . 
 " I have just come from the cemetery , " she say . " I inquire and 
 find the child 's grave . I could not   come to the funeral - thank you 
 for invite I all the same . I read all about it in the paper , 
 and I feel I be not   want ... no - I could not   come to the funeral , " 
 repeat Arabella , who , seem utterly unable to reach the ideal of 
 a catastrophic manner , fumble with iteration . " but I be glad I 
 find the grave . as ' tis your trade , Jude , you will be able to put up 
 a handsome stone to them . " 
 " I shall put up a headstone , " say Jude drearily . 
 " he be my child , and naturally I feel for he . " 
 " I hope so . we all do . " 
 " the other that be not   mine I do not   feel so much for , as be 
 natural . " 
 " of course . " 
 a sigh come from the dark corner where Sue sit . 
 " I have often wish I have mine with I , " continue Mrs. Cartlett . 
 " perhaps ' twouldn't   have happen then ! but of course I do not   wish 
 to take he away from your wife . " 
 " I be not his wife , " come from Sue . 
 the unexpectedness of her word strike Jude silent . 
 " oh , I beg your pardon , I be sure , " say Arabella . " I think you 
 be ! " 
 Jude have know from the quality of Sue 's tone that her new and 
 transcendental view lurk in her word ; but all except their 
 obvious meaning be , naturally , miss by Arabella . the latter , 
 after evince that she be strike by Sue 's avowal , recover 
 herself , and go on to talk with placid bluntness about " her " boy , 
 for whom , though in his lifetime she have show no care at all , 
 she now exhibit a ceremonial mournfulness that be apparently 
 sustain to the conscience . she allude to the past , and in make 
 some remark appeal again to Sue . there be no answer : Sue have 
 invisibly leave the room . 
 " she say she be not your wife ? " resume Arabella in another voice . 
 " why should she do that ? " 
 " I can not inform you , " say Jude shortly . 
 " she be , be not   she ? she once tell I so . " 
 " I do not   criticize what she say . " 
 " ah - I see ! well , my time be up . I be stay here to - night , and 
 think I could do no less than call , after our mutual affliction . 
 I be sleep at the place where I use to be barmaid , and to - morrow 
 I go back to Alfredston . Father be come home again , and I be live 
 with he . " 
 " he have return from Australia ? " say Jude with languid curiosity . 
 " yes . could not   get on there . have a rough time of it . Mother die 
 of dys - what do you call it - in the hot weather , and Father and two 
 of the young one have just get back . he have get a cottage near the 
 old place , and for the present I be keep house for he . " 
 Jude 's former wife have maintain a stereotyped manner of strict good 
 breeding even now that Sue be go , and limit her stay to a number 
 of minute that should accord with the high respectability . when 
 she have depart Jude , much relieved , go to the stair and call 
 Sue - feeling anxious as to what have become of she . 
 there be no answer , and the carpenter who keep the lodging say she 
 have not come in . Jude be puzzle , and become quite alarmed at her 
 absence , for the hour be grow late . the carpenter call his 
 wife , who conjecture that Sue might have go to St. Silas ' church , 
 as she often go there . 
 " surely not at this time o ' night ? " say Jude . " it be shut . " 
 " she know somebody who keep the key , and she have it whenever she 
 want it . " 
 " how long have she be go on with this ? " 
 " oh , some few week , I think . " 
 Jude go vaguely in the direction of the church , which he have never 
 once approach since he live out that way year before , when his 
 young opinion be more mystical than they be now . the spot be 
 desert , but the door be certainly unfastened ; he lift the latch 
 without noise , and push to the door behind he , stand absolutely 
 still inside . the prevalent silence seem to contain a faint sound , 
 explicable as a breathing , or a sobbing , which come from the other 
 end of the building . the floor - cloth deaden his footstep as he 
 move in that direction through the obscurity , which be break only 
 by the faint reflect night - light from without . 
 high overhead , above the chancel step , Jude could discern a huge , 
 solidly construct Latin cross - as large , probably , as the original 
 it be design to commemorate . it seem to be suspend in the 
 air by invisible wire ; it be set with large jewel , which faintly 
 glimmer in some weak ray catch from outside , as the cross sway 
 to and fro in a silent and scarcely perceptible motion . underneath , 
 upon the floor , lie what appear to be a heap of black clothe , and 
 from this be repeat the sobbing that he have hear before . it be 
 his Sue 's form , prostrate on the paving . 
 " Sue ! " he whisper . 
 something white disclose itself ; she have turn up her face . 
 " what - do you want with I here , Jude ? " she say almost sharply . 
 " you should not   come ! I want to be alone ! why do you intrude 
 here ? " 
 " how can you ask ! " he retort in quick reproach , for his full heart 
 be wound to its centre at this attitude of hers towards he . 
 " why do I come ? who have a right to come , I should like to know , if 
 I have not ! I , who love you well than my own self - well - far 
 well - than you have love I ! what make you leave I to come here 
 alone ? " 
 " do not   criticize I , Jude - I can not   bear it ! - I have often tell 
 you so . you must take I as I be . I be a wretch - break by my 
 distraction ! I could not   bear it when Arabella come - I feel so 
 utterly miserable I have to come away . she seem to be your wife 
 still , and Richard to be my husband ! " 
 " but they be nothing to we ! " 
 " yes , dear friend , they be . I see marriage differently now . my 
 baby have be take from I to show I this ! Arabella 's child 
 killing mine be a judgement - the right slay the wrong . what , 
 what shall I do ! I be such a vile creature - too worthless to mix 
 with ordinary human being ! " 
 " this be terrible ! " say Jude , verge on tear . " it be monstrous 
 and unnatural for you to be so remorseful when you have do no 
 wrong ! " 
 " ah - you do not   know my badness ! " 
 he return vehemently : " I do ! every atom and dreg of it ! you make 
 I hate Christianity , or mysticism , or Sacerdotalism , or whatever it 
 may be call , if it be that which have cause this deterioration in 
 you . that a woman - poet , a woman - seer , a woman whose soul shine like 
 a diamond - whom all the wise of the world would have be proud of , 
 if they could have know you - should degrade herself like this ! I be 
 glad I have nothing to do with divinity - damn glad - if it be go to 
 ruin you in this way ! " 
 " you be angry , Jude , and unkind to I , and do not   see how thing 
 be . " 
 " then come along home with I , dearest , and perhaps I shall . I be 
 overburden - and you , too , be unhinge just now . " he put his arm 
 round she and lift she ; but though she come , she prefer to walk 
 without his support . 
 " I do not   dislike you , Jude , " she say in a sweet and implore voice . 
 " I love you as much as ever ! only - I ought not to love you - any 
 more . oh I must not any more ! " 
 " I can not   own it . " 
 " but I have make up my mind that I be not your wife ! I belong to 
 he - I sacramentally join myself to he for life . nothing can 
 alter it ! " 
 " but surely we be man and wife , if ever two people be in this 
 world ? nature 's own marriage it be , unquestionably ! " 
 " but not Heaven 's . another be make for I there , and ratify 
 eternally in the church at Melchester . " 
 " Sue , Sue - affliction have bring you to this unreasonable state ! 
 after convert I to your view on so many thing , to find you 
 suddenly turn to the right - about like this - for no reason whatever , 
 confound all you have formerly say through sentiment merely ! 
 you root out of I what little affection and reverence I have leave in 
 I for the Church as an old acquaintance ... what I can not   understand 
 in you be your extraordinary blindness now to your old logic . be it 
 peculiar to you , or be it common to woman ? be a woman a thinking 
 unit at all , or a fraction always want its integer ? how you 
 argue that marriage be only a clumsy contract - which it be - how you 
 show all the objection to it - all the absurdity ! if two and two 
 make four when we be happy together , surely they make four now ? I 
 can not   understand it , I repeat ! " 
 " ah , dear Jude ; that be because you be like a totally deaf man 
 observe people listen to music . you say ' what be they 
 regard ? nothing be there . ' but something be . " 
 " that be a hard saying from you ; and not a true parallel ! you throw 
 off old husk of prejudice , and teach I to do it ; and now you go 
 back upon yourself . I confess I be utterly stultify in my estimate 
 of you . " 
 " dear friend , my only friend , do not   be hard with I ! I can not   help 
 be as I be , I be convinced I be right - that I see the light at 
 last . but oh , how to profit by it ! " 
 they walk along a few more step till they be outside the 
 building and she have return the key . " can this be the girl , " say 
 Jude when she come back , feel a slight renewal of elasticity now 
 that he be in the open street ; " can this be the girl who bring 
 the pagan deitie into this most christian city ? - who mimic Miss 
 Fontover when she crush they with her heel ? - quote Gibbon , and 
 Shelley , and Mill ? where be dear Apollo , and dear Venus now ! " 
 " oh do not , do not   be so cruel to I , Jude , and I so unhappy ! " she 
 sob . " I can not   bear it ! I be in error - I can not reason with you . 
 I be wrong - proud in my own conceit ! Arabella 's come be the 
 finish . do not   satirize I : it cut like a knife ! " 
 he fling his arm round she and kiss she passionately there in the 
 silent street , before she could hinder he . they go on till they 
 come to a little coffee - house . " Jude , " she say with suppressed 
 tear , " would you mind get a lodging here ? " 
 " I will - if , if you really wish ? but do you ? let I go to our door 
 and understand you . " 
 he go and conduct she in . she say she want no supper , and 
 go in the dark upstairs and strike a light . turn she find that 
 Jude have follow she , and be stand at the chamber door . she 
 go to he , put her hand in his , and say " good - night . " 
 " but Sue ! do not   we live here ? " 
 " you say you would do as I wish ! " 
 " yes . very well ! ... perhaps it be wrong of I to argue 
 distastefully as I have do ! perhaps as we could not   conscientiously 
 marry at first in the old - fashioned way , we ought to have part . 
 perhaps the world be not illuminate enough for such experiment as 
 our ! who be we , to think we could act as pioneer ! " 
 " I be so glad you see that much , at any rate . I never deliberately 
 mean to do as I do . I slip into my false position through 
 jealousy and agitation ! " 
 " but surely through love - you love I ? " 
 " yes . but I want to let it stop there , and go on always as mere 
 lover ; until - " 
 " but people in love could not   live for ever like that ! " 
 " woman could : man can not , because they - will not . an average woman be 
 in this superior to an average man - that she never instigate , only 
 respond . we ought to have live in mental communion , and no more . " 
 " I be the unhappy cause of the change , as I have say 
 before ! ... well , as you will ! ... but human nature can not   help 
 be itself . " 
 " oh yes - that be just what it have to learn - self - mastery . " 
 " I repeat - if either be to blame it be not you but i. " 
 " no - it be i. your wickedness be only the natural man 's desire 
 to possess the woman . mine be not the reciprocal wish till envy 
 stimulate I to oust Arabella . I have think I ought in charity to 
 let you approach I - that it be damnably selfish to torture you as 
 I do my other friend . but I should not   have give way if you have not 
 break I down by make I fear you would go back to she ... but 
 do not   let we say any more about it ! Jude , will you leave I to 
 myself now ? " 
 " yes ... but Sue - my wife , as you be ! " he burst out ; " my old 
 reproach to you be , after all , a true one . you have never love I 
 as I love you - never - never ! your be not a passionate heart - your 
 heart do not burn in a flame ! you be , upon the whole , a sort of 
 fay , or sprite - not a woman ! " 
 " at first I do not love you , Jude ; that I own . when I first know 
 you I merely want you to love I . I do not exactly flirt with 
 you ; but that inborn craving which undermine some woman 's moral 
 almost more than unbridled passion - the craving to attract and 
 captivate , regardless of the injury it may do the man - be in I ; and 
 when I find I have catch you , I be frightened . and then - I do not 
 know how it be - I could not   bear to let you go - possibly to Arabella 
 again - and so I get to love you , Jude . but you see , however fondly 
 it end , it begin in the selfish and cruel wish to make your heart 
 ache for I without let mine ache for you . " 
 " and now you add to your cruelty by leave I ! " 
 " ah - yes ! the far I flounder , the more harm I do ! " 
 " o sue ! " say he with a sudden sense of his own danger . " do not 
 do an immoral thing for moral reason ! you have be my social 
 salvation . stay with I for humanity 's sake ! you know what a weak 
 fellow I be . my two arch - enemy you know - my weakness for womankind 
 and my impulse to strong liquor . do not   abandon I to they , Sue , to 
 save your own soul only ! they have be keep entirely at a distance 
 since you become my guardian - angel ! since I have have you I have be 
 able to go into any temptation of the sort , without risk . be not 
 my safety worth a little sacrifice of dogmatic principle ? I be in 
 terror lest , if you leave I , it will be with I another case of the 
 pig that be wash turn back to his wallowing in the mire ! " 
 Sue burst out weeping . " oh , but you must not , Jude ! you will not ! 
 I will pray for you night and day ! " 
 " well - never mind ; do not   grieve , " say Jude generously . " I do 
 suffer , God know , about you at that time ; and now I suffer again . 
 but perhaps not so much as you . the woman mostly get the bad of 
 it in the long run ! " 
 " she do . " 
 " unless she be absolutely worthless and contemptible . and this one 
 be not that , anyhow ! " 
 Sue draw a nervous breath or two . " she be - I fear ! ... now 
 jude - good - night , - please ! " 
 " I must not   stay ? - not just once more ? as it have be so many 
 time - o Sue , my wife , why not ! " 
 " no - no - not wife ! ... I be in your hand , Jude - do not   tempt I back 
 now I have advance so far ! " 
 " very well . I do your bidding . I owe that to you , darling , in 
 penance for how I overrule it at the first time . my God , how 
 selfish I be ! perhaps - perhaps I spoil one of the high and 
 purest love that ever exist between man and woman ! ... then let 
 the veil of our temple be rent in two from this hour ! " 
 he go to the bed , remove one of the pair of pillow thereon , and 
 fling it to the floor . 
 Sue look at he , and bend over the bed - rail weep silently . 
 " you do not   see that it be a matter of conscience with I , and not 
 of dislike to you ! " she brokenly murmur . " dislike to you ! but I 
 can not   say any more - it break my heart - it will be undo all I 
 have begin ! jude - good - night ! " 
 " good - night , " he say , and turn to go . 
 " oh but you shall kiss I ! " say she , start up . " I 
 can not   - bear - ! " 
 he clasp she , and kiss her weeping face as he have scarcely ever 
 do before , and they remain in silence till she say , " good - bye , 
 good - bye ! " and then gently press he away she get free , try to 
 mitigate the sadness by say : " we will be dear friend just the same , 
 Jude , will not   we ? and we will see each other sometimes - yes ! - and forget 
 all this , and try to be as we be long ago ? " 
 Jude do not permit himself to speak , but turn and descend the 
 stair . 
 IV 
 the man whom Sue , in her mental volte - face , be now regard as 
 her inseparable husband , live still at Marygreen . 
 on the day before the tragedy of the child , Phillotson have see 
 both she and Jude as they stand in the rain at Christminster watch 
 the procession to the theatre . but he have say nothing of it at the 
 moment to his companion Gillingham , who , be an old friend , be 
 stay with he at the village aforesaid , and have , indeed , suggest 
 the day 's trip to Christminster . 
 " what be you think of ? " say Gillingham , as they go home . " the 
 university degree you never obtain ? " 
 " no , no , " say Phillotson gruffly . " of somebody I see to - day . " in a 
 moment he add , " Susanna . " 
 " I see she , too . " 
 " you say nothing . " 
 " I do not   wish to draw your attention to she . but , as you do see 
 she , you should have say : ' how d'ye do , my dear - that - be ? ' " 
 " ah , well . I might have . but what do you think of this : I have good 
 reason for suppose that she be innocent when I divorce she - that 
 I be all wrong . yes , indeed ! Awkward , be not   it ? " 
 " she have take care to set you right since , anyhow , apparently . " 
 " H'm . that be a cheap sneer . I ought to have wait , unquestionably . " 
 at the end of the week , when Gillingham have go back to his school 
 near Shaston , Phillotson , as be his custom , go to Alfredston 
 market ; ruminate again on Arabella 's intelligence as he walk down 
 the long hill which he have know before Jude know it , though his 
 history have not beat so intensely upon its incline . arrive in 
 the town he buy his usual weekly local paper ; and when he have sit 
 down in an inn to refresh himself for the five mile ' walk back , he 
 pull the paper from his pocket and read awhile . the account of the 
 ' strange suicide of a stone - mason 's child " meet his eye . 
 unimpassioned as he be , it impress he painfully , and puzzle he 
 not a little , for he could not understand the age of the eld child 
 be what it be state to be . however , there be no doubt that the 
 newspaper report be in some way true . 
 " their cup of sorrow be now full ! " he say : and think and think 
 of Sue , and what she have gain by leave he . 
 Arabella have make her home at Alfredston , and the schoolmaster 
 come to market there every Saturday , it be not wonderful that in 
 a few week they meet again - the precise time be just alter she 
 return from Christminster , where she have stay much long than she 
 have at first intend , keep an interested eye on Jude , though Jude 
 have see no more of she . Phillotson be on his way homeward when he 
 encounter Arabella , and she be approach the town . 
 " you like walk out this way , Mrs. Cartlett ? " he say . 
 " I have   just begin to again , " she reply . " it be where I live 
 as maid and wife , and all the past thing of my life that be 
 interesting to my feeling be mix up with this road . and they 
 have be stir up in I too , lately ; for I have   be visit at 
 Christminster . yes ; I have   see Jude . " 
 " ah ! how do they bear their terrible affliction ? " 
 " in a ve - ry strange way - ve - ry strange ! she do not   live with he any 
 long . I only hear of it as a certainty just before I leave ; though 
 I have think thing be drift that way from their manner when I 
 call on they . " 
 " not live with her husband ? why , I should have think ' twould have 
 unite they more . " 
 " he be not her husband , after all . she have never really marry he 
 although they have pass as man and wife so long . and now , instead 
 of this sad event make them hurry up , and get the thing do 
 legally , she be take in a queer religious way , just as I be in my 
 affliction at lose Cartlett , only hers be of a more ' sterical sort 
 than mine . and she say , so I be tell , that she be your wife in the 
 eye of Heaven and the Church - yours only ; and can not   be anybody else 's 
 by any act of man . " 
 " ah - indeed ? ... separate , have they ! " 
 " you see , the eld boy be mine - " 
 " oh - your ! " 
 " yes , poor little fellow - bear in lawful wedlock , thank God . and 
 perhaps she feel , over and above other thing , that I ought to have 
 be in her place . I can not   say . however , as for I , I be soon off 
 from here . I have   get Father to look after now , and we can not   live in 
 such a hum - drum place as this . I hope soon to be in a bar again at 
 Christminster , or some other big town . " 
 they part . when Phillotson have ascend the hill a few step he 
 stop , hasten back , and call she . 
 " what be , or be , their address ? " 
 Arabella give it . 
 " thank you . good afternoon . " 
 Arabella smile grimly as she resume her way , and practise 
 dimple - make all along the road from where the pollard willow begin 
 to the old almshouse in the first street of the town . 
 meanwhile Phillotson ascend to Marygreen , and for the first time 
 during a lengthened period he live with a forward eye . on crossing 
 under the large tree of the green to the humble schoolhouse to which 
 he have be reduce he stand a moment , and picture Sue come out of 
 the door to meet he . no man have ever suffer more inconvenience 
 from his own charity , Christian or heathen , than Phillotson have do 
 in let Sue go . he have be knock about from pillar to post at 
 the hand of the virtuous almost beyond endurance ; he have be nearly 
 starve , and be now dependent entirely upon the very small stipend 
 from the school of this village   where the parson have get ill - speak 
 of for befriend he . he have often think of Arabella 's remark 
 that he should have be more severe with Sue , that her recalcitrant 
 spirit would soon have be break . yet such be his obstinate and 
 illogical disregard of opinion , and of the principle in which he have 
 be train , that his conviction on the rightness of his course 
 with his wife have not be disturb . 
 principle which could be subvert by feel in one direction be 
 liable to the same catastrophe in another . the instinct which have 
 allow he to give Sue her liberty now enable he to regard she 
 as none the bad for her life with Jude . he wish for she still , 
 in his curious way , if he do not love she , and , apart from policy , 
 soon feel that he would be gratify to have she again as his , always 
 provide that she come willingly . 
 but artifice be necessary , he have find , for stem the cold and 
 inhumane blast of the world 's contempt . and here be the material 
 ready make . by get Sue back and remarry she on the 
 respectable plea of have entertain erroneous view of she , and 
 gain his divorce wrongfully , he might acquire some comfort , resume 
 his old course , perhaps return to the Shaston school , if not even to 
 the Church as a licentiate . 
 he think he would write to Gillingham to inquire his view , and 
 what he think of his , Phillotson 's , send a letter to she . 
 Gillingham reply , naturally , that now she be go it be good to 
 let she be , and consider that if she be anybody 's wife she be 
 the wife of the man to whom she have bear three child and owe 
 such tragical adventure . probably , as his attachment to she seem 
 unusually strong , the singular pair would make their union legal in 
 course of time , and all would be well , and decent , and in order . 
 " but they will not   - Sue will not ! " exclaim Phillotson to himself . 
 " Gillingham be so matter of fact . she be affect by Christminster 
 sentiment and teaching . I can see her view on the indissolubility 
 of marriage well enough , and I know where she get they . they be not 
 mine ; but I shall make use of they to further mine . " 
 he write a brief reply to Gillingham . " I know I be entirely wrong , 
 but I do not   agree with you . as to she have live with and have 
 three child by he , my feeling be   though I can advance no logical 
 or moral defence of it , on the old line   that it have do little 
 more than finish her education . I shall write to she , and learn 
 whether what that woman say be true or no . " 
 as he have make up his mind to do this before he have write to his 
 friend , there have not be much reason for write to the latter at 
 all . however , it be Phillotson 's way to act thus . 
 he accordingly address a carefully consider epistle to Sue , and , 
 know her emotional temperament , throw a Rhadamanthine strictness 
 into the line here and there , carefully hide his heterodox 
 feeling , not to frighten she . he state that , it have come to his 
 knowledge that her view have considerably change , he feel compel 
 to say that his own , too , be largely modify by event subsequent 
 to their parting . he would not conceal from she that passionate 
 love have little to do with his communication . it arise from a wish 
 to make their life , if not a success , at least no such disastrous 
 failure as they threaten to become , through his act on what 
 he have consider at the time a principle of justice , charity , and 
 reason . 
 to indulge one 's instinctive and uncontrolled sense of justice and 
 right , be not , he have find , permit with impunity in an old 
 civilization like ours . it be necessary to act under an acquire 
 and cultivate sense of the same , if you wish to enjoy an average 
 share of comfort and honour ; and to let crude love kindness take 
 care of itself . 
 he suggest that she should come to he there at Marygreen . 
 on second thought he take out the last paragraph but one ; and have 
 rewrite the letter he dispatch it immediately , and in some 
 excitement await the issue . 
 a few day after a figure move through the white fog which envelop 
 the Beersheba suburb of Christminster , towards the quarter in which 
 Jude Fawley have take up his lodging since his division from Sue . a 
 timid knock sound upon the door of his abode . 
 it be evening - so he be at home ; and by a species of divination he 
 jump up and rush to the door himself . 
 " will you come out with I ? I would rather not come in . I want 
 to - to talk with you - and to go with you to the cemetery . " 
 it have be in the trembling accent of Sue that these word come . 
 Jude put on his hat . " it be dreary for you to be out , " he say . 
 " but if you prefer not to come in , I do not   mind . " 
 " yes - I do . I shall not keep you long . " 
 Jude be too much affected to go on talk at first ; she , too , be 
 now such a mere cluster of nerve that all initiatory power seem 
 to have leave she , and they proceed through the fog like Acherontic 
 shade for a long while , without sound or gesture . 
 " I want to tell you , " she presently say , her voice now quick , now 
 slow , ' so that you may not hear of it by chance . I be go back to 
 Richard . he have - so magnanimously - agree to forgive all . " 
 " go back ? how can you go - " 
 " he be go to marry I again . that be for form 's sake , and to 
 satisfy the world , which do not see thing as they be . but of 
 course I be his wife already . nothing have change that . " 
 he turn upon she with an anguish that be well - nigh fierce . 
 " but you be MY wife ! yes , you be . you know it . I have always 
 regret that feint of our in go away and pretend to come 
 back legally marry , to save appearance . I love you , and you 
 love I ; and we close with each other ; and that make the marriage . 
 we still love - you as well as I - know it , Sue ! therefore our 
 marriage be not cancel . " 
 " yes ; I know how you see it , " she answer with despairing 
 self - suppression . " but I be go to marry he again , as it would 
 be call by you . strictly speak you , too - do not   mind my saying 
 it , Jude ! - you should take back - arabella . " 
 " I should ? good God - what next ! but how if you and I have marry 
 legally , as we be on the point of do ? " 
 " I should have feel just the same - that our be not a marriage . 
 and I would go back to Richard without repeat the sacrament , if 
 he ask I . but ' the world and its way have a certain worth '   I 
 suppose : therefore I concede a repetition of the ceremony ... do not 
 crush all the life out of I by satire and argument , I implore you ! 
 I be strong once , I know , and perhaps I treat you cruelly . 
 but Jude , return good for evil ! I be the weak now . do not 
 retaliate upon I , but be kind . oh be kind to I - a poor wicked 
 woman who be try to mend ! " 
 he shake his head hopelessly , his eye wet . the blow of her 
 bereavement seem to have destroy her reasoning faculty . the once 
 keen vision be dim . " all wrong , all wrong ! " he say huskily . 
 " error - perversity ! it drive I out of my sens . do you care for 
 he ? do you love he ? you know you do not ! it will be a fanatic 
 prostitution - God forgive I , yes - that be what it will be ! " 
 " I do not   love he - I must , must , own it , in deep remorse ! but I 
 shall try to learn to love he by obey he . " 
 Jude argue , urge , implored ; but her conviction be proof against 
 all . it seem to be the one thing on earth on which she be firm , 
 and that her firmness in this have leave her tottering in every other 
 impulse and wish she possess . 
 " I have be considerate enough to let you know the whole truth , 
 and to tell it you myself , " she say in cut tone ; " that you might 
 not consider yourself slight by hear of it at second hand . I 
 have even own the extreme fact that I do not love he . I do not 
 think you would be so rough with I for do so ! I be go to 
 ask you ... " 
 " to give you away ? " 
 " no . to send - my box to I - if you would . but I suppose you 
 will not . " 
 " why , of course I will . what - be not   he come to fetch you - to marry 
 you from here ? he will not   condescend to do that ? " 
 " no - I will not   let he . I go to he voluntarily , just as I go away 
 from he . we be to be marry at his little church at Marygreen . " 
 she be so sadly sweet in what he call her wrong - headedness that 
 Jude could not help be move to tear more than once for pity of 
 she . " I never know such a woman for do impulsive penance , as 
 you , Sue ! no soon do one expect you to go straight on , as the 
 one rational proceeding , than you double round the corner ! " 
 " ah , well ; let that go ! ... Jude , I must say good - bye ! but I want 
 you to go to the cemetery with I . let our farewell be there - beside 
 the graf of those who die to bring home to I the error of my 
 view . " 
 they turn in the direction of the place , and the gate be open to 
 they on application . Sue have be there often , and she know the way 
 to the spot in the dark . they reach it , and stand still . 
 " it be here - I should like to part , " say she . 
 " so be it ! " 
 " do not   think I hard because I have act on conviction . your 
 generous devotion to I be unparalleled , Jude ! your worldly failure , 
 if you have fail , be to your credit rather than to your blame . 
 remember that the good and great among mankind be those who do 
 themselves no worldly good . every successful man be more or less a 
 selfish man . the devoted fail ... ' charity seeketh not her own . ' " 
 " in that chapter we be at one , ever beloved darling , and on it we will 
 part friend . its verse will stand fast when all the rest that you 
 call religion have pass away ! " 
 " well - do not   discuss it . good - bye , Jude ; my fellow - sinner , and 
 kind friend ! " 
 " good - bye , my mistaken wife . good - bye ! " 
 V 
 the next afternoon the familiar Christminster fog still hang over all 
 thing . Sue 's slim shape be only just discernible go towards the 
 station . 
 Jude have no heart to go to his work that day . neither could he go 
 anywhere in the direction by which she would be likely to pass . 
 he go in an opposite one , to a dreary , strange , flat scene , where 
 bough drip , and cough and consumption lurk , and where he have 
 never be before . 
 " Sue be go from I - go ! " he murmur miserably . 
 she in the meantime have leave by the train , and reach Alfredston 
 Road , where she enter the steam - tram and be convey into the 
 town . it have be her request to Phillotson that he should not meet 
 she . she wish , she say , to come to he voluntarily , to his very 
 house and hearthstone . 
 it be Friday evening , which have be choose because the schoolmaster 
 be disengage at four o'clock that day till the Monday morning 
 follow . the little car she hire at the Bear to drive she to 
 Marygreen set she down at the end of the lane , half a mile from the 
 village , by her desire , and precede she to the schoolhouse with 
 such portion of her luggage as she have bring . on its return she 
 encounter it , and ask the driver if he have find the master 's 
 house open . the man inform she that he have , and that her thing 
 have be take in by the schoolmaster himself . 
 she could now enter Marygreen without exciting much observation . 
 she cross by the well and under the tree to the pretty new school 
 on the other side , and lift the latch of the dwelling without 
 knock . Phillotson stand in the middle of the room , await she , 
 as request . 
 " I have   come , Richard , " say she , look pale and shaken , and sink 
 into a chair . " I can not believe - you forgive your - wife ! " 
 " everything , darling Susanna , " say Phillotson . 
 she start at the endearment , though it have be speak advisedly 
 without fervour . then she nerve herself again . 
 " my child - be dead - and it be right that they should be ! I be 
 glad - almost . they be sin - begotten . they be sacrifice to teach 
 I how to live ! their death be the first stage of my purification . 
 that be why they have not die in vain ! ... you will take I back ? " 
 he be so stir by her pitiful word and tone that he do more than 
 he have mean to do . he bend and kiss her cheek . 
 Sue imperceptibly shrink away , her flesh quiver under the touch of 
 his lip . 
 Phillotson 's heart sink , for desire be renascent in he . " you still 
 have an aversion to I ! " 
 " oh no , dear - I have be drive through the damp , and I be 
 chilly ! " she say , with a hurried smile of apprehension . " when be 
 we go to have the marriage ? soon ? " 
 " to - morrow morning , early , I think - if you really wish . I be 
 send round to the vicar to let he know you be come . I have tell 
 he all , and he highly approve - he say it will bring our life to 
 a triumphant and satisfactory issue . but - be you sure of yourself ? 
 it be not too late to refuse now if - you think you can not   bring 
 yourself to it , you know ? " 
 " yes , yes , I can ! I want it do quick . tell he , tell he at once ! 
 my strength be try by the undertaking - I can not   wait long ! " 
 " have something to eat and drink then , and go over to your room 
 at Mrs. Edlin 's . I will tell the vicar half - past eight to - morrow , 
 before anybody be about - if that be not too soon for you ? my friend 
 Gillingham be here to help we in the ceremony . he be be good enough 
 to come all the way from Shaston at great inconvenience to himself . " 
 unlike a woman in ordinary , whose eye be so keen for material thing , 
 Sue seem to see nothing of the room they be in , or any detail of 
 her environment . but on move across the parlour to put down her 
 muff she utter a little " oh ! " and grow pale than before . her look 
 be that of the condemn criminal who catch sight of his coffin . 
 " what ? " say Phillotson . 
 the flap of the bureau chance to be open , and in place her muff 
 upon it her eye have catch a document which lie there . " oh - only 
 a - funny surprise ! " she say , try to laugh away her cry as she 
 come back to the table . 
 " ah ! yes , " say Phillotson . " the licence .... it have just come . " 
 Gillingham now join they from his room above , and Sue nervously 
 make herself agreeable to he by talk on whatever she think 
 likely to interest he , except herself , though that interested he 
 most of all . she obediently eat some supper , and prepare to leave 
 for she lodge hard by . Phillotson cross the green with she , 
 bid her good - night at Mrs. Edlin 's door . 
 the old woman accompany Sue to her temporary quarter , and help 
 she to unpack . among other thing she lay out a night - gown 
 tastefully embroider . 
 " oh - I do not   know that be put in ! " say Sue quickly . " I do not 
 mean it to be . here be a different one . " she hand a new and 
 absolutely plain garment , of coarse and unbleached calico . 
 " but this be the prettiest , " say Mrs. Edlin . " that one be no well 
 than very sackcloth o ' scripture ! " 
 " yes - I mean it to be . give I the other . " 
 she take it , and begin rend it with all her might , the tear 
 resound through the house like a screech - owl . 
 " but my dear , dear ! - whatever ... " 
 " it be adulterous ! it signify what I do not   feel - I buy it long 
 ago - to please Jude . it must be destroy ! " 
 Mrs. Edlin lift her hand , and Sue excitedly continue to tear the 
 linen into strip , lay the piece in the fire . 
 " you me ha ' give it to I ! " say the widow . " it do make my heart 
 ache to see such pretty open - work as that a - burn by the flame - not 
 that ornamental night - rail can be much use to a ' ould ' ooman like I. 
 my day for such be all past and go ! " 
 " it be an accursed thing - it remind I of what I want to forget ! " 
 Sue repeat . " it be only fit for the fire . " 
 " Lord , you be too strict ! what do ye use such word for , and condemn 
 to hell your dear little innocent child that be lose to ' ee ! upon 
 my life I do not   call that religion ! " 
 Sue fling her face upon the bed , sob . " oh , do not , do not ! that 
 kill I ! " she remain shake with her grief , and slip down upon 
 her knee . 
 " I will tell ' ee what - you ought not to marry this man again ! " say 
 Mrs. Edlin indignantly . " you be in love wi ' t ' other still ! " 
 " yes I must - I be his already ! " 
 " Pshoo ! you be t ' other man 's . if you do not   like to commit 
 yourself to the bind vow again , just at first , ' twa all the 
 more credit to your conscience , consider your reason , and you 
 me ha ' live on , and make it all right at last . after all , it 
 concerned nobody but your own two self . " 
 " Richard say he will have I back , and I be bind to go ! if he have 
 refuse , it might not have be so much my duty to - give up Jude . 
 but - " she remain with her face in the bed - clothe , and Mrs. Edlin 
 leave the room . 
 Phillotson in the interval have go back to his friend Gillingham , 
 who still sit over the supper - table . they soon rise , and walk out 
 on the green to smoke awhile . a light be burn in Sue 's room , a 
 shadow move now and then across the blind . 
 Gillingham have evidently be impress with the indefinable charm of 
 Sue , and after a silence he say , " well : you have   all but get she again 
 at last . she can not   very well go a second time . the pear have drop 
 into your hand . " 
 " yes ! ... I suppose I be right in take she at her word . I confess 
 there seem a touch of selfishness in it . apart from she be what 
 she be , of course , a luxury for a fogy like I , it will set I right 
 in the eye of the clergy and orthodox laity , who have never forgive 
 I for let she go . so I may get back in some degree into my old 
 track . " 
 " well - if you have   get any sound reason for marry she again , do it 
 now in God 's name ! I be always against your open the cage - door 
 and let the bird go in such an obviously suicidal way . you might 
 have be a school inspector by this time , or a reverend , if you 
 have not   be so weak about she . " 
 " I do myself irreparable damage - I know it . " 
 " once you have   get she house again , stick to she . " 
 Phillotson be more evasive to - night . he do not care to admit 
 clearly that his take Sue to he again have at bottom nothing to 
 do with repentance of let she go , but be , primarily , a human 
 instinct fly in the face of custom and profession . he say , 
 " yes - I shall do that . I know woman well now . whatever justice 
 there be in release she , there be little logic , for one hold 
 my view on other subject . " 
 Gillingham look at he , and wonder whether it would ever happen 
 that the reactionary spirit induce by the world 's sneer and his own 
 physical wish would make Phillotson more orthodoxly cruel to she 
 than he have erstwhile be informally and perversely kind . 
 " I perceive it will not   do to give way to impulse , " Phillotson resume , 
 feel more and more every minute the necessity of act up to his 
 position . " I fly in the face of the Church 's teaching ; but I do it 
 without malice prepense . woman be so strange in their influence 
 that they tempt you to misplace kindness . however , I know myself 
 well now . a little judicious severity , perhaps ... " 
 " yes ; but you must tighten the rein by degree only . do not   be too 
 strenuous at first . she will come to any term in time . " 
 the caution be unnecessary , though Phillotson do not say so . " I 
 remember what my vicar at Shaston say , when I leave after the row 
 that be make about my agree to her elopement . ' the only thing 
 you can do to retrieve your position and hers be to admit your error 
 in not restrain she with a wise and strong hand , and to get she 
 back again if she will come , and be firm in the future . ' but I be 
 so headstrong at that time that I pay no heed . and that after the 
 divorce she should have think of do so I do not dream . " 
 the gate of Mrs. Edlin 's cottage click , and somebody begin cross 
 in the direction of the school . Phillotson say " good - night . " 
 " oh , be that Mr. Phillotson , " say Mrs. Edlin . " I be go over 
 to see ' ee . I have   be upstairs with she , help she to unpack she 
 thing ; and upon my word , sir , I do not   think this ought to be ! " 
 " what - the wedding ? " 
 " yes . she be force herself to it , poor dear little thing ; and 
 you have   no notion what she be suffer . I be never much for religion 
 nor against it , but it can not   be right to let she do this , and you 
 ought to persuade she out of it . of course everybody will say it be 
 very good and forgiving of ' ee to take she to ' ee again . but for my 
 part I do not . " 
 " it be her wish , and I be willing , " say Phillotson with grave 
 reserve , opposition make he illogically tenacious now . " a great 
 piece of laxity will be rectify . " 
 " I do not   believe it . she be his wife if anybody 's . she be have three 
 child by he , and he love she dearly ; and it be a wicked shame to 
 egg she on to this , poor little quivering thing ! she be get nobody 
 on her side . the one man who would be her friend the obstinate creature 
 will not   allow to come near she . what first put she into this mood o ' 
 mind , I wonder ! " 
 " I can not   tell . not I certainly . it be all voluntary on her part . 
 now that be all I have to say . " Phillotson speak stiffly . " you have 
 turn round , Mrs. Edlin . it be unseemly of you ! " 
 " well . I know you would be affront at what I have to say ; but I do not 
 mind that . the truth be the truth . " 
 " I be not affront , Mrs. Edlin . you have   be too kind a neighbour 
 for that . but I must be allow to know what be good for myself and 
 Susanna . I suppose you will not   go to church with we , then ? " 
 " no . be hang if I can ... I do not   know what the time be come 
 to ! Matrimony have grow to be that serious in these day that one 
 really do feel afeard to move in it at all . in my time we take it 
 more careless ; and I do not   know that we be any the bad for it ! 
 when I and my poor man be jine in it we keep up the junket all 
 the week , and drink the parish dry , and have to borrow half a crown 
 to begin housekeeping ! " 
 when Mrs. Edlin have go back to her cottage Phillotson speak 
 moodily . " I do not   know whether I ought to do it - at any rate quite 
 so rapidly . " 
 " why ? " 
 " if she be really compelling herself to this against her 
 instinct - merely from this new sense of duty or religion - I ought 
 perhaps to let she wait a bit . " 
 " now you have   get so far you ought not to back out of it . that be my 
 opinion . " 
 " I can not   very well put it off now ; that be true . but I have a qualm 
 when she give that little cry at sight of the licence . " 
 " now , never you have qualm , old boy . I mean to give she away 
 to - morrow morning , and you mean to take she . it have always be on 
 my conscience that I do not   urge more objection to your let she 
 go , and now we have   get to this stage I shall not   be content if I do not 
 help you to set the matter right . " 
 Phillotson nod , and see how staunch his friend be , become 
 more frank . " no doubt when it get know what I have   do I shall 
 be think a soft fool by many . but they do not   know Sue as I do . 
 though so elusive , hers be such an honest nature at bottom that I 
 do not   think she have ever do anything against her conscience . the 
 fact of she have live with Fawley go for nothing . at the time 
 she leave I for he she think she be quite within her right . now 
 she think otherwise . " 
 the next morning come , and the self - sacrifice of the woman on the 
 altar of what she be pleased to call her principle be acquiesce 
 in by these two friend , each from his own point of view . phillotson 
 go across to the Widow Edlin 's to fetch Sue a few minute after 
 eight o'clock . the fog of the previous day or two on the low - land 
 have travel up here by now , and the tree on the green catch 
 armful , and turn they into shower of big drop . the bride be 
 wait , ready ; bonnet and all on . she have never in her life look 
 so much like the lily her name connote as she do in that pallid 
 morning light . chasten , world - weary , remorseful , the strain on her 
 nerve have prey upon her flesh and bone , and she appear small 
 in outline than she have formerly do , though Sue have not be a 
 large woman in her day of rude health . 
 " prompt , " say the schoolmaster , magnanimously take her hand . 
 but he check his impulse to kiss she , remember her start of 
 yesterday , which unpleasantly linger in his mind . 
 Gillingham join they , and they leave the house , Widow Edlin 
 continue steadfast in her refusal to assist in the ceremony . 
 " where be the church ? " say Sue . she have not live there for any 
 length of time since the old church be pull down , and in her 
 preoccupation forget the new one . 
 " up here , " say Phillotson ; and presently the tower loom large and 
 solemn in the fog . the vicar have already cross to the building , 
 and when they enter he say pleasantly : " we almost want candle . " 
 " you do - wish I to be your , Richard ? " gasp Sue in a whisper . 
 " certainly , dear : above all thing in the world . " 
 Sue say no more ; and for the second or third time he feel he be not 
 quite follow out the humane instinct which have induce he to let 
 her go . 
 there they stand , five altogether : the parson , the clerk , the couple , 
 and Gillingham ; and the holy ordinance be resolemnize forthwith . 
 in the nave of the edifice be two or three villager , and when the 
 clergyman come to the word , " what God hath join , " a woman 's voice 
 from among these be hear to utter audibly : 
 " God hath jine indeed ! " 
 it be like a re - enactment by the ghost of their former self of 
 the similar scene which have take place at Melchester year before . 
 when the book be sign the vicar congratulate the husband 
 and wife on have perform a noble , and righteous , and mutually 
 forgiving act . " all be well that end well , " he say smile . 
 " may you long be happy together , after thus have be ' save as by 
 fire . ' " 
 they come down the nearly empty building , and cross to the 
 schoolhouse . Gillingham want to get home that night , and leave 
 early . he , too , congratulate the couple . " now , " he say in parting 
 from Phillotson , who walk out a little way , " I shall be able to 
 tell the people in your native place a good round tale ; and they will 
 all say ' well do , ' depend on it . " 
 when the schoolmaster get back Sue be make a pretence of do 
 some housewifery as if she live there . but she seem timid at his 
 approach , and compunction work on he at sight of it . 
 " of course , my dear , I shall not   expect to intrude upon your personal 
 privacy any more than I do before , " he say gravely . " it be for our 
 good socially to do this , and that be its justification , if it be not 
 my reason . " Sue brighten a little . 
 VI 
 the place be the door of Jude 's lodge in the out - skirt of 
 Christminster - far from the precinct of St. Silas ' where he have 
 formerly live , which sadden he to sickness . the rain be come 
 down . a woman in shabby black stand on the doorstep talk to Jude , 
 who hold the door in his hand . 
 " I be lonely , destitute , and houseless - that be what I be ! Father have 
 turn I out of door after borrow every penny I would get , to put it 
 into his business , and then accuse I of laziness when I be only 
 wait for a situation . I be at the mercy of the world ! if you 
 can not   take I and help I , Jude , I must go to the workhouse , or to 
 something bad . only just now two undergraduate wink at I as I 
 come along . ' tis hard for a woman to keep virtuous where there be so 
 many young man ! " 
 the woman in the rain who speak thus be Arabella , the evening be 
 that of the day after Sue 's remarriage with Phillotson . 
 " I be sorry for you , but I be only in lodging , " say Jude coldly . 
 " then you turn I away ? " 
 " I will give you enough to get food and lodge for a few day . " 
 " oh , but can not   you have the kindness to take I in ? I can not endure 
 go to a public house to lodge ; and I be so lonely . please , Jude , 
 for old time ' sake ! " 
 " no , no , " say Jude hastily . " I do not   want to be remind of those 
 thing ; and if you talk about they I shall not help you . " 
 " then I suppose I must go ! " say Arabella . she bend her head against 
 the doorpost and begin sob . 
 " the house be full , " say Jude . " and I have only a little extra room 
 to my own - not much more than a closet - where I keep my tool , and 
 template , and the few book I have leave ! " 
 " that would be a palace for I ! " 
 " there be no bedstead in it . " 
 " a bit of a bed could be make on the floor . it would be good enough 
 for I . " 
 unable to be harsh with she , and not know what to do , Jude call 
 the man who let the lodging , and say this be an acquaintance of 
 his in great distress for want of temporary shelter . 
 " you may remember I as barmaid at the Lamb and Flag formerly ? " speak 
 up Arabella . " my father have insult I this afternoon , and I have 
 leave he , though without a penny ! " 
 the householder say he could not recall her feature . " but still , 
 if you be a friend of Mr. Fawley 's we will do what we can for a day 
 or two - if he will make himself answerable ? " 
 " yes , yes , " say Jude . " she have really take I quite unawares ; but 
 I should wish to help she out of her difficulty . " and an arrangement 
 be ultimately come to under which a bed be to be throw down in 
 Jude 's lumber - room , to make it comfortable for Arabella till she 
 could get out of the strait she be in - not by her own fault , as she 
 declare - and return to her father 's again . 
 while they be wait for this to be do Arabella say : " you know 
 the news , I suppose ? " 
 " I guess what you mean ; but I know nothing . " 
 " I have a letter from Anny at Alfredston to - day . she have just hear 
 that the wedding be to be yesterday : but she do not   know if it have 
 come off . " 
 " I do not   wish to talk of it . " 
 " no , no : of course you do not . only it show what kind of woman - " 
 " do not   speak of she I say ! she be a fool ! and she be an angel , too , 
 poor dear ! " 
 " if it be do , he will have a chance of get back to his old 
 position , by everybody 's account , so Anny say . all his well - wisher 
 will be please , include the bishop himself . " 
 " do spare I , Arabella . " 
 Arabella be duly instal in the little attic , and at first she 
 do not come near Jude at all . she go to and fro about her own 
 business , which , when they meet for a moment on the stair or in the 
 passage , she inform he be that of obtain another place in 
 the occupation she understand well . when Jude suggest London as 
 afford the most likely opening in the liquor trade , she shake she 
 head . " no - the temptation be too many , " she say . " any humble 
 tavern in the country before that for I . " 
 on the Sunday morning follow , when he breakfast later than on 
 other day , she meekly ask he if she might come in to breakfast 
 with he , as she have break her teapot , and could not replace it 
 immediately , the shop be shut . 
 " yes , if you like , " he say indifferently . 
 while they sit without speak she suddenly observe : " you seem all 
 in a brood , old man . I be sorry for you . " 
 " I be all in a brood . " 
 " it be about she , I know . it be no business of mine , but I could find 
 out all about the wedding - if it really do take place - if you want 
 to know . " 
 " how could you ? " 
 " I want to go to Alfredston to get a few thing I leave there . and 
 I could see Anny , who will be sure to have hear all about it , as she 
 have friend at Marygreen . " 
 Jude could not bear to acquiesce in this proposal ; but his suspense 
 pit itself against his discretion , and win in the struggle . " you 
 can ask about it if you like , " he say . " I have   not hear a sound from 
 there . it must have be very private , if - they have marry . " 
 " I be afraid I have not   enough cash to take I there and back , or I 
 should have go before . I must wait till I have earn some . " 
 " oh - I can pay the journey for you , " he say impatiently . and thus 
 his suspense as to Sue 's welfare , and the possible marriage , move 
 he to dispatch for intelligence the last emissary he would have 
 thought of choose deliberately . 
 Arabella go , Jude request she to be home not later than by 
 the seven o'clock train . when she have go he say : " why should I 
 have charge she to be back by a particular time ! she be nothing to 
 I - nor the other neither ! " 
 but have finish work he could not help go to the station to 
 meet Arabella , drag thither by feverish haste to get the news 
 she might bring , and know the bad . Arabella have make dimple 
 most successfully all the way home , and when she step out of the 
 railway carriage she smile . he merely say " well ? " with the very 
 reverse of a smile . 
 " they be marry . " 
 " yes - of course they be ! " he return . she observe , however , the 
 hard strain upon his lip as he speak . 
 " Anny say she have hear from Belinda , her relation out at Marygreen , 
 that it be very sad , and curious ! " 
 " how do you mean sad ? she want to marry he again , do not   she ? 
 and he she ! " 
 " yes - that be it . she want to in one sense , but not in the 
 other . Mrs. Edlin be much upset by it all , and speak out her mind 
 at Phillotson . but Sue be that excited about it that she burn she 
 good embroidery that she would wear with you , to blot you out entirely . 
 well - if a woman feel like it , she ought to do it . I commend she 
 for it , though other do not . " Arabella sigh . " she feel he be her 
 only husband , and that she belong to nobody else in the sight of 
 God a'mighty while he live . perhaps another woman feel the same 
 about herself , too ! " Arabella sigh again . 
 " I do not   want any ca not ! " exclaim Jude . 
 " it be not   can not , " say Arabella . " I feel exactly the same as she ! " 
 he close that issue by remark abruptly : " well - now I know all I 
 want to know . many thank for your information . I be not go 
 back to my lodging just yet . " and he leave her straightway . 
 in his misery and depression Jude walk to well - nigh every spot 
 in the city that he have visit with Sue ; thence he do not know 
 whither , and then think of go home to his usual evening meal . 
 but have all the vice of his virtue , and some to spare , he turn 
 into a public house , for the first time during many month . among 
 the possible consequence of her marriage Sue have not dwelt on this . 
 Arabella , meanwhile , have go back . the evening pass , and Jude 
 do not return . at half - past nine Arabella herself go out , first 
 proceed to an outlying district near the river where her father 
 live , and have open a small and precarious pork - shop lately . 
 " well , " she say to he , " for all your row I that night , I have 
 call in , for I have something to tell you . I think I shall get 
 married and settle again . only you must help I : and you can do 
 no less , after what I have   stand ' ee . " 
 " I will do anything to get thee off my hand ! " 
 " very well . I be now go to look for my young man . he be on the 
 loose I be afraid , and I must get he home . all I want you to do 
 to - night be not to fasten the door , in case I should want to sleep 
 here , and should be late . " 
 " I think you would soon get tired of give yourself air and keep 
 away ! " 
 " well - do not   do the door . that be all I say . " 
 she then sally out again , and first hasten back to Jude 's to 
 make sure that he have not return , begin her search for he . a 
 shrewd guess as to his probable course take she straight to the 
 tavern which Jude have formerly frequent , and where she have be 
 barmaid for a brief term . she have no soon open the door of the 
 " private Bar " than her eye fall upon he - sit in the shade at 
 the back of the compartment , with his eye fix on the floor in a 
 blank stare . he be drink nothing strong than ale just then . 
 he do not observe she , and she enter and sit beside he . 
 Jude look up , and say without surprise : " you have   come to have 
 something , Arabella ? ... I be try to forget she : that be all ! but 
 I can not ; and I be go home . " she see that he be a little way on 
 in liquor , but only a little as yet . 
 " I have   come entirely to look for you , dear boy . you be not well . 
 now you must have something well than that . " Arabella hold up her 
 finger to the barmaid . " you shall have a liqueur - that be well fit 
 for a man of education than beer . you shall have maraschino , or 
 curacao dry or sweet , or cherry brandy . I will treat you , poor chap ! " 
 " I do not   care which ! say cherry brandy ... Sue have serve I badly , 
 very badly . I do not   expect it of Sue ! I stick to she , and she 
 ought to have stick to I . I would have sell my soul for her sake , but 
 she would not   risk her a jot for I . to save her own soul she let 
 mine go damn ! ... but it be not   her fault , poor little girl - I be 
 sure it be not ! " 
 how Arabella have obtain money do not appear , but she order a 
 liqueur each , and pay for they . when they have drink these Arabella 
 suggest another ; and Jude have the pleasure of be , as it be , 
 personally conduct through the variety of spirituous delectation 
 by one who know the landmark well . Arabella keep very considerably 
 in the rear of Jude ; but though she only sip where he drank , she 
 take as much as she could safely take without lose her head - which 
 be not a little , as the crimson upon her countenance show . 
 her tone towards he to - night be uniformly soothing and cajole ; 
 and whenever he say " I do not   care what happen to I , " a thing he 
 do continually , she reply , " but I do very much ! " the closing hour 
 come , and they be compel to turn out ; whereupon Arabella put she 
 arm round his waist , and guide his unsteady footstep . 
 when they be in the street she say : " I do not   know what our 
 landlord will say to my bring you home in this state . I expect we 
 be fasten out , so that he will have to come down and let we in . " 
 " I do not   know - I do not   know . " 
 " that be the bad of not have a home of your own . I tell you , 
 Jude , what we have good do . come round to my father 's - I make it up 
 with he a bit to - day . I can let you in , and nobody will see you at 
 all ; and by to - morrow morning you will be all right . " 
 " anything - anywhere , " reply Jude . " what the devil do it matter 
 to I ? " 
 they go along together , like any other fuddling couple , her arm 
 still round his waist , and his , at last , round her ; though with no 
 amatory intent ; but merely because he be weary , unstable , and in 
 need of support . 
 " this - be th ' Martyrs ' - burn - place , " he stammer as they 
 drag across a broad street . " I remember - in old Fuller 's Holy 
 State - and I be remind of it - by our passing by here - old Fuller 
 in his Holy State say , that at the burning of Ridley , Doctor 
 Smith - preach sermon , and take as his text ' though I give my body 
 to be burn , and have not charity , it profiteth I nothing . ' - often 
 think of it as I pass here . Ridley be a - " 
 " yes . exactly . very thoughtful of you , deary , even though it have not 
 much to do with our present business . " 
 " why , yes it have ! I be give my body to be burn ! but - ah you 
 do not   understand ! - it want Sue to understand such thing ! and I 
 be her seducer - poor little girl ! and she be go - and I do not   care 
 about myself ! do what you like with I ! ... and yet she do it for 
 conscience ' sake , poor little Sue ! " 
 " hang she ! - I mean , I think she be right , " hiccup Arabella . " I have 
 my feeling too , like she ; and I feel I belong to you in Heaven 's 
 eye , and to nobody else , till death we do part ! it be - hic - never 
 too late - hic to mend ! " 
 they have reach her father 's house , and she softly unfasten the 
 door , grope about for a light within . 
 the circumstance be not altogether unlike those of their entry 
 into the cottage at Cresscombe , such a long time before . nor be 
 perhaps Arabella 's motif . but Jude do not think of that , though 
 she do . 
 " I can not   find the match , dear , " she say when she have fasten up 
 the door . " but never mind - this way . as quiet as you can , please . " 
 " it be as dark as pitch , " say Jude . 
 " give I your hand , and I will lead you . that be it . just sit down 
 here , and I will pull off your boot . I do not   want to wake he . " 
 " who ? " 
 " Father . he would make a row , perhaps . " 
 she pull off his boot . " now , " she whisper , " take hold of 
 I - never mind your weight . now - first stair , second stair - " 
 " but - be we out in our old house by Marygreen ? " ask the stupefied 
 Jude . " I have not   be inside it for year till now ! hey ? and where 
 be my book ? that be what I want to know ? " 
 " we be at my house , dear , where there be nobody to spy out how ill 
 you be . now - third stair , fourth stair - that be it . now we shall 
 get on . " 
 VII 
 Arabella be prepare breakfast in the downstair back room of this 
 small , recently hire tenement of her father 's . she put her head 
 into the little pork - shop in front , and tell Mr. Donn it be ready . 
 Donn , endeavour to look like a master pork - butcher , in a greasy 
 blue blouse , and with a strap round his waist from which a steel 
 dangle , come in promptly . 
 " you must mind the shop this morning , " he say casually . " I have   to 
 go and get some inward and half a pig from Lumsdon , and to call 
 elsewhere . if you live here you must put your shoulder to the wheel , 
 at least till I get the business start ! " 
 " well , for to - day I can not   say . " she look deedily into his face . 
 " I have   get a prize upstairs . " 
 " oh ? what be that ? " 
 " a husband - almost . " 
 " no ! " 
 " yes . it be Jude . he be come back to I . " 
 " your old original one ? well , I be damned ! " 
 " well , I always do like he , that I will say . " 
 " but how do he come to be up there ? " say Donn , humour - strike , and 
 nod to the ceiling . 
 " do not   ask inconvenient question , Father . what we have   to do be to 
 keep he here till he and I be - as we be . " 
 " how be that ? " 
 " married . " 
 " ah ... well it be the rumm thing I ever hear of - marry an 
 old husband again , and so much new blood in the world ! he be no 
 catch , to my thinking . I would have have a new one while I be about it . " 
 " it be not   rum for a woman to want her old husband back for 
 respectability , though for a man to want his old wife back - well , 
 perhaps it be funny , rather ! " and Arabella be suddenly seize with 
 a fit of loud laughter , in which her father join more moderately . 
 " be civil to he , and I will do the rest , " she say when she have 
 recover seriousness . " he tell I this morning that his head ache 
 fit to burst , and he hardly seem to know where he be . and no 
 wonder , consider how he mix his drink last night . we must keep 
 he jolly and cheerful here for a day or two , and not let he go back 
 to his lodging . whatever you advance I will pay back to you again . 
 but I must go up and see how he be now , poor deary . " 
 Arabella ascend the stair , softly open the door of the first 
 bedroom , and peep in . find that her shorn Samson be asleep 
 she enter to the bedside and stand regard he . the fevere 
 flush on his face from the debauch of the previous evening lessen 
 the fragility of his ordinary appearance , and his long lash , 
 dark brow , and curly back hair and beard against the white pillow 
 complete the physiognomy of one whom Arabella , as a woman of rank 
 passion , still feel it worth while to recapture , highly important 
 to recapture as a woman straiten both in mean and in reputation . 
 her ardent gaze seem to affect he ; his quick breathing become 
 suspend , and he open his eye . 
 " how be you now , dear ? " say she . " it be i - Arabella . " 
 " ah ! - where - oh yes , I remember ! you give I shelter ... I be 
 strand - ill - demoralize - damn bad ! that be what I be ! " 
 " then do stay here . there be nobody in the house but father and I , 
 and you can rest till you be thoroughly well . I will tell they at 
 the stonework that you be knock up . " 
 " I wonder what they be think at the lodging ! " 
 " I will go round and explain . perhaps you have well let I pay up , or 
 they will think we have   run away ? " 
 " yes . you will find enough money in my pocket there . " 
 quite indifferent , and shut his eye because he could not bear 
 the daylight in his throb eye - ball , Jude seem to doze again . 
 Arabella take his purse , softly leave the room , and put on her 
 outdoor thing go off to the lodging she and he have quit the 
 evening before . 
 Scarcely half an hour have elapse ere she reappear round the 
 corner , walk beside a lad wheel a truck on which be pile all 
 Jude 's household possession , and also the few of Arabella 's thing 
 which she have take to the lodging for her short sojourn there . 
 Jude be in such physical pain from his unfortunate break - down of 
 the previous night , and in such mental pain from the loss of Sue and 
 from have yield in his half - somnolent state to Arabella , that 
 when he see his few chattel unpacked and stand before his eye in 
 this strange bedroom , intermix with woman 's apparel , he scarcely 
 consider how they have come there , or what their come signalize . 
 " now , " say Arabella to her father downstairs , " we must keep plenty 
 of good liquor go in the house these next few day . I know his 
 nature , and if he once get into that fearfully low state that he 
 do get into sometimes , he will never do the honourable thing by I 
 in this world , and I shall be leave in the lurch . he must be keep 
 cheerful . he have a little money in the saving bank , and he have 
 give I his purse to pay for anything necessary . well , that will 
 be the licence ; for I must have that ready at hand , to catch he 
 the moment he be in the humour . you must pay for the liquor . a few 
 friend , and a quiet convivial party would be the thing , if we could 
 get it up . it would advertise the shop , and help I too . " 
 " that can be get up easy enough by anybody who will afford victual and 
 drink ... well yes - it would advertise the shop - that be true . " 
 three day later , when Jude have recover somewhat from the fearful 
 throbbing of his eye and brain , but be still considerably confused 
 in his mind by what have be supply to he by Arabella during 
 the interval - to keep he , jolly , as she express it - the quiet 
 convivial gathering , suggest by she , to wind Jude up to the 
 striking point , take place . 
 Donn have only just open his miserable little pork and sausage 
 shop , which have as yet scarce any customer ; nevertheless that party 
 advertise it well , and the Donns acquire a real notoriety among a 
 certain class in Christminster who know not the college , nor their 
 work , nor their way . Jude be ask if he could suggest any guest 
 in addition to those name by Arabella and her father , and in a 
 saturnine humour of perfect recklessness mention Uncle Joe , and 
 Stagg , and the decayed auctioneer , and other whom he remember as 
 have be frequenter of the well - know tavern during his bout 
 therein year before . he also suggest Freckles and Bower o ' Bliss . 
 Arabella take he at his word so far as the man go , but draw the 
 line at the lady . 
 another man they know , Tinker Taylor , though he live in the same 
 street , be not invite ; but as he go homeward from a late job on 
 the evening of the party , he have occasion to call at the shop for 
 trotter . there be none in , but he be promise some the next 
 morning . while make his inquiry Taylor glance into the back room , 
 and see the guest sit round , card - playing , and drinking , and 
 otherwise enjoy themselves at Donn 's expense . he go home to 
 bed , and on his way out next morning wonder how the party go 
 off . he think it hardly worth while to call at the shop for his 
 provision at that hour , Donn and his daughter be probably not up , 
 if they carouse late the night before . however , he find in pass 
 that the door be open , and he could hear voice within , though the 
 shutter of the meat - stall be not down . he go and tap at the 
 sitting - room door , and open it . 
 " well - to be sure ! " he say , astonish . 
 Hosts and guest be sit card - playing , smoking , and talk , 
 precisely as he have leave they eleven hour early ; the gas be 
 burn and the curtain draw , though it have be broad daylight 
 for two hour out of door . 
 " yes ! " cry Arabella , laugh . " here we be , just the same . we 
 ought to be ashamed of ourselves , ought not   we ! but it be a sort of 
 housewarming , you see ; and our friend be in no hurry . come in , Mr. 
 Taylor , and sit down . " 
 the tinker , or rather reduce ironmonger , be nothing loath , and 
 enter and take a seat . " I shall lose a quarter , but never mind , " 
 he say . " well , really , I could hardly believe my eye when I look 
 in ! it seem as if I be fling back again into last night , all of a 
 sudden . " 
 " so you be . pour out for Mr. Taylor . " 
 he now perceive that she be sit beside Jude , her arm be 
 round his waist . Jude , like the rest of the company , bear on his 
 face the sign of how deeply he have be indulge . 
 " well , we have   be wait for certain legal hour to arrive , to 
 tell the truth , " she continue bashfully , and make her spirituous 
 crimson look as much like a maiden blush as possible . " Jude and I 
 have decide to make up matter between we by tie the knot again , 
 as we find we can not   do without one another after all . so , as a 
 bright notion , we agree to sit on till it be late enough , and go 
 and do it off - hand . " 
 Jude seem to pay no great heed to what she be announce , or 
 indeed to anything whatever . the entrance of Taylor infuse fresh 
 spirit into the company , and they remain sit , till Arabella 
 whisper to her father : " now we may as well go . " 
 " but the parson do not   know ? " 
 " yes , I tell he last night that we might come between eight and 
 nine , as there be reason of decency for do it as early and 
 quiet as possible ; on account of it be our second marriage , which 
 might make people curious to look on if they know . he highly 
 approve . " 
 " oh very well : I be ready , " say her father , get up and shake 
 himself . 
 " now , old darling , " she say to Jude . " come along , as you promise . " 
 " when do I promise anything ? " ask he , whom she have make so tipsy 
 by her special knowledge of that line of business as almost to have 
 make he sober again - or to seem so to those who do not know he . 
 " why ! " say Arabella , affect dismay . " you have   promise to marry I 
 several time as we have   sit here to - night . these gentleman have hear 
 you . " 
 " I do not   remember it , " say Jude doggedly . " there be only one 
 woman - but I will not   mention she in this Capharnaum ! " 
 Arabella look towards her father . " now , Mr. Fawley be honourable , " 
 say Donn . " you and my daughter have be live here together these 
 three or four day , quite on the understanding that you be go to 
 marry she . of course I should not   have have such going on in my house 
 if I have not   understand that . as a point of honour you must do it 
 now . " 
 " do not   say anything against my honour ! " enjoin Jude hotly , 
 stand up . " I would marry the W - - of Babylon rather than do 
 anything dishonourable ! no reflection on you , my dear . it be a 
 mere rhetorical figure - what they call in the book , hyperbole . " 
 " keep your figure for your debt to friend who shelter you , " say 
 Donn . 
 " if I be bind in honour to marry she - as I suppose I be - though 
 how I come to be here with she I know no more than a dead man - marry 
 she I will , so help I God ! I have never behave dishonourably to 
 a woman or to any live thing . I be not a man who want to save 
 himself at the expense of the weak among we ! " 
 " there - never mind he , deary , " say she , put she cheek against 
 Jude 's . " come up and wash your face , and just put yourself tidy , and 
 off we will go . make it up with Father . " 
 they shake hand . Jude go upstairs with she , and soon come down 
 look tidy and calm . arabella , too , have hastily arrange herself , 
 and accompany by donn away they go . 
 " do not   go , " she say to the guest at part . " I have   tell the little 
 maid to get the breakfast while we be go ; and when we come back 
 we will all have some . a good strong cup of tea will set everybody 
 right for go home . " 
 when Arabella , Jude , and Donn have disappear on their matrimonial 
 errand the assemble guest yawn themselves wider awake , and 
 discuss the situation with great interest . Tinker Taylor , be 
 the most sober , reason the most lucidly . 
 " I do not   wish to speak against friend , " he say . " but it do seem a 
 rare curiosity for a couple to marry over again ! if they could not 
 get on the first time when their mind be limp , they will not   the 
 second , by my reckoning . " 
 " do you think he will do it ? " 
 " he be be put upon his honour by the woman , so he me . " 
 " he would hardly do it straight off like this . he be get no licence nor 
 anything . " 
 " she be get that , bless you . do not   you hear she say so to her 
 father ? " 
 " well , " say Tinker Taylor , relighte his pipe at the gas - jet . 
 " take she all together , limb by limb , she be not such a bad - look 
 piece - particular by candlelight . to be sure , halfpence that have 
 be in circulation can not   be expect to look like new one from 
 the mint . but for a woman that be be knock about the four 
 hemisphere for some time , she be passable enough . a little bit thick 
 in the flitch perhaps : but I like a woman that a puff o ' wind will not 
 blow down . " 
 their eye follow the movement of the little girl as she spread 
 the breakfast - cloth on the table they have be use , without wipe 
 up the slop of the liquor . the curtain be undrawn , and the 
 expression of the house make to look like morning . some of the 
 guest , however , fall asleep in their chair . one or two go to the 
 door , and gaze along the street more than once . Tinker Taylor be 
 the chief of these , and after a time he come in with a leer on his 
 face . 
 " by Gad , they be come ! I think the deed be do ! " 
 " no , " say Uncle Joe , follow he in . " take my word , he turn 
 rusty at the last minute . they be walk in a very unusual way ; 
 and that be the meaning of it ! " 
 they wait in silence till the wedding - party could be hear enter 
 the house . first into the room come arabella boisterously ; and her 
 face be enough to show that her strategy have succeed . 
 " Mrs. Fawley , I presume ? " say Tinker Taylor with mock courtesy . 
 " certainly . Mrs. Fawley again , " reply Arabella blandly , pull 
 off her glove and hold out her left hand . " there be the padlock , 
 see ... well , he be a very nice , gentlemanly man indeed . I mean 
 the clergyman . he say to I as gentle as a babe when all be do : 
 ' Mrs. Fawley , I congratulate you heartily , ' he say . ' for have 
 hear your history , and that of your husband , I think you have both 
 do the right and proper thing . and for your past error as a wife , 
 and his as a husband , I think you ought now to be forgive by the 
 world , as you have forgive each other , ' say he . yes : he be a very 
 nice , gentlemanly man . ' the Church do not   recognize divorce in her 
 dogma , strictly speak , ' he say : ' and bear in mind the word of 
 the service in your going out and your coming in : what God hath 
 join together let no man put asunder . ' yes : he be a very nice , 
 gentlemanly man ... but , Jude , my dear , you be enough to make a cat 
 laugh ! you walk that straight , and hold yourself that steady , that 
 one would have think you be go ' prentice to a judge ; though I 
 know you be see double all the time , from the way you fumble 
 with my finger . " 
 " I say I would do anything to - save a woman 's honour , " mutter Jude . 
 " and I have   do it ! " 
 " well now , old deary , come along and have some breakfast . " 
 " I want - some - more whisky , " say Jude stolidly . 
 " Nonsense , dear . not now ! there be no more left . the tea will take 
 the muddle out of our head , and we shall be as fresh as lark . " 
 " all right . I have   - marry you . she say I ought to marry you again , 
 and I have straightway . it be true religion ! ha - ha - ha ! " 
 VIII 
 Michaelmas come and pass , and Jude and his wife , who have live but 
 a short time in her father 's house after their remarriage , be in 
 lodging on the top floor of a dwelling nearer to the centre of the 
 city . 
 he have do a few day ' work during the two or three month since 
 the event , but his health have be indifferent , and it be now 
 precarious . he be sit in an arm - chair before the fire , and 
 cough a good deal . 
 " I have   get a bargain for my trouble in marry thee over 
 again ! " Arabella be say to he . " I shall have to keep ' ee 
 entirely - that be what ' twill come to ! I shall have to make black - pot 
 and sausage , and hawk them about the street , all to support an 
 invalid husband I have no business to be saddle with at all . why 
 do not   you keep your health , deceive one like this ? you be well 
 enough when the wedding be ! " 
 " ah , yes ! " say he , laugh acridly . " I have be think of 
 my foolish feeling about the pig you and I kill during our 
 first marriage . I feel now that the great mercy that could be 
 vouchsafe to I would be that something should serve I as I serve 
 that animal . " 
 this be the sort of discourse that go on between they every day 
 now . the landlord of the lodging , who have hear that they be a 
 queer couple , have doubt if they be marry at all , especially 
 as he have see Arabella kiss Jude one evening when she have take a 
 little cordial ; and he be about to give they notice to quit , till by 
 chance overhear she one night harangue Jude in rattle term , 
 and ultimately fling a shoe at his head , he recognize the note of 
 genuine wedlock ; and conclude that they must be respectable , say 
 no more . 
 Jude do not get any well , and one day he request Arabella , with 
 considerable hesitation , to execute a commission for he . she ask 
 he indifferently what it be . 
 " to write to Sue . " 
 " what in the name - do you want I to write to she for ? " 
 " to ask how she be , and if she will come to see I , because I be ill , 
 and should like to see she - once again . " 
 " it be like you to insult a lawful wife by ask such a thing ! " 
 " it be just in order not to insult you that I ask you to do it . you 
 know I love Sue . I do not   wish to mince the matter - there stand the 
 fact : I love she . I could find a dozen way of send a letter to 
 she without your knowledge . but I wish to be quite above - board with 
 you , and with her husband . a message through you ask she to come 
 be at least free from any odour of intrigue . if she retain any of 
 her old nature at all , she will come . " 
 " you have   no respect for marriage whatever , or its right and duty ! " 
 " what do it matter what my opinion be - a wretch like I ! can 
 it matter to anybody in the world who come to see I for half an 
 hour - here with one foot in the grave ! ... come , please write , 
 Arabella ! " he plead . " repay my candour by a little generosity ! " 
 " I should think not ! " 
 " not just once ? - oh do ! " he feel that his physical weakness have 
 take away all his dignity . 
 " what do you want she to know how you be for ? she do not   want to see 
 ' ee . she be the rat that forsook the sink ship ! " 
 " do not , do not ! " 
 " and I stick to un - the more fool I ! have that strumpet in the house 
 indeed ! " 
 almost as soon as the word be speak Jude spring from the chair , 
 and before Arabella know where she be he have she on her back upon a 
 little couch which stand there , he kneel above she . 
 " say another word of that sort , " he whisper , " and I will kill 
 you - here and now ! I have   everything to gain by it - my own death not 
 be the least part . so do not   think there be no meaning in what I 
 say ! " 
 " what do you want I to do ? " gasp Arabella . 
 " promise never to speak of she . " 
 " very well . I do . " 
 " I take your word , " he say scornfully as he loosen she . " but what 
 it be worth I can not   say . " 
 " you could not   kill the pig , but you could kill I ! " 
 " ah - there you have I ! no - I could not   kill you - even in a passion . 
 taunt away ! " 
 he then begin cough very much , and she estimate his life with an 
 appraiser 's eye as he sink back ghastly pale . " I will send for she , " 
 Arabella murmur , " if you will agree to my be in the room with you 
 all the time she be here . " 
 the soft side of his nature , the desire to see Sue , make he unable 
 to resist the offer even now , provoke as he have be ; and he reply 
 breathlessly : " yes , I agree . only send for she ! " 
 in the evening he inquire if she have write . 
 " yes , " she say ; " I write a note tell she you be ill , and ask 
 she to come to - morrow or the day after . I have not   post it yet . " 
 the next day Jude wonder if she really do post it , but would not 
 ask she ; and foolish Hope , that live on a drop and a crumb , make he 
 restless with expectation . he know the time of the possible train , 
 and listen on each occasion for sound of she . 
 she do not come ; but Jude would not address Arabella again thereon . 
 he hop and expect all the next day ; but no Sue appear ; neither 
 be there any note of reply . then Jude decide in the privacy of his 
 mind that Arabella have never post her , although she have write 
 it . there be something in her manner which tell it . his physical 
 weakness be such that he shed tear at the disappointment when she 
 be not there to see . his suspicion be , in fact , well found . 
 Arabella , like some other nurse , think that your duty towards your 
 invalid be to pacify he by any mean short of really act upon 
 his fancy . 
 he never say another word to she about his wish or his conjecture . 
 a silent , undiscerned resolve grow up in he , which give he , if not 
 strength , stability and calm . one midday when , after an absence of 
 two hour , she come into the room , she behold the chair empty . 
 down she flop on the bed , and sit , meditate . " now where the 
 devil be my man go to ! " she say . 
 a drive rain from the north - east have be fall with more or less 
 intermission all the morning , and look from the window at the 
 dripping spout it seem impossible to believe that any sick man 
 would have venture out to almost certain death . yet a conviction 
 possess Arabella that he have go out , and it become a certainty 
 when she have search the house . " if he be such a fool , let he be ! " 
 she say . " I can do no more . " 
 Jude be at that moment in a railway train that be draw near to 
 Alfredston , oddly swathe , pale as a monumental figure in alabaster , 
 and much star at by other passenger . an hour later his thin form , 
 in the long great - coat and blanket he have come with , but without an 
 umbrella , could have be see walk along the five - mile road to 
 Marygreen . on his face show the determine purpose that alone 
 sustain he , but to which have weakness afford a sorry foundation . 
 by the up - hill walk he be quite blow , but he press on ; and at 
 half - past three o'clock stand by the familiar well at Marygreen . 
 the rain be keep everybody indoor ; Jude cross the green to the 
 church without observation , and find the building open . here he 
 stand , look forth at the school , whence he could hear the usual 
 sing - song tone of the little voice that have not learn Creation 's 
 groan . 
 he wait till a small boy come from the school - one evidently 
 allow out before hour for some reason or other . Jude hold up his 
 hand , and the child come . 
 " please call at the schoolhouse and ask Mrs. Phillotson if she will 
 be kind enough to come to the church for a few minute . " 
 the child depart , and Jude hear he knock at the door of the 
 dwelling . he himself go far into the church . everything 
 be new , except a few piece of carving preserve from the wrecked 
 old fabric , now fix against the new wall . he stand by these : 
 they seem akin to the perished people of that place who be his 
 ancestor and Sue 's . 
 a light footstep , which might have be account no more than an 
 add drip to the rainfall , sound in the porch , and he look 
 round . 
 " oh - I do not   think it be you ! I do not   - oh , Jude ! " a hysterical 
 catch in her breath end in a succession of they . he advance , but 
 she quickly recover and go back . 
 " do not   go - do not   go ! " he implore . " this be my last time ! I think 
 it would be less intrusive than to enter your house . and I shall 
 never come again . do not   then be unmerciful . Sue , Sue ! we be 
 act by the letter ; and ' the letter killeth ' ! " 
 " I will stay - I will not   be unkind ! " she say , her mouth quivering and her 
 tear flow as she allow he to come close . " but why do you 
 come , and do this wrong thing , after do such a right thing as you 
 have do ? " 
 " what right thing ? " 
 " Marrying Arabella again . it be in the Alfredston paper . she have 
 never be other than your , Jude - in a proper sense . and therefore 
 you do so well - oh so well ! - in recognize it - and take she to 
 you again . " 
 " God above - and be that all I have   come to hear ? if there be anything 
 more degrading , immoral , unnatural , than another in my life , it be 
 this meretricious contract with Arabella which have be call do 
 the right thing ! and you too - you call yourself Phillotson 's wife ! 
 his wife ! you be mine . " 
 " do not   make I rush away from you - I can not   bear much ! but on this 
 point I be decide . " 
 " I can not understand how you do it - how you think it - I can not ! " 
 " never mind that . he be a kind husband to I - and I - I have   wrestle 
 and struggle , and fast , and pray . I have nearly bring my body 
 into complete subjection . and you must not   - will you - wake - " 
 " oh you darle little fool ; where be your reason ? you seem to have 
 suffer the loss of your faculty ! I would argue with you if I 
 do not   know that a woman in your state of feeling be quite beyond all 
 appeal to her brain . or be it that you be humbug yourself , as 
 so many woman do about these thing ; and do not   actually believe what 
 you pretend to , and only be indulge in the luxury of the emotion 
 raise by an affected belief ? " 
 " luxury ! how can you be so cruel ! " 
 " you dear , sad , soft , most melancholy wreck of a promising human 
 intellect that it have ever be my lot to behold ! where be your 
 scorn of convention go ? I would have die game ! " 
 " you crush , almost insult I , Jude ! go away from I ! " she turn 
 off quickly . 
 " I will . I would never come to see you again , even if I have the 
 strength to come , which I shall not have any more . Sue , Sue , you be 
 not worth a man 's love ! " 
 her bosom begin to go up and down . " I can not   endure you to say that ! " 
 she burst out , and her eye rest on he a moment , she turn back 
 impulsively . " do not , do not   scorn I ! kiss I , oh kiss I lot 
 of time , and say I be not a coward and a contemptible humbug - I 
 can not   bear it ! " she rush up to he and , with her mouth on his , 
 continue : " I must tell you - oh I must - my darling Love ! it have 
 be - only a church marriage - an apparent marriage I mean ! he 
 suggest it at the very first ! " 
 " how ? " 
 " I mean it be a nominal marriage only . it have not   be more than that 
 at all since I come back to he ! " 
 " Sue ! " he say . press she to he in his arm he bruise she 
 lip with kiss : " if misery can know happiness , I have a moment 's 
 happiness now ! now , in the name of all you hold holy , tell I the 
 truth , and no lie . you do love I still ? " 
 " I do ! you know it too well ! ... but I MUSTN'T do this ! I must not 
 kiss you back as I would ! " 
 " but do ! " 
 " and yet you be so dear ! - and you look so ill - " 
 " and so do you ! there be one more , in memory of our dead little 
 child - your and mine ! " 
 the word strike she like a blow , and she bend her head . " I 
 MUSTN'T - I can't go on with this ! " she gasp presently . " but there , 
 there , darling ; I give you back your kiss ; I do , I do ! ... and now 
 I will hate myself for ever for my sin ! " 
 " no - let I make my last appeal . listen to this ! we have   both 
 remarry out of our sens . I be make drunk to do it . you be 
 the same . I be gin - drunk ; you be creed - drunk . either form of 
 intoxication take away the nobler vision ... let we then shake off 
 our mistake , and run away together ! " 
 " no ; again no ! ... why do you tempt I so far , Jude ! it be too 
 merciless ! ... but I have   get over myself now . do not   follow I - do not 
 look at I . leave I , for pity 's sake ! " 
 she run up the church to the east end , and Jude do as she request . 
 he do not turn his head , but take up his blanket , which she have not 
 see , and go straight out . as he pass the end of the church she 
 hear his cough mingle with the rain on the window , and in a last 
 instinct of human affection , even now unsubdue by her fetter , she 
 spring up as if to go and succour he . but she kneel down again , and 
 stop her ear with her hand till all possible sound of he have 
 pass away . 
 he be by this time at the corner of the green , from which the path 
 run across the field in which he have scar rook as a boy . he 
 turn and look back , once , at the building which still contain 
 Sue ; and then go on , know that his eye would light on that 
 scene no more . 
 there be cold spot up and down Wessex in autumn and winter weather ; 
 but the cold of all when a north or east wind be blow be the 
 crest of the down by the Brown House , where the road to Alfredston 
 cross the old ridgeway . here the first winter sleet and snow 
 fall and lie , and here the spring frost linger last unthaw . here 
 in the tooth of the north - east wind and rain Jude now pursue his 
 way , wet through , the necessary slowness of his walk from lack of his 
 former strength be insufficent to maintain his heat . he come to 
 the milestone , and , rain as it be , spread his blanket and lie 
 down there to rest . before move on he go and feel at the back 
 of the stone for his own carving . it be still there ; but nearly 
 obliterate by moss . he pass the spot where the gibbet of his 
 ancestor and Sue 's have stand , and descend the hill . 
 it be dark when he reach Alfredston , where he have a cup of tea , 
 the deadly chill that begin to creep into his bone be too much 
 for he to endure fasting . to get home he have to travel by a steam 
 tram - car , and two branch of railway , with much wait at a 
 junction . he do not reach Christminster till ten o'clock . 
 IX 
 on the platform stand Arabella . she look he up and down . 
 " you have   be to see she ? " she ask . 
 " I have , " say Jude , literally totter with cold and lassitude . 
 " well , now you would well march along home . " 
 the water run out of he as he go , and he be compel to lean 
 against the wall to support himself while cough . 
 " you have   do for yourself by this , young man , " say she . " I do not 
 know whether you know it . " 
 " of course I do . I mean to do for myself . " 
 " what - to commit suicide ? " 
 " certainly . " 
 " well , I be blest ! kill yourself for a woman . " 
 " listen to I , Arabella . you think you be the strong ; and so 
 you be , in a physical sense , now . you could push I over like a 
 nine - pin . you do not send that letter the other day , and I could 
 not resent your conduct . but I be not so weak in another way as 
 you think . I make up my mind that a man confine to his room by 
 inflammation of the lung , a fellow who have only two wish leave in 
 the world , to see a particular woman , and then to die , could neatly 
 accomplish those two wish at one stroke by take this journey in 
 the rain . that I have   do . I have see she for the last time , and 
 I have   finish myself - put an end to a feverish life which ought never 
 to have be begin ! " 
 " Lord - you do talk lofty ! will not   you have something warm to drink ? " 
 " no thank you . let us get home . " 
 they go along by the silent college , and Jude keep stop . 
 " what be you look at ? " 
 " stupid fancy . I see , in a way , those spirit of the dead again , 
 on this my last walk , that I see when I first walk here ! " 
 " what a curious chap you be ! " 
 " I seem to see they , and almost hear they rustle . but I do not 
 revere all of they as I do then . I do not   believe in half of they . 
 the theologian , the apologist , and their kin the metaphysicians , 
 the high - handed statesman , and other , no long interest I . all 
 that have be spoil for I by the grind of stern reality ! " 
 the expression of Jude 's corpselike face in the watery lamplight be 
 indeed as if he see people where there be nobody . at moment he 
 stand still by an archway , like one watch a figure walk out ; then 
 he would look at a window like one discern a familiar face behind 
 it . he seem to hear voice , whose word he repeat as if to 
 gather their meaning . 
 " they seem laugh at I ! " 
 " who ? " 
 " oh - I be talk to myself ! the phantom all about here , in the 
 college archway , and window . they use to look friendly in the old 
 day , particularly Addison , and Gibbon , and Johnson , and Dr. Browne , 
 and Bishop Ken - " 
 " come along do ! phantom ! there be neither live nor dead 
 hereabout except a damn policeman ! I never see the street 
 emptier . " 
 " Fancy ! the Poet of Liberty use to walk here , and the great 
 Dissector of Melancholy there ! " 
 " I do not   want to hear about them ! they bear I . " 
 " Walter Raleigh be beckon to I from that lane - Wycliffe - Harvey - 
 Hooker - Arnold - and a whole crowd of Tractarian Shades - " 
 " I don't want to know their name , I tell you ! what do I care about 
 folk dead and go ? upon my soul you be more sober when you have   be 
 drink than when you have not ! " 
 " I must rest a moment , " he say ; and as he pause , hold to the 
 railing , he measure with his eye the height of a college front . 
 " this be old rubric . and that Sarcophagus ; and up that lane Crozier 
 and Tudor : and all down there be Cardinal with its long front , and 
 its window with lift eyebrow , represent the polite surprise of 
 the university at the effort of such as I. " 
 " come along , and I will treat you ! " 
 " very well . it will help I home , for I feel the chilly fog from 
 the meadow of Cardinal as if death - claw be grab I through 
 and through . as Antigone say , I be neither a dweller among man nor 
 ghost . but , Arabella , when I be dead , you will see my spirit flit 
 up and down here among these ! " 
 " Pooh ! you may not   die after all . you be tough enough yet , old 
 man . " 
 it be night at Marygreen , and the rain of the afternoon show no 
 sign of abatement . about the time at which Jude and Arabella be 
 walk the street of Christminster homeward , the Widow Edlin 
 cross the green , and open the back door of the schoolmaster 's 
 dwelling , which she often do now before bedtime , to assist Sue in 
 put thing away . 
 Sue be muddle helplessly in the kitchen , for she be not a good 
 housewife , though she try to be , and grow impatient of domestic 
 detail . 
 " Lord love ' ee , what do ye do that yourself for , when I have   come o ' 
 purpose ! you know I should come . " 
 " oh - I do not   know - I forget ! no , I do not   forget . I do it to 
 discipline myself . I have scrub the stair since eight o'clock . 
 I must practise myself in my household duty . I have   shamefully 
 neglect they ! " 
 " why should ye ? he will get a well school , perhaps be a parson , in 
 time , and you will keep two servant . ' tis a pity to spoil they pretty 
 hand . " 
 " do not   talk of my pretty hand , Mrs. Edlin . this pretty body of mine 
 have be the ruin of I already ! " 
 " Pshoo - you have   get no body to speak of ! you put I more in mind 
 of a sperrit . but there seem something wrong to - night , my dear . 
 Husband cross ? " 
 " no . he never be . he be go to bed early . " 
 " then what be it ? " 
 " I can not tell you . I have do wrong to - day . and I want to 
 eradicate it ... well - I will tell you this - Jude have be here this 
 afternoon , and I find I still love he - oh , grossly ! I can not tell 
 you more . " 
 " ah ! " say the widow . " I tell ' ee how ' twould be ! " 
 " but it shall not   be ! I have not tell my husband of his visit ; it be 
 not necessary to trouble he about it , as I never mean to see Jude 
 any more . but I be go to make my conscience right on my duty to 
 Richard - by do a penance - the ultimate thing . I must ! " 
 " I would not   - since he agree to it be otherwise , and it have go 
 on three month very well as it be . " 
 " yes - he agree to my living as I choose ; but I feel it be an 
 indulgence I ought not to exact from he . it ought not to have be 
 accept by I . to reverse it will be terrible - but I must be more 
 just to he . o why be I so unheroic ! " 
 " what be it you do not   like in he ? " ask Mrs. Edlin curiously . 
 " I can not tell you . it be something ... I can not say . the mournful 
 thing be , that nobody would admit it as a reason for feeling as I do ; 
 so that no excuse be leave I . " 
 " do you ever tell Jude what it be ? " 
 " never . " 
 " I have   hear strange tale o ' husband in my time , " observe the widow 
 in a lowered voice . " they say that when the saint be upon the 
 earth devil use to take husband ' form o ' night , and get poor 
 woman into all sort of trouble . but I do not   know why that should 
 come into my head , for it be only a tale ... what a wind and rain it 
 be to - night ! well - do not   be in a hurry to alter thing , my dear . 
 think it over . " 
 " no , no ! I have   screw my weak soul up to treat he more 
 courteously - and it must be now - at once - before I break down ! " 
 " I do not   think you ought to force your nature . no woman ought to be 
 expect to . " 
 " it be my duty . I will drink my cup to the dreg ! " 
 half an hour later when Mrs. Edlin put on her bonnet and shawl to 
 leave , Sue seem to be seize with vague terror . 
 " no - no - do not   go , Mrs. Edlin , " she implore , her eye enlarge , and 
 with a quick nervous look over her shoulder . 
 " but it be bedtime , child . " 
 " yes , but - there be the little spare room - my room that be . it be 
 quite ready . please stay , Mrs. Edlin ! - I shall want you in the 
 morning . " 
 " oh well - I do not   mind , if you wish . nothing will happen to my four 
 old wall , whether I be there or no . " 
 she then fasten up the door , and they ascend the stair 
 together . 
 " wait here , Mrs. Edlin , " say Sue . " I will go into my old room a 
 moment by myself . " 
 leave the widow on the landing Sue turn to the chamber which have 
 be hers exclusively since her arrival at Marygreen , and push to 
 the door kneel down by the bed for a minute or two . she then arise , 
 and take her night - gown from the pillow undressed and come out to 
 Mrs. Edlin . a man could be hear snore in the room opposite . she 
 wish Mrs. Edlin good - night , and the widow enter the room that Sue 
 have just vacate . 
 Sue unlatche the other chamber door , and , as if seize with 
 faintness , sink down outside it . get up again she half open 
 the door , and say " Richard . " as the word come out of her mouth she 
 visibly shudder . 
 the snoring have quite cease for some time , but he do not reply . 
 Sue seem relieve , and hurry back to Mrs. Edlin 's chamber . " be 
 you in bed , Mrs. Edlin ? " she ask . 
 " no , dear , " say the widow , open the door . " I be old and slow , 
 and it take I a long while to un - ray . I han't   unlace my jump 
 yet . " 
 " I - do not   hear he ! and perhaps - perhaps - " 
 " what , child ? " 
 " perhaps he be dead ! " she gasp . " and then - I should be free , and I 
 could go to Jude ! ... ah - no - I forget she - and God ! " 
 " let us go and hearken . no - he be snore again . but the rain and the 
 wind be so loud that you can hardly hear anything but between 
 while . " 
 Sue have drag herself back . " Mrs. Edlin , good - night again ! I be 
 sorry I call you out . " the widow retreat a second time . 
 the strained , resign look return to Sue 's face when she be 
 alone . " I must do it - I must ! I must drink to the dreg ! " she 
 whisper . " Richard ! " she say again . 
 " hey - what ? be that you , Susanna ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " what do you want ? anything the matter ? wait a moment . " he pull 
 on some article of clothing , and come to the door . " yes ? " 
 " when we be at Shaston I jump out of the window rather than that 
 you should come near I . I have never reverse that treatment till 
 now - when I have come to beg your pardon for it , and ask you to let 
 I in . " 
 " perhaps you only think you ought to do this ? I do not   wish you to 
 come against your impulse , as I have say . " 
 " but I beg to be admit . " she wait a moment , and repeat , 
 " I beg to be admit ! I have be in error - even to - day . I have 
 exceed my right . I do not mean to tell you , but perhaps I ought . 
 I sin against you this afternoon . " 
 " how ? " 
 " I meet Jude ! I do not   know he be come . and - " 
 " well ? " 
 " I kiss he , and let he kiss I . " 
 " oh - the old story ! " 
 " Richard , I do not   know we be go to kiss each other till we 
 do ! " 
 " how many time ? " 
 " a good many . I do not   know . I be horrified to look back on it , and 
 the least I can do after it be to come to you like this . " 
 " come - this be pretty bad , after what I have   do ! anything else to 
 confess ? " 
 " no . " she have be intend to say : " I call he my darling love . " 
 but , as a contrite woman always keep back a little , that portion of 
 the scene remain untold . she go on : " I be never go to see he 
 any more . he speak of some thing of the past : and it overcome I . 
 he speak of - the child . but , as I have say , I be glad - almost 
 glad I mean - that they be dead , Richard . it blot out all that life 
 of mine ! " 
 " well - about not see he again any more . come - you really mean 
 this ? " there be something in Phillotson 's tone now which seem to 
 show that his three month of remarriage with Sue have somehow not 
 be so satisfactory as his magnanimity or amative patience have 
 anticipate . 
 " yes , yes ! " 
 " perhaps you will swear it on the New Testament ? " 
 " I will . " 
 he go back to the room and bring out a little brown Testament . 
 " now then : so help you God ! " 
 she swear . 
 " very good ! " 
 " now I supplicate you , Richard , to whom I belong , and whom I wish to 
 honour and obey , as I vow , to let I in . " 
 " think it over well . you know what it mean . have you back in the 
 house be one thing - this another . so think again . " 
 " I have think - I wish this ! " 
 " that be a complaisant spirit - and perhaps you be right . with a 
 lover hang about , a half - marriage should be complete . but I 
 repeat my reminder this third and last time . " 
 " it be my wish ! ... o God ! " 
 " what do you say ' o god ' for ? " 
 " I do not   know ! " 
 " yes you do ! but ... " he gloomily consider her thin and fragile 
 form a moment long as she crouch before he in her night - clothe . 
 " well , I think it might end like this , " he say presently . " I owe 
 you nothing , after these sign ; but I will take you in at your word , 
 and forgive you . " 
 he put his arm round she to lift she up . Sue start back . 
 " what be the matter ? " he ask , speak for the first time sternly . 
 " you shrink from I again ? - just as formerly ! " 
 " no , Richard - I - I - be not think - " 
 " you wish to come in here ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " you still bear in mind what it mean ? " 
 " yes . it be my duty ! " 
 place the candlestick on the chest of drawer he lead she through 
 the doorway , and lift she bodily , kiss she . a quick look of 
 aversion pass over her face , but clench her tooth she utter 
 no cry . 
 Mrs. Edlin have by this time undressed , and be about to get into bed 
 when she say to herself : " ah - perhaps I would well go and see if the 
 little thing be all right . how it do blow and rain ! " 
 the widow go out on the landing , and see that Sue have disappear . " ah ! 
 Poor soul ! wedding be funeral ' a b'lieve nowadays . fifty - five 
 year ago , come Fall , since my man and I marry ! time have change 
 since then ! " 
 X 
 despite himself Jude recover somewhat , and work at his trade for 
 several week . after Christmas , however , he break down again . 
 with the money he have earn he shift his lodging to a yet more 
 central part of the town . but Arabella see that he be not likely 
 to do much work for a long while , and be cross enough at the turn 
 affair have take since her remarriage to he . " I be hang if you 
 have not   be clever in this last stroke ! " she would say , " to get a 
 nurse for nothing by marry I ! " 
 Jude be absolutely indifferent to what she say , and indeed , often 
 regard her abuse in a humorous light . sometimes his mood be more 
 earnest , and as he lie he often ramble on upon the defeat of his 
 early aim . 
 " every man have some little power in some one direction , " he would 
 say . " I be never really stout enough for the stone trade , 
 particularly the fixing . move the block always use to strain 
 I , and stand the try draught in building before the window 
 be in always give I cold , and I think that begin the mischief 
 inside . but I feel I could do one thing if I have the opportunity . 
 I could accumulate idea , and impart they to other . I wonder if the 
 founder have such as I in their mind - a fellow good for nothing else 
 but that particular thing ? ... I hear that soon there be go to 
 be a well chance for such helpless student as I be . there be 
 scheme afoot for make the university less exclusive , and extend 
 its influence . I do not   know much about it . and it be too late , too 
 late for I ! ah - and for how many worthy one before I ! " 
 " how you keep a - mumbling ! " say Arabella . " I should have think 
 you would have get over all that craze about book by this time . and so 
 you would , if you have have any sense to begin with . you be as bad now 
 as when we be first marry . " 
 on one occasion while soliloquize thus he call she " sue " 
 unconsciously . 
 " I wish you would mind who you be talk to ! " say Arabella 
 indignantly . " call a respectable married woman by the name of 
 that - " she remember herself and he do not catch the word . 
 but in the course of time , when she see how thing be go , and 
 how very little she have to fear from Sue 's rivalry , she have a fit of 
 generosity . " I suppose you want to see your - Sue ? " she say . " well , 
 I do not   mind she come . you can have she here if you like . " 
 " I do not   wish to see she again . " 
 " oh - that be a change ! " 
 " and do not   tell she anything about I - that I be ill , or anything . 
 she have choose she course . let she go ! " 
 one day he receive a surprise . Mrs. Edlin come to see he , quite 
 on her own account . Jude 's wife , whose feeling as to where his 
 affection be centre have reach absolute indifference by 
 this time , go out , leave the old woman alone with Jude . he 
 impulsively ask how Sue be , and then say bluntly , remember 
 what Sue have tell he : " I suppose they be still only husband and 
 wife in name ? " 
 Mrs. Edlin hesitate . " well , no - it be different now . she be begin it 
 quite lately - all of her own free will . " 
 " when do she begin ? " he ask quickly . 
 " the night after you come . but as a punishment to her poor self . 
 he do not   wish it , but she insist . " 
 " Sue , my Sue - you darle fool - this be almost more than I can 
 endure ! ... Mrs. Edlin - do not   be frighten at my rambling - I have 
 get to talk to myself lie here so many hour alone - she be once 
 a woman whose intellect be to mine like a star to a benzoline lamp : 
 who see all MY superstition as cobwebs that she could brush away 
 with a word . then bitter affliction come to we , and her intellect 
 break , and she veer round to darkness . strange difference of sex , 
 that time and circumstance , which enlarge the view of most man , 
 narrow the view of woman almost invariably . and now the ultimate 
 horror have come - she give herself like this to what she loathe , in 
 her enslavement to form ! she , so sensitive , so shrink , that the 
 very wind seem to blow on she with a touch of deference ... as for 
 Sue and I when we be at our own good , long ago - when our mind 
 be clear , and our love of truth fearless - the time be not ripe 
 for we ! our idea be fifty year too soon to be any good to we . 
 and so the resistance they meet with bring reaction in she , and 
 recklessness and ruin on I ! ... there - this , Mrs. Edlin , be how 
 I go on to myself continually , as I lie here . I must be bore you 
 awfully . " 
 " not at all , my dear boy . I could hearken to ' ee all day . " 
 as Jude reflect more and more on her news , and grow more restless , 
 he begin in his mental agony to use terribly profane language about 
 social convention , which start a fit of coughing . presently there 
 come a knock at the door downstairs . as nobody answer it Mrs. 
 Edlin herself go down . 
 the visitor say blandly : " the doctor . " the lanky form be that of 
 Physician Vilbert , who have be call in by Arabella . 
 " how be my patient at present ? " ask the physician . 
 " oh bad - very bad ! poor chap , he get excite , and do blaspeam 
 terribly , since I let out some gossip by accident - the more to my 
 blame . but there - you must excuse a man in suffer for what he 
 say , and I hope God will forgive he . " 
 " ah . I will go up and see he . Mrs. Fawley at home ? " 
 " she be not in at present , but she will be here soon . " 
 Vilbert go ; but though Jude have hitherto take the medicine of 
 that skilful practitioner with the great indifference whenever 
 pour down his throat by Arabella , he be now so bring to bay by 
 event that he vent his opinion of Vilbert in the physician 's face , 
 and so forcibly , and with such striking epithet , that Vilbert soon 
 scurry downstairs again . at the door he meet Arabella , Mrs. Edlin 
 have leave . Arabella inquire how he think her husband be 
 now , and see that the doctor look ruffle , ask he to take 
 something . he assent . 
 " I will bring it to you here in the passage , " she say . " there be 
 nobody but I about the house to - day . " 
 she bring he a bottle and a glass , and he drank . 
 Arabella begin shake with suppressed laughter . " what be this , my 
 dear ? " he ask , smack his lip . 
 " oh - a drop of wine - and something in it . " laugh again she say : 
 " I pour your own love - philtre into it , that you sell I at the 
 agricultural show , do not   you re - member ? " 
 " I do , I do ! clever woman ! but you must be prepare for the 
 consequence . " put his arm round her shoulder he kiss she 
 there and then . 
 " do not   do not , " she whisper , laugh good - humouredly . " my man will 
 hear . " 
 she let he out of the house , and as she go back she say to 
 herself : " well ! weak woman must provide for a rainy day . and if my 
 poor fellow upstairs do go off - as I suppose he will soon - it be well 
 to keep chance open . and I can not   pick and choose now as I could 
 when I be young . and one must take the old if one can not   get the 
 young . " 
 XI 
 the last page to which the chronicler of these life would ask the 
 reader 's attention be concern with the scene in and out of Jude 's 
 bedroom when leafy summer come round again . 
 his face be now so thin that his old friend would hardly have know 
 he . it be afternoon , and Arabella be at the look - glass curling 
 her hair , which operation she perform by heat an umbrella - stay 
 in the flame of a candle she have light , and use it upon the 
 flow lock . when she have finish this , practise a dimple , and 
 put on her thing , she cast her eye round upon Jude . he seem to 
 be sleep , though his position be an elevated one , his malady 
 prevent he lie down . 
 Arabella , hat , gloved , and ready , sit down and wait , as if 
 expect some one to come and take her place as nurse . 
 certain sound from without reveal that the town be in festivity , 
 though little of the festival , whatever it might have be , could be 
 see here . bell begin to ring , and the note come into the room 
 through the open window , and travel round Jude 's head in a hum . 
 they make she restless , and at last she say to herself : " why ever 
 do not   Father come ! " 
 she look again at Jude , critically gauge his ebb life , as she 
 have do so many time during the late month , and glance at his 
 watch , which be hang up by way of timepiece , rise impatiently . 
 still he sleep , and come to a resolution she slip from the room , 
 close the door noiselessly , and descend the stair . the house 
 be empty . the attraction which move Arabella to go abroad have 
 evidently draw away the other inmate long before . 
 it be a warm , cloudless , entice day . she shut the front door , and 
 hasten round into Chief Street , and when near the theatre could 
 hear the note of the organ , a rehearsal for a come concert be 
 in progress . she enter under the archway of Oldgate College , where 
 man be put up awning round the quadrangle for a ball in the 
 hall that evening . People who have come up from the country for the 
 day be picnic on the grass , and Arabella walk along the 
 gravel path and under the aged lime . but find this place rather 
 dull she return to the street , and watch the carriage draw 
 up for the concert , numerous don and their wife , and undergraduate 
 with gay female companion , crowd up likewise . when the door 
 be close , and the concert begin , she move on . 
 the powerful note of that concert roll forth through the swing 
 yellow blind of the open window , over the housetop , and into the 
 still air of the lane . they reach so far as to the room in which 
 Jude lay ; and it be about this time that his cough begin again and 
 awaken he . 
 as soon as he could speak he murmur , his eye still close : " a 
 little water , please . " 
 nothing but the deserted room receive his appeal , and he cough 
 to exhaustion again - say still more feebly : " water - some 
 water - Sue - Arabella ! " 
 the room remain still as before . presently he gasp again : 
 " throat - water - Sue - darling - drop of water - please - oh please ! " 
 no water come , and the organ note , faint as a bee 's hum , roll in 
 as before . 
 while he remain , his face change , shout and hurrah come from 
 somewhere in the direction of the river . 
 " ah - yes ! the Remembrance game , " he murmur . " and I here . and 
 Sue defile ! " 
 the hurrah be repeat , drown the faint organ note . Jude 's 
 face change more : he whisper slowly , his parch lip scarcely 
 move : 
  " let the day perish wherein I be bear , and the night in which it 
 be say , there be a man - child conceive . " 
  " Hurrah ! " 
  " let that day be darkness ; let not God regard it from above , neither 
 let the light shine upon it . Lo , let that night be solitary , let no 
 joyful voice come therein . " 
  " Hurrah ! " 
  " why die I not from the womb ? why do I not give up the ghost when 
 I come out of the belly ? ... for now should I have lain still and 
 be quiet . I should have sleep : then have I be at rest ! " 
  " Hurrah ! " 
  " there the prisoner rest together ; they hear not the voice of the 
 oppressor ... the small and the great be there ; and the servant be 
 free from his master . wherefore be light give to he that be in 
 misery , and life unto the bitter in soul ? " 
 meanwhile Arabella , in her journey to discover what be go on , 
 take a short cut down a narrow street and through an obscure nook 
 into the quad of Cardinal . it be full of bustle , and brilliant 
 in the sunlight with flower and other preparation for a ball 
 here also . a carpenter nod to she , one who have formerly be a 
 fellow - workman of Jude 's . a corridor be in course of erection from 
 the entrance to the hall staircase , of gay red and buff bunt . 
 Waggon - load of box contain bright plant in full bloom be 
 be place about , and the great staircase be cover with red 
 cloth . she nod to one workman and another , and ascend to the 
 hall on the strength of their acquaintance , where they be put 
 down a new floor and decorate for the dance . 
 the cathedral bell close at hand be sound for five o'clock 
 service . 
 " I should not mind have a spin there with a fellow 's arm round my 
 waist , " she say to one of the man . " but Lord , I must be get 
 home again - there be a lot to do . no dancing for I ! " 
 when she reach home she be meet at the door by Stagg , and one or 
 two other of Jude 's fellow stoneworker . " we be just go down 
 to the river , " say the former , " to see the boat - bumping . but we have 
 call round on our way to ask how your husband be . " 
 " he be sleep nicely , thank you , " say Arabella . 
 " that be right . well now , can not   you give yourself half an hour 's 
 relaxation , Mrs. Fawley , and come along with we ? ' twould do you 
 good . " 
 " I should like to go , " say she . " I have   never see the boat - racing , 
 and I hear it be good fun . " 
 " come along ! " 
 " how I wish I could ! " she look longingly down the street . " wait 
 a minute , then . I will just run up and see how he be now . Father be 
 with he , I believe ; so I can most likely come . " 
 they wait , and she enter . Downstairs the inmate be absent 
 as before , have , in fact , go in a body to the river where the 
 procession of boat be to pass . when she reach the bedroom she 
 find that her father have not even now come . 
 " why could not   he have be here ! " she say impatiently . " he want to 
 see the boat himself - that be what it be ! " 
 however , on look round to the bed she brighten , for she see 
 that Jude be apparently sleep , though he be not in the usual 
 half - elevate posture necessitate by his cough . he have slip 
 down , and lie flat . a second glance cause she to start , and she 
 go to the bed . his face be quite white , and gradually become 
 rigid . she touch his finger ; they be cold , though his body be 
 still warm . she listen at his chest . all be still within . the 
 bumping of near thirty year have cease . 
 after her first appalled sense of what have happen the faint note 
 of a military or other brass band from the river reach her ear ; 
 and in a provoked tone she exclaim , " to think he should die just 
 now ! why do he die just now ! " then meditate another moment or 
 two she go to the door , softly close it as before , and again 
 descend the stair . 
 " here she be ! " say one of the workman . " we wonder if you be 
 come after all . come along ; we must be quick to get a good 
 place ... well , how be he ? sleep well still ? of course , we do not 
 want to drag ' ee away if - " 
 " oh yes - sleep quite sound . he will not   wake yet , " she say 
 hurriedly . 
 they go with the crowd down Cardinal Street , where they presently 
 reach the bridge , and the gay barge burst upon their view . thence 
 they pass by a narrow slit down to the riverside path - now dusty , 
 hot , and throng . almost as soon as they have arrive the grand 
 procession of boat begin ; the oar smack with a loud kiss on the 
 face of the stream , as they be lower from the perpendicular . 
 " oh , I say - how jolly ! I be glad I have   come , " say Arabella . " and - it 
 can not   hurt my husband - my be away . " 
 on the opposite side of the river , on the crowded barge , be 
 gorgeous nosegay of feminine beauty , fashionably array in green , 
 pink , blue , and white . the blue flag of the boat club denote the 
 centre of interest , beneath which a band in red uniform give out the 
 note she have already hear in the death - chamber . collegian of all 
 sort , in canoe with lady , watch keenly for " our " boat , dart 
 up and down . while she regard the lively scene somebody touch 
 Arabella in the rib , and look round she see Vilbert . 
 " that philtre be operate , you know ! " he say with a leer . " shame 
 on ' ee to wreck a heart so ! " 
 " I shall not   talk of love to - day . " 
 " why not ? it be a general holiday . " 
 she do not reply . Vilbert 's arm steal round her waist , which act 
 could be perform unobserved in the crowd . an arch expression 
 overspread Arabella 's face at the feel of the arm , but she keep she 
 eye on the river as if she do not know of the embrace . 
 the crowd surge , push Arabella and her friend sometimes nearly 
 into the river , and she would have laugh heartily at the horse - play 
 that succeed , if the imprint on her mind 's eye of a pale , 
 statuesque countenance she have lately gaze upon have not sober she 
 a little . 
 the fun on the water reach the acme of excitement ; there be 
 immersion , there be shout : the race be lose and win , the pink 
 and blue and yellow lady retire from the barge , and the people 
 who have watch begin to move . 
 " well - it be be awfully good , " cry Arabella . " but I think I must 
 get back to my poor man . Father be there , so far as I know ; but I 
 have well get back . " 
 " what be your hurry ? " 
 " well , I must go ... dear , dear , this be awkward ! " 
 at the narrow gangway where the people ascend from the riverside 
 path to the bridge the crowd be literally jammed into one hot 
 mass - Arabella and Vilbert with the rest ; and here they remain 
 motionless , Arabella exclaim , " dear , dear ! " more and more 
 impatiently ; for it have just occur to her mind that if Jude be 
 discover to have die alone an inqu might be deem necessary . 
 " what a fidget you be , my love , " say the physician , who , be 
 press close against she by the throng , have no need of personal 
 effort for contact . " just as well have patience : there be no get 
 away yet ! " 
 it be nearly ten minute before the wedged multitude move 
 sufficiently to let they pass through . as soon as she get up 
 into the street Arabella hasten on , forbid the physician to 
 accompany she far that day . she do not go straight to her 
 house ; but to the abode of a woman who perform the last necessary 
 office for the poorer dead ; where she knock . 
 " my husband have just go , poor soul , " she say . " can you come and 
 lie he out ? " 
 Arabella wait a few minute ; and the two woman go along , elbow 
 their way through the stream of fashionable people pour out of 
 Cardinal meadow , and be nearly knock down by the carriage . 
 " I must call at the sexton 's about the bell , too , " say Arabella . 
 " it be just round here , be not   it ? I will meet you at my door . " 
 by ten o'clock that night Jude be lie on the bedstead at his 
 lodging cover with a sheet , and straight as an arrow . through the 
 partly open window the joyous throb of a waltz enter from the 
 ball - room at Cardinal . 
 two day later , when the sky be equally cloudless , and the air 
 equally still , two person stand beside Jude 's open coffin in the 
 same little bedroom . on one side be Arabella , on the other the 
 Widow Edlin . they be both look at Jude 's face , the wear old 
 eyelid of Mrs. Edlin be red . 
 " how beautiful he be ! " say she . 
 " yes . he be a ' andsome corpse , " say Arabella . 
 the window be still open to ventilate the room , and it be about 
 noontide the clear air be motionless and quiet without . from a 
 distance come voice ; and an apparent noise of person stamp . 
 " what be that ? " murmur the old woman . 
 " oh , that be the doctor in the theatre , confer honorary degree 
 on the Duke of Hamptonshire and a lot more illustrious gent of that 
 sort . it be Remembrance Week , you know . the cheer come from the 
 young man . " 
 " aye ; young and strong - lunged ! not like our poor boy here . " 
 an occasional word , as from some one make a speech , float from 
 the open window of the theatre across to this quiet corner , at which 
 there seem to be a smile of some sort upon the marble feature 
 of Jude ; while the old , supersede , Delphin edition of Virgil and 
 Horace , and the dog - eare Greek Testament on the neighbour shelf , 
 and the few other volume of the sort that he have not part with , 
 roughen with stone - dust where he have be in the habit of catch 
 they up for a few minute between his labour , seem to pale to a 
 sickly cast at the sound . the bell strike out joyously ; and their 
 reverberation travel round the bed - room . 
 Arabella 's eye remove from Jude to Mrs. Edlin . " D'ye think she 
 will come ? " she ask . 
 " I could not say . she swear not to see he again . " 
 " how be she look ? " 
 " tired and miserable , poor heart . year and year old than when 
 you see she last . quite a staid , wear woman now . ' tis the man - she 
 can not   stomach un , even now ! " 
 " if Jude have be alive to see she , he would hardly have care for 
 she any more , perhaps . " 
 " that be what we do not   know ... do not   he ever ask you to send for 
 she , since he come to see she in that strange way ? " 
 " no . quite the contrary . I offer to send , and he say I be not 
 to let she know how ill he be . " 
 " do he forgive she ? " 
 " not as I know . " 
 " well - poor little thing , ' tis to be believe she be find forgiveness 
 somewhere ! she say she have find peace ! 
 " she may swear that on her knee to the holy cross upon her necklace 
 till she be hoarse , but it will not   be true ! " say Arabella . " she be 
 never find peace since she leave his arm , and never will again till 
 she be as he be now ! " 
