The Ambassadors , 
 by 
 Henry James . 
 New York Edition   1909 . 
 volume I 
 preface 
 nothing be more easy than to state the subject of " the Ambassadors , " 
 which first appear in twelve number of the North American Review 
  1903   and be publish as a whole the same year . the situation 
 involve be gather up betime , that be in the second chapter of Book 
 Fifth , for the reader 's benefit , into as few word as possible - plant 
 or ' sink , " stiffly and saliently , in the centre of the current , almost 
 perhaps to the obstruction of traffic . never can a composition of this 
 sort have spring straighter from a drop grain of suggestion , and 
 never can that grain , develop , overgrown and smother , have yet 
 lurk more in the mass as an independent particle . the whole case , in 
 fine , be in Lambert Strether 's irrepressible outbreak to little Bilham 
 on the Sunday afternoon in Gloriani 's garden , the candour with which he 
 yield , for his young friend 's enlightenment , to the charming 
 admonition of that crisis . the idea of the tale reside indeed in the 
 very fact that an hour of such unprecedented ease should have be feel 
 by he as a crisis , and he be at pain to express it for we as neatly 
 as we could desire . the remark to which he thus give utterance 
 contain the essence of " the Ambassadors , " his finger close , before he 
 have do , round the stem of the full - blow flower ; which , after that 
 fashion , he continue officiously to present to we . " live all you can ; 
 it be a mistake not to . it do not   so much matter what you do in 
 particular so long as you have your life . if you have not   have that what 
 have you have ? I be too old - too old at any rate for what I see . what 
 one lose one lose ; make no mistake about that . still , we have the 
 illusion of freedom ; therefore do not , like I to - day , be without the 
 memory of that illusion . I be either , at the right time , too stupid or 
 too intelligent to have it , and now I be a case of reaction against the 
 mistake . do what you like so long as you do not   make it . for it be a 
 mistake . live , live ! " such be the gist of Strether 's appeal to the 
 impressed youth , whom he like and whom he desire to befriend ; the 
 word " mistake " occur several time , it will be see , in the course of 
 his remark - which give the measure of the signal warning he feel 
 attach to his case . he have accordingly miss too much , though 
 perhaps after all constitutionally qualified for a well part , and he 
 wake up to it in condition that press the spring of a terrible 
 question . would there yet perhaps be time for reparation ? - reparation , 
 that be , for the injury do his character ; for the affront , he be 
 quite ready to say , so stupidly put upon it and in which he have even 
 himself have so clumsy a hand ? the answer to which be that he now at 
 all event see ; so that the business of my tale and the march of my 
 action , not to say the precious moral of everything , be just my 
 demonstration of this process of vision . 
 nothing can exceed the closeness with which the whole fit again into 
 its germ . that have be give I bodily , as usual , by the speak word , 
 for I be to take the image over exactly as I happen to have meet it . 
 a friend have repeat to I , with great appreciation , a thing or two 
 say to he by a man of distinction , much his senior , and to which a 
 sense akin to that of Strether 's melancholy eloquence might be 
 impute - say as chance would have , and so easily might , in Paris , and 
 in a charming old garden attach to a house of art , and on a Sunday 
 afternoon of summer , many person of great interest be present . the 
 observation there listen to and gather up have contain part of the 
 " note " that I be to recognise on the spot as to my purpose - have 
 contain in fact the great part ; the rest be in the place and the 
 time and the scene they sketch : these constituent cluster and 
 combine to give I further support , to give I what I may call the 
 note absolute . there it stand , accordingly , full in the tideway ; 
 drive in , with hard tap , like some strong stake for the noose of a 
 cable , the swirl of the current roundabout it . what amplify the hint 
 to more than the bulk of hint in general be the gift with it of the 
 old Paris garden , for in that token be seal up value infinitely 
 precious . there be of course the seal to break and each item of the 
 packet to count over and handle and estimate ; but somehow , in the light 
 of the hint , all the element of a situation of the sort most to my 
 taste be there . I could even remember no occasion on which , so 
 confront , I have find it of a lively interest to take stock , in 
 this fashion , of suggest wealth . for I think , verily , that there be 
 degree of merit in subject - in spite of the fact that to treat even 
 one of the most ambiguous with due decency we must for the time , for 
 the feverish and prejudiced hour , at least figure its merit and its 
 dignity as POSSIBLY absolute . what it come to , doubtless , be that 
 even among the supremely good - since with such alone be it one 's theory 
 of one 's honour to be concern - there be an ideal beauty of goodness 
 the invoke action of which be to raise the artistic faith to its 
 maximum . then truly , I hold , one 's theme may be say to shine , and 
 that of " the Ambassadors , " I confess , wear this glow for I from 
 begin to end . fortunately thus I be able to estimate this as , 
 frankly , quite the good , " all round , " of all my production ; any 
 failure of that justification would have make such an extreme of 
 complacency publicly fatuous . 
 I recall then in this connexion no moment of subjective intermittence , 
 never one of those alarm as for a suspect hollow beneath one 's foot , 
 a feel ingratitude in the scheme adopt , under which confidence fail 
 and opportunity seem but to mock . if the motive of " the Wings of the 
 Dove , " as I have note , be to worry I at moment by a sealing - up of 
 its face - though without prejudice to its again , of a sudden , fairly 
 grimacing with expression - so in this other business I have absolute 
 conviction and constant clearness to deal with ; it have be a frank 
 proposition , the whole bunch of datum , instal on my premise like a 
 monotony of fine weather .   the order of composition , in these thing , 
 I may mention , be reverse by the order of publication ; the early 
 write of the two book have appear as the later .   even under the 
 weight of my hero 's year I could feel my postulate firm ; even under 
 the strain of the difference between those of Madame de Vionnet and 
 those of Chad Newsome , a difference liable to be denounce as shocking , 
 I could still feel it serene . nothing resist , nothing betray , I 
 seem to make out , in this full and sound sense of the matter ; it shed 
 from any side I could turn it to the same golden glow . I rejoice in 
 the promise of a hero so mature , who would give I thereby the more to 
 bite into - since it be only into thicken motive and accumulated 
 character , I think , that the painter of life bite more than a little . 
 my poor friend should have accumulate character , certainly ; or rather 
 would be quite naturally and handsomely possess of it , in the sense 
 that he would have , and would always have feel he have , imagination 
 galore , and that this yet would not   have wreck he . it be 
 immeasurable , the opportunity to " do " a man of imagination , for if 
 THERE might not   be a chance to " bite , " where in the world might it be ? 
 this personage of course , so enriched , would not   give I , for his type , 
 imagination in PREDOMINANCE or as his prime faculty , nor should I , in 
 view of other matter , have find that convenient . so particular a 
 luxury - some occasion , that is , for study of the high gift in SUPREME 
 command of a case or of a career - would still doubtless come on the day 
 I should be ready to pay for it ; and till then might , as from far back , 
 remain hung up well in view and just out of reach . the comparative case 
 meanwhile would serve - it be only on the minor scale that I have 
 treat myself even to comparative case . 
 I be to hasten to add however that , happy stopgap as the minor scale 
 have thus yield , the instance in hand should enjoy the advantage of 
 the full range of the major ; since most immediately to the point be 
 the question of that supplement of situation logically involve in our 
 gentleman 's impulse to deliver himself in the Paris garden on the 
 Sunday afternoon - or if not involve by strict logic then all ideally 
 and enchantingly imply in it .   I say " ideally , " because I need 
 scarce mention that for development , for expression of its maximum , my 
 glimmering story be , at the early stage , to have nip the thread 
 of connexion with the possibility of the actual report speaker . he 
 remain but the happy of accident ; his actuality , all too 
 definite , preclude any range of possibility ; it have only be his 
 charming office to project upon that wide field of the artist 's 
 vision - which hang there ever in place like the white sheet suspend 
 for the figure of a child 's magic - lantern - a more fantastic and more 
 moveable shadow .   no privilege of the teller of tale and the handler 
 of puppet be more delightful , or have more of the suspense and the 
 thrill of a game of difficulty breathlessly play , than just this 
 business of look for the unseen and the occult , in a scheme 
 half - grasp , by the light or , so to speak , by the clinging scent , of 
 the gage already in hand . no dreadful old pursuit of the hidden slave 
 with bloodhound and the rag of association can ever , for " excitement , " 
 I judge , have better it at its good . for the dramatist always , by 
 the very law of his genius , believe not only in a possible right issue 
 from the rightly - conceive tight place ; he do much more than this - he 
 believe , irresistibly , in the necessary , the precious " tightness " of 
 the place   whatever the issue   on the strength of any respectable hint . 
 it be thus the respectable hint that I have with such avidity pick 
 up , what would be the story to which it would most inevitably form the 
 centre ? it be part of the charm attendant on such question that the 
 ' story , " with the omen true , as I say , put on from this stage the 
 authenticity of concrete existence . it then be , essentially - it begin 
 to be , though it may more or less obscurely lurk , so that the point be 
 not in the least what to make of it , but only , very delightfully and 
 very damnably , where to put one 's hand on it . 
 in which truth reside surely much of the interest of that admirable 
 mixture for salutary application which we know as art . art deal with 
 what we see , it must first contribute full - handed that ingredient ; it 
 pluck its material , otherwise express , in the garden of life - which 
 material elsewhere grow be stale and uneatable . but it have no soon 
 do this than it have to take account of a process - from which only 
 when it be the basest of the servant of man , incur ignominious 
 dismissal with no " character , " do it , and whether under some muddle 
 pretext of morality or on any other , pusillanimously edge away . the 
 process , that of the expression , the literal squeezing - out , of value be 
 another affair - with which the happy luck of mere finding have little to 
 do . the joy of find , at this stage , be pretty well over ; that 
 quest of the subject as a whole by " matching , " as the lady say at the 
 shop , the big piece with the snippet , have end , we assume , with a 
 capture . the subject be find , and if the problem be then transfer 
 to the ground of what to do with it the field open out for any amount 
 of do . this be precisely the infusion that , as I submit , complete 
 the strong mixture . it be on the other hand the part of the business 
 that can least be liken to the chase with horn and hound . it be all a 
 sedentary part - involve as much ciphering , of sort , as would merit 
 the high salary pay to a chief accountant . not , however , that the 
 chief accountant have not   his gleam of bliss ; for the felicity , or at 
 least the equilibrium of the artist 's state dwell less , surely , in the 
 further delightful complication he can smuggle in than in those he 
 succeed in keep out . he sow his seed at the risk of too thick a 
 crop ; wherefore yet again , like the gentleman who audit ledger , he 
 must keep his head at any price . in consequence of all which , for the 
 interest of the matter , I might seem here to have my choice of 
 narrate my " hunt " for Lambert Strether , of describe the capture of 
 the shadow project by my friend 's anecdote , or of report on the 
 occurrence subsequent to that triumph . but I have probably good 
 attempt a little to glance in each direction ; since it come to I 
 again and again , over this licentious record , that one 's bag of 
 adventure , conceive or conceivable , have be only half - empty by the 
 mere telling of one 's story . it depend so on what one mean by that 
 equivocal quantity . there be the story of one 's hero , and then , thank 
 to the intimate connexion of thing , the story of one 's story itself . I 
 blush to confess it , but if one be a dramatist one be a dramatist , and 
 the latter imbroglio be liable on occasion to strike I as really the 
 more objective of the two . 
 the philosophy impute to he in that beautiful outbreak , the hour 
 there , amid such happy provision , strike for he , would have be 
 then , on behalf of my man of imagination , to be logically and , as the 
 artless craft of comedy have it , " lead up " to ; the probable course to 
 such a goal , the goal of so conscious a predicament , would have in 
 short to be finely calculate . where have he come from and why have he 
 come , what be he do   as we anglo - saxon , and we only , say , in our 
 foredoom clutch of exotic aid to expression   in that galere ? to 
 answer these question plausibly , to answer they as under 
 cross - examination in the witness - box by counsel for the prosecution , in 
 other word satisfactorily to account for Strether and for his 
 " peculiar tone , " be to possess myself of the entire fabric . at the 
 same time the clue to its whereabouts would lie in a certain principle 
 of probability : he would not   have indulge in his peculiar tone without 
 a reason ; it would take a feel predicament or a false position to give 
 he so ironic an accent . one have not   be note " tone " all one 's life 
 without recognise when one hear it the voice of the false position . 
 the dear man in the Paris garden be then admirably and unmistakeably 
 in one - which be no small point gain ; what next accordingly 
 concerned we be the determination of this identity . one could only go 
 by probability , but there be the advantage that the most general of 
 the probability be virtual certainty . possess of our friend 's 
 nationality , to start with , there be a general probability in his 
 narrow localism ; which , for that matter , one have really but to keep 
 under the lens for an hour to see it give up its secret . he would 
 have issue , our rueful worthy , from the very heart of New England - at 
 the heel of which matter of course a perfect train of secret tumble 
 for I into the light . they have to be sift and sort , and I shall 
 not reproduce the detail of that process ; but unmistakeably they be 
 all there , and it be but a question , auspiciously , of pick among 
 they . what the " position " would infallibly be , and why , on his hand , 
 it have turn " false " - these inductive step could only be as rapid as 
 they be distinct . I account for everything - and " everything " have 
 by this time become the most promising quantity - by the view that he 
 have come to Paris in some state of mind which be literally undergo , 
 as a result of new and unexpected assault and infusion , a change 
 almost from hour to hour . he have come with a view that might have be 
 figure by a clear green liquid , say , in a neat glass phial ; and the 
 liquid , once pour into the open cup of APPLICATION , once expose to 
 the action of another air , have begin to turn from green to red , or 
 whatever , and might , for all he know , be on its way to purple , to 
 black , to yellow . at the still wilder extreme represent perhaps , 
 for all he could say to the contrary , by a variability so violent , he 
 would at first , naturally , but have gaze in surprise and alarm ; 
 whereby the SITUATION clearly would spring from the play of wildness 
 and the development of extreme . I see in a moment that , should this 
 development proceed both with force and logic , my ' story " would leave 
 nothing to be desire . there be always , of course , for the 
 story - teller , the irresistible determinant and the incalculable 
 advantage of his interest in the story as SUCH ; it be ever , obviously , 
 overwhelmingly , the prime and precious thing   as other than this I have 
 never be able to see it ; as to which what make for it , with 
 whatever headlong energy , may be say to pale before the energy with 
 which it simply make for itself . it rejoice , none the less , at its 
 good , to seem to offer itself in a light , to seem to know , and with the 
 very last knowledge , what it be about - liable as it yet be at moment to 
 be catch by we with its tongue in its cheek and absolutely no warrant 
 but its splendid impudence . let we grant then that the impudence be 
 always there - there , so to speak , for grace and effect and ALLURE ; 
 there , above all , because the Story be just the spoiled child of art , 
 and because , as we be always disappoint when the pamper do not 
 " play up , " we like it , to that extent , to look all its character . it 
 probably do so , in truth , even when we most flatter ourselves that we 
 negotiate with it by treaty . 
 all of which , again , be but to say that the step , for my fable , place 
 themselves with a prompt and , as it be , functional assurance - an air 
 quite as of readiness to have dispense with logic have I be in fact 
 too stupid for my clue . never , positively , none the less , as the link 
 multiply , have I feel less stupid than for the determination of poor 
 Strether 's errand and for the apprehension of his issue . these thing 
 continue to fall together , as by the neat action of their own weight 
 and form , even while their commentator scratch his head about they ; 
 he easily see now that they be always well in advance of he . as 
 the case complete itself he have in fact , from a good way behind , to 
 catch up with they , breathless and a little flurry , as he good could . 
 the false position , for our belated man of the world - belate because 
 he have endeavour so long to escape be one , and now at last have 
 really to face his doom - the false position for he , I say , be 
 obviously to have present himself at the gate of that boundless 
 menagerie prim with a moral scheme of the most approve pattern which 
 be yet frame to break down on any approach to vivid fact ; that be to 
 any at all liberal appreciation of they . there would have be of 
 course the case of the Strether prepare , wherever present himself , 
 only to judge and to feel meanly ; but he would have move for I , I 
 confess , envelop in no legend whatever . the actual man 's note , from 
 the first of our seeing it strike , be the note of discrimination , just 
 as his drama be to become , under stress , the drama of discrimination . 
 it would have be his bl imagination , we have see , that have 
 already help he to discriminate ; the element that be for so much of 
 the pleasure of my cutting thick , as I have intimate , into his 
 intellectual , into his moral substance . yet here it be , at the same 
 time , just here , that a shade for a moment fall across the scene . 
 there be the dreadful little old tradition , one of the platitude of 
 the human comedy , that people 's moral scheme do break down in Paris ; 
 that nothing be more frequently observe ; that hundred of thousand of 
 more or less hypocritical or more or less cynical person annually 
 visit the place for the sake of the probable catastrophe , and that I 
 come late in the day to work myself up about it . there be in fine the 
 TRIVIAL association , one of the vulgar in the world ; but which give 
 I pause no long , I think , simply because its vulgarity be so 
 advertise . the revolution perform by Strether under the influence 
 of the most interesting of great city be to have nothing to do with 
 any betise of the imputably " tempt " state ; he be to be throw 
 forward , rather , throw quite with violence , upon his lifelong trick of 
 intense reflexion : which friendly test indeed be to bring he out , 
 through wind passage , through alternation of darkness and light , 
 very much in Paris , but with the surround scene itself a minor 
 matter , a mere symbol for more thing than have be dream of in the 
 philosophy of Woollett . another surround scene would have do as 
 well for our show could it have represent a place in which Strether 's 
 errand be likely to lie and his crisis to await he . the LIKELY place 
 have the great merit of spar I preparation ; there would have be 
 too many involved - not at all impossibility , only rather worrying and 
 delay difficulty - in posit elsewhere Chad Newsome 's interesting 
 relation , his so interesting complexity of relation . Strether 's 
 appoint stage , in fine , could be but Chad 's most luckily select 
 one . the young man have go in , as they say , for circumjacent charm ; 
 and where he would have find it , by the turn of his mind , most 
 " authentic , " be where his earnest friend 's analysis would most find 
 HIM ; as well as where , for that matter , the former 's whole analytic 
 faculty would be lead such a wonderful dance . 
 " the Ambassadors " have be , all conveniently , " arrange for " ; its first 
 appearance be from month to month , in the North American Review 
 during 1903 , and I have be open from far back to any pleasant 
 provocation for ingenuity that might reside in one 's actively 
 adopt - so as to make it , in its way , a small compositional 
 law - recurrent break and resumption . I have make up my mind here 
 regularly to exploit and enjoy these often rather rude jolt - have 
 find , as I believe an admirable way to it ; yet every question of form 
 and pressure , I easily remember , pal in the light of the major 
 propriety , recognise as soon as really weigh ; that of employing but 
 one centre and keep it all within my hero 's compass . the thing be 
 to be so much this worthy 's intimate adventure that even the projection 
 of his consciousness upon it from begin to end without intermission 
 or deviation would probably still leave a part of its value for he , 
 and a fortiori for ourselves , unexpresse . I might , however , express 
 every grain of it that there would be room for - on condition of 
 contrive a splendid particular economy . other person in no small 
 number be to people the scene , and each with his or her axe to grind , 
 his or her situation to treat , his or her coherency not to fail of , his 
 or her relation to my lead motive , in a word , to establish and carry 
 on . but Strether 's sense of these thing , and Strether 's only , should 
 avail I for show they ; I should know they but through his more or 
 less groping knowledge of they , since his very groping would figure 
 among his most interesting motion , and a full observance of the rich 
 rigour I speak of would give I more of the effect I should be most 
 " after " than all other possible observance together . it would give I 
 a large unity , and that in turn would crown I with the grace to which 
 the enlighten story - teller will at any time , for his interest , 
 sacrifice if need be all other grace whatever . I refer of course to 
 the grace of intensity , which there be way of signally achieve and 
 way of signally miss - as we see it , all round we , helplessly and 
 woefully miss . not that it be not , on the other hand , a virtue 
 eminently subject to appreciation - there be no strict , no absolute 
 measure of it ; so that one may hear it acclaim where it have quite 
 escape one 's perception , and see it unnoticed where one have gratefully 
 hail it . after all of which I be not sure , either , that the immense 
 amusement of the whole cluster of difficulty so arrayed may not 
 operate , for the fond fabulist , when judicious not less than fond , as 
 his good of determinant . that charming principle be always there , at 
 all event , to keep interest fresh : it be a principle , we remember , 
 essentially ravenous , without scruple and without mercy , appease with 
 no cheap nor easy nourishment . it enjoy the costly sacrifice and 
 rejoice thereby in the very odour of difficulty - even as ogre , with 
 their " fee - faw - fum ! " rejoice in the smell of the blood of Englishmen . 
 thus it be , at all event , that the ultimate , though after all so 
 speedy , definition of my gentleman 's job - his come out , all solemnly 
 appoint and depute , to ' save " Chad , and his then find the young 
 man so disobligingly and , at first , so bewilderingly not lose that a 
 new issue altogether , in the connexion , prodigiously face they , which 
 have to be deal with in a new light - promise as many call on 
 ingenuity and on the high branch of the compositional art as one 
 could possibly desire . again and yet again , as , from book to book , I 
 proceed with my survey , I find no source of interest equal to this 
 verification after the fact , as I may call it , and the more in detail 
 the well , of the scheme of consistency " go in " for . as 
 always - since the charm never fail - the retracing of the process from 
 point to point bring back the old illusion . the old intention bloom 
 again and flower - in spite of all the blossom they be to have 
 drop by the way . this be the charm , as I say , of adventure 
 TRANSPOSED - the thrilling up and down , the intricate in and out of 
 the compositional problem , make after such a fashion admirably 
 objective , become the question at issue and keep the author 's 
 heart in his mouth . such an element , for instance , as his intention 
 that Mrs. Newsome , away off with her finger on the pulse of 
 Massachusetts , should yet be no less intensely than circuitously 
 present through the whole thing , should be no less feel as to be 
 reckon with than the most direct exhibition , the fine portrayal at 
 first hand could make she , such a sign of artistic good faith , I say , 
 once it be unmistakeably there , take on again an actuality not too much 
 impair by the comparative dimness of the particular success . 
 cherish intention too inevitably act and operate , in the book , 
 about fifty time as little as I have fondly dream it might ; but that 
 scarce spoil for I the pleasure of recognise the fifty way in 
 which I have seek to provide for it . the mere charm of see such an 
 idea constituent , in its degree ; the fineness of the measure take - a 
 real extension , if successful , of the very term and possibility of 
 representation and figuration - such thing alone be , after this 
 fashion , inspire , such thing alone be a gage of the probable 
 success of that dissimulated calculation with which the whole effort 
 be to square . but oh the care beget , none the less , of that same 
 " judicious " sacrifice to a particular form of interest ! one 's work 
 should have composition , because composition alone be positive beauty ; 
 but all the while - apart from one 's inevitable consciousness too of the 
 dire paucity of reader ever recognise or ever miss positive 
 beauty - how , as to the cheap and easy , at every turn , how , as to 
 immediacy and facility , and even as to the commoner vivacity , positive 
 beauty might have to be sweat for and pay for ! once achieve and 
 instal it may always be trust to make the poor seeker feel he 
 would have blush to the root of his hair for fail of it ; yet , 
 how , as its virtue can be essentially but the virtue of the whole , the 
 wayside trap set in the interest of muddlement and pleading but the 
 cause of the moment , of the particular bit in itself , have to be kick 
 out of the path ! all the sophistication in life , for example , might 
 have appear to muster on behalf of the menace - the menace to a bright 
 variety - involve in Strether 's have all the subjective ' say , " as it 
 be , to himself . 
 have I , meanwhile , make he at once hero and historian , endow he with 
 the romantic privilege of the " first person " - the dark abyss of 
 romance this , inveterately , when enjoy on the grand scale - variety , 
 and many other queer matter as well , might have be smuggle in by a 
 back door . suffice it , to be brief , that the first person , in the long 
 piece , be a form foredoom to looseness and that looseness , never much 
 my affair , have never be so little so as on this particular occasion . 
 all of which reflexion flock to the standard from the moment - a very 
 early one - the question of how to keep my form amusing while stick 
 so close to my central figure and constantly take its pattern from 
 he have to be face . he arrive   arrive at Chester   as for the 
 dreadful purpose of give his creator " no end " to tell about 
 he - before which rigorous mission the serenest of creator might well 
 have quail . I be far from the serene ; I be more than agitated 
 enough to reflect that , grimly deprive of one alternative or one 
 substitute for " telling , " I must address myself tooth and nail to 
 another . I could not , save by implication , make other person tell EACH 
 OTHER about he - bl resource , bl necessity , of the drama , which 
 reach its effect of unity , all remarkably , by path absolutely 
 opposite to the path of the novel : with other person , save as they 
 be primarily his person   not he primarily but one of theirs , I have 
 simply nothing to do . I have relation for he none the less , by the 
 mercy of Providence , quite as much as if my exhibition be to be a 
 muddle ; if I could only by implication and a show of consequence make 
 other person tell each other about he , I could at least make he tell 
 THEM whatever in the world he must ; and could so , by the same 
 token - which be a further luxury throw in - see straight into the deep 
 difference between what that could do for I , or at all event for 
 HIM , and the large ease of " autobiography . " it may be ask why , if 
 one so keep to one 's hero , one should not   make a single mouthful of 
 " method , " should not   throw the rein on his neck and , let they flap 
 there as free as in " Gil Blas " or in " David Copperfield , " equip he 
 with the double privilege of subject and object - a course that have at 
 least the merit of brush away question at a sweep . the answer to 
 which be , I think , that one make that surrender only if one be 
 prepared not to make certain precious discrimination . 
 the " first person " then , so employ , be address by the author 
 directly to ourselves , his possible reader , whom he have to reckon 
 with , at the good , by our english tradition , so loosely and vaguely 
 after all , so little respectfully , on so scant a presumption of 
 exposure to criticism . Strether , on the other hand , encaged and 
 provide for as " the Ambassadors " encage and provide , have to keep in 
 view propriety much stiff and more salutary than any our straight 
 and credulous gape be likely to bring home to he , have exhibitional 
 condition to meet , in a word , that forbid the terrible fluidity of 
 self - revelation . I may seem not to well the case for my 
 discrimination if I say that , for my first care , I have thus inevitably 
 to set he up a confidant or two , to wave away with energy the custom 
 of the seat mass of explanation after the fact , the insert block of 
 merely referential narrative , which flourish so , to the shame of the 
 modern impatience , on the serrie page of Balzac , but which seem 
 simply to appal our actual , our general weak , digestion . " hark 
 back to make up " take at any rate more doing , as the phrase be , not 
 only than the reader of to - day demand , but than he will tolerate at 
 any price any call upon he either to understand or remotely to 
 measure ; and for the beauty of the thing when do the current 
 editorial mind in particular appear wholly without sense . it be not , 
 however , primarily for either of these reason , whatever their weight , 
 that Strether 's friend Waymarsh be so keenly clutch at , on the 
 threshold of the book , or that no less a pounce be make on Maria 
 Gostrey - without even the pretext , either , of she be , in essence , 
 Strether 's friend . she be the reader 's friend much rather - in 
 consequence of disposition that make he so eminently require one ; and 
 she act in that capacity , and REALLY in that capacity alone , with 
 exemplary devotion from begin to and of the book . she be an 
 enrol , a direct , aid to lucidity ; she be in fine , to tear off her 
 mask , the most unmitigated and abandon of ficelle . half the 
 dramatist 's art , as we well know - since if we do not   it be not the fault 
 of the proof that lie scatter about we - be in the use of ficelle ; 
 by which I mean in a deep dissimulation of his dependence on they . 
 waymarsh only to a slighter degree belong , in the whole business , less 
 to my subject than to my treatment of it ; the interesting proof , in 
 these connexion , be that one have but to take one 's subject for the 
 stuff of drama to interweave with enthusiasm as many gostrey as need 
 be . 
 the material of " the Ambassadors , " conform in this respect exactly 
 to that of " the Wings of the dove , " publish just before it , be take 
 absolutely for the stuff of drama ; so that , avail myself of the 
 opportunity give I by this edition for some prefatory remark on the 
 latter work , I have mainly to make on its behalf the point of its scenic 
 consistency . it disguise that virtue , in the oddest way in the world , 
 by just LOOKING , as we turn its page , as little scenic as possible ; 
 but it sharply divide itself , just as the composition before we do , 
 into the part that prepare , that tend in fact to over - prepare , for 
 scene , and the part , or otherwise into the scene , that justify and 
 crown the preparation . it may definitely be say , I think , that 
 everything in it that be not scene   not , I of course mean , complete and 
 functional scene , treat all the submit matter , as by logical 
 start , logical turn , and logical finish   be discriminated preparation , 
 be the fusion and synthesis of picture . these alternation propose 
 themselves all recogniseably , I think , from an early stage , as the very 
 form and figure of " the Ambassadors " ; so that , to repeat , such an agent 
 as Miss Gostrey pre - engaged at a high salary , but wait in the draughty 
 wing with her shawl and her smell - salt . her function speak at 
 once for itself , and by the time she have din with Strether in London 
 and go to a play with he her intervention as a ficelle be , I hold , 
 expertly justify . thank to it we have treat scenically , and 
 scenically alone , the whole lumpish question of Strether 's " past , " 
 which have see we more happily on the way than anything else could have 
 do ; we have strain to a high lucidity and vivacity   or at least we 
 hope we have   certain indispensable fact ; we have see our two or 
 three immediate friend all conveniently and profitably in " action " ; to 
 say nothing of our beginning to descry other , of a remoter intensity , 
 get into motion , even if a bit vaguely as yet , for our further 
 enrichment . let my first point be here that the scene in question , 
 that in which the whole situation at Woollett and the complex force 
 that have propel my hero to where this lively extractor of his value 
 and distiller of his essence await he , be normal and entire , be 
 really an excellent standard scene ; copious , comprehensive , and 
 accordingly never short , but with its office as definite as that of the 
 hammer on the gong of the clock , the office of express all that be 
 in the hour . 
 the " ficelle " character of the subordinate party be as artfully 
 dissimulate , throughout , as may be , and to that extent that , with the 
 seam or joint of Maria Gostrey 's ostensible connectedness take 
 particular care of , duly smooth over , that is , and anxiously keep 
 from show as " piece on ; " this figure doubtless achieve , after a 
 fashion , something of the dignity of a prime idea : which circumstance 
 but show we afresh how many quite incalculable but none the less clear 
 source of enjoyment for the infatuated artist , how many copious 
 spring of our never - to - be - slight " fun " for the reader and critic 
 susceptible of contagion , may sound their incidental plash as soon as 
 an artistic process begin to enjoy free development . exquisite - in 
 illustration of this - the mere interest and amusement of such at once 
 " creative " and critical question as how and where and why to make Miss 
 Gostrey 's false connexion carry itself , under a due high polish , as a 
 real one . nowhere be it more of an artful expedient for mere 
 consistency of form , to mention a case , than in the last ' scene " of the 
 book , where its function be to give or to add nothing whatever , but 
 only to express as vividly as possible certain thing quite other than 
 itself and that be of the already fix and appoint measure . since , 
 however , all art be EXPRESSION , and be thereby vividness , one be to 
 find the door open here to any amount of delightful dissimulation . 
 these verily be the refinement and ecstasy of method - amid which , 
 or certainly under the influence of any exhilarate demonstration of 
 which , one must keep one 's head and not lose one 's way . to cultivate 
 an adequate intelligence for they and to make that sense operative be 
 positively to find a charm in any produce ambiguity of appearance that 
 be not by the same stroke , and all helplessly , an ambiguity of sense . 
 to project imaginatively , for my hero , a relation that have nothing to 
 do with the matter   the matter of my subject   but have everything to do 
 with the manner   the manner of my presentation of the same   and yet to 
 treat it , at close quarter and for fully economic expression 's 
 possible sake , as if it be important and essential - to do that sort 
 of thing and yet muddle nothing may easily become , as one go , a 
 signally attach proposition ; even though it all remain but part and 
 parcel , I hasten to recognise , of the merely general and related 
 question of expressional curiosity and expressional decency . 
 I be move to add after so much insistence on the scenic side of my 
 labour that I have find the step of re - perusal almost as much waylay 
 here by quite another style of effort in the same signal interest - or 
 have in other word not fail to note how , even so associated and so 
 discriminate , the fine propriety and charm of the non - scenic may , 
 under the right hand for they , still keep their intelligibility and 
 assert their office . infinitely suggestive such an observation as this 
 last on the whole delightful head , where representation be concern , 
 of possible variety , of effective expressional change and contrast . one 
 would like , at such an hour as this , for critical licence , to go into 
 the matter of the note inevitable deviation   from too fond an original 
 vision   that the exquisite treachery even of the straight execution 
 may ever be trust to inflict even on the most mature plan - the case 
 be that , though one 's last reconsider production always seem to 
 bristle with that particular evidence , " the Ambassadors " would place a 
 flood of such light at my service . I must attach to my final remark 
 here a different import ; note in the other connexion I just glance 
 at that such passage as that of my hero 's first encounter with Chad 
 Newsome , absolute attestation of the non - scenic form though they be , 
 yet lie the firm hand too - so far at least as intention go - on 
 representational effect . to report at all closely and completely of 
 what " pass " on a give occasion be inevitably to become more or less 
 scenic ; and yet in the instance I allude to , with the conveyance , 
 expressional curiosity and expressional decency be seek and arrive 
 at under quite another law . the true inwardness of this may be at 
 bottom but that one of the suffer treachery have consist 
 precisely , for Chad 's whole figure and presence , of a direct 
 presentability diminish and compromise - despoil , that be , of its 
 PROPORTIONAL advantage ; so that , in a word , the whole economy of his 
 author 's relation to he have at important point to be redetermine . 
 the book , however , critically view , be touchingly full of these 
 disguised and repaired loss , these insidious recovery , these 
 intensely redemptive consistency . the page in which Mamie Pocock 
 give she appoint and , I can not   but think , duly feel lift to the whole 
 action by the so inscrutably - apply side - stroke or short - cut of our 
 just watch and as quite at an angle of vision as yet untried , her 
 single hour of suspense in the hotel salon , in our partaking of her 
 concentrated study of the sense of matter bear on her own case , all 
 the bright warm Paris afternoon , from the balcony that overlook the 
 Tuileries garden - these be as mark an example of the 
 representational virtue that insist here and there on be , for the 
 charm of opposition and renewal , other than the scenic . it would not 
 take much to make I far argue that from an equal play of such 
 opposition the book gather an intensity that fairly add to the 
 dramatic - though the latter be suppose to be the sum of all 
 intensity ; or that have at any rate nothing to fear from juxtaposition 
 with it . I consciously fail to shrink in fact from that 
 extravagance - I risk it rather , for the sake of the moral involve ; 
 which be not that the particular production before we exhaust the 
 interesting question it raise , but that the Novel remain still , 
 under the right persuasion , the most independent , most elastic , most 
 prodigious of literary form . 
 HENRY JAMES . 
 Book First 
 I 
 Strether 's first question , when he reach the hotel , be about his 
 friend ; yet on his learning that Waymarsh be apparently not to arrive 
 till evening he be not wholly disconcert . a telegram from he 
 bespeak a room " only if not noisy , " reply pay , be produce for the 
 enquirer at the office , so that the understanding they should meet at 
 Chester rather than at Liverpool remain to that extent sound . the 
 same secret principle , however , that have prompt Strether not 
 absolutely to desire Waymarsh 's presence at the dock , that have lead he 
 thus to postpone for a few hour his enjoyment of it , now operate to 
 make he feel he could still wait without disappointment . they would 
 dine together at the bad , and , with all respect to dear old 
 waymarsh - if not even , for that matter , to himself - there be little 
 fear that in the sequel they should not   see enough of each other . the 
 principle I have just mention as operate have be , with the most 
 newly disembarked of the two man , wholly instinctive - the fruit of a 
 sharp sense that , delightful as it would be to find himself look , 
 after so much separation , into his comrade 's face , his business would 
 be a trifle bungle should he simply arrange for this countenance to 
 present itself to the nearing steamer as the first " note , " of Europe . 
 mix with everything be the apprehension , already , on Strether 's 
 part , that it would , at good , throughout , prove the note of Europe in 
 quite a sufficient degree . 
 that note have be meanwhile - since the previous afternoon , thank to 
 this happy device - such a consciousness of personal freedom as he 
 have not   know for year ; such a deep taste of change and of have above 
 all for the moment nobody and nothing to consider , as promise already , 
 if headlong hope be not too foolish , to colour his adventure with 
 cool success . there be people on the ship with whom he have easily 
 consort - so far as ease could up to now be impute to he - and who 
 for the most part plunge straight into the current that set from the 
 landing - stage to London ; there be other who have invite he to a 
 tryst at the inn and have even invoke his aid for a " look round " at the 
 beauty of Liverpool ; but he have steal away from every one alike , have 
 keep no appointment and renew no acquaintance , have be indifferently 
 aware of the number of person who esteem themselves fortunate in 
 be , unlike himself , " meet , " and have even independently , unsociably , 
 alone , without encounter or relapse and by mere quiet evasion , give 
 his afternoon and evening to the immediate and the sensible . they 
 form a qualified draught of Europe , an afternoon and an evening on 
 the bank of the Mersey , but such as it be he take his potion at least 
 undiluted . he wince a little , truly , at the thought that Waymarsh 
 might be already at Chester ; he reflect that , should he have to 
 describe himself there as have " get in " so early , it would be 
 difficult to make the interval look particularly eager ; but he be like 
 a man who , elatedly find in his pocket more money than usual , 
 handle it a while and idly and pleasantly chink it before address 
 himself to the business of spending . that he be prepared to be vague 
 to Waymarsh about the hour of the ship 's touching , and that he both 
 want extremely to see he and enjoy extremely the duration of 
 delay - these thing , it be to be conceive , be early sign in he 
 that his relation to his actual errand might prove none of the 
 simple . he be burden , poor Strether - it have well be confess 
 at the outset - with the oddity of a double consciousness . there be 
 detachment in his zeal and curiosity in his indifference . 
 after the young woman in the glass cage have hold up to he across she 
 counter the pale - pink leaflet bear his friend 's name , which she 
 neatly pronounce , he turn away to find himself , in the hall , face 
 a lady who meet his eye as with an intention suddenly determine , and 
 whose feature - not freshly young , not markedly fine , but on happy 
 term with each other - come back to he as from a recent vision . for a 
 moment they stand confront ; then the moment place she : he have 
 notice she the day before , notice she at his previous inn , 
 where - again in the hall - she have be briefly engage with some people 
 of his own ship 's company . nothing have actually pass between they , 
 and he would as little have be able to say what have be the sign of 
 her face for he on the first occasion as to name the ground of his 
 present recognition . recognition at any rate appear to prevail on her 
 own side as well - which would only have add to the mystery . all she 
 now begin by say to he nevertheless be that , have chance to 
 catch his enquiry , she be move to ask , by his leave , if it be 
 possibly a question of Mr. Waymarsh of Milrose Connecticut - Mr. 
 Waymarsh the american lawyer . 
 " oh yes , " he reply , " my very well - know friend . he be to meet I 
 here , come up from Malvern , and I suppose he would already have arrive . 
 but he do not   come till later , and I be relieve not to have keep he . 
 do you know he ? " Strether wind up . 
 it be not   till after he have speak that he become aware of how much 
 there have be in he of response ; when the tone of her own rejoinder , 
 as well as the play of something more in her face - something more , that 
 be , than its apparently usual restless light - seem to notify he . 
 " I have   meet he at Milrose - where I use sometimes , a good while ago , to 
 stay ; I have friend there who be friend of his , and I have   be at his 
 house . I will not   answer for it that he would know I , " Strether 's new 
 acquaintance pursue ; " but I should be delighted to see he . perhaps , " 
 she add , " I shall - for I be stay over . " she pause while our 
 friend take in these thing , and it be as if a good deal of talk have 
 already pass . they even vaguely smile at it , and Strether presently 
 observe that Mr. Waymarsh would , no doubt , be easily to be see . this , 
 however , appear to affect the lady as if she might have advance too 
 far . she appear to have no reserve about anything . " oh , " she say , 
 " he will not   care ! " - and she immediately thereupon remark that she 
 believe Strether know the Munsters ; the Munsters be the people he 
 have see she with at Liverpool . 
 but he do not , it happen , know the Munsters well enough to give the 
 case much of a lift ; so that they be leave together as if over the 
 mere lay table of conversation . her qualification of the mention 
 connexion have rather remove than place a dish , and there seem 
 nothing else to serve . their attitude remain , none the less , that of 
 not forsake the board ; and the effect of this in turn be to give 
 they the appearance of have accept each other with an absence of 
 preliminary practically complete . they move along the hall 
 together , and Strether 's companion throw off that the hotel have the 
 advantage of a garden . he be aware by this time of his strange 
 inconsequence : he have shirk the intimacy of the steamer and have 
 muffle the shock of Waymarsh only to find himself forsake , in this 
 sudden case , both of avoidance and of caution . he pass , under this 
 unsought protection and before he have so much as go up to his room , 
 into the garden of the hotel , and at the end of ten minute have agree 
 to meet there again , as soon as he should have make himself tidy , the 
 dispenser of such good assurance . he want to look at the town , and 
 they would forthwith look together . it be almost as if she have be 
 in possession and receive he as a guest . her acquaintance with the 
 place present she in a manner as a hostess , and Strether have a rueful 
 glance for the lady in the glass cage . it be as if this personage have 
 see herself instantly supersede . 
 when in a quarter of an hour he come down , what his hostess see , what 
 she might have take in with a vision kindly adjust , be the lean , 
 the slightly loose figure of a man of the middle height and something 
 more perhaps than the middle age - a man of five - and - fifty , whose most 
 immediate sign be a marked bloodless brownness of face , a thick dark 
 moustache , of characteristically american cut , grow strong and 
 fall low , a head of hair still abundant but irregularly streak 
 with grey , and a nose of bold free prominence , the even line , the high 
 finish , as it might have be call , of which , have a certain effect of 
 mitigation . a perpetual pair of glass astride of this fine ridge , 
 and a line , unusually deep and draw , the prolong pen - stroke of time , 
 accompany the curve of the moustache from nostril to chin , do 
 something to complete the facial furniture that an attentive observer 
 would have see catalogue , on the spot , in the vision of the other 
 party to Strether 's appointment . she wait for he in the garden , the 
 other party , draw on a pair of singularly fresh soft and elastic 
 light glove and present herself with a superficial readiness which , 
 as he approach she over the small smooth lawn and in the watery 
 english sunshine , he might , with his rougher preparation , have mark 
 as the model for such an occasion . she have , this lady , a perfect plain 
 propriety , an expensive subdued suitability , that her companion be not 
 free to analyse , but that strike he , so that his consciousness of it 
 be instantly acute , as a quality quite new to he . before reach 
 she he stop on the grass and go through the form of feel for 
 something , possibly forget , in the light overcoat he carry on his 
 arm ; yet the essence of the act be no more than the impulse to gain 
 time . nothing could have be odd than Strether 's sense of himself 
 as at that moment launch in something of which the sense would be 
 quite disconnected from the sense of his past and which be literally 
 begin there and then . it have begin in fact already upstairs and 
 before the dress glass that strike he as block far , so 
 strangely , the dimness of the window of his dull bedroom ; begin with a 
 sharp survey of the element of Appearance than he have for a long 
 time be move to make . he have during those moment feel these 
 element to be not so much to his hand as he should have like , and 
 then have fall back on the thought that they be precisely a matter 
 as to which help be suppose to come from what he be about to do . he 
 be about to go up to London , so that hat and necktie might wait . what 
 have come as straight to he as a ball in a well - play game - and catch 
 moreover not less neatly - be just the air , in the person of his 
 friend , of have see and choose , the air of achieve possession of 
 those vague quality and quantity that collectively figure to he 
 as the advantage snatch from lucky chance . without pomp or 
 circumstance , certainly , as her original address to he , equally with 
 his own response , have be , he would have sketch to himself his 
 impression of she as : " well , she be more thoroughly civilized - ! " if 
 " more thoroughly than WHOM ? " would not have be for he a sequel to 
 this remark , that be just by reason of his deep consciousness of the 
 bearing of his comparison . 
 the amusement , at all event , of a civilisation intenser be 
 what - familiar compatriot as she be , with the full tone of the 
 compatriot and the rattle link not with mystery but only with dear 
 dyspeptic Waymarsh - she appear distinctly to promise . his pause 
 while he feel in his overcoat be positively the pause of confidence , 
 and it enable his eye to make out as much of a case for she , in 
 proportion , as her own make out for himself . she affect he as 
 almost insolently young ; but an easily carry five - and - thirty could 
 still do that . she be , however , like himself mark and wan ; only it 
 naturally could not   have be know to he how much a spectator look 
 from one to the other might have discern that they have in common . it 
 would not   for such a spectator have be altogether insupposable that , 
 each so finely brown and so sharply spare , each confessing so to dent 
 of surface and aid to sight , to a disproportionate nose and a head 
 delicately or grossly grizzle , they might have be brother and 
 sister . on this ground indeed there would have be a residuum of 
 difference ; such a sister have surely know in respect to such a 
 brother the extremity of separation , and such a brother now feel in 
 respect to such a sister the extremity of surprise . surprise , it be 
 true , be not on the other hand what the eye of Strether 's friend most 
 show he while she give he , stroke her glove smoother , the time 
 he appreciate . they have take hold of he straightway measure he 
 up and down as if they know how ; as if he be human material they have 
 already in some sort handle . their possessor be in truth , it may be 
 communicate , the mistress of a hundred case or category , 
 receptacle of the mind , subdivision for convenience , in which , from a 
 full experience , she pigeon - hole her fellow mortal with a hand as 
 free as that of a compositor scatter type . she be as equip in 
 this particular as Strether be the reverse , and it make an opposition 
 between they which he might well have shrink from submit to if he 
 have fully suspect it . so far as he do suspect it he be on the 
 contrary , after a short shake of his consciousness , as pleasantly 
 passive as might be . he really have a sort of sense of what she know . 
 he have quite the sense that she know thing he do not , and though this 
 be a concession that in general he find not easy to make to woman , he 
 make it now as good - humouredly as if it lift a burden . his eye be 
 so quiet behind his eternal nipper that they might almost have be 
 absent without change his face , which take its expression mainly , and 
 not least its stamp of sensibility , from other source , surface and 
 grain and form . he join his guide in an instant , and then feel she 
 have profit still well than he by his have be for the moment 
 just mention , so at the disposal of her intelligence . she know even 
 intimate thing about he that he have not   yet tell she and perhaps never 
 would . he be not   unaware that he have tell she rather remarkably many 
 for the time , but these be not the real one . some of the real one , 
 however , precisely , be what she know . 
 they be to pass again through the hall of the inn to get into the 
 street , and it be here she presently check he with a question . 
 " have you look up my name ? " 
 he could only stop with a laugh . " have you look up mine ? " 
 " oh dear , yes - as soon as you leave I . I go to the office and ask . 
 had not   you well do the same ? " 
 he wonder . " find out who you be ? - after the uplifted young woman 
 there have see we thus scrape acquaintance ! " 
 she laugh on her side now at the shade of alarm in his amusement . 
 " be not   it a reason the more ? if what you be afraid of be the injury 
 for I - my be see to walk off with a gentleman who have to ask who I 
 be - I assure you I do not   in the least mind . here , however , " she 
 continue , " be my card , and as I find there be something else again I 
 have to say at the office , you can just study it during the moment I 
 leave you . " 
 she leave he after he have take from she the small pasteboard she have 
 extract from her pocket - book , and he have extract another from his 
 own , to exchange with it , before she come back . he read thus the 
 simple designation " Maria Gostrey , " to which be attach , in a corner 
 of the card , with a number , the name of a street , presumably in Paris , 
 without other appreciable identity than its foreignness . he put the 
 card into his waistcoat pocket , keep his own meanwhile in evidence ; 
 and as he lean against the door - post he meet with the smile of a 
 straying think what the expanse before the hotel offer to his view . 
 it be positively droll to he that he should already have Maria 
 Gostrey , whoever she be - of which he have not   really the least idea - in 
 a place of safe keeping . he have somehow an assurance that he should 
 carefully preserve the little token he have just tuck in . he gaze 
 with unseee linger eye as he follow some of the implication of 
 his act , ask himself if he really feel admonish to qualify it as 
 disloyal . it be prompt , it be possibly even premature , and there be 
 little doubt of the expression of face the sight of it would have 
 produce in a certain person . but if it be " wrong " - why then he have 
 well not have come out at all . at this , poor man , have he 
 already - and even before meet Waymarsh - arrived . he have believe he 
 have a limit , but the limit have be transcend within thirty - six 
 hour . by how long a space on the plane of manner or even of moral , 
 moreover , he feel still more sharply after Maria Gostrey have come back 
 to he and with a gay decisive " so now - ! " lead he forth into the 
 world . this count , it strike he as he walk beside she with his 
 overcoat on an arm , his umbrella under another and his personal 
 pasteboard a little stiffly retain between forefinger and thumb , this 
 strike he as really , in comparison his introduction to thing . it 
 have not   be " Europe " at Liverpool no - not even in the dreadful 
 delightful impressive street the night before - to the extent his 
 present companion make it so . she have not   yet do that so much as 
 when , after their walk have last a few minute and he have have time to 
 wonder if a couple of sidelong glance from she mean that he have well 
 have put on glove she almost pull he up with an amuse challenge . 
 " but why - fondly as it be so easy to imagine your clinging to it - do not 
 you put it away ? or if it be an inconvenience to you to carry it , one 's 
 often glad to have one 's card back . the fortune one spend in they ! " 
 then he see both that his way of marching with his own prepared tribute 
 have affect she as a deviation in one of those direction he could not 
 yet measure , and that she suppose this emblem to be still the one he 
 have receive from she . he accordingly hand she the card as if in 
 restitution , but as soon as she have it she feel the difference and , 
 with her eye on it , stop short for apology . " I like , " she observe , 
 " your name . " 
 " oh , " he answer , " you will not   have hear of it ! " yet he have his reason 
 for not be sure but that she perhaps might . 
 ah it be but too visible ! she read it over again as one who have never 
 see it . " ' Mr. Lewis Lambert Strether ' " - she sound it almost as 
 freely as for any stranger . she repeat however that she like 
 it - " particularly the Lewis Lambert . it be the name of a novel of 
 Balzac 's . " 
 " oh I know that ! " say Strether . 
 " but the novel be an awfully bad one . " 
 " I know that too , " Strether smile . to which he add with an 
 irrelevance that be only superficial : " I come from Woollett 
 Massachusetts . " it make she for some reason - the irrelevance or 
 whatever - laugh . Balzac have describe many city , but have not 
 describe Woollett Massachusetts . " you say that , " she return , " as if 
 you want one immediately to know the bad . " 
 " oh I think it be a thing , " he say , " that you must already have make 
 out . I feel it so that I certainly must look it , speak it , and , as 
 people say there , ' act ' it . it stick out of I , and you know surely 
 for yourself as soon as you look at I . " 
 " the bad , you mean ? " 
 " well , the fact of where I come from . there at any rate it be ; so that 
 you will not   be able , if anything happen , to say I have   not be straight 
 with you . " 
 " I see " - and Miss Gostrey look really interested in the point he have 
 make . " but what do you think of as happen ? " 
 though he be not   shy - which be rather anomalous - Strether gaze about 
 without meet her eye ; a motion that be frequent with he in talk , 
 yet of which his word often seem not at all the effect . " why that 
 you should find I too hopeless . " with which they walk on again 
 together while she answer , as they go , that the most " hopeless " of 
 her countryfolk be in general precisely those she like well . all 
 sort of other pleasant small thing - small thing that be yet large 
 for he - flower in the air of the occasion , but the bearing of the 
 occasion itself on matter still remote concern we too closely to 
 permit we to multiply our illustration . two or three , however , in 
 truth , we should perhaps regret to lose . the tortuous wall - girdle , 
 long since snap , of the little swollen city , half hold in place by 
 careful civic hand - wander in narrow file between parapet smooth 
 by peaceful generation , pause here and there for a dismantled gate 
 or a bridged gap , with rise and drop , step up and step down , queer 
 twist , queer contact , peep into homely street and under the brow 
 of gable , view of cathedral tower and waterside field , of huddled 
 english town and order english country . too deep almost for word 
 be the delight of these thing to Strether ; yet as deeply mix with 
 it be certain image of his inward picture . he have trod this walk 
 in the far - off time , at twenty - five ; but that , instead of spoil it , 
 only enrich it for present feeling and mark his renewal as a thing 
 substantial enough to share . it be with Waymarsh he should have 
 share it , and he be now accordingly take from he something that 
 be his due . he look repeatedly at his watch , and when he have do 
 so for the fifth time Miss Gostrey take he up . 
 " you be do something that you think not right . " 
 it so touch the place that he quite change colour and his laugh grow 
 almost awkward . " be I enjoy it as much as that ? " 
 " you be not enjoy it , I think , so much as you ought . " 
 " I see " - he appear thoughtfully to agree . " Great be my privilege . " 
 " oh it be not your privilege ! it have nothing to do with I . it have to 
 do with yourself . your failure 's general . " 
 " ah there you be ! " he laugh . " it be the failure of Woollett . THAT be 
 general . " 
 " the failure to enjoy , " Miss Gostrey explain , " be what I mean . " 
 " precisely . Woollett be not   sure it ought to enjoy . if it be it 
 would . but it have not , poor thing , " Strether continue , " any one to 
 show it how . it be not like I . I have somebody . " 
 they have stop , in the afternoon sunshine - constantly pause , in 
 their stroll , for the sharp sense of what they see - and Strether 
 rest on one of the high side of the old stony groove of the little 
 rampart . he lean back on this support with his face to the tower of 
 the cathedral , now admirably command by their station , the high 
 red - brown mass , square and subordinately spire and crockete , 
 retouch and restore , but charming to his long - seal eye and with 
 the first swallow of the year weave their flight all round it . Miss 
 Gostrey linger near he , full of an air , to which she more and more 
 justify her right , of understand the effect of thing . she quite 
 concur . " you have   indeed somebody . " and she add : " I wish you would 
 let I show you how ! " 
 " oh I be afraid of you ! " he cheerfully plead . 
 she keep on he a moment , through her glass and through his own , a 
 certain pleasant pointedness . " ah no , you be not ! you be not in the 
 least , thank goodness ! if you have be we should not   so soon have find 
 ourselves here together . I think , " she comfortably conclude , " you 
 trust I . " 
 " I think I do ! - but that be exactly what I be afraid of . I should not 
 mind if I do not . it be fall thus in twenty minute so utterly into 
 your hand . I dare say , " Strether continue , " it be a sort of thing 
 you be thoroughly familiar with ; but nothing more extraordinary have 
 ever happen to I . " 
 she watch he with all her kindness . " that mean simply that you have 
 recognise I - which be rather beautiful and rare . you see what I be . " 
 as on this , however , he protest , with a good - humour headshake , a 
 resignation of any such claim , she have a moment of explanation . " if 
 you will only come on far as you have come you will at any rate make 
 out . my own fate have be too many for I , and I have   succumb to it . 
 I be a general guide - to ' Europe , ' do not   you know ? I wait for people - I 
 put they through . I pick they up - I set they down . I be a sort of 
 superior ' courier - maid . ' I be a companion at large . I take people , as 
 I have   tell you , about . I never seek it - it have come to I . it have 
 be my fate , and one 's fate one accept . it be a dreadful thing to 
 have to say , in so wicked a world , but I verily believe that , such as 
 you see I , there be nothing I do not   know . I know all the shop and the 
 price - but I know bad thing still . I bear on my back the huge load 
 of our national consciousness , or , in other word - for it come to 
 that - of our nation itself . of what be our nation compose but of the 
 man and woman individually on my shoulder ? I do not   do it , you know , 
 for any particular advantage . I do not   do it , for instance - some people 
 do , you know - for money . " 
 Strether could only listen and wonder and weigh his chance . " and yet , 
 affect as you be then to so many of your client , you can scarcely 
 be say to do it for love . " he wait a moment . " how do we reward 
 you ? " 
 she have her own hesitation , but " you do not ! " she finally return , 
 set he again in motion . they go on , but in a few minute , 
 though while still think over what she have say , he once more take 
 out his watch ; mechanically , unconsciously and as if make nervous by 
 the mere exhilaration of what strike he as her strange and cynical 
 wit . he look at the hour without see it , and then , on something 
 again say by his companion , have another pause . " you be really in 
 terror of he . " 
 he smile a smile that he almost feel to be sickly . " now you can see 
 why I be afraid of you . " 
 " because I have   such illumination ? why they be all for your help ! it be 
 what I tell you , " she add , " just now . you feel as if this be 
 wrong . " 
 he fall back once more , settle himself against the parapet as if to 
 hear more about it . " then get I out ! " 
 her face fairly brighten for the joy of the appeal , but , as if it 
 be a question of immediate action , she visibly consider . " out of 
 wait for he ? - of see he at all ? " 
 " oh no - not that , " say poor Strether , look grave . " I have   get to 
 wait for he - and I want very much to see he . but out of the terror . 
 you do put your finger on it a few minute ago . it be general , but it 
 avail itself of particular occasion . that be what it be do for I 
 now . I be always consider something else ; something else , I mean , 
 than the thing of the moment . the obsession of the other thing be the 
 terror . I be consider at present for instance something else than 
 you . " 
 she listen with charming earnestness . " oh you ought not   to do that ! " 
 " it be what I admit . make it then impossible . " 
 she continue to think . " be it really an ' order ' from you ? - that I 
 shall take the job ? will you give yourself up ? " 
 Poor Strether heave his sigh . " if I only could ! but that be the deuce 
 of it - that I never can . no - I can not . " 
 she be not , however , discourage . " but you want to at least ? " 
 " oh unspeakably ! " 
 " ah then , if you will try ! " - and she take over the job , as she have call 
 it , on the spot . " trust I ! " she exclaim , and the action of this , as 
 they retrace their step , be presently to make he pass his hand into 
 her arm in the manner of a benign dependent paternal old person who 
 wish to be " nice " to a young one . if he draw it out again indeed 
 as they approach the inn this may have be because , after more talk 
 have pass between they , the relation of age , or at least of 
 experience - which , for that matter , have already play to and fro with 
 some freedom - affect he as incur a readjustment . it be at all 
 event perhaps lucky that they arrive in sufficiently separate fashion 
 within range of the hotel - door . the young lady they have leave in the 
 glass cage watch as if she have come to await they on the threshold . 
 at her side stand a person equally interested , by his attitude , in 
 their return , and the effect of the sight of whom be instantly to 
 determine for Strether another of those responsive arrest that we have 
 have so repeatedly to note . he leave it to Miss Gostrey to name , with 
 the fine full bravado as it almost strike he , of her " Mr. Waymarsh ! " 
 what be to have be , what - he more than ever feel as his short stare 
 of suspend welcome take thing in - would have be , but for herself , 
 his doom . it be already upon he even at that distance - Mr. Waymarsh 
 be for his part joyless . 
 II 
 he have none the less to confess to this friend that evening that he 
 know almost nothing about she , and it be a deficiency that waymarsh , 
 even with his memory refresh by contact , by her own prompt and lucid 
 allusion and enquiry , by their have publicly partake of dinner in 
 her company , and by another stroll , to which she be not a stranger , 
 out into the town to look at the cathedral by moonlight - it be a blank 
 that the resident of Milrose , though admit acquaintance with the 
 Munsters , profess himself unable to fill . he have no recollection of 
 Miss Gostrey , and two or three question that she put to he about 
 those member of his circle have , to Strether 's observation , the same 
 effect he himself have already more directly feel - the effect of 
 appear to place all knowledge , for the time , on this original 
 woman 's side . it interest he indeed to mark the limit of any such 
 relation for she with his friend as there could possibly be a question 
 of , and it particularly strike he that they be to be mark 
 altogether in Waymarsh 's quarter . this add to his own sense of 
 have go far with she - give he an early illustration of a much 
 short course . there be a certitude he immediately grasp - a 
 conviction that Waymarsh would quite fail , as it be , and on whatever 
 degree of acquaintance to profit by she . 
 there have be after the first interchange among the three a talk of 
 some five minute in the hall , and then the two man have adjourn to 
 the garden , Miss Gostrey for the time disappear . Strether in due 
 course accompany his friend to the room he have bespeak and have , 
 before go out , scrupulously visit ; where at the end of another 
 half - hour he have no less discreetly leave he . on leave he he 
 repair straight to his own room , but with the prompt effect of 
 feel the compass of that chamber resent by his condition . there 
 he enjoy at once the first consequence of their reunion . a place be 
 too small for he after it that have seem large enough before . he have 
 await it with something he would have be sorry , have be almost 
 ashamed not to recognise as emotion , yet with a tacit assumption at the 
 same time that emotion would in the event find itself relieve . the 
 actual oddity be that he be only more excited ; and his excitement - to 
 which indeed he would have find it difficult instantly to give a 
 name - bring he once more downstairs and cause he for some minute 
 vaguely to wander . he go once more to the garden ; he look into the 
 public room , find Miss Gostrey write letter and back out ; he 
 roam , fidget and waste time ; but he be to have his more intimate 
 session with his friend before the evening close . 
 it be late - not till Strether have spend an hour upstairs with 
 he - that this subject consent to betake himself to doubtful rest . 
 Dinner and the subsequent stroll by moonlight - a dream , on Strether 's 
 part , of romantic effect rather prosaically merge in a mere missing 
 of thick coat - have measurably intervene , and this midnight 
 conference be the result of Waymarsh 's have   when they be free , as 
 he put it , of their fashionable friend   find the smoking - room not 
 quite what he want , and yet bed what he want less . his most 
 frequent form of word be that he know himself , and they be apply 
 on this occasion to his certainty of not sleep . he know himself 
 well enough to know that he should have a night of prowling unless he 
 should succeed , as a preliminary , in get prodigiously tired . if 
 the effort direct to this end involve till a late hour the presence 
 of Strether - consist , that is , in the detention of the latter for 
 full discourse - there be yet an impression of minor discipline 
 involve for our friend in the picture Waymarsh make as he sit in 
 trouser and shirt on the edge of his couch . with his long leg 
 extend and his large back much bent , he nurse alternately , for an 
 almost incredible time , his elbow and his beard . he strike his 
 visitor as extremely , as almost wilfully uncomfortable ; yet what have 
 this be for Strether , from that first glimpse of he disconcert in 
 the porch of the hotel , but the predominant note . the discomfort be 
 in a manner contagious , as well as also in a manner inconsequent and 
 unfounded ; the visitor feel that unless he should get use to it - or 
 unless Waymarsh himself should - it would constitute a menace for his 
 own prepare , his own already confirm , consciousness of the 
 agreeable . on their first go up together to the room Strether have 
 select for he Waymarsh have look it over in silence and with a sigh 
 that represent for his companion , if not the habit of disapprobation , 
 at least the despair of felicity ; and this look have recur to 
 Strether as the key of much he have since observe . " Europe , " he have 
 begin to gather from these thing , have up to now rather fail of its 
 message to he ; he have not   get into tune with it and have at the end of 
 three month almost renounce any such expectation . 
 he really appear at present to insist on that by just perch there 
 with the gas in his eye . this of itself somehow convey the futility 
 of single rectification in a multiform failure . he have a large 
 handsome head and a large sallow seam face - a striking significant 
 physiognomic total , the upper range of which , the great political brow , 
 the thick loose hair , the dark fuliginous eye , recall even to a 
 generation whose standard have dreadfully deviate the impressive image , 
 familiar by engraving and bust , of some great national worthy of the 
 early part of the mid - century . he be of the personal type - and it 
 be an element in the power and promise that in their early time 
 Strether have find in he - of the american statesman , the statesman 
 train in " congressional hall , " of an eld day . the legend have be 
 in later year that as the low part of his face , which be weak , and 
 slightly crooked , spoil the likeness , this be the real reason for 
 the growth of his beard , which might have seem to spoil it for those 
 not in the secret . he shake his mane ; he fix , with his admirable 
 eye , his auditor or his observer ; he wear no glass and have a way , 
 partly formidable , yet also partly encouraging , as from a 
 representative to a constituent , of look very hard at those who 
 approach he . he meet you as if you have knock and he have bid you 
 enter . Strether , who have not   see he for so long an interval , 
 apprehend he now with a freshness of taste , and have perhaps never 
 do he such ideal justice . the head be big , the eye finer , than 
 they need have be for the career ; but that only mean , after all , 
 that the career be itself expressive . what it express at midnight 
 in the gas - glare bedroom at Chester be that the subject of it have , 
 at the end of year , barely escape , by flight in time , a general 
 nervous collapse . but this very proof of the full life , as the full 
 life be understand at Milrose , would have make to Strether 's 
 imagination an element in which Waymarsh could have float easily have 
 he only consent to float . alas nothing so little resemble float 
 as the rigour with which , on the edge of his bed , he hug his posture 
 of prolonged impermanence . it suggest to his comrade something that 
 always , when keep up , worry he - a person establish in a 
 railway - coach with a forward inclination . it represent the angle at 
 which poor Waymarsh be to sit through the ordeal of Europe . 
 thank to the stress of occupation , the strain of profession , the 
 absorption and embarrassment of each , they have not , at home , during 
 year before this sudden brief and almost bewildering reign of 
 comparative ease , find so much as a day for a meeting ; a fact that be 
 in some degree an explanation of the sharpness with which most of his 
 friend 's feature stand out to Strether . those he have lose sight of 
 since the early time come back to he ; other that it be never 
 possible to forget strike he now as sit , cluster and expectant , 
 like a somewhat defiant family - group , on the doorstep of their 
 residence . the room be narrow for its length , and the occupant of the 
 bed thrust so far a pair of slippere foot that the visitor have almost 
 to step over they in his recurrent rebound from his chair to fidget 
 back and forth . there be mark the friend make on thing to talk 
 about , and on thing not to , and one of the latter in particular fall 
 like the tap of chalk on the blackboard . marry at thirty , Waymarsh 
 have not live with his wife for fifteen year , and it come up vividly 
 between they in the glare of the gas that Strether be not   to ask about 
 she . he know they be still separate and that she live at hotel , 
 travel in Europe , paint her face and write her husband abusive 
 letter , of not one of which , to a certainty , that sufferer spar 
 himself the perusal ; but he respect without difficulty the cold 
 twilight that have settle on this side of his companion 's life . it be 
 a province in which mystery reign and as to which Waymarsh have never 
 speak the informing word . Strether , who want to do he the high 
 justice wherever he could do it , singularly admire he for the dignity 
 of this reserve , and even count it as one of the ground - ground all 
 handle and number - for rank he , in the range of their 
 acquaintance , as a success . he be a success , waymarsh , in spite of 
 overwork , or prostration , of sensible shrinkage , of his wife 's letter 
 and of his not like Europe . Strether would have reckon his own 
 career less futile have he be able to put into it anything so handsome 
 as so much fine silence . one might one 's self easily have leave Mrs. 
 Waymarsh ; and one would assuredly have pay one 's tribute to the ideal 
 in cover with that attitude the derision of have be leave by she . 
 her husband have hold his tongue and have make a large income ; and these 
 be in especial the achievement as to which Strether envy he . our 
 friend have have indeed on his side too a subject for silence , which he 
 fully appreciate ; but it be a matter of a different sort , and the 
 figure of the income he have arrive at have never be high enough to 
 look any one in the face . 
 " I do not   know as I quite see what you require it for . you do not   appear 
 sick to speak of . " it be of Europe Waymarsh thus finally speak . 
 " well , " say Strether , who fall as much as possible into step , " I guess 
 I do not   feel sick now that I have   start . but I have pretty well run 
 down before I do start . " 
 Waymarsh raise his melancholy look . " ai not   you about up to your usual 
 average ? " 
 it be not quite pointedly sceptical , but it seem somehow a plea for 
 the pure veracity , and it thereby affect our friend as the very 
 voice of Milrose . he have long since make a mental distinction - though 
 never in truth dare to betray it - between the voice of Milrose and 
 the voice even of Woollett . it be the former he feel , that be most 
 in the real tradition . there have be occasion in his past when the 
 sound of it have reduce he to temporary confusion , and the present , 
 for some reason , suddenly become such another . it be nevertheless no 
 light matter that the very effect of his confusion should be to make 
 he again prevaricate . " that description hardly do justice to a man 
 to whom it have do such a lot of good to see you . " 
 Waymarsh fix on his washing - stand the silent detach stare with 
 which Milrose in person , as it be , might have mark the 
 unexpectedness of a compliment from Woollett , and Strether for his 
 part , feel once more like Woollett in person . " I mean , " his friend 
 presently continue , " that your appearance be not   as bad as I have   see 
 it : it compare favourably with what it be when I last notice it . " 
 on this appearance waymarsh 's eye yet fail to rest ; it be almost as 
 if they obey an instinct of propriety , and the effect be still 
 strong when , always consider the basin and jug , he add : " you have 
 fill out some since then . " 
 " I be afraid I have , " Strether laugh : " one do fill out some with 
 all one take in , and I have   take in , I dare say , more than I have   natural 
 room for . I be dog - tired when I sail . " it have the odd sound of 
 cheerfulness . 
 " I be dog - tired , " his companion return , " when I arrive , and it be 
 this wild hunt for rest that take all the life out of I . the fact 
 be , Strether - and it be a comfort to have you here at last to say it to ; 
 though I do not   know , after all , that I have   really wait ; I have   tell it 
 to people I have   meet in the car - the fact be , such a country as this 
 be not   my kind of country anyway . there be not   a country I have   see over 
 here that do seem my kind . oh I do not   say but what there be plenty 
 of pretty place and remarkable old thing ; but the trouble be that I 
 do not   seem to feel anywhere in tune . that be one of the reason why I 
 suppose I have   gain so little . I have not   have the first sign of that 
 lift I be lead to expect . " with this he break out more earnestly . 
 " look here - I want to go back . " 
 his eye be all attach to Strether 's now , for he be one of the man 
 who fully face you when they talk of themselves . this enable his 
 friend to look at he hard and immediately to appear to the high 
 advantage in his eye by do so . " that be a genial thing to say to a 
 fellow who have come out on purpose to meet you ! " 
 nothing could have be fine , on this , than Waymarsh 's sombre glow . 
 " have you come out on purpose ? " 
 " well - very largely . " 
 " I think from the way you write there be something back of it . " 
 Strether hesitate . " back of my desire to be with you ? " 
 " back of your prostration . " 
 Strether , with a smile make more dim by a certain consciousness , shake 
 his head . " there be all the cause of it ! " 
 " and no particular cause that seem most to drive you ? " 
 our friend could at last conscientiously answer . " yes . one . there be 
 a matter that have have much to do with my come out . " 
 Waymarsh wait a little . " too private to mention ? " 
 " no , not too private - for you . only rather complicated . " 
 " well , " say Waymarsh , who have wait again , " I may lose my mind over 
 here , but I do not   know as I have   do so yet . " 
 " oh you shall have the whole thing . but not tonight . " 
 Waymarsh seem to sit stiffer and to hold his elbow tight . " why 
 not - if I can not   sleep ? " 
 " because , my dear man , I can ! " 
 " then where be your prostration ? " 
 " just in that - that I can put in eight hour . " and Strether bring it 
 out that if Waymarsh do not   " gain " it be because he do not   go to bed : 
 the result of which be , in its order , that , to do the latter justice , 
 he permit his friend to insist on his really get settle . 
 Strether , with a kind coercive hand for it , assist he to this 
 consummation , and again find his own part in their relation 
 auspiciously enlarge by the small touch of lower the lamp and 
 see to a sufficiency of blanket . it somehow minister for he to 
 indulgence to feel Waymarsh , who look unnaturally big and black in 
 bed , as much tuck in as a patient in a hospital and , with his 
 covering up to his chin , as much simplify by it he hover in vague 
 pity , to be brief , while his companion challenge he out of the 
 bedclothe . " be she really after you ? be that what be behind ? " 
 Strether feel an uneasiness at the direction take by his companion 's 
 insight , but he play a little at uncertainty . " behind my come out ? " 
 " behind your prostration or whatever . it be generally feel , you know , 
 that she follow you up pretty close . " 
 Strether 's candour be never very far off . " oh it have occur to you 
 that I be literally run away from Mrs. Newsome ? " 
 " well , I have not   know but what you be . you be a very attractive man , 
 Strether . you have   see for yourself , " say Waymarsh " what that lady 
 downstair make of it . unless indeed , " he ramble on with an effect 
 between the ironic and the anxious , " it be you who be after she . be 
 Mrs. Newsome over here ? " he speak as with a droll dread of she . 
 it make his friend - though rather dimly - smile . " dear no she be safe , 
 thank goodness - as I think I more and more feel - at home . she think 
 of come , but she give it up . I have   come in a manner instead of she ; 
 and come to that extent - for you be right in your inference - on her 
 business . so you see there be plenty of connexion . " 
 Waymarsh continue to see at least all there be . " involve 
 accordingly the particular one I have   refer to ? " 
 Strether take another turn about the room , give a twitch to his 
 companion 's blanket and finally gain the door . his feeling be that 
 of a nurse who have earn personal rest by have make everything 
 straight . " involve more thing than I can think of break ground 
 on now . but do not   be afraid - you shall have they from I : you will 
 probably find yourself have quite as much of they as you can do with . 
 I shall - if we keep together - very much depend on your impression of 
 some of they . " 
 Waymarsh 's acknowledgement of this tribute be characteristically 
 indirect . " you mean to say you do not   believe we will keep together ? " 
 " I only glance at the danger , " Strether paternally say , " because when 
 I hear you wail to go back I seem to see you open up such possibility 
 of folly . " 
 Waymarsh take it - silent a little - like a large snub child " what be 
 you go to do with I ? " 
 it be the very question Strether himself have put to Miss Gostrey , and 
 he wonder if he have sound like that . but he at least could be more 
 definite . " I be go to take you right down to London . " 
 " oh I have   be down to London ! " waymarsh more softly moan . " I have   no 
 use , Strether , for anything down there . " 
 " well , " say Strether , good - humouredly , " I guess you have   some use for 
 I . " 
 " so I have   get to go ? " 
 " oh you have   get to go far yet . " 
 " well , " Waymarsh sigh , " do your damnedest ! only you will tell I 
 before you lead I on all the way - ? " 
 our friend have again so lose himself , both for amusement and for 
 contrition , in the wonder of whether he have make , in his own challenge 
 that afternoon , such another figure , that he for an instant miss the 
 thread . " tell you - ? " 
 " why what you have   get on hand . " 
 Strether hesitate . " why it be such a matter as that even if I 
 positively want I should not   be able to keep it from you . " 
 Waymarsh gloomily gazed . " what do that mean then but that your trip 
 be just for she ? " 
 " for Mrs. Newsome ? oh it certainly be , as I say . very much . " 
 " then why do you also say it be for I ? " 
 Strether , in impatience , violently play with his latch . " it be simple 
 enough . it be for both of you . " 
 waymarsh at last turn over with a groan . " well , I will not   marry you ! " 
 " Neither , when it come to that - ! " but the visitor have already laugh 
 and escape . 
 III 
 he have tell Miss Gostrey he should probably take , for departure with 
 Waymarsh , some afternoon train , and it thereupon in the morning 
 appear that this lady have make her own plan for an early one . she 
 have breakfast when Strether come into the coffee - room ; but , Waymarsh 
 not have yet emerge , he be in time to recall she to the term of 
 their understanding and to pronounce her discretion overdone . she be 
 surely not to break away at the very moment she have create a want . he 
 have meet she as she rise from her little table in a window , where , with 
 the morning paper beside she , she remind he , as he let she know , of 
 Major Pendennis breakfast at his club - a compliment of which she 
 profess a deep appreciation ; and he detain she as pleadingly as if 
 he have already - and notably under pressure of the vision of the 
 night - learn to be unable to do without she . she must teach he at 
 all event , before she go , to order breakfast as breakfast be 
 order in Europe , and she must especially sustain he in the problem 
 of order for Waymarsh . the latter have lay upon his friend , by 
 desperate sound through the door of his room , dreadful divine 
 responsibility in respect to beefsteak and orange - responsibility 
 which Miss Gostrey take over with an alertness of action that match 
 her quick intelligence . she have before this wean the expatriate 
 from tradition compare with which the matutinal beefsteak be but the 
 creature of an hour , and it be not for she , with some of her memory , 
 to falter in the path though she freely enough declare , on reflexion , 
 that there be always in such case a choice of oppose policy . 
 " there be time when to give they their head , you know - ! " 
 they have go to wait together in the garden for the dressing of the 
 meal , and Strether find she more suggestive than ever " well , what ? " 
 " be to bring about for they such a complexity of relation - unless 
 indeed we call it a simplicity ! - that the situation have to wind itself 
 up . they want to go back . " 
 " and you want they to go ! " Strether gaily conclude . 
 " I always want they to go , and I send they as fast as I can . ' 
 " oh I know - you take they to Liverpool . " 
 " any port will serve in a storm . I be - with all my other function - an 
 agent for repatriation . I want to re - people our stricken country . what 
 will become of it else ? I want to discourage other . " 
 the order English garden , in the freshness of the day , be 
 delightful to Strether , who like the sound , under his foot , of the 
 tight fine gravel , pack with the chronic damp , and who have the idle 
 eye for the deep smoothness of turf and the clean curve of path . 
 " other people ? " 
 " other country . other people - yes . I want to encourage our own . " 
 Strether wonder . " not to come ? why then do you ' meet ' they - since 
 it do not   appear to be to stop they ? " 
 " oh that they should not   come be as yet too much to ask . what I attend 
 to be that they come quickly and return still more so . I meet they to 
 help it to be over as soon as possible , and though I do not   stop they 
 I have   my way of put they through . that be my little system ; and , if 
 you want to know , " say Maria Gostrey , " it be my real secret , my 
 innermost mission and use . I only seem , you see , to beguile and 
 approve ; but I have   think it all out and I be work all the while 
 underground . I can not   perhaps quite give you my formula , but I think 
 that practically I succeed . I send you back spend . so you stay back . 
 pass through my hand - " 
 " we do not   turn up again ? " the far she go the far he always 
 see himself able to follow . " I do not   want your formula - I feel quite 
 enough , as I hint yesterday , your abyss . spend ! " he echo . " if 
 that be how you be arrange so subtly to send I I thank you for the 
 warning . " 
 for a minute , amid the pleasantness - poetry in tariffed item , but all 
 the more , for guest already convict , a challenge to consumption - they 
 smile at each other in confirmed fellowship . " do you call it subtly ? 
 it be a plain poor tale . besides , you be a special case . " 
 " oh special case - that be weak ! " she be weak enough , far still , to 
 defer her journey and agree to accompany the gentleman on their own , 
 might a separate carriage mark her independence ; though it be in spite 
 of this to befall after luncheon that she go off alone and that , with 
 a tryst take for a day of her company in London , they linger another 
 night . she have , during the morning - spend in a way that he be to 
 remember later on as the very climax of his foretaste , as warm with 
 presentiment , with what he would have call collapse - have all sort 
 of thing out with Strether ; and among they the fact that though there 
 be never a moment of her life when she be not   " due " somewhere , there 
 be yet scarce a perfidy to other of which she be not   capable for his 
 sake . she explain moreover that wherever she happen to be she 
 find a drop thread to pick up , a ragged edge to repair , some 
 familiar appetite in ambush , jump out as she approach , yet 
 appeasable with a temporary biscuit . it become , on she take the risk 
 of the deviation impose on he by her insidious arrangement of his 
 morning meal , a point of honour for she not to fail with Waymarsh of 
 the large success too ; and her subsequent boast to Strether be that 
 she have make their friend fare - and quite without his know what be 
 the matter - as Major Pendennis would have fare at the Megatherium . she 
 have make he breakfast like a gentleman , and it be nothing , she 
 forcibly assert , to what she would yet make he do . she make he 
 participate in the slow reiterate ramble with which , for Strether , the 
 new day amply fill itself ; and it be by her art that he somehow have 
 the air , on the rampart and in the Rows , of carry a point of his 
 own . 
 the three stroll and star and gossip , or at least the two do ; 
 the case really yield for their comrade , if analyse , but the 
 element of stricken silence . this element indeed affect Strether as 
 charge with audible rumbling , but he be conscious of the care of 
 take it explicitly as a sign of pleasant peace . he would not   appeal 
 too much , for that provoke stiffness ; yet he would not   be too freely 
 tacit , for that suggest give up . Waymarsh himself adhere to an 
 ambiguous dumbness that might have represent either the growth of a 
 perception or the despair of one ; and at time and in place - where the 
 low - browed gallery be darkest , the opposite gable queer , the 
 solicitation of every kind densest - the other catch he fix hard 
 some object of minor interest , fix even at moment nothing 
 discernible , as if he be indulge it with a truce . when he meet 
 Strether 's eye on such occasion he look guilty and furtive , fall the 
 next minute into some attitude of retractation . our friend could not 
 show he the right thing for fear of provoke some total 
 renouncement , and be tempt even to show he the wrong in order to 
 make he differ with triumph . there be moment when he himself feel 
 shy of profess the full sweetness of the taste of leisure , and there 
 be other when he find himself feel as if his passage of 
 interchange with the lady at his side might fall upon the third member 
 of their party very much as Mr. Burchell , at Dr. Primrose 's fireside , 
 be influence by the high flight of the visitor from London . the 
 small thing so arrest and amuse he that he repeatedly almost 
 apologise - bring up afresh in explanation his plea of a previous 
 grind . he be aware at the same time that his grind have be as 
 nothing to Waymarsh 's , and he repeatedly confess that , to cover his 
 frivolity , he be do his good for his previous virtue . do what he 
 might , in any case , his previous virtue be still there , and it seem 
 fairly to stare at he out of the window of shop that be not as the 
 shop of Woollett , fairly to make he want thing that he should not 
 know what to do with . it be by the oddest , the least admissible of 
 law demoralise he now ; and the way it boldly take be to make he 
 want more want . these first walk in Europe be in fact a kind of 
 finely lurid intimation of what one might find at the end of that 
 process . have he come back after long year , in something already so 
 like the evening of life , only to be expose to it ? it be at all 
 event over the shop - window that he make , with Waymarsh , most free ; 
 though it would have be easy have not the latter most sensibly 
 yield to the appeal of the merely useful trade . he pierce with his 
 sombre detachment the plate - glass of ironmonger and saddler , while 
 Strether flaunt an affinity with the dealer in stamp letter - paper 
 and in smart necktie . Strether be in fact recurrently shameless in 
 the presence of the tailor , though it be just over the head of the 
 tailor that his countryman most loftily look . this give Miss 
 Gostrey a grasp opportunity to back up waymarsh at his expense . the 
 weary lawyer - it be unmistakeable - have a conception of dress ; but 
 that , in view of some of the feature of the effect produce , be just 
 what make the danger of insistence on it . Strether wonder if he by 
 this time think Miss Gostrey less fashionable or Lambert Strether 
 more so ; and it appear probable that most of the remark exchange 
 between this latter pair about passer , figure , face , personal type , 
 exemplified in their degree the disposition to talk as ' society " talk . 
 be what be happen to himself then , be what already had happen , 
 really that a woman of fashion be float he into society and that 
 an old friend desert on the brink be watch the force of the 
 current ? when the woman of fashion permit Strether - as she 
 permit he at the most - the purchase of a pair of glove , the term 
 she make about it , the prohibition of necktie and other item till she 
 should be able to guide he through the Burlington Arcade , be such as 
 to fall upon a sensitive ear as a challenge to just imputation . Miss 
 Gostrey be such a woman of fashion as could make without a symptom of 
 vulgar blink an appointment for the Burlington Arcade . mere 
 discrimination about a pair of glove could thus at any rate 
 represent - always for such sensitive ear as be in 
 question - possibility of something that Strether could make a mark 
 against only as the peril of apparent wantonness . he have quite the 
 consciousness of his new friend , for their companion , that he might 
 have have of a Jesuit in petticoat , a representative of the recruiting 
 interest of the Catholic Church . the Catholic Church , for 
 waymarsh - that be to say the enemy , the monster of bulge eye and 
 far - reach quivering groping tentacle - be exactly society , exactly 
 the multiplication of shibboleth , exactly the discrimination of type 
 and tone , exactly the wicked old Rows of Chester , rank with feudalism ; 
 exactly in short Europe . 
 there be light for observation , however , in an incident that occur 
 just before they turn back to luncheon . Waymarsh have be for a 
 quarter of an hour exceptionally mute and distant , and something , or 
 other - Strether be never to make out exactly what - prove , as it be , 
 too much for he after his comrade have stand for three minute take 
 in , while they lean on an old balustrade that guard the edge of the 
 Row , a particularly crooked and huddle street - view . " he think we 
 sophisticated , he think we worldly , he think we wicke , he think we 
 all sort of queer thing , " Strether reflect ; for wondrous be the 
 vague quantity our friend have within a couple of short day acquire 
 the habit of conveniently and conclusively lump together . there 
 seem moreover a direct connexion between some such inference and a 
 sudden grim dash take by Waymarsh to the opposite side . this movement 
 be startlingly sudden , and his companion at first suppose he to 
 have espy , to be pursue , the glimpse of an acquaintance . they next 
 make out , however , that an open door have instantly receive he , and 
 they then recognise he as engulf in the establishment of a 
 jeweller , behind whose glitter front he be lose to view . the fact 
 have somehow the note of a demonstration , and it leave each of the other 
 to show a face almost of fear . but Miss Gostrey break into a laugh . 
 " what be the matter with he ? " 
 " well , " say Strether , " he can not   stand it . " 
 " but can not   stand what ? " 
 " anything . Europe . " 
 " then how will that jeweller help he ? " 
 Strether seem to make it out , from their position , between the 
 interstice of array watch , of close - hung dangling gewgaw . " you will 
 see . " 
 " ah that be just what - if he buy anything - I be afraid of : that I shall 
 see something rather dreadful . " 
 Strether study the fine appearance . " he may buy everything . " 
 " then do not   you think we ought to follow he ? " 
 " not for world . besides we can not . we be paralysed . we exchange a 
 long scared look , we publicly tremble . the thing be , you see , we 
 ' realise . ' he have strike for freedom . " 
 she wonder but she laugh . " ah what a price to pay ! and I be 
 prepare some for he so cheap . " 
 " no , no , " Strether go on , frankly amuse now ; " do not   call it that : 
 the kind of freedom you deal in be dear . " then as to justify himself : 
 " be I not in MY way try it ? it be this . " 
 " be here , you mean , with I ? " 
 " yes , and talk to you as I do . I have   know you a few hour , and I have 
 know HIM all my life ; so that if the ease I thus take with you about 
 he be not   magnificent " - and the thought of it hold he a moment - " why 
 it be rather base . " 
 " it be magnificent ! " say Miss Gostrey to make an end of it . " and you 
 should hear , " she add , " the ease I take - and I above all intend to 
 take - with Mr. Waymarsh . " 
 Strether think . " about I ? ah that be no equivalent . the equivalent 
 would be Waymarsh 's himself serve I up - his remorseless analysis of 
 I . and he will never do that " - he be sadly clear . " he will never 
 remorselessly analyse I . " he quite hold she with the authority of 
 this . " he will never say a word to you about I . " 
 she take it in ; she do it justice ; yet after an instant her reason , 
 her restless irony , dispose of it . " of course he will not . for what do 
 you take people , that they be able to say word about anything , able 
 remorselessly to analyse ? there be not many like you and I . it will 
 be only because he be too stupid . " 
 it stir in her friend a sceptical echo which be at the same time 
 the protest of the faith of year . " waymarsh stupid ? " 
 " compare with you . " 
 Strether have still his eye on the jeweller 's front , and he wait a 
 moment to answer . " he be a success of a kind that I have not   approach . " 
 " do you mean he have make money ? " 
 " he make it - to my belief . and I , " say Strether , " though with a back 
 quite as bent , have never make anything . I be a perfectly equip 
 failure . " 
 he fear an instant she would ask he if he mean he be poor ; and he be 
 glad she do not , for he really do not   know to what the truth on this 
 unpleasant point might not   have prompt she . she only , however , 
 confirm his assertion . " thank goodness you be a failure - it be why I 
 so distinguish you ! anything else to - day be too hideous . look about 
 you - look at the success . would you be one , on your honour ? look , 
 moreover , " she continue , " at I . " 
 for a little accordingly their eye meet . " I see , " Strether return . 
 " you too be out of it . " 
 " the superiority you discern in I , " she concur , " announce my 
 futility . if you know , " she sigh , " the dream of my youth ! but our 
 reality be what have bring we together . we be beat brother in 
 arm . " 
 he smile at she kindly enough , but he shake his head . " it do not 
 alter the fact that you be expensive . you have   cost I already - ! " 
 but he have hang fire . " cost you what ? " 
 " well , my past - in one great lump . but no matter , " he laugh : " I will 
 pay with my last penny . " 
 her attention have unfortunately now be engage by their comrade 's 
 return , for Waymarsh meet their view as he come out of his shop . " I 
 hope he have not   pay , " she say , " with his last ; though I be convinced he 
 have be splendid , and have be so for you . " 
 " ah no - not that ! " 
 " then for I ? " 
 " quite as little . " Waymarsh be by this time near enough to show sign 
 his friend could read , though he seem to look almost carefully at 
 nothing in particular . 
 " then for himself ? " 
 " for nobody . for nothing . for freedom . " 
 " but what have freedom to do with it ? " 
 Strether 's answer be indirect . " to be as good as you and I . but 
 different . " 
 she have have time to take in their companion 's face ; and with it , as 
 such thing be easy for she , she take in all . " different - yes . but 
 well ! " 
 if Waymarsh be sombre he be also indeed almost sublime . he tell they 
 nothing , leave his absence unexplained , and though they be convince 
 he have make some extraordinary purchase they be never to learn its 
 nature . he only glower grandly at the top of the old gable . " it be 
 the sacred rage , " Strether have have further time to say ; and this sacred 
 rage be to become between they , for convenient comprehension , the 
 description of one of his periodical necessity . it be Strether who 
 eventually contend that it do make he well than they . but by 
 that time Miss Gostrey be convince that she do not   want to be well 
 than Strether . 
 Book Second 
 I 
 those occasion on which Strether be , in association with the exile 
 from Milrose , to see the sacred rage glimmer through would doubtless 
 have their due periodicity ; but our friend have meanwhile to find name 
 for many other matter . on no evening of his life perhaps , as he 
 reflect , have he have to supply so many as on the third of his short 
 stay in London ; an evening spend by Miss Gostrey 's side at one of the 
 theatre , to which he have find himself transport , without his own 
 hand raise , on the mere expression of a conscientious wonder . she 
 know her theatre , she know her play , as she have triumphantly know , 
 three day run , everything else , and the moment fill to the brim , 
 for her companion , that apprehension of the interesting which , whether 
 or no the interesting happen to filter through his guide , strain 
 now to its limit his brief opportunity . waymarsh have not   come with 
 they ; he have see play enough , he signify , before Strether have 
 join he - an affirmation that have its full force when his friend 
 ascertain by question that he have see two and a circus . question 
 as to what he have see have on he indeed an effect only less favourable 
 than question as to what he have not . he like the former to be 
 discriminate ; but how could it be do , Strether ask of their 
 constant counsellor , without discriminate the latter ? 
 Miss Gostrey have din with he at his hotel , face to face over a small 
 table on which the light candle have rise - colour shade ; and the 
 rose - colour shade and the small table and the soft fragrance of the 
 lady - have anything to his mere sense ever be so soft ? - be so many 
 touch in he scarce know what positive high picture . he have be to 
 the theatre , even to the opera , in Boston , with Mrs. Newsome , more than 
 once act as her only escort ; but there have be no little confront 
 dinner , no pink light , no whiff of vague sweetness , as a preliminary : 
 one of the result of which be that at present , mildly rueful , though 
 with a sharpish accent , he actually ask himself why there have not . 
 there be much the same difference in his impression of the noticed 
 state of his companion , whose dress be " cut down , " as he believe the 
 term to be , in respect to shoulder and bosom , in a manner quite other 
 than Mrs. Newsome 's , and who wear round her throat a broad red velvet 
 band with an antique jewel - he be rather complacently sure it be 
 antique - attach to it in front . Mrs. Newsome 's dress be never in 
 any degree " cut down , " and she never wear round her throat a broad red 
 velvet band : if she have , moreover , would it ever have serve so to 
 carry on and complicate , as he now almost feel , his vision ? 
 it would have be absurd of he to trace into ramification the effect 
 of the ribbon from which Miss Gostrey 's trinket depend , have he not 
 for the hour , at the good , be so give over to uncontrolled 
 perception . what be it but an uncontrolled perception that his 
 friend 's velvet band somehow add , in her appearance , to the value of 
 every other item - to that of her smile and of the way she carry she 
 head , to that of her complexion , of her lip , her tooth , her eye , her 
 hair ? what , certainly , have a man conscious of a man 's work in the 
 world to do with red velvet band ? he would not   for anything have so 
 expose himself as to tell Miss Gostrey how much he like her , yet he 
 had none the less not only catch himself in the act - frivolous , no 
 doubt , idiotic , and above all unexpected - of like it : he have in 
 addition take it as a starting - point for fresh backward , fresh 
 forward , fresh lateral flight . the manner in which Mrs. Newsome 's 
 throat be encircled suddenly represent for he , in an alien order , 
 almost as many thing as the manner in which Miss Gostrey 's be . Mrs. 
 Newsome wear , at operatic hour , a black silk dress - very handsome , he 
 know it be " handsome " - and an ornament that his memory be able 
 far to identify as a ruche . he have his association indeed with the 
 ruche , but it be rather imperfectly romantic . he have once say to the 
 wearer - and it be as " free " a remark as he have ever make to she - that 
 she look , with her ruff and other matter , like Queen Elizabeth ; and 
 it have after this in truth be his fancy that , as a consequence of 
 that tenderness and an acceptance of the idea , the form of this special 
 tribute to the " frill " have grow slightly more marked . the connexion , 
 as he sit there and let his imagination roam , be to strike he as 
 vaguely pathetic ; but there it all be , and pathetic be doubtless in 
 the condition the good thing it could possibly be . it have assuredly 
 exist at any rate ; for it seem now to come over he that no 
 gentleman of his age at Woollett could ever , to a lady of Mrs. 
 Newsome 's , which be not much less than his , have embark on such a 
 simile . 
 all sort of thing in fact now seem to come over he , comparatively 
 few of which his chronicler can hope for space to mention . it come 
 over he for instance that Miss Gostrey look perhaps like Mary 
 Stuart : Lambert Strether have a candour of fancy which could rest for 
 an instant gratify in such an antithesis . it come over he that 
 never before - no , literally never - have a lady din with he at a 
 public place before go to the play . the publicity of the place be 
 just , in the matter , for Strether , the rare strange thing ; it affect 
 he almost as the achievement of privacy might have affect a man of a 
 different experience . he have marry , in the far - away year , so young 
 as to have miss the time natural in Boston for take girl to the 
 Museum ; and it be absolutely true of hint that - even after the close 
 of the period of conscious detachment occupy the centre of his life , 
 the grey middle desert of the two death , that of his wife and that , 
 ten year later , of his boy - he have never take any one anywhere . it 
 come over he in especial - though the monition have , as happen , 
 already sound , fitfully gleam , in other form - that the business he 
 have come out on have not   yet be so bring home to he as by the sight 
 of the people about he . she give he the impression , his friend , at 
 first , more straight than he get it for himself - give it simply by 
 say with off - hand illumination : " oh yes , they be type ! " - but after 
 he have take it he make to the full his own use of it ; both while he 
 keep silence for the four act and while he talk in the interval . it 
 be an evening , it be a world of type , and this be a connexion above 
 all in which the figure and face in the stall be interchangeable 
 with those on the stage . 
 he feel as if the play itself penetrate he with the naked elbow of 
 his neighbour , a great strip handsome red - haired lady who converse 
 with a gentleman on her other side in stray dissyllable which have for 
 his ear , in the oddest way in the world , so much sound that he wonder 
 they have not   more sense ; and he recognise by the same law , beyond the 
 footlight , what he be pleased to take for the very flush of english 
 life . he have distract drop in which he could not   have say if it 
 be actor or auditor who be most true , and the upshot of which , 
 each time , be the consciousness of new contact . however he view 
 his job it be " type " he should have to tackle . those before he and 
 around he be not as the type of Woollett , where , for that matter , 
 it have begin to seem to he that there must only have be the male and 
 the female . these make two exactly , even with the individual variety . 
 here , on the other hand , apart from the personal and the sexual 
 range - which might be great or less - a series of strong stamp have 
 be apply , as it be , from without ; stamp that his observation 
 play with as , before a glass case on a table , it might have pass 
 from medal to medal and from copper to gold . it befell that in the 
 drama precisely there be a bad woman in a yellow frock who make a 
 pleasant weak good - look young man in perpetual evening dress do the 
 most dreadful thing . Strether feel himself on the whole not afraid of 
 the yellow frock , but he be vaguely anxious over a certain kindness 
 into which he find himself drift for its victim . he have not   come 
 out , he remind himself , to be too kind , or indeed to be kind at all , 
 to Chadwick Newsome . would Chad also be in perpetual evening dress ? 
 he somehow rather hop it - it seem so to add to this young man 's 
 general amenability ; though he wonder too if , to fight he with his 
 own weapon , he himself   a thought almost startling   would have 
 likewise to be . this young man furthermore would have be much more 
 easy to handle - at least for HIM - than appear probable in respect to 
 Chad . 
 it come up for he with Miss Gostrey that there be thing of which 
 she would really perhaps after all have hear , and she admit when a 
 little pressed that she be never quite sure of what she hear as 
 distinguish from thing such as , on occasion like the present , she 
 only extravagantly guess . " I seem with this freedom , you see , to 
 have guess Mr. Chad . he be a young man on whose head high hope be 
 place at Woollett ; a young man a wicked woman have get hold of and whom 
 his family over there have send you out to rescue . you have   accept the 
 mission of separate he from the wicked woman . be you quite sure 
 she be very bad for he ? " 
 something in his manner show it as quite pull he up . " of course 
 we be . would not   you be ? " 
 " oh I do not   know . one never do - do one ? - beforehand . one can only 
 judge on the fact . your be quite new to I ; I be really not in the 
 least , as you see , in possession of they : so it will be awfully 
 interesting to have they from you . if you be satisfied , that be all 
 that be require . I mean if you be sure you be sure : sure it will not   do . " 
 " that he should lead such a life ? rather ! " 
 " oh but I do not   know , you see , about his life ; you have   not tell I about 
 his life . she may be charming - his life ! " 
 " Charming ? " - Strether star before he . " she 's base , venal - out of the 
 street . " 
 " I see . and HE - ? " 
 " Chad , wretched boy ? " 
 " of what type and temper be he ? " she go on as Strether have lapse . 
 " well - the obstinate . " it be as if for a moment he have be go to 
 say more and have then control himself . 
 that be scarce what she wish . " do you like he ? " 
 this time he be prompt . " no . how can I ? " 
 " do you mean because of your be so saddled with he ? " 
 " I be think of his mother , " say Strether after a moment . " he have 
 darken her admirable life . " he speak with austerity . " he have 
 worry her half to death . " 
 " oh that be of course odious . " she have a pause as if for renewed 
 emphasis of this truth , but it end on another note . " be her life 
 very admirable ? " 
 " extraordinarily . " 
 there be so much in the tone that Miss Gostrey have to devote another 
 pause to the appreciation of it . " and have he only she ? I do not   mean 
 the bad woman in Paris , " she quickly add - " for I assure you I 
 should not   even at the good be dispose to allow he more than one . but 
 have he only his mother ? " 
 " he have also a sister , old than himself and marry ; and they be both 
 remarkably fine woman . " 
 " very handsome , you mean ? " 
 this promptitude - almost , as he might have think , this precipitation , 
 give he a brief drop ; but he come up again . " Mrs. Newsome , I think , be 
 handsome , though she be not of course , with a son of twenty - eight and a 
 daughter of thirty , in her very first youth . she marry , however , 
 extremely young . " 
 " and be wonderful , " Miss Gostrey ask , " for her age ? " 
 Strether seem to feel with a certain disquiet the pressure of it . " I 
 do not   say she be wonderful . or rather , " he go on the next moment , " I 
 do say it . it be exactly what she be - wonderful . but I be not   think 
 of her appearance , " he explain - ' strike as that doubtless be . I 
 be think - well , of many other thing . " he seem to look at these 
 as if to mention some of they ; then take , pull himself up , another 
 turn . " about Mrs. Pocock people may differ . " 
 " be that the daughter 's name - ' Pocock ' ? " 
 " that be the daughter 's name , " Strether sturdily confess . 
 " and people may differ , you mean , about her beauty ? " 
 " about everything . " 
 " but you admire she ? " 
 he give his friend a glance as to show how he could bear this " I be 
 perhaps a little afraid of she . " 
 " oh , " say Miss Gostrey , " I see she from here ! you may say then I see 
 very fast and very far , but I have   already show you I do . the young man 
 and the two lady , " she go on , " be at any rate all the family ? " 
 " quite all . his father have be dead ten year , and there be no 
 brother , nor any other sister . they would do , " say Strether , " anything in 
 the world for he . " 
 " and you would do anything in the world for they ? " 
 he shift again ; she have make it perhaps just a shade too affirmative 
 for his nerve . " oh I do not   know ! " 
 " you would do at any rate this , and the ' anything ' they would do be represent 
 by their making you do it . " 
 " ah they could not   have come - either of they . they be very busy people 
 and Mrs. Newsome in particular have a large full life . she be moreover 
 highly nervous - and not at all strong . " 
 " you mean she be an american invalid ? " 
 he carefully distinguish . " there be nothing she like less than to be 
 call one , but she would consent to be one of those thing , I think , " 
 he laugh , " if it be the only way to be the other . " 
 " consent to be an American in order to be an invalid ? " 
 " no , " say Strether , " the other way round . she be at any rate delicate 
 sensitive high - string . she put so much of herself into everything - " 
 ah Maria know these thing ! " that she have nothing leave for anything 
 else ? of course she have not . to whom do you say it ? high - string ? 
 do not   I spend my life , for they , jam down the pedal ? I see 
 moreover how it have tell on you . " 
 Strether take this more lightly . " oh I jam down the pedal too ! " 
 " well , " she lucidly return , " we must from this moment bear on it 
 together with all our might . " and she forge ahead . " have they money ? " 
 but it be as if , while her energetic image still hold he , her enquiry 
 fall short . " Mrs. Newsome , " he wish far to explain , " have not 
 moreover your courage on the question of contact . if she have come it 
 would have be to see the person herself . " 
 " the woman ? ah but that be courage . " 
 " no - it be exaltation , which be a very different thing . courage , " he , 
 however , accommodatingly throw out , " be what you have . " 
 she shake her head . " you say that only to patch I up - to cover the 
 nudity of my want of exaltation . I have   neither the one nor the other . 
 I have   mere battered indifference . I see that what you mean , " Miss 
 Gostrey pursue , " be that if your friend had come she would take great 
 view , and the great view , to put it simply , would be too much for 
 she . " 
 Strether look amused at her notion of the simple , but he adopt she 
 formula . " everything be too much for she . " 
 " ah then such a service as this of your - " 
 " be more for she than anything else ? yes - far more . but so long as it 
 be not   too much for me - ! " 
 " her condition do not   matter ? surely not ; we leave her condition out ; 
 we take it , that be , for grant . I see it , her condition , as behind 
 and beneath you ; yet at the same time I see it as bear you up . " 
 " oh it do bear I up ! " Strether laugh . 
 " well then as yours bear I nothing more be need . " with which she 
 put again her question . " have Mrs. Newsome money ? " 
 this time he heed . " oh plenty . that be the root of the evil . there be 
 money , to very large amount , in the concern . Chad have have the free 
 use of a great deal . but if he will pull himself together and come home , 
 all the same , he will find his account in it . " 
 she have listen with all her interest . " and I hope to goodness you will 
 find your ! " 
 " he will take up his definite material reward , " say Strether without 
 acknowledgement of this . " he be at the parting of the way . he can 
 come into the business now - he can not   come later . " 
 " be there a business ? " 
 " Lord , yes - a big brave bounce business . a roar trade . " 
 " a great shop ? " 
 " yes - a workshop ; a great production , a great industry . the concern 's 
 a manufacture - and a manufacture that , if it be only properly look 
 after , may well be on the way to become a monopoly . it be a little thing 
 they make - make well , it appear , than other people can , or than 
 other people , at any rate , do . Mr. Newsome , be a man of idea , at 
 least in that particular line , " Strether explain , " put they on it 
 with great effect , and give the place altogether , in his time , an 
 immense lift . " 
 " it be a place in itself ? " 
 " well , quite a number of building ; almost a little industrial colony . 
 but above all it be a thing . the article produce . " 
 " and what be the article produce ? " 
 Strether look about he as in slight reluctance to say ; then the 
 curtain , which he see about to rise , come to his aid . " I will tell you 
 next time . " but when the next time come he only say he would tell she 
 later on - after they should have leave the theatre ; for she have 
 immediately revert to their topic , and even for himself the picture 
 of the stage be now overlay with another image . his postponement , 
 however , make her wonder - wonder if the article refer to be 
 anything bad . and she explain that she mean improper or ridiculous 
 or wrong . but Strether , so far as that go , could satisfy she . 
 " Unmentionable ? oh no , we constantly talk of it ; we be quite familiar 
 and brazen about it . only , as a small , trivial , rather ridiculous 
 object of the commonest domestic use , it be just want in - what shall I 
 say ? well , dignity , or the least approach to distinction . right here 
 therefore , with everything about we so grand - ! " in short he shrink . 
 " it be a false note ? " 
 " sadly . it be vulgar . " 
 " but surely not vulgar than this . " then on his wondering as she 
 herself have do : " than everything about we . " she seem a trifle 
 irritated . " what do you take this for ? " 
 " why for - comparatively - divine ! " 
 " this dreadful London theatre ? it be impossible , if you really want to 
 know . " 
 " oh then , " laugh Strether , " I don't really want to know ! " 
 it make between they a pause , which she , however , still fascinate by 
 the mystery of the production at Woollett , presently break . " ' rather 
 ridiculous ' ? clothe - pin ? Saleratus ? shoe - polish ? " 
 it bring he round . " no - you do not   even ' burn . ' I do not   think , you 
 know , you will guess it . " 
 " how then can I judge how vulgar it be ? " 
 " you will judge when I do tell you " - and he persuade she to patience . 
 but it may even now frankly be mention that he in the sequel never 
 be to tell she . he actually never do so , and it moreover oddly 
 occur that by the law , within she , of the incalculable , her desire 
 for the information drop and her attitude to the question convert 
 itself into a positive cultivation of ignorance . in ignorance she 
 could humour her fancy , and that prove a useful freedom . she could 
 treat the little nameless object as indeed unnameable - she could make 
 their abstention enormously definite . there might indeed have be for 
 Strether the portent of this in what she next say . 
 " be it perhaps then because it be so bad - because your industry as you 
 call it , be so vulgar - that Mr. Chad will not   come back ? do he feel the 
 taint ? be he stay away not to be mix up in it ? " 
 " oh , " Strether laugh , " it would not   appear - would it ? - that he feel 
 ' taint ' ! he be glad enough of the money from it , and the money be his 
 whole basis . there 's appreciation in that - I mean as to the allowance 
 his mother have hitherto make he . she have of course the resource of 
 cut this allowance off ; but even then he have unfortunately , and on 
 no small scale , his independent supply - money leave he by his 
 grandfather , her own father . " 
 " would not   the fact you mention then , " Miss Gostrey ask , " make it just 
 more easy for he to be particular ? be not   he conceivable as fastidious 
 about the source - the apparent and public source - of his income ? " 
 Strether be able quite good - humouredly to entertain the proposition . 
 " the source of his grandfather 's wealth - and thereby of his own share 
 in it - be not particularly noble . " 
 " and what source be it ? " 
 Strether cast about . " well - practice . " 
 " in business ? infamy ? he be an old swindler ? " 
 " oh , " he say with more emphasis than spirit , " I shall not   describe HIM 
 nor narrate his exploit . " 
 " Lord , what abyss ! and the late Mr. Newsome then ? " 
 " well , what about he ? " 
 " be he like the grandfather ? " 
 " no - he be on the other side of the house . and he be different . " 
 Miss Gostrey keep it up . " well ? " 
 her friend for a moment hang fire . " no . " 
 her comment on his hesitation be scarce the less marked for be 
 mute . " thank you . now do not   you see , " she go on , " why the boy 
 do not   come home ? he be drown his shame . " 
 " his shame ? what shame ? " 
 " what shame ? comment donc ? the shame . " 
 " but where and when , " Strether ask , " be ' the shame ' - where be any 
 shame - to - day ? the man I speak of - they do as every one do ; and 
  besides be ancient history   it be all a matter of appreciation . " 
 she show how she understand . " Mrs. Newsome have appreciate ? " 
 " ah I can not   speak for she ! " 
 " in the midst of such doing - and , as I understand you , profit by 
 they , she at least have remain exquisite ? " 
 " oh I can not   talk of she ! " Strether say . 
 " I think she be just what you could talk of . you don't trust I , " 
 Miss Gostrey after a moment declare . 
 it have its effect . " well , her money be spend , her life conceive and 
 carry on with a large beneficence - " 
 " that be a kind of expiation of wrong ? gracious , " she add before he 
 could speak , " how intensely you make I see she ! " 
 " if you see she , " Strether drop , " it be all that be necessary . " 
 she really seem to have she . " I feel that . she be , in spite of 
 everything , handsome . " 
 this at least enliven he . " what do you mean by everything ? " 
 " well , I mean you . " with which she have one of her swift change of 
 ground . " you say the concern need look after ; but do not   Mrs. 
 Newsome look after it ? " 
 " so far as possible . she be wonderfully able , but it be not her affair , 
 and her life be a good deal overcharge . she have many , many thing . " 
 " and you also ? " 
 " oh yes - I have   many too , if you will . " 
 " I see . but what I mean be , " Miss Gostrey amend , " do you also look 
 after the business ? " 
 " oh no , I do not   touch the business . " 
 " only everything else ? " 
 " well , yes - some thing . " 
 " as for instance - ? " 
 Strether obligingly think . " well , the Review . " 
 " the Review ? - you have a Review ? " 
 " certainly . Woollett have a Review - which Mrs. Newsome , for the most 
 part , magnificently pay for and which I , not at all magnificently , 
 edit . my name be on the cover , " Strether pursue , " and I be really 
 rather disappointed and hurt that you seem never to have hear of it . " 
 she neglect for a moment this grievance . " and what kind of a Review 
 be it ? " 
 his serenity be now completely restore . " well , it be green . " 
 " do you mean in political colour as they say here - in thought ? " 
 " no ; I mean the cover 's green - of the most lovely shade . " 
 " and with Mrs. Newsome 's name on it too ? " 
 he wait a little . " oh as for that you must judge if she peep out . 
 she be behind the whole thing ; but she be of a delicacy and a 
 discretion - ! " 
 Miss Gostrey take it all . " I be sure . she would be . I do not   underrate 
 she . she must be rather a swell . " 
 " oh yes , she be rather a swell ! " 
 " a Woollett swell - bon ! I like the idea of a Woollett swell . and you 
 must be rather one too , to be so mixed up with she . " 
 " ah no , " say Strether , " that be not the way it work . " 
 but she have already take he up . " the way it work - you need not   tell 
 I ! - be of course that you efface yourself . " 
 " with my name on the cover ? " he lucidly object . 
 " ah but you do not   put it on for yourself . " 
 " I beg your pardon - that be exactly what I do put it on for . it be 
 exactly the thing that I be reduce to do for myself . it seem to 
 rescue a little , you see , from the wreck of hope and ambition , the 
 refuse - heap of disappointment and failure , my one presentable little 
 scrap of an identity . " 
 on this she look at he as to say many thing , but what she at last 
 simply say be : " she like to see it there . you be the big swell 
 of the two , " she immediately continue , " because you think you be not 
 one . she think she be one . however , " Miss Gostrey add , ' she 
 think you be one too . you be at all event the big she can get 
 hold of . " she embroider , she abound . " I do not   say it to interfere 
 between you , but on the day she get hold of a big one - ! " Strether 
 have throw back his head as in silent mirth over something that strike 
 he in her audacity or felicity , and her flight meanwhile be already 
 high . " therefore close with she - ! " 
 " close with she ? " he ask as she seem to hang poise . 
 " before you lose your chance . " 
 their eye meet over it . " what do you mean by close ? " 
 " and what do I mean by your chance ? I will tell you when you tell I all 
 the thing you do not . be it her GREATEST fad ? " she briskly pursue . 
 " the Review ? " he seem to wonder how he could well describe it . this 
 result however but in a sketch . " it be her tribute to the ideal . " 
 " I see . you go in for tremendous thing . " 
 " we go in for the unpopular side - that be so far as we dare . " 
 " and how far do you dare ? " 
 " well , she very far . I much less . I do not   begin to have her faith . 
 she provide , " say Strether , " three fourth of that . and she 
 provide , as I have   confide to you , all the money . " 
 it evoke somehow a vision of gold that hold for a little Miss 
 Gostrey 's eye , and she look as if she hear the bright dollar 
 shovel in . " I hope then you make a good thing - " 
 " I never make a good thing ! " he at once return . 
 she just wait . " do not   you call it a good thing to be love ? " 
 " oh we be not love . we be not even hat . we be only just sweetly 
 ignore . " 
 she have another pause . " you do not   trust I ! " she once more repeat . 
 " do not   I when I lift the last veil ? - tell you the very secret of the 
 prison - house ? " 
 again she meet his eye , but to the result that after an instant her own 
 turn away with impatience . " you do not   sell ? oh I be glad of that ! " 
 after which however , and before he could protest , she be off again . 
 " she be just a MORAL swell . " 
 he accept gaily enough the definition . " yes - I really think that 
 describe she . " 
 but it have for his friend the oddest connexion . " how do she do her 
 hair ? " 
 he laugh out . " beautifully ! " 
 " ah that do not   tell I . however , it do not   matter - I know . it be 
 tremendously neat - a real reproach ; quite remarkably thick and without , 
 as yet , a single strand of white . there ! " 
 he blush for her realism , but gap at her truth . " you be the very 
 deuce . " 
 " what else should I be ? it be as the very deuce I pounce on you . but 
 do not   let it trouble you , for everything but the very deuce - at our 
 age - be a bore and a delusion , and even he himself , after all , but half 
 a joy . " with which , on a single sweep of her wing , she resume . " you 
 assist she to expiate - which be rather hard when you have   yourself not 
 sin . " 
 " it be she who have not   sin , " Strether reply . " I have   sin the most . " 
 " ah , " Miss Gostrey cynically laugh , " what a picture of she ! have you 
 rob the widow and the orphan ? " 
 " I have   sin enough , " say Strether . 
 " Enough for whom ? enough for what ? " 
 " well , to be where I be . " 
 " thank you ! " they be disturb at this moment by the passage between 
 their knee and the back of the seat before they of a gentleman who 
 have be absent during a part of the performance and who now return 
 for the close ; but the interruption leave Miss Gostrey time , before the 
 subsequent hush , to express as a sharp finality her sense of the moral 
 of all their talk . " I know you have something up your sleeve ! " this 
 finality , however , leave they in its turn , at the end of the play , as 
 dispose to hang back as if they have still much to say ; so that they 
 easily agree to let every one go before they - they find an interest 
 in wait . they make out from the lobby that the night have turn to 
 rain ; yet Miss Gostrey let her friend know that he be not   to see she 
 home . he be simply to put she , by herself , into a four - wheeler ; she 
 like so in London , of wet night after wild pleasure , think thing 
 over , on the return , in lonely four - wheeler . this be her great time , 
 she intimate , for pull herself together . the delay cause by the 
 weather , the struggle for vehicle at the door , give they occasion to 
 subside on a divan at the back of the vestibule and just beyond the 
 reach of the fresh damp gust from the street . here Strether 's comrade 
 resume that free handling of the subject to which his own imagination 
 of it already owe so much . " do your young friend in Paris like you ? " 
 it have almost , after the interval , startle he . " oh I hope not ! why 
 should he ? " 
 " why should not   he ? " Miss Gostrey ask . " that you be come down on 
 he need have nothing to do with it . " 
 " you see more in it , " he presently return , " than I. " 
 " of course I see you in it . " 
 " well then you see more in ' I ' ! " 
 " than you see in yourself ? very likely . that be always one 's right . 
 what I be think of , " she explain , " be the possible particular 
 effect on he of his milieu . " 
 " oh his milieu - ! " Strether really feel he could imagine it well now 
 than three hour before . 
 " do you mean it can only have be so lower ? " 
 " why that be my very starting - point . " 
 " yes , but you start so far back . what do his letter say ? " 
 " nothing . he practically ignore we - or spar we . he do not   write . " 
 " I see . but there be all the same , " she go on , " two quite distinct 
 thing that - give the wonderful place he be in - may have happen to 
 he . one be that he may have get brutalise . the other be that he may 
 have get refine . " 
 Strether star - this be a novelty . " refine ? " 
 " oh , " she say quietly , " there be refinement . " 
 the way of it make he , after look at she , break into a laugh . " you 
 have they ! " 
 " as one of the sign , " she continue in the same tone , " they constitute 
 perhaps the bad . " 
 he think it over and his gravity return . " be it a refinement not 
 to answer his mother 's letter ? " 
 she appear to have a scruple , but she bring it out . " oh I should 
 say the great of all . " 
 " well , " say Strether , " I'M quite content to let it , as one of the 
 sign , pass for the bad that I know he believe he can do what he 
 like with I . " 
 this appear to strike she . " how do you know it ? " 
 " oh I be sure of it . I feel it in my bone . " 
 " feel he can do it ? " 
 " feel that he believe he can . it may come to the same thing ! " 
 Strether laugh . 
 she would not , however , have this . " nothing for you will ever come to 
 the same thing as anything else . " and she understand what she mean , 
 it seem , sufficiently to go straight on . " you say that if he do 
 break he will come in for thing at home ? " 
 " quite positively . he will come in for a particular chance - a chance 
 that any properly constituted young man would jump at . the business 
 have so develop that an opening scarcely apparent three year ago , but 
 which his father 's will take account of as in certain condition 
 possible and which , under that will , attach to Chad 's availing 
 himself of it a large contingent advantage - this opening , the 
 condition have come about , now simply await he . his mother have 
 keep it for he , hold out against strong pressure , till the last 
 possible moment . it require , naturally , as it carry with it a 
 handsome ' part , ' a large share in profit , his be on the spot and 
 make a big effort for a big result . that be what I mean by his chance . 
 if he miss it he come in , as you say , for nothing . and to see that 
 he do not   miss it be , in a word , what I have   come out for . " 
 she let it all sink in . " what you have   come out for then be simply to 
 render he an immense service . " 
 well , poor Strether be willing to take it so . " ah if you like . " 
 " he stand , as they say , if you succeed with he , to gain - " 
 " oh a lot of advantage . " Strether have they clearly at his finger ' 
 end . 
 " by which you mean of course a lot of money . " 
 " well , not only . I be act with a sense for he of other thing too . 
 consideration and comfort and security - the general safety of be 
 anchor by a strong chain . he want , as I see he , to be protect . 
 protect I mean from life . " 
 " ah voila ! " - her thought fit with a click . " from life . what you 
 REALLY want to get he home for be to marry he . " 
 " well , that be about the size of it . " 
 " of course , " she say , " it be rudimentary . but to any one in 
 particular ? " 
 he smile at this , look a little more conscious . " you get 
 everything out . " 
 for a moment again their eye meet . " you put everything in ! " 
 he acknowledge the tribute by tell she . " to Mamie Pocock . " 
 she wonder ; then gravely , even exquisitely , as if to make the oddity 
 also fit : " his own niece ? " 
 " oh you must yourself find a name for the relation . his 
 brother - in - law 's sister . Mrs. Jim 's sister - in - law . " 
 it seem to have on Miss Gostrey a certain harden effect . " and who 
 in the world 's Mrs. Jim ? " 
 " Chad 's sister - who be Sarah Newsome . she be married - do not   I mention 
 it ? - to Jim Pocock . " 
 " ah yes , " she tacitly reply ; but he have mention thing - ! then , 
 however , with all the sound it could have , " who in the world 's Jim 
 Pocock ? " she ask . 
 " why Sally 's husband . that be the only way we distinguish people at 
 Woollett , " he good - humoredly explain . 
 " and be it a great distinction - be Sally 's husband ? " 
 he consider . " I think there can be scarcely a great - unless it may 
 become one , in the future , to be Chad 's wife . " 
 " then how do they distinguish you ? " 
 " they don't - except , as I have   tell you , by the green cover . " 
 once more their eye meet on it , and she hold he an instant . " the 
 green cover will not   - nor will any cover - avail you with I . you be of a 
 depth of duplicity ! " still , she could in her own large grasp of the 
 real condone it . " be Mamie a great parti ? " 
 " oh the great we have - our prettiest bright girl . " 
 Miss Gostrey seem to fix the poor child . " I know what they can be . 
 and with money ? " 
 " not perhaps with a great deal of that - but with so much of everything 
 else that we do not   miss it . we don't miss money much , you know , " 
 Strether add , " in general , in America , in pretty girl . " 
 " no , " she concede ; " but I know also what you do sometimes miss . and do 
 you , " she ask , " yourself admire she ? " 
 it be a question , he indicate , that there might be several way of 
 taking ; but he decide after an instant for the humorous . " have not   I 
 sufficiently show you how I admire any pretty girl ? " 
 her interest in his problem be by this time such that it scarce leave 
 her freedom , and she keep close to the fact . " I suppose that at 
 Woollett you want they - what shall I call it ? - blameless . I mean 
 your young man for your pretty girl . " 
 " so do I ! " Strether confess . " but you strike there a curious 
 fact - the fact that Woollett too accommodate itself to the spirit of 
 the age and the increase mildness of manner . everything change , 
 and I hold that our situation precisely mark a date . we should prefer 
 they blameless , but we have to make the good of they as we find they . 
 since the spirit of the age and the increase mildness send they so 
 much more to Paris - " 
 " you have   to take they back as they come . when they do come . Bon ! " once 
 more she embrace it all , but she have a moment of thought . " Poor Chad ! " 
 " ah , " say Strether cheerfully " Mamie will save he ! " 
 she be look away , still in her vision , and she speak with 
 impatience and almost as if he have not   understand she . " you'll save 
 he . that be who will save he . " 
 " oh but with Mamie 's aid . unless indeed you mean , " he add , " that I 
 shall effect so much more with your ! " 
 it make she at last again look at he . " you will do more - as you be so 
 much well - than all of we put together . " 
 " I think I be only well since I have   know you ! " Strether bravely 
 return . 
 the depletion of the place , the shrinkage of the crowd and now 
 comparatively quiet withdrawal of its last element have already bring 
 they nearer the door and put they in relation with a messenger of whom 
 he bespoke Miss Gostrey 's cab . but this leave they a few minute more , 
 which she be clearly in no mood not to use . " you have   speak to I of 
 what - by your success - Mr. Chad stand to gain . but you have   not speak 
 to I of what you do . " 
 " oh I have   nothing more to gain , " say Strether very simply . 
 she take it as even quite too simple . " you mean you have   get it all 
 ' down ' ? you have   be pay in advance ? " 
 " ah do not   talk about payment ! " he groan . 
 something in the tone of it pull she up , but as their messenger still 
 delay she have another chance and she put it in another way . " what - by 
 failure - do you stand to lose ? " 
 he still , however , would not   have it . " nothing ! " he exclaim , and on 
 the messenger 's at this instant reappearing he be able to sink the 
 subject in their responsive advance . when , a few step up the street , 
 under a lamp , he have put she into her four - wheeler and she have ask 
 he if the man have call for he no second conveyance , he reply 
 before the door be close . " you will not   take I with you ? " 
 " not for the world . " 
 " then I shall walk . " 
 " in the rain ? " 
 " I like the rain , " say Strether . " good - night ! " 
 she keep he a moment , while his hand be on the door , by not 
 answer ; after which she answer by repeat her question . " what do 
 you stand to lose ? " 
 why the question now affect he as other he could not   have say ; he 
 could only this time meet it otherwise . " everything . " 
 " so I think . then you shall succeed . and to that end I be yours - " 
 " ah , dear lady ! " he kindly breathe . 
 " till death ! " say Maria Gostrey . " good - night . " 
 II 
 Strether call , his second morning in Paris , on the banker of the Rue 
 Scribe to whom his letter of credit be address , and he make this 
 visit attend by Waymarsh , in whose company he have cross from London 
 two day before . they have hasten to the Rue Scribe on the morrow of 
 their arrival , but Strether have not then find the letter the hope of 
 which prompt this errand . he have have as yet none at all ; have not 
 expect they in London , but have count on several in Paris , and , 
 disconcert now , have presently stroll back to the Boulevard with a 
 sense of injury that he feel himself take for as good a start as any 
 other . it would serve , this spur to his spirit , he reflect , as , 
 pause at the top of the street , he look up and down the great 
 foreign avenue , it would serve to begin business with . his idea be to 
 begin business immediately , and it do much for he the rest of his day 
 that the beginning of business await he . he do little else till 
 night but ask himself what he should do if he have not   fortunately have so 
 much to do ; but he put himself the question in many different 
 situation and connexion . what carry he hither and yon be an 
 admirable theory that nothing he could do would not   be in some manner 
 relate to what he fundamentally have on hand , or would be - should he 
 happen to have a scruple - waste for it . he do happen to have a 
 scruple - a scruple about take no definite step till he should get 
 letter ; but this reasoning carry it off . a single day to feel his 
 foot - he have feel they as yet only at Chester and in London - be he 
 could consider , none too much ; and have , as he have often privately 
 express it , Paris to reckon with , he throw these hour of freshness 
 consciously into the reckoning . they make it continually great , but 
 that be what it have well be if it be to be anything at all , and he 
 give himself up till far into the evening , at the theatre and on the 
 return , after the theatre , along the bright congested Boulevard , to 
 feel it grow . Waymarsh have accompany he this time to the play , 
 and the two man have walk together , as a first stage , from the Gymnase 
 to the Cafe Riche , into the crowded " terrace " of which 
 establishment - the night , or rather the morning , for midnight have 
 strike , be bland and populous - they have wedge themselves for 
 refreshment . waymarsh , as a result of some discussion with his friend , 
 have make a marked virtue of his have now let himself go ; and there 
 have be element of impression in their half - hour over their water 
 beer - glass that give he his occasion for convey that he hold this 
 compromise with his stiff self to have become extreme . he convey 
 it - for it be still , after all , his stiff self who gloome out of 
 the glare of the terrace - in solemn silence ; and there be indeed a 
 great deal of critical silence , every way , between the companion , even 
 till they gain the Place de l'Opera , as to the character of their 
 nocturnal progress . 
 this morning there be letter - letter which have reach London , 
 apparently all together , the day of Strether 's journey , and have take 
 their time to follow he ; so that , after a control impulse to go 
 into they in the reception - room of the bank , which , remind he of 
 the post - office at Woollett , affect he as the abutment of some 
 transatlantic bridge , he slip they into the pocket of his loose grey 
 overcoat with a sense of the felicity of carry they off . waymarsh , 
 who have have letter yesterday , have have they again to - day , and Waymarsh 
 suggest in this particular no control impulse . the last one he 
 be at all event likely to be observe to struggle with be clearly 
 that of bring to a premature close any visit to the Rue Scribe . 
 Strether have leave he there yesterday ; he want to see the paper , and 
 he have spend , by what his friend could make out , a succession of hour 
 with the paper . he speak of the establishment , with emphasis , as a 
 post of superior observation ; just as he speak generally of his actual 
 damnable doom as a device for hide from he what be go on . Europe 
 be well describe , to his mind , as an elaborate engine for 
 dissociate the confine American from that indispensable knowledge , 
 and be accordingly only render bearable by these occasional station 
 of relief , trap for the arrest of wander western air . Strether , 
 on his side , set himself to walk again - he have his relief in his 
 pocket ; and indeed , much as he have desire his budget , the growth of 
 restlessness might have be mark in he from the moment he have 
 assure himself of the superscription of most of the missive it 
 contain . this restlessness become therefore his temporary law ; he 
 know he should recognise as soon as see it the good place of all for 
 settle down with his chief correspondent . he have for the next hour 
 an accidental air of look for it in the window of shop ; he come 
 down the Rue de la Paix in the sun and , pass across the Tuileries 
 and the river , indulge more than once - as if on find himself 
 determine - in a sudden pause before the book - stall of the opposite 
 quay . in the garden of the Tuileries he have linger , on two or three 
 spot , to look ; it be as if the wonderful Paris spring have stay he 
 as he roam . the prompt Paris morning strike its cheerful note - in a 
 soft breeze and a sprinkled smell , in the light flit , over the 
 garden - floor , of bareheaded girl with the buckle strap of oblong 
 box , in the type of ancient thrifty person bask betime where 
 terrace - wall be warm , in the blue - frock brass - label officialism 
 of humble raker and scraper , in the deep reference of a 
 straight - pace priest or the sharp one of a white - gaitere red - legged 
 soldier . he watch little brisk figure , figure whose movement be 
 as the tick of the great Paris clock , take their smooth diagonal from 
 point to point ; the air have a taste as of something mix with art , 
 something that present nature as a white - cap master - chef . the 
 palace be go , Strether remember the palace ; and when he gaze into 
 the irremediable void of its site the historic sense in he might have 
 be freely at play - the play under which in Paris indeed it so often 
 wince like a touch nerve . he fill out space with dim symbol of 
 scene ; he catch the gleam of white statue at the base of which , with 
 his letter out , he could tilt back a straw - bottom chair . but his 
 drift be , for reason , to the other side , and it float he unspent 
 up the Rue de Seine and as far as the Luxembourg . in the Luxembourg 
 Gardens he pull up ; here at last he find his nook , and here , on a 
 penny chair from which terrace , alley , vista , fountain , little 
 tree in green tub , little woman in white cap and shrill little girl 
 at play all sunnily " compose " together , he pass an hour in which the 
 cup of his impression seem truly to overflow . but a week have elapse 
 since he quit the ship , and there be more thing in his mind than 
 so few day could account for . More than once , during the time , he have 
 regard himself as admonish ; but the admonition this morning be 
 formidably sharp . it take as it have not   do yet the form of a 
 question - the question of what he be do with such an extraordinary 
 sense of escape . this sense be sharp after he have read his 
 letter , but that be also precisely why the question press . four of 
 the letter be from Mrs. Newsome and none of they short ; she have lose 
 no time , have follow on his heel while he move , so express 
 herself that he now could measure the probable frequency with which he 
 should hear . they would arrive , it would seem , her communication , at 
 the rate of several a week ; he should be able to count , it might even 
 prove , on more than one by each mail . if he have begin yesterday with a 
 small grievance he have therefore an opportunity to begin to - day with 
 its opposite . he read the letter successively and slowly , put 
 other back into his pocket but keep these for a long time 
 afterwards gather in his lap . he hold they there , lose in thought , 
 as if to prolong the presence of what they give he ; or as if at the 
 least to assure they their part in the constitution of some lucidity . 
 his friend write admirably , and her tone be even more in her style 
 than in her voice - he might almost , for the hour , have have to come this 
 distance to get its full carry quality ; yet the plentitude of his 
 consciousness of difference consort perfectly with the deepen 
 intensity of the connexion . it be the difference , the difference of 
 be just where he be and as he be , that form the escape - this 
 difference be so much great than he have dream it would be ; and 
 what he finally sit there turn over be the strange logic of his 
 find himself so free . he feel it in a manner his duty to think out 
 his state , to approve the process , and when he come in fact to trace 
 the step and add up the item they sufficiently account for the sum . 
 he have never expect - that be the truth of it - again to find himself 
 young , and all the year and other thing it have take to make he so 
 be exactly his present arithmetic . he have to make sure of they to 
 put his scruple to rest . 
 it all spring at bottom from the beauty of Mrs. Newsome 's desire that 
 he should be worry with nothing that be not of the essence of his 
 task ; by insist that he should thoroughly intermit and break she have 
 so provide for his freedom that she would , as it be , have only 
 herself to thank . Strether could not at this point indeed have 
 complete his thought by the image of what she might have to thank 
 herself for : the image , at good , of his own likeness - poor Lambert 
 Strether wash up on the sunny strand by the wave of a single day , 
 poor Lambert Strether thankful for breathing - time and stiffen 
 himself while he gasp . there he be , and with nothing in his aspect 
 or his posture to scandalise : it be only true that if he have see Mrs. 
 newsome come he would instinctively have jump up to walk away a 
 little . he would have come round and back to she bravely , but he would 
 have have first to pull himself together . she abound in news of the 
 situation at home , prove to he how perfectly she be arrange for 
 his absence , tell he who would take up this and who take up that 
 exactly where he have leave it , give he in fact chapter and verse for 
 the moral that nothing would suffer . it fill for he , this tone of 
 her , all the air ; yet it strike he at the same time as the hum of 
 vain thing . this latter effect be what he try to justify - and with 
 the success that , grave though the appearance , he at last light on a 
 form that be happy . he arrive at it by the inevitable recognition of 
 his have be a fortnight before one of the weariest of man . if ever 
 a man have come off tired Lambert Strether be that man ; and have not   it 
 be distinctly on the ground of his fatigue that his wonderful friend 
 at home have so feel for he and so contrived ? it seem to he somehow 
 at these instant that , could he only maintain with sufficient firmness 
 his grasp of that truth , it might become in a manner his compass and 
 his helm . what he want most be some idea that would simplify , and 
 nothing would do this so much as the fact that he be do for and 
 finish . if it have be in such a light that he have just detect in 
 his cup the dreg of youth , that be a mere flaw of the surface of his 
 scheme . he be so distinctly fag - out that it must serve precisely 
 as his convenience , and if he could but consistently be good for little 
 enough he might do everything he want . 
 everything he want be comprise moreover in a single boon - the 
 common unattainable art of take thing as they come . he appear to 
 himself to have give his good year to an active appreciation of the 
 way they do not   come ; but perhaps - as they would seemingly here be 
 thing quite other - this long ache might at last drop to rest . he 
 could easily see that from the moment he should accept the notion of 
 his foredoomed collapse the last thing he would lack would be reason 
 and memory . oh if he should do the sum no slate would hold the 
 figure ! the fact that he have fail , as he consider , in everything , 
 in each relation and in half a dozen trade , as he like luxuriously to 
 put it , might have make , might still make , for an empty present ; but it 
 stand solidly for a crowded past . it have not be , so much achievement 
 miss , a light yoke nor a short load . it be at present as if 
 the backward picture have hang there , the long crooked course , grey in 
 the shadow of his solitude . it have be a dreadful cheerful sociable 
 solitude , a solitude of life or choice , of community ; but though there 
 have be people enough all round it there have be but three or four 
 person in it . Waymarsh be one of these , and the fact strike he just 
 now as mark the record . Mrs. Newsome be another , and Miss Gostrey 
 have of a sudden show sign of become a third . beyond , behind they 
 be the pale figure of his real youth , which hold against its breast 
 the two presence pale than itself - the young wife he have early lose 
 and the young son he have stupidly sacrifice . he have again and again 
 make out for himself that he might have keep his little boy , his little 
 dull boy who have die at school of rapid diphtheria , if he have not in 
 those year so insanely give himself to merely miss the mother . it 
 be the soreness of his remorse that the child have in all likelihood 
 not really be dull - have be dull , as he have be banish and 
 neglect , mainly because the father have be unwittingly selfish . this 
 be doubtless but the secret habit of sorrow , which have slowly give 
 way to time ; yet there remain an ache sharp enough to make the 
 spirit , at the sight now and again of some fair young man just grow 
 up , wince with the thought of an opportunity lose . have ever a man , he 
 have finally fall into the way of ask himself , lose so much and 
 even do so much for so little ? there have be particular reason why 
 all yesterday , beyond other day , he should have have in one ear this 
 cold enquiry . his name on the green cover , where he have put it for 
 Mrs. Newsome , express he doubtless just enough to make the 
 world - the world as distinguish , both for more and for less , from 
 Woollett - ask who he be . he have incur the ridicule of have to 
 have his explanation explain . he be Lambert Strether because he be 
 on the cover , whereas it should have be , for anything like glory , 
 that he be on the cover because he be Lambert Strether . he would 
 have do anything for Mrs. Newsome , have be still more 
 ridiculous - as he might , for that matter , have occasion to be yet ; 
 which come to say that this acceptance of fate be all he have to 
 show at fifty - five . 
 he judge the quantity as small because it be small , and all the more 
 egregiously since it could not , as he see the case , so much as thinkably 
 have be large . he have not   have the gift of make the most of what he 
 try , and if he have try and try again - no one but himself know how 
 often - it appear to have be that he might demonstrate what else , in 
 default of that , could be make . old ghost of experiment come back to 
 he , old drudgery and delusion , and disgust , old recovery with 
 their relapse , old fever with their chill , break moment of good 
 faith , other of still well doubt ; adventure , for the most part , of 
 the sort qualified as lesson . the special spring that have constantly 
 play for he the day before be the recognition - frequent enough to 
 surprise he - of the promise to himself that he have after his other 
 visit never keep . the reminiscence to - day most quicken for he be 
 that of the vow take in the course of the pilgrimage that , 
 newly - marry , with the War just over , and helplessly young in spite of 
 it , he have recklessly make with the creature who be so much young 
 still . it have be a bold dash , for which they have take money set 
 apart for necessity , but keep sacred at the moment in a hundred way , 
 and in none more so than by this private pledge of his own to treat the 
 occasion as a relation form with the high culture and see that , as 
 they say at Woollett , it should bear a good harvest . he have believe , 
 sail home again , that he have gain something great , and his 
 theory - with an elaborate innocent plan of reading , digest , come 
 back even , every few year - have then be to preserve , cherish and 
 extend it . as such plan as these have come to nothing , however , in 
 respect to acquisition still more precious , it be doubtless little 
 enough of a marvel that he should have lose account of that handful of 
 seed . bury for long year in dark corner at any rate these few 
 germ have sprout again under forty - eight hour of Paris . the process 
 of yesterday have really be the process of feel the general stir 
 life of connexion long since individually drop . Strether have 
 become acquaint even on this ground with short gust of 
 speculation - sudden flight of fancy in Louvre gallery , hungry gaze 
 through clear plate behind which lemon - colour volume be as fresh 
 as fruit on the tree . 
 there be instant at which he could ask whether , since there have be 
 fundamentally so little question of his keep anything , the fate 
 after all decreed for he have not   be only to be keep . keep for 
 something , in that event , that he do not   pretend , do not   possibly dare 
 as yet to divine ; something that make he hover and wonder and laugh 
 and sigh , make he advance and retreat , feel half ashamed of his 
 impulse to plunge and more than half afraid of his impulse to wait . he 
 remember for instance how he have go back in the sixty with 
 lemon - colour volume in general on the brain as well as with a 
 dozen - select for his wife too - in his trunk ; and nothing have at the 
 moment show more confidence than this invocation of the fine taste . 
 they be still somewhere at home , the dozen - stale and soiled and 
 never send to the binder ; but what have become of the sharp initiation 
 they represent ? they represent now the mere sallow paint on the 
 door of the temple of taste that he have dream of raise up - a 
 structure he have practically never carry far . Strether 's present 
 high flight be perhaps those in which this particular lapse 
 figure to he as a symbol , a symbol of his long grind and his want of 
 odd moment , his want moreover of money , of opportunity , of positive 
 dignity . that the memory of the vow of his youth should , in order to 
 throb again , have have to wait for this last , as he feel it , of all his 
 accident - that be surely proof enough of how his conscience have be 
 encumber . if any further proof be need it would have be to be 
 find in the fact that , as he perfectly now see , he have cease even to 
 measure his meagreness , a meagreness that sprawl , in this retrospect , 
 vague and comprehensive , stretch back like some unmapped Hinterland 
 from a rough coast - settlement . his conscience have be amusing itself 
 for the forty - eight hour by forbid he the purchase of a book ; he 
 hold off from that , hold off from everything ; from the moment he do not 
 yet call on Chad he would not   for the world have take any other step . 
 on this evidence , however , of the way they actually affect he he 
 glare at the lemon - colour cover in confession of the 
 subconsciousness that , all the same , in the great desert of the year , 
 he must have have of they . the green cover at home comprise , by the 
 law of their purpose , no tribute to letter ; it be of a mere rich 
 kernel of economic , politic , ethic that , glaze and , as Mrs. Newsome 
 maintain rather against his view , pre - eminently pleasant to touch , 
 they form the specious shell . without therefore any need 
 instinctive knowledge of what be come out , in Paris , on the bright 
 highway , he strike himself at present as have more than once flush 
 with a suspicion : he could not   otherwise at present be feel so many 
 fear confirm . there be " movement " he be too late for : be not 
 they , with the fun of they , already spend ? there be sequence he have 
 miss and great gap in the procession : he might have be watch 
 it all recede in a golden cloud of dust . if the playhouse be not 
 close his seat have at least fall to somebody else . he have have an 
 uneasy feeling the night before that if he be at the theatre at 
 all - though he indeed justify the theatre , in the specific sense , and 
 with a grotesqueness to which his imagination do all honour , as 
 something he owe poor waymarsh - he should have be there with , and as 
 might have be say , for Chad . 
 this suggest the question of whether he could properly have take he 
 to such a play , and what effect - it be a point that suddenly rise - his 
 peculiar responsibility might be hold in general to have on his choice 
 of entertainment . it have literally be present to he at the 
 Gymnase - where one be hold moreover comparatively safe - that have 
 his young friend at his side would have be an odd feature of the work 
 of redemption ; and this quite in spite of the fact that the picture 
 present might well , confront with Chad 's own private stage , have 
 seem the pattern of propriety . he clearly have not   come out in the 
 name of propriety but to visit unattended equivocal performance ; yet 
 still less have he do so to undermine his authority by share they 
 with the graceless youth . be he to renounce all amusement for the 
 sweet sake of that authority ? and would such renouncement give he for 
 Chad a moral glamour ? the little problem bristle the more by reason 
 of poor Strether 's fairly open sense of the irony of thing . be 
 there then side on which his predicament threaten to look rather 
 droll to he ? should he have to pretend to believe - either to himself 
 or the wretched boy - that there be anything that could make the latter 
 bad ? be not   some such pretence on the other hand involve in the 
 assumption of possible process that would make he well ? his 
 great uneasiness seem to peep at he out of the imminent 
 impression that almost any acceptance of Paris might give one 's 
 authority away . it hang before he this morning , the vast bright 
 Babylon , like some huge iridescent object , a jewel brilliant and hard , 
 in which part be not to be discriminate nor difference comfortably 
 marked . it twinkle and tremble and melt together , and what seem 
 all surface one moment seem all depth the next . it be a place of 
 which , unmistakeably , Chad be fond ; wherefore if he , Strether , should 
 like it too much , what on earth , with such a bond , would become of 
 either of they ? it all depend of course - which be a gleam of 
 light - on how the " too much " be measure ; though indeed our friend 
 fairly feel , while he prolong the meditation I describe , that for 
 himself even already a certain measure have be reach . it will have 
 be sufficiently see that he be not a man to neglect any good chance 
 for reflexion . be it at all possible for instance to like Paris 
 enough without like it too much ? he luckily however have not   promise 
 Mrs. Newsome not to like it at all . he be ready to recognise at this 
 stage that such an engagement would have tie his hand . the 
 Luxembourg Gardens be incontestably just so adorable at this hour by 
 reason - in addition to their intrinsic charm - of his not have take 
 it . the only engagement he have take , when he look the thing in the 
 face , be to do what he reasonably could . 
 it upset he a little none the less and after a while to find himself 
 at last remembering on what current of association he have be float 
 so far . old imagination of the Latin Quarter have play their part 
 for he , and he have duly recall its have be with this scene of 
 rather ominous legend that , like so many young man in fiction as well 
 as in fact , Chad have begin . he be now quite out of it , with his 
 " home , " as Strether figure the place , in the Boulevard Malesherbes ; 
 which be perhaps why , repair , not to fail of justice either , to the 
 elder neighbourhood , our friend have feel he could allow for the element 
 of the usual , the immemorial , without court perturbation . he be 
 not at least in danger of see the youth and the particular Person 
 flaunt by together ; and yet he be in the very air of which - just to 
 feel what the early natural note must have be - he wish most to take 
 counsel . it become at once vivid to he that he have originally have , 
 for a few day , an almost envious vision of the boy 's romantic 
 privilege . Melancholy Murger , with Francine and Musette and Rodolphe , 
 at home , in the company of the tattered , one - if he not in his single 
 self two or three - of the unbound , the paper - cover dozen on the 
 shelf ; and when Chad have write , five year ago , after a sojourn then 
 already prolong to six month , that he have decide to go in for 
 economy and the real thing , Strether 's fancy have quite fondly 
 accompany he in this migration , which be to convey he , as they 
 somewhat confusedly learn at Woollett , across the bridge and up the 
 Montagne Sainte - Genevieve . this be the region - Chad have be quite 
 distinct about it - in which the good french , and many other thing , 
 be to be learn at least cost , and in which all sort of clever 
 fellow , compatriot there for a purpose , form an awfully pleasant 
 set . the clever fellow , the friendly countryman be mainly young 
 painter , sculptor , architect , medical student ; but they be , Chad 
 sagely opine , a much more profitable lot to be with - even on the 
 footing of not be quite one of they - than the " terrible tough " 
  Strether remember the edify discrimination   of the american bar 
 and bank roundabout the Opera . Chad have throw out , in the 
 communication follow this one - for at that time he do once in a 
 while communicate - that several member of a band of earnest worker 
 under one of the great artist have take he right in , make he dine 
 every night , almost for nothing , at their place , and even press he 
 not to neglect the hypothesis of there be as much " in he " as in any 
 of they . there have be literally a moment at which it appear there 
 might be something in he ; there have be at any rate a moment at which 
 he have write that he do not   know but what a month or two more might 
 see he enrol in some atelier . the season have be one at which 
 Mrs. Newsome be move to gratitude for small mercy ; it have break on 
 they all as a blessing that their absentee had perhaps a 
 conscience - that he be sate in fine with idleness , be ambitious of 
 variety . the exhibition be doubtless as yet not brilliant , but 
 Strether himself , even by that time much enlisted and immerse , have 
 determine , on the part of the two lady , a temperate approval and in 
 fact , as he now recollect , a certain austere enthusiasm . 
 but the very next thing that happen have be a dark drop of the 
 curtain . the son and brother have not browse long on the Montagne 
 Sainte - Genevieve - his effective little use of the name of which , like 
 his allusion to the good French , appear to have be but one of the 
 note of his rough cunning . the light refreshment of these vain 
 appearance have not accordingly carry any of they very far . on the 
 other hand it have gain Chad time ; it have give he a chance , 
 unchecked , to strike his root , have pave the way for initiation more 
 direct and more deep . it be Strether 's belief that he have be 
 comparatively innocent before this first migration , and even that the 
 first effect of the migration would not have be , without some 
 particular bad accident , to have be deplore . there have be three 
 month - he have sufficiently figure it out - in which Chad have want to 
 try . he have try , though not very hard - he have have his little hour of 
 good faith . the weakness of this principle in he be that almost any 
 accident attestedly bad enough be strong . such have at any rate 
 markedly be the case for the precipitation of a special series of 
 impression . they have prove , successively , these impression - all of 
 Musette and Francine , but Musette and Francine vulgarise by the large 
 evolution of the type - irresistibly sharp : he have " take up , " by what 
 be at the time to be shrinkingly gather , as it be scantly 
 mention , with one ferociously " interested " little person after 
 another . Strether have read somewhere of a Latin motto , a description 
 of the hour , observe on a clock by a traveller in Spain ; and he have 
 be lead to apply it in thought to Chad 's number one , number two , 
 number three . Omnes vulnerant , ultima necat - they have all morally 
 wound , the last have morally kill . the last have be long in 
 possession - in possession , that be , of whatever be leave of the poor 
 boy 's fine mortality . and it have not   be she , it have be one of her 
 early predecessor , who have determine the second migration , the 
 expensive return and relapse , the exchange again , as be fairly to be 
 presume , of the vaunted good french for some special variety of the 
 bad . 
 he pull himself then at last together for his own progress back ; not 
 with the feeling that he have take his walk in vain . he prolong it a 
 little , in the immediate neighbourhood , after he have quit his chair ; 
 and the upshot of the whole morning for he be that his campaign have 
 begin . he have want to put himself in relation , and he would be 
 hang if he be not in relation . he be that at no moment so much as 
 while , under the old arch of the Odeon , he linger before the 
 charming open - air array of literature classic and casual . he find the 
 effect of tone and tint , in the long charge table and shelf , 
 delicate and appetising ; the impression - substitute one kind of 
 low - price consommation for another - might have be that of one of the 
 pleasant cafe that overlap , under an awning , to the pavement ; but 
 he edge along , graze the table , with his hand firmly behind he . 
 he be not   there to dip , to consume - he be there to reconstruct . he 
 be not   there for his own profit - not , that is , the direct ; he be there 
 on some chance of feel the brush of the wing of the stray spirit of 
 youth . he feel it in fact , he have it beside he ; the old arcade 
 indeed , as his inner sense listen , give out the faint sound , as from 
 far off , of the wild waving of wing . they be fold now over the 
 breast of bury generation ; but a flutter or two live again in the 
 turn page of shock - head slouch - hat loiterer whose young 
 intensity of type , in the direction of pale acuteness , deepen his 
 vision , and even his appreciation , of racial difference , and whose 
 manipulation of the uncut volume be too often , however , but a 
 listen at closed door . he reconstruct a possible groping Chad of 
 three or four year before , a Chad who have , after all , simply - for that 
 be the only way to see it - be too vulgar for his privilege . surely 
 it be a privilege to have be young and happy just there . well , the 
 good thing Strether know of he be that he have have such a dream . 
 but his own actual business half an hour later be with a third floor 
 on the Boulevard Malesherbes - so much as that be definite ; and the 
 fact of the enjoyment by the third - floor window of a continuous 
 balcony , to which he be help by this knowledge , have perhaps 
 something to do with his lingering for five minute on the opposite 
 side of the street . there be point as to which he have quite make up 
 his mind , and one of these bore precisely on the wisdom of the 
 abruptness to which event have finally commit he , a policy that he 
 be pleased to find not at all shake as he now look at his watch and 
 wonder . he have announce himself - six month before ; have write out 
 at least that Chad be not   to be surprised should he see he some day 
 turn up . Chad have thereupon , in a few word of rather carefully 
 colourless answer , offer he a general welcome ; and Strether , 
 ruefully reflect that he might have understand the warning as a hint 
 to hospitality , a bid for an invitation , have fall back upon silence 
 as the corrective most to his own taste . he have ask Mrs. Newsome 
 moreover not to announce he again ; he have so distinct an opinion on 
 his attack his job , should he attack it at all , in his own way . not 
 the least of this lady 's high merit for he be that he could 
 absolutely rest on her word . she be the only woman he have know , even 
 at Woollett , as to whom his conviction be positive that to lie be 
 beyond her art . Sarah Pocock , for instance , her own daughter , though 
 with social ideal , as they say , in some respect different - Sarah who 
 be , in her way , aesthetic , have never refuse to human commerce that 
 mitigation of rigour ; there be occasion when he have distinctly see 
 she apply it . since , accordingly , at all event , he have have it from 
 Mrs. Newsome that she have , at whatever cost to her more strenuous view , 
 conform , in the matter of prepare Chad , wholly to his restriction , 
 he now look up at the fine continuous balcony with a safe sense that 
 if the case have be bungle the mistake be at least his property . be 
 there perhaps just a suspicion of that in his present pause on the edge 
 of the Boulevard and well in the pleasant light ? 
 many thing come over he here , and one of they be that he should 
 doubtless presently know whether he have be shallow or sharp . another 
 be that the balcony in question do not   somehow show as a convenience 
 easy to surrender . poor Strether have at this very moment to recognise 
 the truth that wherever one pause in Paris the imagination react 
 before one could stop it . this perpetual reaction put a price , if one 
 would , on pause ; but it pile up consequence till there be scarce 
 room to pick one 's step among they . what call have he , at such a 
 juncture , for example , to like Chad 's very house ? high broad clear - he 
 be expert enough to make out in a moment that it be admirably 
 build - it fairly embarrass our friend by the quality that , as he 
 would have say , it ' sprang " on he . he have strike off the fancy that 
 it might , as a preliminary , be of service to he to be see , by a happy 
 accident , from the third - story window , which take all the March sun , 
 but of what service be it to find himself make out after a moment 
 that the quality ' sprung , " the quality produce by measure and balance , 
 the fine relation of part to part and space to space , be 
 probably - aid by the presence of ornament as positive as it be 
 discreet , and by the complexion of the stone , a cold fair grey , warm 
 and polish a little by life - neither more nor less than a case of 
 distinction , such a case as he could only feel unexpectedly as a sort 
 of deliver challenge ? meanwhile , however , the chance he have allow 
 for - the chance of be see in time from the balcony - have become a 
 fact . two or three of the window stand open to the violet air ; and , 
 before Strether have cut the knot by crossing , a young man have come out 
 and look about he , have light a cigarette and toss the match 
 over , and then , rest on the rail , have give himself up to watch 
 the life below while he smoke . his arrival contribute , in its order , 
 to keep Strether in position ; the result of which in turn be that 
 Strether soon feel himself notice . the young man begin to look at he 
 as in acknowledgement of his be himself in observation . 
 this be interesting so far as it go , but the interest be affect 
 by the young man be not be Chad . Strether wonder at first if he 
 be perhaps Chad alter , and then see that this be ask too much 
 of alteration . the young man be light bright and alert - with an air 
 too pleasant to have be arrive at by patch . Strether have 
 conceive Chad as patch , but not beyond recognition . he be in 
 presence , he feel , of amendment enough as they stand ; it be a 
 sufficient amendment that the gentleman up there should be Chad 's 
 friend . he be young too then , the gentleman up there - he be very 
 young ; young enough apparently to be amuse at an elderly watcher , to 
 be curious even to see what the elderly watcher would do on find 
 himself watch . there be youth in that , there be youth in the 
 surrender to the balcony , there be youth for Strether at this moment 
 in everything but his own business ; and Chad 's thus pronounce 
 association with youth have give the next instant an extraordinary 
 quick lift to the issue . the balcony , the distinguished front , 
 testify suddenly , for Strether 's fancy , to something that be up and 
 up ; they place the whole case materially , and as by an admirable 
 image , on a level that he find himself at the end of another moment 
 rejoice to think he might reach . the young man look at he still , 
 he look at the young man ; and the issue , by a rapid process , be that 
 this knowledge of a perch privacy appear to he the last of 
 luxury . to he too the perch privacy be open , and he see it now 
 but in one light - that of the only domicile , the only fireside , in the 
 great ironic city , on which he have the shadow of a claim . Miss Gostrey 
 have a fireside ; she have tell he of it , and it be something that 
 doubtless await he ; but Miss Gostrey have not   yet arrive - she 
 might not   arrive for day ; and the sole attenuation of his exclude 
 state be his vision of the small , the admittedly secondary hotel in 
 the bye - street from the Rue de la Paix , in which her solicitude for his 
 purse have place he , which affect he somehow as all indoor chill , 
 glass - roof court and slippery staircase , and which , by the same 
 token , express the presence of Waymarsh even at time when Waymarsh 
 might have be certain to be round at the bank . it come to pass 
 before he move that waymarsh , and Waymarsh alone , waymarsh not only 
 undiluted but positively strengthen , strike he as the present 
 alternative to the young man in the balcony . when he do move it be 
 fairly to escape that alternative . take his way over the street at 
 last and pass through the porte - cochere of the house be like 
 consciously leave Waymarsh out . however , he would tell he all about 
 it . 
 Book Third 
 I 
 Strether tell Waymarsh all about it that very evening , on their dining 
 together at the hotel ; which need not   have happen , he be all the 
 while aware , have not   he choose to sacrifice to this occasion a rarer 
 opportunity . the mention to his companion of the sacrifice be 
 moreover exactly what introduce his recital - or , as he would have 
 call it with more confidence in his interlocutor , his confession . his 
 confession be that he have be capture and that one of the feature 
 of the affair have just fail to be his engage himself on the spot to 
 dinner . as by such a freedom waymarsh would have lose he he have 
 obey his scruple ; and he have likewise obey another scruple - which 
 bore on the question of his himself bring a guest . 
 Waymarsh look gravely ardent , over the finished soup , at this array 
 of scruple ; Strether have not   yet get quite used to be so unprepared 
 for the consequence of the impression he produce . it be 
 comparatively easy to explain , however , that he have not   feel sure his 
 guest would please . the person be a young man whose acquaintance he 
 have make but that afternoon in the course of rather a hinder enquiry 
 for another person - an enquiry his new friend have just prevent in 
 fact from be vain . " oh , " say Strether , " I have   all sort of thing 
 to tell you ! " - and he put it in a way that be a virtual hint to 
 waymarsh to help he to enjoy the telling . he wait for his fish , he 
 drink of his wine , he wipe his long moustache , he lean back in his 
 chair , he take in the two english lady who have just creak past they 
 and whom he would even have articulately greet if they have not   rather 
 chill the impulse ; so that all he could do be - by way of do 
 something - to say " Merci , Francois ! " out quite loud when his fish be 
 bring . everything be there that he want , everything that could 
 make the moment an occasion , that would do beautifully - everything but 
 what Waymarsh might give . the little wax salle - a - manger be sallow 
 and sociable ; Francois , dance over it , all smile , be a man and a 
 brother ; the high - shoulder patronne , with her high - hold , much - rub 
 hand , seem always assent exuberantly to something unsaid ; the 
 Paris evening in short be , for Strether , in the very taste of the 
 soup , in the goodness , as he be innocently pleased to think it , of the 
 wine , in the pleasant coarse texture of the napkin and the crunch of 
 the thick - crust bread . these all be thing congruous with his 
 confession , and his confession be that he had - it would come out 
 properly just there if Waymarsh would only take it properly - agree to 
 breakfast out , at twelve literally , the next day . he do not   quite know 
 where ; the delicacy of the case come straight up in the remembrance of 
 his new friend 's " we will see ; I will take you somewhere ! " - for it have 
 require little more than that , after all , to let he right in . he be 
 affect after a minute , face to face with his actual comrade , by the 
 impulse to overcolour . there have already be thing in respect to 
 which he know himself tempt by this perversity . if Waymarsh think 
 they bad he should at least have his reason for his discomfort ; so 
 Strether show they as bad . still , he be now , in his way , 
 sincerely perplexed . 
 Chad have be absent from the Boulevard Malesherbes - be absent from 
 Paris altogether ; he have learn that from the concierge , but have 
 nevertheless go up , and go up - there be no two way about 
 it - from an uncontrollable , a really , if one would , deprave curiosity . 
 the concierge have mention to he that a friend of the tenant of the 
 troisieme be for the time in possession ; and this have be Strether 's 
 pretext for a further enquiry , an experiment carry on , under Chad 's 
 roof , without his knowledge . " I find his friend in fact there keep 
 the place warm , as he call it , for he ; Chad himself be , as 
 appear , in the south . he go a month ago to Cannes and though his 
 return begin to be look for it can not   be for some day . I might , you 
 see , perfectly have wait a week ; might have beat a retreat as soon 
 as I get this essential knowledge . but I beat no retreat ; I do the 
 opposite ; I stay , I dawdle , I trifle ; above all I look round . I 
 see , in fine ; and - I do not   know what to call it - I sniff . it be a 
 detail , but it be as if there be something - something very good - to 
 sniff . " 
 Waymarsh 's face have show his friend an attention apparently so remote 
 that the latter be slightly surprised to find it at this point abreast 
 with he . " do you mean a smell ? what of ? " 
 " a charming scent . but I do not   know . " 
 Waymarsh give an inferential grunt . " do he live there with a woman ? " 
 " I do not   know . " 
 Waymarsh wait an instant for more , then resume . " have he take she 
 off with he ? " 
 " and will he bring she back ? " - Strether fall into the enquiry . but he 
 wound it up as before . " I do not   know . " 
 the way he wind it up , accompany as this be with another drop back , 
 another degustation of the Leoville , another wipe of his moustache and 
 another good word for Francois , seem to produce in his companion a 
 slight irritation . " then what the devil do you know ? " 
 " well , " say Strether almost gaily , " I guess I do not   know anything ! " 
 his gaiety might have be a tribute to the fact that the state he have 
 be reduce to do for he again what have be do by his talk of the 
 matter with Miss Gostrey at the London theatre . it be somehow 
 enlarging ; and the air of that amplitude be now doubtless more or 
 less - and all for Waymarsh to feel - in his further response . " that be 
 what I find out from the young man . " 
 " but I think you say you find out nothing . " 
 " nothing but that - that I do not   know anything . " 
 " and what good do that do you ? " 
 " it be just , " say Strether , " what I have   come to you to help I to 
 discover . I mean anything about anything over here . I feel that , up 
 there . it regularly rise before I in its might . the young man 
 moreover - Chad 's friend - as good as tell I so . " 
 " as good as tell you you know nothing about anything ? " Waymarsh 
 appear to look at some one who might have as good as tell HIM . " how 
 old be he ? " 
 " well , I guess not thirty . " 
 " yet you have to take that from he ? " 
 " oh I take a good deal more - since , as I tell you , I take an invitation 
 to dejeuner . " 
 " and be you go to that unholy meal ? " 
 " if you will come with I . he want you too , you know . I tell he about 
 you . he give I his card , " Strether pursue , " and his name 's rather 
 funny . it be John Little Bilham , and he say his two surname be , on 
 account of his be small , inevitably use together . " 
 " well , " Waymarsh ask with due detachment from these detail , " what be 
 he do up there ? " 
 " his account of himself be that he be ' only a little artist - man . ' that 
 seem to I perfectly to describe he . but he be yet in the phase of 
 study ; this , you know , be the great art - school - to pass a certain 
 number of year in which he come over . and he be a great friend of 
 Chad 's , and occupy Chad 's room just now because they be so 
 pleasant . he be very pleasant and curious too , " Strether add - " though 
 he be not from Boston . " 
 Waymarsh look already rather sick of he . " where be he from ? " 
 Strether think . " I do not   know that , either . but he be ' notoriously , ' 
 as he put it himself , not from Boston . " 
 " well , " Waymarsh moralise from dry depth , " every one can not 
 notoriously be from Boston . why , " he continue , " be he curious ? " 
 " perhaps just for that - for one thing ! but really , " Strether add , 
 " for everything . when you meet he you will see . " 
 " oh I do not   want to meet he , " Waymarsh impatiently growl . " why 
 do not   he go home ? " 
 Strether hesitate . " well , because he like it over here . " 
 this appear in particular more than Waymarsh could bear . " he ought 
 then to be ashamed of himself , and , as you admit that you think so too , 
 why drag he in ? " 
 Strether 's reply again take time . " perhaps I do think so 
 myself - though I do not   quite yet admit it . I be not a bit sure - it be 
 again one of the thing I want to find out . I like he , and can you 
 like people - ? but no matter . " he pull himself up . " there be no 
 doubt I want you to come down on I and squash I . " 
 Waymarsh help himself to the next course , which , however prove not 
 the dish he have just note as supply to the english lady , have the 
 effect of cause his imagination temporarily to wander . but it 
 presently break out at a soft spot . " have they get a handsome place 
 up there ? " 
 " oh a charming place ; full of beautiful and valuable thing . I never 
 see such a place " - and Strether 's thought go back to it . " for a 
 little artist - man - ! " he could in fact scarce express it . 
 but his companion , who appear now to have a view , insist . " well ? " 
 " well , life can hold nothing well . besides , they be thing of which 
 he be in charge . " 
 " so that he do doorkeeper for your precious pair ? can life , " Waymarsh 
 enquire , " hold nothing well than that ? " then as Strether , silent , 
 seem even yet to wonder , " do not   he know what she be ? " he go on . 
 " I do not   know . I do not   ask he . I could not . it be impossible . you 
 would not   either . besides I do not   want to . no more would you . " 
 Strether in short explain it at a stroke . " you can not   make out over 
 here what people do know . " 
 " then what do you come over for ? " 
 " well , I suppose exactly to see for myself - without their aid . " 
 " then what do you want mine for ? " 
 " oh , " Strether laugh , " you be not one of they ! I do know what you 
 know . " 
 as , however , this last assertion cause Waymarsh again to look at he 
 hard - such be the latter 's doubt of its implication - he feel his 
 justification lame . which be still more the case when Waymarsh 
 presently say : " look here , Strether . quit this . " 
 our friend smile with a doubt of his own . " do you mean my tone ? " 
 " no - damn your tone . I mean your nosing round . quit the whole job . 
 let they stew in their juice . you be be use for a thing you be not 
 fit for . People do not   take a fine - tooth comb to groom a horse . " 
 " be I a fine - tooth comb ? " Strether laugh . " it be something I never 
 call myself ! " 
 " it be what you be , all the same . you be not   so young as you be , but 
 you have   keep your tooth . " 
 he acknowledge his friend 's humour . " take care I do not   get they into 
 you ! you would like they , my friend at home , waymarsh , " he declare ; 
 " you would really particularly like they . and I know " - it be slightly 
 irrelevant , but he give it sudden and singular force - " I know they would 
 like you ! " 
 " oh do not   work they off on I ! " Waymarsh groan . 
 yet Strether still linger with his hand in his pocket . " it be 
 really quite as indispensable as I say that Chad should be get back . " 
 " indispensable to whom ? to you ? " 
 " yes , " Strether presently say . 
 " because if you get he you also get Mrs. Newsome ? " 
 Strether face it . " yes . " 
 " and if you do not   get he you do not   get she ? " 
 it might be merciless , but he continue not to flinch . " I think it 
 might have some effect on our personal understanding . Chad 's of real 
 importance - or can easily become so if he will - to the business . " 
 " and the business be of real importance to his mother 's husband ? " 
 " well , I naturally want what my future wife want . and the thing will 
 be much well if we have our own man in it . " 
 " if you have your own man in it , in other word , " Waymarsh say , 
 " you will marry - you personally - more money . she be already rich , as I 
 understand you , but she will be rich still if the business can be make 
 to boom on certain line that you have   lay down . " 
 " I have not   lay they down , " Strether promptly return . " Mr. 
 Newsome - who know extraordinarily well what he be about - lay they 
 down ten year ago . " 
 oh well , Waymarsh seem to indicate with a shake of his mane , that 
 do not   matter ! " you be fierce for the boom anyway . " 
 his friend weigh a moment in silence the justice of the charge . " I 
 can scarcely be call fierce , I think , when I so freely take my chance 
 of the possibility , the danger , of be influence in a sense counter 
 to Mrs. Newsome 's own feeling . " 
 Waymarsh give this proposition a long hard look . " I see . you be 
 afraid yourself of be square . but you be a humbug , " he add , " all 
 the same . " 
 " oh ! " Strether quickly protest . 
 " yes , you ask I for protection - which make you very interesting ; and 
 then you will not   take it . you say you want to be squash - " 
 " ah but not so easily ! do not   you see , " Strether demand " where my 
 interest , as already show you , lie ? it lie in my not be square . 
 if I be square where be my marriage ? if I miss my errand I miss that ; 
 and if I miss that I miss everything - I be nowhere . " 
 waymarsh - but all relentlessly - take this in . " what do I care where 
 you be if you be spoil ? " 
 their eye meet on it an instant . " thank you awfully , " Strether at last 
 say . " but do not   you think she judgement of that - ? " 
 " ought to content I ? no . " 
 it keep they again face to face , and the end of this be that Strether 
 again laugh . " you do her injustice . you really must know she . 
 good - night . " 
 he breakfast with Mr. Bilham on the morrow , and , as inconsequently 
 befell , with Waymarsh massively of the party . the latter announce , at 
 the eleventh hour and much to his friend 's surprise , that , damn it , he 
 would as soon join he as do anything else ; on which they proceed 
 together , stroll in a state of detachment practically luxurious for 
 they to the Boulevard Malesherbes , a couple engage that day with the 
 sharp spell of Paris as confessedly , it might have be see , as any 
 couple among the daily thousand so compromised . they walk , 
 wander , wonder and , a little , lose themselves ; Strether have not   have 
 for year so rich a consciousness of time - a bag of gold into which he 
 constantly dip for a handful . it be present to he that when the 
 little business with Mr. Bilham should be over he would still have 
 shin hour to use absolutely as he like . there be no great pulse 
 of haste yet in this process of save Chad ; nor be that effect a bit 
 more marked as he sit , half an hour later , with his leg under Chad 's 
 mahogany , with Mr. Bilham on one side , with a friend of Mr. Bilham 's on 
 the other , with Waymarsh stupendously opposite , and with the great hum 
 of Paris come up in softness , vagueness - for Strether himself indeed 
 already positive sweetness - through the sunny window toward which , the 
 day before , his curiosity have raise its wing from below . the feeling 
 strong with he at that moment have bear fruit almost fast than he 
 could taste it , and Strether literally feel at the present hour that 
 there be a precipitation in his fate . he have know nothing and nobody 
 as he stand in the street ; but have not   his view now take a bound in the 
 direction of every one and of every thing ? 
 " what be he up to , what be he up to ? " - something like that be at the 
 back of his head all the while in respect to little Bilham ; but 
 meanwhile , till he should make out , every one and every thing be as 
 good as represent for he by the combination of his host and the lady 
 on his left . the lady on his left , the lady thus promptly and 
 ingeniously invite to " meet " Mr. Strether and Mr. Waymarsh - it be the 
 way she herself express her case - be a very marked person , a person 
 who have much to do with our friend 's ask himself if the occasion 
 be not   in its essence the most bait , the most gild of trap . 
 bait it could properly be call when the repast be of so wise a 
 savour , and gild surround object seem inevitably to need to be 
 when Miss Barrace - which be the lady 's name - look at they with 
 convex parisian eye and through a glass with a remarkably long 
 tortoise - shell handle . why Miss Barrace , mature meagre erect and 
 eminently gay , highly adorn , perfectly familiar , freely 
 contradiction and remind he of some last - century portrait of a 
 clever head without powder - why Miss Barrace should have be in 
 particular the note of a " trap " Strether could not   on the spot have 
 explain ; he blink in the light of a conviction that he should know 
 later on , and know well - as it come over he , for that matter , with 
 force , that he should need to . he wonder what he be to think 
 exactly of either of his new friend ; since the young man , Chad 's 
 intimate and deputy , have , in thus constitute the scene , practise so 
 much more subtly than he have be prepare for , and since in especial 
 Miss Barrace , surround clearly by every consideration , have not 
 scruple to figure as a familiar object . it be interesting to he to 
 feel that he be in the presence of new measure , other standard , a 
 different scale of relation , and that evidently here be a happy pair 
 who do not   think of thing at all as he and Waymarsh think . nothing 
 be less to have be calculate in the business than that it should 
 now be for he as if he and Waymarsh be comparatively quite at one . 
 the latter be magnificent - this at least be an assurance privately 
 give he by Miss Barrace . " oh your friend 's a type , the grand old 
 American - what shall one call it ? the Hebrew prophet , Ezekiel , 
 Jeremiah , who use when I be a little girl in the Rue Montaigne to 
 come to see my father and who be usually the American Minister to the 
 Tuileries or some other court . I have not   see one these ever so many 
 year ; the sight of it warm my poor old chilled heart ; this speciman 
 be wonderful ; in the right quarter , you know , he will have a succe fou . " 
 Strether have not   fail to ask what the right quarter might be , much as 
 he require his presence of mind to meet such a change in their scheme . 
 " oh the artist - quarter and that kind of thing ; here already , for 
 instance , as you see . " he have be on the point of echo 
 " ' here ' ? - be this the artist - quarter ? " but she have already dispose of 
 the question with a wave of all her tortoise - shell and an easy " bre 
 he to I ! " he know on the spot how little he should be able to bring 
 he , for the very air be by this time , to his sense , thick and hot 
 with poor Waymarsh 's judgement of it . he be in the trap still more 
 than his companion and , unlike his companion , not make the good of 
 it ; which be precisely what doubtless give he his admirable sombre 
 glow . little do Miss Barrace know that what be behind it be his 
 grave estimate of her own laxity . the general assumption with which our 
 two friend have arrive have be that of find Mr. Bilham ready to 
 conduct they to one or other of those resort of the earnest , the 
 aesthetic fraternity which be show among the sight of Paris . in 
 this character it would have justify they in a proper insistence on 
 discharge their score . Waymarsh 's only proviso at the last have be 
 that nobody should pay for he ; but he find himself , as the occasion 
 develop , pay for on a scale as to which Strether privately make out 
 that he already nurse retribution . Strether be conscious across the 
 table of what work in he , conscious when they pass back to the 
 small salon to which , the previous evening , he himself have make so rich 
 a reference ; conscious most of all as they step out to the balcony 
 in which one would have have to be an ogre not to recognise the perfect 
 place for easy aftertaste . these thing be enhance for Miss 
 Barrace by a succession of excellent cigarette - acknowledge , 
 acclaim , as a part of the wonderful supply leave behind he by 
 Chad - in an almost equal absorption of which Strether find himself 
 blindly , almost wildly push forward . he might perish by the sword 
 as well as by famine , and he know that his have abet the lady by 
 an excess that be rare with he would count for little in the sum - as 
 Waymarsh might so easily add it up - of her licence . Waymarsh have 
 smoke of old , smoke hugely ; but Waymarsh do nothing now , and that 
 give he his advantage over people who take thing up lightly just when 
 other have lay they heavily down . Strether have never smoke , and he 
 feel as if he flaunt at his friend that this have be only because of 
 a reason . the reason , it now begin to appear even to himself , be that 
 he have never have a lady to smoke with . 
 it be this lady 's be there at all , however , that be the strange 
 free thing ; perhaps , since she be there , her smoking be the least of 
 her freedom . if Strether have be sure at each juncture of what - with 
 Bilham in especial - she talk about , he might have trace other and 
 wince at they and feel waymarsh wince ; but he be in fact so often at 
 sea that his sense of the range of reference be merely general and 
 that he on several different occasion guess and interpret only to 
 doubt . he wonder what they mean , but there be thing he scarce 
 think they could be suppose to mean , and " oh no - not that ! " be at 
 the end of most of his venture . this be the very beginning with he 
 of a condition as to which , later on , it will be see , he find cause 
 to pull himself up ; and he be to remember the moment duly as the first 
 step in a process . the central fact of the place be neither more nor 
 less , when analysed - and a pressure superficial suffice - than the 
 fundamental impropriety of Chad 's situation , round about which they 
 thus seem cynically cluster . accordingly , since they take it for 
 grant , they take for grant all that be in connexion with it take 
 for grant at Woollett - matter as to which , verily , he have be 
 reduce with Mrs. Newsome to the last intensity of silence . that be 
 the consequence of their be too bad to be talk about , and be the 
 accompaniment , by the same token , of a deep conception of their 
 badness . it befell therefore that when poor Strether put it to himself 
 that their badness be ultimately , or perhaps even insolently , what 
 such a scene as the one before he be , so to speak , build upon , he 
 could scarce shirk the dilemma of read a roundabout echo of they 
 into almost anything that come up . this , he be well aware , be a 
 dreadful necessity ; but such be the stern logic , he could only gather , 
 of a relation to the irregular life . 
 it be the way the irregular life sit upon Bilham and Miss Barrace that 
 be the insidious , the delicate marvel . he be eager to concede that 
 their relation to it be all indirect , for anything else in he would 
 have show the grossness of bad manner ; but the indirectness be none 
 the less consonant - that be strike - with a grateful enjoyment of 
 everything that be Chad 's . they speak of he repeatedly , invoke his 
 good name and good nature , and the bad confusion of mind for Strether 
 be that all their mention of he be of a kind to do he honour . they 
 commend his munificence and approve his taste , and in do so sit 
 down , as it seem to Strether , in the very soil out of which these 
 thing flower . our friend 's final predicament be that he himself 
 be sit down , for the time , with they , and there be a supreme 
 moment at which , compare with his collapse , Waymarsh 's erectness 
 affect he as really high . one thing be certain - he see he must 
 make up his mind . he must approach Chad , must wait for he , deal with 
 he , master he , but he must not   dispossess himself of the faculty of 
 see thing as they be . he must bring he to HIM - not go himself , 
 as it be , so much of the way . he must at any rate be clear as to 
 what - should he continue to do that for convenience - he be still 
 condone . it be on the detail of this quantity - and what could the 
 fact be but mystifying?-that Bilham and Miss Barrace throw so little 
 light . so there they be . 
 II 
 when Miss Gostrey arrive , at the end of a week , she make he a sign ; 
 he go immediately to see she , and it be not   till then that he could 
 again close his grasp on the idea of a corrective . this idea however 
 be luckily all before he again from the moment he cross the 
 threshold of the little entresol of the Quartier Marboeuf into which 
 she have gather , as she say , pick they up in a thousand flight 
 and funny little passionate pounce , the making of a final nest . he 
 recognise in an instant that there really , there only , he should find 
 the boon with the vision of which he have first mount Chad 's stair . 
 he might have be a little scared at the picture of how much more , in 
 this place , he should know himself " in " have not   his friend be on the 
 spot to measure the amount to his appetite . her compact and crowd 
 little chamber , almost dusky , as they at first strike he , with 
 accumulation , represent a supreme general adjustment to 
 opportunity and condition . wherever he look he see an old ivory 
 or an old brocade , and he scarce know where to sit for fear of a 
 misappliance . the life of the occupant strike he of a sudden as more 
 charge with possession even than Chad 's or than Miss Barrace 's ; wide 
 as his glimpse have lately become of the empire of " thing , " what be 
 before he still enlarge it ; the lust of the eye and the pride of 
 life have indeed thus their temple . it be the innermost nook of the 
 shrine - as brown as a pirate 's cave . in the brownness be glint of 
 gold ; patch of purple be in the gloom ; object all that catch , 
 through the muslin , with their high rarity , the light of the low 
 window . nothing be clear about they but that they be precious , and 
 they brush his ignorance with their contempt as a flower , in a 
 liberty take with he , might have be whisk under his nose . but 
 after a full look at his hostess he know none the less what most 
 concern he . the circle in which they stand together be warm with 
 life , and every question between they would live there as nowhere else . 
 a question come up as soon as they have speak , for his answer , with a 
 laugh , be quickly : " well , they have   get hold of I ! " much of their 
 talk on this first occasion be his development of that truth . he be 
 extraordinarily glad to see she , express to she frankly what she 
 most show he , that one might live for year without a blessing 
 unsuspected , but that to know it at last for no more than three day 
 be to need it or miss it for ever . she be the blessing that have now 
 become his need , and what could prove it well than that without she 
 he have lose himself ? 
 " what do you mean ? " she ask with an absence of alarm that , correct 
 he as if he have mistake the " period " of one of her piece , give he 
 afresh a sense of her easy movement through the maze he have but begin 
 to tread . " what in the name of all the Pococks have you manage to do ? " 
 " why exactly the wrong thing . I have   make a frantic friend of little 
 Bilham . " 
 " ah that sort of thing be of the essence of your case and to have be 
 allow for from the first . " and it be only after this that , quite as 
 a minor matter , she ask who in the world little Bilham might be . when 
 she learn that he be a friend of Chad 's and live for the time in 
 Chad 's room in Chad 's absence , quite as if act in Chad 's spirit and 
 serve Chad 's cause , she show , however , more interest . " should you 
 mind my see he ? only once , you know , " she add . 
 " oh the oftener the well : he be amusing - he be original . " 
 " he do not   shock you ? " Miss Gostrey throw out . 
 " never in the world ! we escape that with a perfection - ! I feel it to 
 be largely , no doubt , because I do not   half - understand he ; but our 
 modus vivendi be not   spoil even by that . you must dine with I to 
 meet he , " Strether go on . " then you will see . ' 
 " be you give dinner ? " 
 " yes - there I be . that be what I mean . " 
 all her kindness wonder . " that you be spend too much money ? " 
 " dear no - they seem to cost so little . but that I do it to they . I 
 ought to hold off . " 
 she think again - she laugh . " the money you must be spend to 
 think it cheap ! but I must be out of it - to the naked eye . " 
 he look for a moment as if she be really fail he . " then you 
 will not   meet they ? " it be almost as if she have develop an unexpected 
 personal prudence . 
 she hesitate . " who be they - first ? " 
 " why little Bilham to begin with . " he keep back for the moment Miss 
 Barrace . " and Chad - when he come - you must absolutely see . " 
 " when then do he come ? " 
 " when Bilham have have time to write he , and hear from he about I . 
 Bilham , however , " he pursue , " will report favourably - favourably for 
 Chad . that will make he not afraid to come . I want you the more 
 therefore , you see , for my bluff . " 
 " oh you will do yourself for your bluff . " she be perfectly easy . " at 
 the rate you have   go I be quiet . " 
 " ah but I have not , " say Strether , " make one protest . " 
 she turn it over . " have not   you be see what there be to protest 
 about ? " 
 he let she , with this , however ruefully , have the whole truth . " I 
 have not   yet find a single thing . " 
 " be not   there any one with he then ? " 
 " of the sort I come out about ? " Strether take a moment . " how do I 
 know ? and what do I care ? " 
 " oh oh ! " - and her laughter spread . he be strike in fact by the effect 
 on she of his joke . he see now how he mean it as a joke . SHE see , 
 however , still other thing , though in an instant she have hide they . 
 " you have   get at no fact at all ? " 
 he try to muster they . " well , he have a lovely home . " 
 " ah that , in Paris , " she quickly return , " prove nothing . that be 
 rather it disprove nothing . they may very well , you see , the people 
 your mission be concern with , have do it for he . " 
 " exactly . and it be on the scene of their doing then that Waymarsh 
 and I sit guzzle . " 
 " oh if you forbore to guzzle here on scene of doing , " she reply , 
 " you might easily die of starvation . " with which she smile at he . 
 " you have   bad before you . " 
 " ah I have   everything before I . but on our hypothesis , you know , they 
 must be wonderful . " 
 " they be ! " say Miss Gostrey . " you be not therefore , you see , " she 
 add , " wholly without fact . they have   be , in effect , wonderful . " 
 to have get at something comparatively definite appear at last a 
 little to help - a wave by which moreover , the next moment , recollection 
 be wash . " my young man do admit furthermore that they be our 
 friend 's great interest . " 
 " be that the expression he use ? " 
 Strether more exactly recall . " no - not quite . " 
 " something more vivid ? Less ? " 
 he have bend , with neared glass , over a group of article on a small 
 stand ; and at this he come up . " it be a mere allusion , but , on the 
 lookout as I be , it strike I . ' Awful , you know , as Chad be ' - those 
 be Bilham 's word . " 
 " ' awful , you know ' - ? oh ! " - and Miss Gostrey turn they over . she 
 seem , however , satisfied . " well , what more do you want ? " 
 he glance once more at a bibelot or two , and everything send he back . 
 " but it be all the same as if they wish to let I have it between the 
 eye . " 
 she wonder . " Quoi donc ? " 
 " why what I speak of . the amenity . they can stun you with that as 
 well as with anything else . " 
 " oh , " she answer , " you will come round ! I must see they each , " she go 
 on , " for myself . I mean Mr. Bilham and Mr. Newsome - Mr. Bilham 
 naturally first . once only - once for each ; that will do . but face to 
 face - for half an hour . what be Mr. Chad , " she immediately pursue , 
 " do at canne ? decent man do not   go to Cannes with the - well , with 
 the kind of lady you mean . " 
 " do not   they ? " Strether ask with an interest in decent man that 
 amuse she . 
 " no , elsewhere , but not to Cannes . canne be different . canne be 
 well . canne be good . I mean it be all people you know - when you do 
 know they . and if he do , why that be different too . he must have 
 go alone . she can not   be with he . " 
 " I have not , " Strether confess in his weakness , " the least idea . " 
 there seem much in what she say , but he be able after a little to 
 help she to a nearer impression . the meeting with little Bilham take 
 place , by easy arrangement , in the great gallery of the Louvre ; and 
 when , stand with his fellow visitor before one of the splendid 
 Titians - the overwhelming portrait of the young man with the 
 strangely - shape glove and the blue - grey eye - he turn to see the 
 third member of their party advance from the end of the waxed and 
 gild vista , he have a sense of have at last take hold . he have 
 agree with Miss Gostrey - it date even from Chester - for a morning at 
 the Louvre , and he have embrace independently the same idea as throw 
 out by little Bilham , whom he have already accompany to the museum of 
 the Luxembourg . the fusion of these scheme present no difficulty , 
 and it be to strike he again that in little Bilham 's company 
 contrariety in general drop . 
 " oh he be all right - he be one of US ! " Miss Gostrey , after the first 
 exchange , soon find a chance to murmur to her companion ; and Strether , 
 as they proceed and pause and while a quick unanimity between the 
 two appear to have phrase itself in half a dozen remark - Strether 
 know that he know almost immediately what she mean , and take it as 
 still another sign that he have get his job in hand . this be the more 
 grateful to he that he could think of the intelligence now serve he 
 as an acquisition positively new . he would not   have know even the day 
 before what she mean - that be if she mean , what he assume , that they 
 be intense Americans together . he have just work round - and with a 
 sharp turn of the screw than any yet - to the conception of an 
 american intense as little Bilham be intense . the young man be his 
 first speciman ; the speciman have profoundly perplex he ; at present 
 however there be light . it be by little Bilham 's amazing serenity 
 that he have at first be affect , but he have inevitably , in his 
 circumspection , feel it as the trail of the serpent , the corruption , as 
 he might conveniently have say , of Europe ; whereas the promptness with 
 which it come up for Miss Gostrey but as a special little form of the 
 old thing they know justify it at once to his own vision as well . 
 he want to be able to like his speciman with a clear good conscience , 
 and this fully permit it . what have muddle he be precisely the 
 small artist - man 's way - it be so complete - of be more american than 
 anybody . but it now for the time put Strether vastly at his ease to 
 have this view of a new way . 
 the amiable youth then look out , as it have first strike Strether , at 
 a world in respect to which he have not   a prejudice . the one our friend 
 most instantly miss be the usual one in favour of an occupation 
 accept . little Bilham have an occupation , but it be only an 
 occupation decline ; and it be by his general exemption from alarm , 
 anxiety or remorse on this score that the impression of his serenity 
 be make . he have come out to Paris to paint - to fathom , that be , at 
 large , that mystery ; but study have be fatal to he so far as anything 
 could be fatal , and his productive power falter in proportion as his 
 knowledge grow . Strether have gather from he that at the moment of 
 his find he in Chad 's room he have not   save from his shipwreck a 
 scrap of anything but his beautiful intelligence and his confirm 
 habit of Paris . he refer to these thing with an equal fond 
 familiarity , and it be sufficiently clear that , as an outfit , they 
 still serve he . they be charming to Strether through the hour 
 spend at the Louvre , where indeed they figure for he as an 
 unseparated part of the charge iridescent air , the glamour of the 
 name , the splendour of the space , the colour of the master . yet they 
 be present too wherever the young man lead , and the day after the 
 visit to the Louvre they hang , in a different walk , about the step of 
 our party . he have invite his companion to cross the river with he , 
 offer to show they his own poor place ; and his own poor place , which 
 be very poor , give to his idiosyncrasy , for Strether - the small 
 sublime indifference and independence that have strike the latter as 
 fresh - an odd and engage dignity . he live at the end of an alley 
 that go out of an old short cobble street , a street that go in 
 turn out of a new long smooth avenue - street and avenue and alley 
 have , however , in common a sort of social shabbiness ; and he 
 introduce they to the rather cold and blank little studio which he have 
 lend to a comrade for the term of his elegant absence . the comrade be 
 another ingenuous compatriot , to whom he have wire that tea be to 
 await they " regardless , " and this reckless repast , and the second 
 ingenuous compatriot , and the faraway makeshift life , with its joke 
 and its gap , its delicate daub and its three or four chair , its 
 overflow of taste and conviction and its lack of nearly all else - these 
 thing weave round the occasion a spell to which our hero unreservedly 
 surrender . 
 he like the ingenuous compatriot - for two or three other soon 
 gather ; he like the delicate daub and the free 
 discrimination - involve reference indeed , involve enthusiasm and 
 execration that make he , as they say , sit up ; he like above all the 
 legend of good - humour poverty , of mutual accommodation fairly raise 
 to the romantic , that he soon read into the scene . the ingenuous 
 compatriot show a candour , he think , surpass even the candour 
 of Woollett ; they be red - haired and long - legged , they be quaint and 
 queer and dear and droll ; they make the place resound with the 
 vernacular , which he have never know so marked as when figure for the 
 choose language , he must suppose , of contemporary art . they twang 
 with a vengeance the aesthetic lyre - they draw from it wonderful air . 
 this aspect of their life have an admirable innocence ; and he look on 
 occasion at Maria Gostrey to see to what extent that element reach 
 she . she give he however for the hour , as she have give he the 
 previous day , no further sign than to show how she deal with boy ; 
 meet they with the air of old parisian practice that she have for 
 every one , for everything , in turn . wonderful about the delicate daub , 
 masterful about the way to make tea , trustful about the leg of chair 
 and familiarly reminiscent of those , in the other time , the name , the 
 numbered or the caricature , who have flourish or fail , disappear 
 or arrive , she have accept with the good grace her second course of 
 little Bilham , and have say to Strether , the previous afternoon on his 
 leave they , that , since her impression be to be renew , she would 
 reserve judgement till after the new evidence . 
 the new evidence be to come , as it prove , in a day or two . he soon 
 have from Maria a message to the effect that an excellent box at the 
 Francais have be lend she for the following night ; it seem on such 
 occasion not the least of her merit that she be subject to such 
 approach . the sense of how she be always pay for something in 
 advance be equalled on Strether 's part only by the sense of how she 
 be always be pay ; all of which make for his consciousness , in the 
 large air , of a lively bustling traffic , the exchange of such value 
 as be not for he to handle . she hat , he know , at the french play , 
 anything but a box - just as she hat at the English anything but a 
 stall ; and a box be what he be already in this phase gird himself 
 to press upon she . but she have for that matter her community with 
 little Bilham : she too always , on the great issue , show as have 
 know in time . it make she constantly beforehand with he and give he 
 mainly the chance to ask himself how on the day of their settlement 
 their account would stand . he endeavour even now to keep it a little 
 straight by arrange that if he accept her invitation she should 
 dine with he first ; but the upshot of this scruple be that at eight 
 o'clock on the morrow he await she with Waymarsh under the pillare 
 portico . she have not   din with he , and it be characteristic of their 
 relation that she have make he embrace her refusal without in the least 
 understand it . she ever cause her rearrangement to affect he as 
 her tender touch . it be on that principle for instance that , 
 give he the opportunity to be amiable again to little Bilham , she 
 have suggest his offer the young man a seat in their box . Strether 
 have dispatch for this purpose a small blue missive to the Boulevard 
 Malesherbes , but up to the moment of their pass into the theatre he 
 have receive no response to his message . he hold , however , even after 
 they have be for some time conveniently seat , that their friend , who 
 know his way about , would come in at his own right moment . his 
 temporary absence moreover seem , as never yet , to make the right 
 moment for Miss Gostrey . Strether have be wait till tonight to get 
 back from she in some mirrored form her impression and conclusion . 
 she have elect , as they say , to see little Bilham once ; but now she 
 have see he twice and have nevertheless not say more than a word . 
 Waymarsh meanwhile sit opposite he with their hostess between ; and 
 Miss Gostrey speak of herself as an instructor of youth introduce her 
 little charge to a work that be one of the glory of literature . the 
 glory be happily unobjectionable , and the little charge be candid ; 
 for herself she have travel that road and she merely wait on their 
 innocence . but she refer in due time to their absent friend , whom 
 it be clear they should have to give up . " he either will not   have get 
 your note , " she say , " or you will not   have get his : he have have some kind 
 of hindrance , and , of course , for that matter , you know , a man never 
 write about come to a box . " she speak as if , with her look , it 
 might have be waymarsh who have write to the youth , and the latter 's 
 face show a mixture of austerity and anguish . she go on however as 
 if to meet this . " he be far and away , you know , the good of they . " 
 " the good of whom , ma'am ? " 
 " why of all the long procession - the boy , the girl , or the old man 
 and old woman as they sometimes really be ; the hope , as one may say , 
 of our country . they have   all pass , year after year ; but there have 
 be no one in particular I have   ever want to stop . I feel - do not 
 you ? - that I want to stop little Bilham ; he be so exactly right as he 
 be . " she continue to talk to Waymarsh . " he be too delightful . if 
 he will only not spoil it ! but they always will ; they always do ; they 
 always have . " 
 " I do not   think Waymarsh know , " Strether say after a moment , " quite 
 what it be open to Bilham to spoil . " 
 " it can not   be a good american , " waymarsh lucidly enough reply ; " for it 
 do not   strike I the young man have develop much in that shape . " 
 " ah , " Miss Gostrey sigh , " the name of the good American be as easily 
 give as take away ! what be it , to begin with , to be one , and what be 
 the extraordinary hurry ? surely nothing that be so pressing be ever so 
 little define . it be such an order , really , that before we cook you 
 the dish we must at least have your receipt . besides the poor chick 
 have time ! what I have   see so often spoil , " she pursue , " be the happy 
 attitude itself , the state of faith and - what shall I call it ? - the 
 sense of beauty . you be right about he " - she now take in Strether ; 
 " little Bilham have they to a charm , we must keep little Bilham along . " 
 then she be all again for Waymarsh . " the other have all want so 
 dreadfully to do something , and they have   go and do it in too many 
 case indeed . it leave they never the same afterwards ; the charm 's 
 always somehow break . now he , I think , you know , really will not . he 
 will not   do the least dreadful little thing . we shall continue to enjoy 
 he just as he be . no - he be quite beautiful . he see everything . he 
 be not   a bit ashamed . he have every scrap of the courage of it that one 
 could ask . only think what he might do . one want really - for fear of 
 some accident - to keep he in view . at this very moment perhaps what 
 may not   he be up to ? I have   have my disappointment - the poor thing be 
 never really safe ; or only at least when you have they under your eye . 
 one can never completely trust they . one be uneasy , and I think that be 
 why I most miss he now . " 
 she have wind up with a laugh of enjoyment over her embroidery of her 
 idea - an enjoyment that her face communicate to Strether , who almost 
 wish none the less at this moment that she would let poor Waymarsh 
 alone . he know more or less what she mean ; but the fact be not   a 
 reason for she not pretend to Waymarsh that he do not . it be 
 craven of he perhaps , but he would , for the high amenity of the 
 occasion , have like Waymarsh not to be so sure of his wit . her 
 recognition of it give he away and , before she have do with he or 
 with that article , would give he bad . what be he , all the same , to 
 do ? he look across the box at his friend ; their eye meet ; something 
 queer and stiff , something that bear on the situation but that it be 
 well not to touch , pass in silence between they . well , the effect 
 of it for Strether be an abrupt reaction , a final impatience of his 
 own tendency to temporise . where be that take he anyway ? it be 
 one of the quiet instant that sometimes settle more matter than the 
 outbreak dear to the historic muse . the only qualification of the 
 quietness be the synthetic " oh hang it ! " into which Strether 's share 
 of the silence soundlessly flower . it represent , this mute 
 ejaculation , a final impulse to burn his ship . these ship , to the 
 historic muse , may seem of course mere cockle , but when he presently 
 speak to Miss Gostrey it be with the sense at least of apply the 
 torch . " be it then a conspiracy ? " 
 " between the two young man ? well , I do not   pretend to be a seer or a 
 prophetess , " she presently reply ; " but if I be simply a woman of sense 
 he be work for you to - night . I do not   quite know how - but it be in my 
 bone . " and she look at he at last as if , little material as she 
 yet give he , he would really understand . " for an opinion that be my 
 opinion . he make you out too well not to . " 
 " not to work for I to - night ? " Strether wonder . " then I hope he 
 be not   do anything very bad . " 
 " they have   get you , " she portentously answer . 
 " do you mean he be - ? " 
 " they have   get you , " she merely repeat . though she disclaim the 
 prophetic vision she be at this instant the near approach he have 
 ever meet to the priestess of the oracle . the light be in her eye . 
 " you must face it now . " 
 he face it on the spot . " they had arrange - ? " 
 " every move in the game . and they have   be arrange ever since . he 
 have have every day his little telegram from Cannes . " 
 it make Strether open his eye . " do you know that ? " 
 " I do well . I see it . this be , before I meet he , what I wonder 
 whether I be to see . but as soon as I meet he I cease to wonder , and 
 our second meeting make I sure . I take he all in . he be act - he 
 be still - on his daily instruction . " 
 " so that Chad have do the whole thing ? " 
 " oh no - not the whole . WE'VE do some of it . you and I and ' Europe . ' " 
 " Europe - yes , " Strether muse . 
 " dear old Paris , " she seem to explain . but there be more , and , with 
 one of her turn , she risk it . " and dear old Waymarsh . you , " she 
 declare , " have be a good bit of it . " 
 he sit massive . " a good bit of what , ma'am ? " 
 " why of the wonderful consciousness of our friend here . you have   help 
 too in your way to float he to where he be . " 
 " and where the devil be he ? " 
 she pass it on with a laugh . " where the devil , Strether , be you ? " 
 he speak as if he have just be think it out . " well , quite already 
 in Chad 's hand , it would seem . " and he have have with this another 
 thought . " will that be - just all through Bilham - the way he be go to 
 work it ? it would be , for he , you know , an idea . and Chad with an 
 idea - ! " 
 " well ? " she ask while the image hold he . 
 " well , be Chad - what shall I say ? - monstrous ? " 
 " oh as much as you like ! but the idea you speak of , " she say , " will not 
 have be his good . he will have a well . it will not   be all through 
 little Bilham that he will work it . " 
 this already sound almost like a hope destroy . " through whom else 
 then ? " 
 " that be what we shall see ! " but quite as she speak she turn , and 
 Strether turn ; for the door of the box have open , with the click of 
 the ouvreuse , from the lobby , and a gentleman , a stranger to they , have 
 come in with a quick step . the door close behind he , and , though 
 their face show he his mistake , his air , which be strike , be 
 all good confidence . the curtain have just again arise , and , in the 
 hush of the general attention , Strether 's challenge be tacit , as be 
 also the greeting , with a quickly deprecate hand and smile , of the 
 unannounced visitor . he discreetly sign that he would wait , would 
 stand , and these thing and his face , one look from which she have 
 catch , have suddenly work for Miss Gostrey . she fit to they all 
 an answer for Strether 's last question . the solid stranger be simply 
 the answer - as she now , turn to her friend , indicate . she bring 
 it straight out for he - it present the intruder . " why , through this 
 gentleman ! " the gentleman indeed , at the same time , though sound 
 for Strether a very short name , do practically as much to explain . 
 Strether gasp the name back - then only have he see Miss Gostrey have 
 say more than she know . they be in presence of Chad himself . 
 our friend be to go over it afterwards again and again - he be go 
 over it much of the time that they be together , and they be 
 together constantly for three or four day : the note have be so 
 strongly strike during that first half - hour that everything happen 
 since be comparatively a minor development . the fact be that his 
 perception of the young man 's identity - so absolutely check for a 
 minute - have be quite one of the sensation that count in life ; he 
 certainly have never know one that have act , as he might have say , 
 with more of a crowded rush . and the rush though both vague and 
 multitudinous , have last a long time , protect , as it be , yet at 
 the same time aggravate , by the circumstance of its coinciding with a 
 stretch of decorous silence . they could not   talk without disturb the 
 spectator in the part of the balcony just below they ; and it , for that 
 matter , come to Strether - be a thing of the sort that do come to 
 he - that these be the accident of a high civilisation ; the impose 
 tribute to propriety , the frequent exposure to condition , usually 
 brilliant , in which relief have to await its time . relief be never 
 quite near at hand for king , queen , comedian and other such people , 
 and though you might be yourself not exactly one of those , you could 
 yet , in lead the life of high pressure , guess a little how they 
 sometimes feel . it be truly the life of high pressure that Strether 
 have seem to feel himself lead while he sit there , close to Chad , 
 during the long tension of the act . he be in presence of a fact that 
 occupy his whole mind , that occupy for the half - hour his sens 
 themselves all together ; but he could not   without inconvenience show 
 anything - which moreover might count really as luck . what he might 
 have show , have he show at all , be exactly the kind of emotion - the 
 emotion of bewilderment - that he have propose to himself from the 
 first , whatever should occur , to show least . the phenomenon that have 
 suddenly sit down there with he be a phenomenon of change so complete 
 that his imagination , which have work so beforehand , feel itself , in 
 the connexion , without margin or allowance . it have face every 
 contingency but that Chad should not be Chad , and this be what it now 
 have to face with a mere strained smile and an uncomfortable flush . 
 he ask himself if , by any chance , before he should have in some way 
 to commit himself , he might feel his mind settle to the new vision , 
 might habituate it , so to speak , to the remarkable truth . but oh it be 
 too remarkable , the truth ; for what could be more remarkable than this 
 sharp rupture of an identity ? you could deal with a man as 
 himself - you could not   deal with he as somebody else . it be a small 
 source of peace moreover to be reduce to wonder how little he might 
 know in such an event what a sum he be set you . he could not 
 absolutely not know , for you could not   absolutely not let he . it be a 
 case then simply , a strong case , as people nowadays call such 
 thing , ' a case of transformation unsurpasse , and the hope be but in 
 the general law that strong case be liable to control from without . 
 perhaps he , Strether himself , be the only person after all aware of 
 it . even Miss Gostrey , with all her science , would not   be , would 
 she ? - and he have never see any one less aware of anything than 
 waymarsh as he glower at Chad . the social sightlessness of his old 
 friend 's survey mark for he afresh , and almost in an humiliating 
 way , the inevitable limit of direct aid from this source . he be not 
 certain , however , of not draw a shade of compensation from the 
 privilege , as yet untasted , of know more about something in 
 particular than Miss Gostrey do . his situation too be a case , for 
 that matter , and he be now so interested , quite so privately agog , 
 about it , that he have already an eye to the fun it would be to open up 
 to she afterwards . he derive during his half - hour no assistance from 
 she , and just this fact of she not meet his eye play a little , it 
 must be confess , into his predicament . 
 he have introduce Chad , in the first minute , under his breath , and 
 there be never the primness in she of the person unacquainted ; but she 
 have none the less betray at first no vision but of the stage , where 
 she occasionally find a pretext for an appreciative moment that she 
 invite Waymarsh to share . the latter 's faculty of participation have 
 never have , all round , such an assault to meet ; the pressure on he 
 be the sharp for this choose attitude in she , as Strether judge 
 it , of isolate , for their natural intercourse , Chad and himself . this 
 intercourse be meanwhile restrict to a frank friendly look from the 
 young man , something markedly like a smile , but fall far short of a 
 grin , and to the vivacity of Strether 's private speculation as to 
 whether he carry himself like a fool . he do not   quite see how he 
 could so feel as one without somehow show as one . the bad of that 
 question moreover be that he know it as a symptom the sense of which 
 annoy he . " if I be go to be odiously conscious of how I may 
 strike the fellow , " he reflect , " it be so little what I come out for 
 that I may as well stop before I begin . " this sage consideration too , 
 distinctly , seem to leave untouched the fact that he be go to be 
 conscious . he be conscious of everything but of what would have 
 serve he . 
 he be to know afterwards , in the watch of the night , that nothing 
 would have be more open to he than after a minute or two to propose 
 to Chad to seek with he the refuge of the lobby . he have not   only not 
 propose it , but have lack even the presence of mind to see it as 
 possible . he have stick there like a schoolboy wish not to miss a 
 minute of the show ; though for that portion of the show then present 
 he have not   have an instant 's real attention . he could not   when the 
 curtain fall have give the slight account of what have happen . he 
 have therefore , far , not at that moment acknowledge the amenity 
 add by this acceptance of his awkwardness to Chad 's general patience . 
 had not   he none the less known at the very time - know it stupidly and 
 without reaction - that the boy be accept something ? he be 
 modestly benevolent , the boy - that be at least what he have be 
 capable of the superiority of make out his chance to be ; and one have 
 one 's self literally not have the gumption to get in ahead of he . if 
 we should go into all that occupy our friend in the watch of the 
 night we should have to mend our pen ; but an instance or two may mark 
 for we the vividness with which he could remember . he remember the 
 two absurdity that , if his presence of mind have fail , be the 
 thing that have have most to do with it . he have never in his life see 
 a young man come into a box at ten o'clock at night , and would , if 
 challenge on the question in advance , have scarce be ready to 
 pronounce as to different way of do so . but it be in spite of 
 this definite to he that Chad have have a way that be wonderful : a 
 fact carry with it an implication that , as one might imagine it , he 
 know , he have learn , how . 
 here already then be abound result ; he have on the spot and 
 without the least trouble of intention teach Strether that even in so 
 small a thing as that there be different way . he have do in the 
 same line still more than this ; have by a mere shake or two of the head 
 make his old friend observe that the change in he be perhaps more 
 than anything else , for the eye , a matter of the marked streak of 
 grey , extraordinary at his age , in his thick black hair ; as well as 
 that this new feature be curiously become to he , do something for 
 he , as characterisation , also even - of all thing in the world - as 
 refinement , that have be a good deal want . Strether feel , however , 
 he would have have to confess , that it would not   have be easy just now , 
 on this and other count , in the presence of what have be supply , to 
 be quite clear as to what have be miss . a reflexion a candid critic 
 might have make of old , for instance , be that it would have be 
 happy for the son to look more like the mother ; but this be a 
 reflexion that at present would never occur . the ground have quite 
 fall away from it , yet no resemblance whatever to the mother have 
 supervene . it would have be hard for a young man 's face and air to 
 disconnect themselves more completely than Chad 's at this juncture from 
 any discern , from any imaginable aspect of a New England female 
 parent . that of course be no more than have be on the card ; but it 
 produce in Strether none the less one of those frequent phenomenon of 
 mental reference with which all judgement in he be actually beset . 
 again and again as the day pass he have have a sense of the pertinence 
 of communicate quickly with Woollett - communicating with a quickness 
 with which telegraphy alone would rhyme ; the fruit really of a fine 
 fancy in he for keep thing straight , for the happy forestalment of 
 error . no one could explain well when needful , nor put more 
 conscience into an account or a report ; which burden of conscience be 
 perhaps exactly the reason why his heart always sink when the cloud of 
 explanation gather . his high ingenuity be in keep the sky of 
 life clear of they . whether or no he have a grand idea of the lucid , he 
 hold that nothing ever be in fact - for any one else - explain . one 
 go through the vain motion , but it be mostly a waste of life . a 
 personal relation be a relation only so long as people either 
 perfectly understand or , well still , do not   care if they do not . from 
 the moment they care if they do not   it be live by the sweat of 
 one 's brow ; and the sweat of one 's brow be just what one might buy 
 one 's self off from by keep the ground free of the wild weed of 
 delusion . it easily grow too fast , and the atlantic cable now alone 
 could race with it . that agency would each day have testify for he 
 to something that be not what Woollett have argue . he be not at this 
 moment absolutely sure that the effect of the morrow 's - or rather of 
 the night 's - appreciation of the crisis would not   be to determine some 
 brief missive . " have at last see he , but oh dear ! " - some temporary 
 relief of that sort seem to hover before he . it hover somehow as 
 prepare they all - yet prepare they for what ? if he might do so 
 more luminously and cheaply he would tick out in four word : " awfully 
 old - grey hair . " to this particular item in Chad 's appearance he 
 constantly , during their mute half - hour , revert ; as if so very much 
 more than he could have say have be involve in it . the most he 
 could have say would have be : " if he be go to make I feel 
 young - ! " which indeed , however , carry with it quite enough . if 
 Strether be to feel young , that is , it would be because Chad be to 
 feel old ; and an aged and hoary sinner have be no part of the scheme . 
 the question of Chadwick 's true time of life be , doubtless , what come 
 up quick after the adjournment of the two , when the play be over , 
 to a cafe in the Avenue de l'Opera . Miss Gostrey have in due course 
 be perfect for such a step ; she have know exactly what they 
 want - to go straight somewhere and talk ; and Strether have even feel 
 she have know what he wish to say and that he be arrange 
 immediately to begin . she have not   pretend this , as she have pretend 
 on the other hand , to have divine Waymarsh 's wish to extend to her an 
 independent protection homeward ; but Strether nevertheless find how , 
 after he have Chad opposite to he at a small table in the brilliant 
 hall that his companion straightway select , sharply and easily 
 discriminate from other , it be quite , to his mind , as if she hear 
 he speak ; as if , sit up , a mile away , in the little apartment he 
 know , she would listen hard enough to catch . he find too that he 
 like that idea , and he wish that , by the same token , Mrs. Newsome 
 might have catch as well . for what have above all be determine in 
 he as a necessity of the first order be not to lose another hour , nor 
 a fraction of one ; be to advance , to overwhelm , with a rush . this be 
 how he would anticipate - by a night - attack , as might be - any forced 
 maturity that a crammed consciousness of Paris be likely to take upon 
 itself to assert on behalf of the boy . he know to the full , on what he 
 have just extract from Miss Gostrey , Chad 's mark of alertness ; but 
 they be a reason the more for not dawdling . if he be himself 
 moreover to be treat as young he would not   at all event be so treat 
 before he should have strike out at least once . his arm might be 
 pinion afterwards , but it would have be leave on record that he be 
 fifty . the importance of this he have indeed begin to feel before they 
 leave the theatre ; it have become a wild unrest , urge he to seize his 
 chance . he could scarcely wait for it as they go ; he be on the 
 verge of the indecency of bring up the question in the street ; he 
 fairly catch himself go on - so he afterwards invidiously name 
 it - as if there would be for he no second chance should the present be 
 lose . not till , on the purple divan before the perfunctory bock , he 
 have bring out the word themselves , be he sure , for that matter , 
 that the present would be save . 
 Book Fourth 
 I 
 " I have   come , you know , to make you break with everything , neither more 
 nor less , and take you straight home ; so you will be so good as 
 immediately and favourably to consider it ! " - Strether , face to face 
 with Chad after the play , have sound these word almost breathlessly , 
 and with an effect at first positively disconcert to himself alone . 
 for Chad 's receptive attitude be that of a person who have be 
 gracefully quiet while the messenger at last reach he have run a 
 mile through the dust . during some second after he have speak 
 Strether feel as if he have make some such exertion ; he be not even 
 certain that the perspiration be not   on his brow . it be the kind of 
 consciousness for which he have to thank the look that , while the strain 
 last , the young man 's eye give he . they reflect - and the deuce 
 of the thing be that they reflect really with a sort of shyness of 
 kindness - his momentarily disorder state ; which fact bring on in 
 its turn for our friend the dawn of a fear that Chad might simply " take 
 it out " - take everything out - in be sorry for he . such a fear , any 
 fear , be unpleasant . but everything be unpleasant ; it be odd how 
 everything have suddenly turn so . this however be no reason for 
 let the least thing go . Strether have the next minute proceed as 
 roundly as if with an advantage to follow up . " of course I be a 
 busybody , if you want to fight the case to the death ; but after all 
 mainly in the sense of have know you and have give you such 
 attention as you kindly permit when you be in jacket and 
 knickerbocker . yes - it be knickerbocker , I be busybody enough to 
 remember that ; and that you have , for your age - I speak of the first 
 far - away time - tremendously stout leg . well , we want you to break . 
 your mother 's heart 's passionately set upon it , but she have above and 
 beyond that excellent argument and reason . I have   not put they into 
 her head - I need not   remind you how little she be a person who need 
 that . but they exist - you must take it from I as a friend both of 
 her and yours - for myself as well . I do not   invent they , I do not 
 originally work they out ; but I understand they , I think I can explain 
 they - by which I mean make you actively do they justice ; and that be why 
 you see I here . you have well know the bad at once . it be a 
 question of an immediate rupture and an immediate return . I have   be 
 conceited enough to dream I can sugar that pill . I take at any rate 
 the great interest in the question . I take it already before I leave 
 home , and I do not   mind tell you that , alter as you be , I take it 
 still more now that I have   see you . you be old and - I do not   know what 
 to call it ! - more of a handful ; but you be by so much the more , I seem 
 to make out , to our purpose . " 
 " do I strike you as improve ? " Strether be to recall that Chad have at 
 this point enquire . 
 he be likewise to recall - and it have to count for some time as his 
 great comfort - that it have be " give " he , as they say at 
 Woollett , to reply with some presence of mind : " I have not   the least 
 idea . " he be really for a while to like think he have be 
 positively hard . on the point of concede that Chad have improve in 
 appearance , but that to the question of appearance the remark must be 
 confine , he check even that compromise and leave his reservation 
 bare . not only his moral , but also , as it be , his aesthetic sense 
 have a little to pay for this , Chad be unmistakeably - and be not   it a 
 matter of the confound grey hair again ? - handsomer than he have ever 
 promise . that however fall in perfectly with what Strether have say . 
 they have no desire to keep down his proper expansion , and he would not 
 be less to their purpose for not look , as he have too often do of 
 old , only bold and wild . there be indeed a signal particular in which 
 he would distinctly be more so . Strether do not , as he talk , 
 absolutely follow himself ; he only know he be clutch his thread and 
 that he hold it from moment to moment a little tight ; his mere 
 uninterruptedness during the few minute help he to do that . he have 
 frequently for a month , turn over what he should say on this very 
 occasion , and he seem at last to have say nothing he have think 
 of - everything be so totally different . 
 but in spite of all he have put the flag at the window . this be what 
 he have do , and there be a minute during which he affect himself as 
 have shake it hard , flap it with a mighty flutter , straight in 
 front of his companion 's nose . it give he really almost the sense of 
 have already act his part . the momentary relief - as if from the 
 knowledge that nothing of that at least could be undo - spring from a 
 particular cause , the cause that have flash into operation , in Miss 
 Gostrey 's box , with direct apprehension , with amazed recognition , and 
 that have be concern since then in every throb of his consciousness . 
 what it come to be that with an absolutely new quantity to deal with 
 one simply could not   know . the new quantity be represent by the fact 
 that Chad have be make over . that be all ; whatever it be it be 
 everything . Strether have never see the thing so do before - it be 
 perhaps a speciality of Paris . if one have be present at the process 
 one might little by little have master the result ; but he be face to 
 face , as matter stand , with the finished business . it have freely be 
 note for he that he might be receive as a dog among skittle , but 
 that be on the basis of the old quantity . he have originally think of 
 line and tone as thing to be take , but these possibility have now 
 quite melt away . there be no computing at all what the young man 
 before he would think or feel or say on any subject whatever . this 
 intelligence Strether have afterwards , to account for his nervousness , 
 reconstitute as he might , just as he have also reconstitute the 
 promptness with which Chad have correct his uncertainty . an 
 extraordinarily short time have be require for the correction , and 
 there have cease to be anything negative in his companion 's face and 
 air as soon as it be make . " your engagement to my mother have become 
 then what they call here a fait accompli ? " - it have consist , the 
 determinant touch , in nothing more than that . 
 well , that be enough , Strether have feel while his answer hung fire . he 
 have feel at the same time , however , that nothing could less become he 
 than that it should hang fire too long . " yes , " he say brightly , " it 
 be on the happy settlement of the question that I start . you see 
 therefore to what tune I be in your family . moreover , " he add , " I have 
 be suppose you would suppose it . " 
 " oh I have   be suppose it for a long time , and what you tell I help 
 I to understand that you should want to do something . to do 
 something , I mean , " say Chad , " to commemorate an event so - what do 
 they call it ? - so auspicious . I see you make out , and not 
 unnaturally , " he continue , " that bring I home in triumph as a sort 
 of wedding - present to Mother would commemorate it well than anything 
 else . you want to make a bonfire in fact , " he laugh , " and you pitch 
 I on . thank you , thank you ! " he laugh again . 
 he be altogether easy about it , and this make Strether now see how at 
 bottom , and in spite of the shade of shyness that really cost he 
 nothing , he have from the first moment be easy about everything . the 
 shade of shyness be mere good taste . People with manner form could 
 apparently have , as one of their good card , the shade of shyness too . 
 he have lean a little forward to speak ; his elbow be on the table ; 
 and the inscrutable new face that he have get somewhere and somehow be 
 bring by the movement nearer to his critic there be a fascination 
 for that critic in its not be , this ripe physiognomy , the face that , 
 under observation at least , he have originally carry away from 
 Woollett . Strether find a certain freedom on his own side in define 
 it as that of a man of the world - a formula that indeed seem to come 
 now in some degree to his relief ; that of a man to whom thing have 
 happen and be variously know . in gleam , in glance , the past do 
 perhaps peep out of it ; but such light be faint and instantly 
 merge . Chad be brown and thick and strong , and of old Chad have be 
 rough . be all the difference therefore that he be actually smooth ? 
 possibly ; for that he be smooth be as mark as in the taste of a 
 sauce or in the rub of a hand . the effect of it be general - it have 
 retouch his feature , draw they with a clean line . it have clear 
 his eye and settle his colour and polish his fine square tooth - the 
 main ornament of his face ; and at the same time that it have give he a 
 form and a surface , almost a design , it have tone his voice , 
 establish his accent , encourage his smile to more play and his other 
 motion to less . he have formerly , with a great deal of action , 
 express very little ; and he now express whatever be necessary with 
 almost none at all . it be as if in short he have really , copious 
 perhaps but shapeless , be put into a firm mould and turn 
 successfully out . the phenomenon - Strether keep eye it as a 
 phenomenon , an eminent case - be mark enough to be touch by the 
 finger . he finally put his hand across the table and lay it on Chad 's 
 arm . " if you will promise I - here on the spot and give I your word of 
 honour - to break straight off , you will make the future the real right 
 thing for all of we alike . you will ease off the strain of this decent 
 but none the less acute suspense in which I have   for so many day be 
 wait for you , and let I turn in to rest . I shall leave you with my 
 blessing and go to bed in peace . " 
 Chad again fall back at this and , his hand pocket , settle himself a 
 little ; in which posture he look , though he rather anxiously smile , 
 only the more earnest . then Strether seem to see that he be really 
 nervous , and he take that as what he would have call a wholesome 
 sign . the only mark of it hitherto have be his more than once take 
 off and put on his wide - brim crush hat . he have at this moment 
 make the motion again to remove it , then have only push it back , so 
 that it hang informally on his strong young grizzle crop . it be a 
 touch that give the note of the familiar - the intimate and the 
 belate - to their quiet colloquy ; and it be indeed by some such 
 trivial aid that Strether become aware at the same moment of something 
 else . the observation be at any rate determine in he by some light 
 too fine to distinguish from so many other , but it be none the less 
 sharply determine . Chad look unmistakeably during these 
 instant - well , as Strether put it to himself , all he be worth . our 
 friend have a sudden apprehension of what that would on certain side 
 be . he see he in a flash as the young man mark out by woman ; and for 
 a concentrated minute the dignity , the comparative austerity , as he 
 funnily fancy it , of this character affect he almost with awe . 
 there be an experience on his interlocutor 's part that look out at 
 he from under the displace hat , and that look out moreover by a 
 force of its own , the deep fact of its quantity and quality , and not 
 through Chad 's intend bravado or swagger . that be then the way man 
 mark out by woman be - and also the man by whom the woman be 
 doubtless in turn sufficiently distinguish . it affect Strether for 
 thirty second as a relevant truth , a truth which , however , the next 
 minute , have fall into its relation . " can not   you imagine there be 
 some question , " Chad ask , " that a fellow - however much impressed by 
 your charming way of state thing - would like to put to you first ? " 
 " oh yes - easily . I be here to answer everything . I think I can even 
 tell you thing , of the great interest to you , that you will not   know 
 enough to ask I . we will take as many day to it as you like . but I 
 want , " Strether wind up , " to go to bed now . " 
 " really ? " 
 Chad have speak in such surprise that he be amuse . " can not   you 
 believe it ? - with what you put I through ? " 
 the young man seem to consider . " oh I have not   put you through 
 much - yet . " 
 " do you mean there be so much more to come ? " Strether laugh . " all 
 the more reason then that I should gird myself . " and as if to mark 
 what he feel he could by this time count on he be already on his foot . 
 Chad , still seat , stay he , with a hand against he , as he pass 
 between their table and the next . " oh we shall get on ! " 
 the tone be , as who should say , everything Strether could have 
 desire ; and quite as good the expression of face with which the 
 speaker have look up at he and kindly hold he . all these thing 
 lack be their not show quite so much as the fruit of experience . 
 yes , experience be what Chad do play on he , if he do not   play any 
 grossness of defiance . of course experience be in a manner defiance ; 
 but it be not , at any rate - rather indeed quite the 
 contrary ! - grossness ; which be so much gain . he fairly grow old , 
 Strether think , while he himself so reason . then with his mature 
 pat of his visitor 's arm he also get up ; and there have be enough of 
 it all by this time to make the visitor feel that something be 
 settle . be not   it settle that he have at least the testimony of 
 Chad 's own belief in a settlement ? Strether find himself treat 
 Chad 's profession that they would get on as a sufficient basis for 
 go to bed . he have not   nevertheless after this go to bed directly ; 
 for when they have again pass out together into the mild bright night 
 a check have virtually spring from nothing more than a small 
 circumstance which might have act only as confirm quiescence . 
 there be people , expressive sound , project light , still abroad , and 
 after they have take in for a moment , through everything , the great 
 clear architectural street , they turn off in tacit union to the 
 quarter of Strether 's hotel . " of course , " Chad here abruptly begin , 
 " of course Mother 's make thing out with you about I have be 
 natural - and of course also you have   have a good deal to go upon . still , 
 you must have fill out . " 
 he have stop , leave his friend to wonder a little what point he 
 wish to make ; and this it be that enable Strether meanwhile to make 
 one . " oh we have   never pretend to go into detail . we be not   in the 
 least bind to that . it be ' fill out ' enough to miss you as we 
 do . " 
 but Chad rather oddly insist , though under the high lamp at their 
 corner , where they pause , he have at first look as if touch by 
 Strether 's allusion to the long sense , at home , of his absence . " what 
 I mean be you must have imagine . " 
 " imagine what ? " 
 " well - horror . " 
 it affect Strether : horror be so little - superficially at 
 least - in this robust and reasoning image . but he be none the less 
 there to be veracious . " yes , I dare say we have imagine horror . but 
 where be the harm if we have not   be wrong ? " 
 Chad raise his face to the lamp , and it be one of the moment at 
 which he have , in his extraordinary way , most his air of designedly 
 show himself . it be as if at these instant he just present 
 himself , his identity so round off , his palpable presence and his 
 massive young manhood , as such a link in the chain as might practically 
 amount to a kind of demonstration . it be as if - and how but 
 anomalously ? - he could not   after all help think sufficiently well of 
 these thing to let they go for what they be worth . what could there 
 be in this for Strether but the hint of some self - respect , some sense 
 of power , oddly pervert ; something latent and beyond access , ominous 
 and perhaps enviable ? the intimation have the next thing , in a flash , 
 take on a name - a name on which our friend seize as he ask himself 
 if he be not   perhaps really deal with an irreducible young Pagan . 
 this description - he quite jump at it - have a sound that gratify his 
 mental ear , so that of a sudden he have already adopt it . Pagan - yes , 
 that be , be not   it ? what Chad would logically be . it be what he 
 must be . it be what he be . the idea be a clue and , instead of 
 darken the prospect , project a certain clearness . Strether make 
 out in this quick ray that a Pagan be perhaps , at the pass they have 
 come to , the thing most want at Woollett . they would be able to do with 
 one - a good one ; he would find an opening - yes ; and Strether 's imagination 
 even now prefigure and accompany the first appearance there of the 
 rouse personage . he have only the slight discomfort of feeling , as the 
 young man turn away from the lamp , that his thought have in the 
 momentary silence possibly be guess . " well , I have   no doubt , " say 
 Chad , " you have   come near enough . the detail , as you say , do not   matter . 
 it have be generally the case that I have   let myself go . but I be come 
 round - I be not so bad now . " with which they walk on again to 
 Strether 's hotel . 
 " do you mean , " the latter ask as they approach the door , " that 
 there be not   any woman with you now ? " 
 " but pray what have that to do with it ? " 
 " why it be the whole question . " 
 " of my go home ? " Chad be clearly surprised . " oh not much ! do you 
 think that when I want to go any one will have any power - " 
 " to keep you " - Strether take he straight up - " from carry out your 
 wish ? well , our idea have be that somebody have hitherto - or a good 
 many person perhaps - keep you pretty well from ' wanting . ' that be 
 what - if you be in anybody 's hand - may again happen . you do not   answer 
 my question " - he keep it up ; " but if you be not   in anybody 's hand so 
 much the well . there be nothing then but what make for your going . " 
 Chad turn this over . " I do not   answer your question ? " he speak quite 
 without resent it . " well , such question have always a rather 
 exaggerated side . one do not   know quite what you mean by be in 
 woman 's ' hand . ' it be all so vague . one be when one be not . one be not 
 when one be . and then one can not   quite give people away . " he seem 
 kindly to explain . " I have   never get stick - so very hard ; and , as 
 against anything at any time really well , I do not   think I have   ever 
 be afraid . " there be something in it that hold Strether to wonder , 
 and this give he time to go on . he break out as with a more helpful 
 thought . " do not   you know how I like Paris itself ? " 
 the upshot be indeed to make our friend marvel . " oh if that be all 
 that be the matter with you - ! " it be he who almost show resentment . 
 Chad 's smile of a truth more than meet it . " but be not   that enough ? " 
 Strether hesitate , but it come out . " not enough for your mother ! " 
 speak , however , it sound a trifle odd - the effect of which be that 
 Chad break into a laugh . Strether , at this , succumb as well , though 
 with extreme brevity . " permit we to have still our theory . but if you 
 be so free and so strong you be inexcusable . I will write in the 
 morning , " he add with decision . " I will say I have   get you . " 
 this appear to open for Chad a new interest . " how often do you 
 write ? " 
 " oh perpetually . " 
 " and at great length ? " 
 Strether have become a little impatient . " I hope it be not find too 
 great . " 
 " oh I be sure not . and you hear as often ? " 
 again Strether pause . " as often as I deserve . " 
 " mother write , " say Chad , " a lovely letter . " 
 Strether , before the close porte - cochere , fix he a moment . " it be 
 more , my boy , than you do ! but our supposition do not   matter , " he 
 add , " if you be actually not entangle . " 
 Chad 's pride seem none the less a little touch . " I never be 
 that - let I insist . I always have my own way . " with which he pursue : 
 " and I have it at present . " 
 " then what be you here for ? what have keep you , " Strether ask , " if 
 you have be able to leave ? " 
 it make Chad , after a stare , throw himself back . " do you think one 's 
 keep only by woman ? " his surprise and his verbal emphasis ring out so 
 clear in the still street that Strether wince till he remember the 
 safety of their english speech . " be that , " the young man demand , 
 " what they think at Woollett ? " at the good faith in the question 
 Strether have change colour , feel that , as he would have say , he 
 have put his foot in it . he have appear stupidly to misrepresent what 
 they think at Woollett ; but before he have time to rectify Chad again 
 be upon he . " I must say then you show a low mind ! " 
 it so fall in , unhappily for Strether , with that reflexion of his own 
 prompt in he by the pleasant air of the Boulevard Malesherbes , that 
 its disconcert force be rather unfairly great . it be a dig that , 
 administer by himself - and administer even to poor Mrs. 
 newsome - be no more than salutary ; but administer by Chad - and quite 
 logically - it come nearer draw blood . they HADn't   a low mind - nor 
 any approach to one ; yet incontestably they have work , and with a 
 certain smugness , on a basis that might be turn against they . Chad 
 have at any rate pull his visitor up ; he have even pull up his 
 admirable mother ; he have absolutely , by a turn of the wrist and a jerk 
 of the far - flung noose , pull up , in a bunch , Woollett browse in its 
 pride . there be no doubt Woollett have insist on his coarseness ; and 
 what he at present stand there for in the sleep street be , by his 
 manner of strike the other note , to make of such insistence a 
 preoccupation compromise to the insister . it be exactly as if they 
 have impute to he a vulgarity that he have by a mere gesture cause to 
 fall from he . the devil of the case be that Strether feel it , by the 
 same stroke , as fall straight upon himself . he have be wonder a 
 minute ago if the boy be not   a Pagan , and he find himself wonder 
 now if he be not   by chance a gentleman . it do not   in the least , on 
 the spot , spring up helpfully for he that a person could not   at the 
 same time be both . there be nothing at this moment in the air to 
 challenge the combination ; there be everything to give it on the 
 contrary something of a flourish . it strike Strether into the bargain 
 as do something to meet the most difficult of the question ; though 
 perhaps indeed only by substitute another . would not   it be precisely 
 by have learn to be a gentleman that he have master the consequent 
 trick of look so well that one could scarce speak to he straight ? 
 but what in the world be the clue to such a prime produce cause ? 
 there be too many clue then that Strether still lack , and these 
 clue to clue be among they . what it accordingly amount to for he 
 be that he have to take full in the face a fresh attribution of 
 ignorance . he have grow use by this time to reminder , especially 
 from his own lip , of what he do not   know ; but he have bear they 
 because in the first place they be private and because in the second 
 they practically convey a tribute . he do not   know what be bad , 
 and - as other do not   know how little he know it - he could put up with 
 his state . but if he do not   know , in so important a particular , what 
 be good , Chad at least be now aware he do not ; and that , for some 
 reason , affect our friend as curiously public . it be in fact an 
 expose condition that the young man leave he in long enough for he to 
 feel its chill - till he see fit , in a word , generously again to cover 
 he . this last be in truth what Chad quite gracefully do . but he 
 do it as with a simple thought that meet the whole of the case . " oh 
 I be all right ! " it be what Strether have rather bewilderedly to go to 
 bed on . 
 II 
 it really look true moreover from the way Chad be to behave after 
 this . he be full of attention to his mother 's ambassador ; in spite 
 of which , all the while , the latter 's other relation rather remarkably 
 contrive to assert themselves . Strether 's sitting pen in hand with 
 Mrs. Newsome up in his own room be break , yet they be rich ; and 
 they be more than ever intersperse with the hour in which he 
 report himself , in a different fashion , but with scarce less 
 earnestness and fulness , to Maria Gostrey . now that , as he would have 
 express it , he have really something to talk about he find himself , 
 in respect to any oddity that might reside for he in the double 
 connexion , at once more aware and more indifferent . he have be fine 
 to Mrs. Newsome about his useful friend , but it have begin to haunt his 
 imagination that Chad , take up again for her benefit a pen too long 
 disuse , might possibly be finer . it would not   at all do , he see , that 
 anything should come up for he at Chad 's hand but what specifically 
 be to have come ; the great divergence from which would be precisely 
 the element of any lubrication of their intercourse by levity it be 
 accordingly to forestall such an accident that he frankly put before 
 the young man the several fact , just as they have occur , of his 
 funny alliance . he speak of these fact , pleasantly and obligingly , as 
 " the whole story , " and feel that he might qualify the alliance as funny 
 if he remain sufficiently grave about it . he flatter himself that 
 he even exaggerate the wild freedom of his original encounter with the 
 wonderful lady ; he be scrupulously definite about the absurd 
 condition in which they have make acquaintance - their have pick 
 each other up almost in the street ; and he have   fine inspiration of 
 all !   a conception of carry the war into the enemy 's country by 
 show surprise at the enemy 's ignorance . 
 he have always have a notion that this last be the grand style of 
 fighting ; the great therefore the reason for it , as he could not 
 remember that he have ever before fight in the grand style . every one , 
 accord to this , know Miss Gostrey : how come it Chad do not   know 
 she ? the difficulty , the impossibility , be really to escape it ; 
 Strether put on he , by what he take for grant , the burden of proof 
 of the contrary . this tone be so far successful as that Chad quite 
 appear to recognise she as a person whose fame have reach he , but 
 against his acquaintance with whom much mischance have work . he make 
 the point at the same time that his social relation , such as they 
 could be call , be perhaps not to the extent Strether suppose with 
 the rise flood of their compatriot . he hint at his have more 
 and more give way to a different principle of selection ; the moral of 
 which seem to be that he go about little in the " colony . " for the 
 moment certainly he have quite another interest . it be deep , what he 
 understand , and Strether , for himself , could only so observe it . he 
 could not   see as yet how deep . might he not all too soon ! for there be 
 really too much of their question that Chad have already commit 
 himself to like . he like , to begin with , his prospective 
 stepfather ; which be distinctly what have not be on the card . his 
 hat he be the untowardness for which Strether have be well 
 prepare ; he have not   expect the boy 's actual form to give he more to 
 do than his impute . it give he more through suggest that he must 
 somehow make up to himself for not be sure he be sufficiently 
 disagreeable . that have really be present to he as his only way to 
 be sure he be sufficiently thorough . the point be that if Chad 's 
 tolerance of his thoroughness be insincere , be but the good of 
 device for gain time , it none the less do treat everything as 
 tacitly conclude . 
 that seem at the end of ten day the upshot of the abundant , the 
 recurrent talk through which Strether pour into he all it concern 
 he to know , put he in full possession of fact and figure . never 
 cut these colloquy short by a minute , Chad behave , look and 
 speak as if he be rather heavily , perhaps even a trifle gloomily , but 
 none the less fundamentally and comfortably free . he make no crude 
 profession of eagerness to yield , but he ask the most intelligent 
 question , probe , at moment , abruptly , even deep than his friend 's 
 layer of information , justify by these touch the native estimate of 
 his latent stuff , and have in every way the air of try to live , 
 reflectively , into the square bright picture . he walk up and down in 
 front of this production , sociably take Strether 's arm at the point at 
 which he stop , survey it repeatedly from the right and from the 
 left , incline a critical head to either quarter , and , while he puff 
 a still more critical cigarette , animadvert to his companion on this 
 passage and that . Strether seek relief - there be hour when he 
 require it - in repeat himself ; it be in truth not to be blink 
 that Chad have a way . the main question as yet be of what it be a way 
 to . it make vulgar question no more easy ; but that be unimportant 
 when all question save those of his own asking have drop . that he 
 be free be answer enough , and it be not   quite ridiculous that this 
 freedom should end by present itself as what be difficult to move . 
 his changed state , his lovely home , his beautiful thing , his easy 
 talk , his very appetite for Strether , insatiable and , when all be 
 say , flattering - what be such marked matter all but the note of 
 his freedom ? he have the effect of make a sacrifice of it just in 
 these handsome form to his visitor ; which be mainly the reason the 
 visitor be privately , for the time , a little out of countenance . 
 Strether be at this period again and again throw back on a feel need 
 to remodel somehow his plan . he fairly catch himself shoot rueful 
 glance , shy look of pursuit , toward the embody influence , the 
 definite adversary , who have by a stroke of her own fail he and on a 
 fond theory of whose palpable presence he have , under Mrs. Newsome 's 
 inspiration , altogether proceed . he have once or twice , in secret , 
 literally express the irritated wish that she would come out and find 
 she . 
 he could not   quite yet force it upon Woollett that such a career , such a 
 perverted young life , show after all a certain plausible side , do in 
 the case before they flaunt something like an impunity for the social 
 man ; but he could at least treat himself to the statement that would 
 prepare he for the sharp echo . this echo - as distinct over there in 
 the dry thin air as some shrill " head " above a column of 
 print - seem to reach he even as he write . " he say there be no 
 woman , " he could hear Mrs. Newsome report , in capital almost of 
 newspaper size , to Mrs. Pocock ; and he could focus in Mrs. Pocock the 
 response of the reader of the journal . he could see in the young 
 lady 's face the earnestness of her attention and catch the full 
 scepticism of she but slightly delay " what be there then ? " just so 
 he could again as little miss the mother 's clear decision : " there be 
 plenty of disposition , no doubt , to pretend there be not . " Strether 
 have , after post his letter , the whole scene out ; and it be a scene 
 during which , come and go , as befell , he keep his eye not least 
 upon the daughter . he have his fine sense of the conviction Mrs. Pocock 
 would take occasion to reaffirm - a conviction bearing , as he have from 
 the first deeply divine it to bear , on Mr. Strether 's essential 
 inaptitude . she have look he in his conscious eye even before he 
 sail , and that she do not   believe he would find the woman have be 
 write in her book . had not   she at the good but a scant faith in 
 his ability to find woman ? it be not   even as if he have find she 
 mother - so much more , to her discrimination , have her mother perform 
 the finding . her mother have , in a case her private judgement of which 
 remain educative of Mrs. Pocock 's critical sense , find the man . the 
 man owe his unchallenged state , in general , to the fact that Mrs. 
 Newsome 's discovery be accept at Woollett ; but he know in his 
 bone , our friend do , how almost irresistibly Mrs. Pocock would now be 
 move to show what she think of his own . give she a free hand , would 
 be the moral , and the woman would soon be find . 
 his impression of Miss Gostrey after her introduction to Chad be 
 meanwhile an impression of a person almost unnaturally on her guard . he 
 strike himself as at first unable to extract from she what he wish ; 
 though indeed of what he wish at this special juncture he would 
 doubtless have contrive to make but a crude statement . it sift and 
 settle nothing to put to she , tout betement , as she often say , " do 
 you like he , eh ? " - thank to his feeling it actually the least of his 
 need to heap up the evidence in the young man 's favour . he repeatedly 
 knock at her door to let she have it afresh that Chad 's 
 case - whatever else of minor interest it might yield - be first and 
 foremost a miracle almost monstrous . it be the alteration of the 
 entire man , and be so signal an instance that nothing else , for the 
 intelligent observer , could - could it ? - signify . " it be a plot , " he 
 declare - " there be more in it than meet the eye . " he give the rein to 
 his fancy . " it be a plant ! " 
 his fancy seem to please she . " whose then ? " 
 " well , the party responsible be , I suppose , the fate that wait for 
 one , the dark doom that rid . what I mean be that with such element 
 one can not   count . I have   but my poor individual , my modest human mean . 
 it be not   play the game to turn on the uncanny . all one 's energy 
 go to face it , to track it . one want , confound it , do not   you 
 see ? " he confess with a queer face - " one want to enjoy anything so 
 rare . call it then life " - he puzzle it out - " call it poor dear old 
 life simply that spring the surprise . nothing alter the fact that the 
 surprise be paralyse , or at any rate engross - all , practically , 
 hang it , that one see , that one can see . " 
 her silence be never barren , nor even dull . " be that what you have 
 write home ? " 
 he toss it off . " oh dear , yes ! " 
 she have another pause while , across her carpet , he have another walk . 
 " if you do not   look out you will have they straight over . " 
 " oh but I have   say he will go back . " 
 " and will he ? " Miss Gostrey ask . 
 the special tone of it make he , pull up , look at her long . " what be 
 that but just the question I have   spend treasure of patience and 
 ingenuity in give you , by the sight of he - after everything have lead 
 up - every facility to answer ? what be it but just the thing I come 
 here to - day to get out of you ? will he ? " 
 " no - he will not , " she say at last . " he be not free . " 
 the air of it hold he . " then you have   all the while know - ? " 
 " I have   know nothing but what I have   see ; and I wonder , " she declare 
 with some impatience , " that you do not   see as much . it be enough to be 
 with he there - " 
 " in the box ? yes , " he rather blankly urge . 
 " well - to feel sure . " 
 " sure of what ? " 
 she get up from her chair , at this , with a near approach than she have 
 ever yet show to dismay at his dimness . she even , fairly pause for 
 it , speak with a shade of pity . " guess ! " 
 it be a shade , fairly , that bring a flush into his face ; so that for 
 a moment , as they wait together , their difference be between they . 
 " you mean that just your hour with he tell you so much of his story ? 
 very good ; I be not such a fool , on my side , as that I do not   understand 
 you , or as that I do not   in some degree understand HIM . that he have 
 do what he like most be not , among any of we , a matter the least in 
 dispute . there be equally little question at this time of day of what 
 it be he do like most . but I be not talk , " he reasonably 
 explain , " of any mere wretch he may still pick up . I be talk of 
 some person who in his present situation may have hold her own , may 
 really have count . " 
 " that be exactly what I be ! " say Miss Gostrey . but she as quickly make 
 her point . " I think you think - or that they think at 
 Woollett - that that be what mere wretch necessarily do . mere wretch 
 necessarily don't ! " she declare with spirit . " there must , behind 
 every appearance to the contrary , still be somebody - somebody who be not 
 a mere wretch , since we accept the miracle . what else but such a 
 somebody can such a miracle be ? " 
 he take it in . " because the fact itself be the woman ? " 
 " a woman . some woman or other . it be one of the thing that have to 
 be . " 
 " but you mean then at least a good one . " 
 " a good woman ? " she throw up her arm with a laugh . " I should call 
 her excellent ! " 
 " then why do he deny she ? " 
 Miss Gostrey think a moment . " because she be too good to admit ! do not 
 you see , " she go on , " how she account for he ? " 
 Strether clearly , more and more , do see ; yet it make he also see 
 other thing . " but be not   what we want that he shall account for she ? " 
 " well , he do . what you have before you be his way . you must forgive 
 he if it be not   quite outspoken . in Paris such debt be tacit . " 
 Strether could imagine ; but still - ! " even when the woman 's good ? " 
 again she laugh out . " yes , and even when the man be ! there be always 
 a caution in such case , " she more seriously explain - " for what it 
 may seem to show . there be nothing that be take as show so much here 
 as sudden unnatural goodness . " 
 " ah then you be speak now , " Strether say , " of people who be not 
 nice . " 
 " I delight , " she reply , " in your classification . but do you want 
 I , " she ask , " to give you in the matter , on this ground , the wise 
 advice I be capable of ? do not   consider she , do not   judge she at all in 
 herself . consider she and judge she only in Chad . " 
 he have the courage at least of his companion 's logic . " because then I 
 shall like she ? " he almost look , with his quick imagination as if he 
 already do , though see at once also the full extent of how little 
 it would suit his book . " but be that what I come out for ? " 
 she have to confess indeed that it be not . but there be something 
 else . " do not   make up your mind . there be all sort of thing . you 
 have not   see he all . " 
 this on his side Strether recognise ; but his acuteness none the less 
 show he the danger . " yes , but if the more I see the well he 
 seem ? " 
 well , she find something . " that may be - but his disavowal of she 
 be not , all the same , pure consideration . there be a hitch . " she make 
 it out . " it be the effort to sink she . " 
 Strether wince at the image . " to ' sink ' - ? " 
 " well , I mean there be a struggle , and a part of it be just what he 
 hide . take time - that be the only way not to make some mistake that 
 you will regret . then you will see . he do really want to shake she off . " 
 our friend have by this time so get into the vision that he almost 
 gasp . " after all she have do for he ? " 
 Miss Gostrey give he a look which break the next moment into a 
 wonderful smile . " he be not so good as you think ! " 
 they remain with he , these word , promise he , in their character 
 of warning , considerable help ; but the support he try to draw from 
 they find itself on each renewal of contact with Chad defeat by 
 something else . what could it be , this disconcert force , he ask 
 himself , but the sense , constantly renew , that Chad WAS - quite in 
 fact insist on be - as good as he think ? it seem somehow as if 
 he could not   but be as good from the moment he be not   as bad . there be 
 a succession of day at all event when contact with he - and in its 
 immediate effect , as if it could produce no other - elbow out of 
 Strether 's consciousness everything but itself . little Bilham once 
 more pervade the scene , but little Bilham become even in a high 
 degree than he have originally be one of the numerous form of the 
 inclusive relation ; a consequence promote , to our friend 's sense , by 
 two or three incident with which we have yet to make acquaintance . 
 waymarsh himself , for the occasion , be draw into the eddy ; it 
 absolutely , though but temporarily , swallow he down , and there be 
 day when Strether seem to bump against he as a sink swimmer 
 might brush a submarine object . the fathomless medium hold 
 they - Chad 's manner be the fathomless medium ; and our friend feel as 
 if they pass each other , in their deep immersion , with the round 
 impersonal eye of silent fish . it be practically produce between 
 they that Waymarsh be give he then his chance ; and the shade of 
 discomfort that Strether draw from the allowance resemble not a little 
 the embarrassment he have know at school , as a boy , when member of his 
 family have be present at exhibition . he could perform before 
 stranger , but relative be fatal , and it be now as if , 
 comparatively , Waymarsh be a relative . he seem to hear he say 
 " strike up then ! " and to enjoy a foretaste of conscientious domestic 
 criticism . he have strike up , so far as he actually could ; Chad know by 
 this time in profusion what he want ; and what vulgar violence do his 
 fellow pilgrim expect of he when he have really empty his mind ? it 
 go somehow to and fro that what poor Waymarsh mean be " I tell you 
 so - that you would lose your immortal soul ! " but it be also fairly 
 explicit that Strether have his own challenge and that , since they must 
 go to the bottom of thing , he waste no more virtue in watch Chad 
 than Chad waste in watch he . his dip for duty 's sake - where be 
 it bad than Waymarsh 's own ? for he need not   have stop resist 
 and refuse , need not   have parley , at that rate , with the foe . 
 the stroll over Paris to see something or call somewhere be 
 accordingly inevitable and natural , and the late session in the 
 wondrous troisieme , the lovely home , when man drop in and the 
 picture compose more suggestively through the haze of tobacco , of 
 music more or less good and of talk more or less polyglot , be on a 
 principle not to be distinguish from that of the morning and the 
 afternoon . nothing , Strether have to recognise as he lean back and 
 smoke , could well less resemble a scene of violence than even the 
 lively of these occasion . they be occasion of discussion , none 
 the less , and Strether have never in his life hear so many opinion on 
 so many subject . there be opinion at Woollett , but only on three 
 or four . the difference be there to match ; if they be doubtless 
 deep , though few , they be quiet - they be , as might be say , almost 
 as shy as if people have be ashamed of they . People show little 
 diffidence about such thing , on the other hand , in the Boulevard 
 Malesherbes , and be so far from be ashamed of they - or indeed of 
 anything else - that they often seem to have invent they to avert 
 those agreement that destroy the taste of talk . no one have ever do 
 that at Woollett , though Strether could remember time when he himself 
 have be tempt to it without quite know why . he see why at 
 present - he have but want to promote intercourse . 
 these , however , be but parenthetic memory , and the turn take by 
 his affair on the whole be positively that if his nerve be on the 
 stretch it be because he miss violence . when he ask himself if 
 none would then , in connexion with it , ever come at all , he might 
 almost have pass as wonder how to provoke it . it would be too 
 absurd if such a vision as that should have to be invoke for relief ; 
 it be already mark enough as absurd that he should actually have 
 begin with flutter and dignity on the score of a single accept 
 meal . what sort of a brute have he expect Chad to be , 
 anyway ? - Strether have occasion to make the enquiry but be careful to 
 make it in private . he could himself , comparatively recent as it 
 be - it be truly but the fact of a few day since - focus his primal 
 crudity ; but he would on the approach of an observer , as if handle an 
 illicit possession , have slip the reminiscence out of sight . there 
 be echo of it still in Mrs. Newsome 's letter , and there be 
 moment when these echo make he exclaim on her want of tact . he 
 blush of course , at once , still more for the explanation than for the 
 ground of it : it come to he in time to save his manner that she 
 could not   at the good become tactful as quickly as he . her tact have to 
 reckon with the Atlantic Ocean , the General Post - Office and the 
 extravagant curve of the globe . Chad have one day offer tea at the 
 Boulevard Malesherbes to a choose few , a group again include the 
 unobscure Miss Barrace ; and Strether have on come out walk away 
 with the acquaintance whom in his letter to Mrs. Newsome he always 
 speak of as the little artist - man . he have have full occasion to mention 
 he as the other party , so oddly , to the only close personal alliance 
 observation have as yet detect in Chad 's existence . little Bilham 's 
 way this afternoon be not Strether 's , but he have none the less kindly 
 come with he , and it be somehow a part of his kindness that as it have 
 sadly begin to rain they suddenly find themselves seat for 
 conversation at a cafe in which they have take refuge . he have pass 
 no more crowded hour in Chad 's society than the one just end ; he have 
 talk with Miss Barrace , who have reproach he with not have come 
 to see she , and he have above all hit on a happy thought for cause 
 Waymarsh 's tension to relax . something might possibly be extract for 
 the latter from the idea of his success with that lady , whose quick 
 apprehension of what might amuse she have give Strether a free hand . 
 what have she mean if not to ask whether she could not   help he with his 
 splendid encumbrance , and might not   the sacred rage at any rate be keep 
 a little in abeyance by thus create for his comrade 's mind even in a 
 world of irrelevance the possibility of a relation ? what be it but a 
 relation to be regard as so decorative and , in especial , on the 
 strength of it , to be whirl away , amid flounce and feather , in a 
 coupe line , by what Strether could make out , with dark blue brocade ? 
 he himself have never be whirl away - never at least in a coupe and 
 behind a footman ; he have drive with Miss Gostrey in cab , with Mrs. 
 Pocock , a few time , in an open buggy , with Mrs. Newsome in a 
 four - seat cart and , occasionally up at the mountain , on a buckboard ; 
 but his friend 's actual adventure transcend his personal experience . 
 he now show his companion soon enough indeed how inadequate , as a 
 general monitor , this last queer quantity could once more feel itself . 
 " what game under the sun be he play ? " he signify the next moment 
 that his allusion be not to the fat gentleman immerse in domino on 
 whom his eye have begin by rest , but to their host of the previous 
 hour , as to whom , there on the velvet bench , with a final collapse of 
 all consistency , he treat himself to the comfort of indiscretion . 
 " where do you see he come out ? " 
 Little Bilham , in meditation , look at he with a kindness almost 
 paternal . " do not   you like it over here ? " 
 Strether laugh out - for the tone be indeed droll ; he let himself go . 
 " what have that to do with it ? the only thing I have   any business to like 
 be to feel that I be move he . that be why I ask you whether you 
 believe I be ? be the creature " - and he do his good to show that he 
 simply wish to ascertain - " honest ? " 
 his companion look responsible , but look it through a small dim 
 smile . " what creature do you mean ? " 
 it be on this that they do have for a little a mute interchange . " be 
 it untrue that he be free ? how then , " Strether ask wonder " do he 
 arrange his life ? " 
 " be the creature you mean Chad himself ? " little Bilham say . 
 Strether here , with a rise hope , just think , " we must take one of 
 they at a time . " but his coherence lapse . " be there some woman ? of 
 whom he be really afraid of course I mean - or who do with he what she 
 like . " 
 " it be awfully charming of you , " Bilham presently remark , " not to have 
 ask I that before . " 
 " oh I be not fit for my job ! " 
 the exclamation have escape our friend , but it make little Bilham more 
 deliberate . " Chad 's a rare case ! " he luminously observe . " he be 
 awfully change , " he add . 
 " then you see it too ? " 
 " the way he have improve ? oh yes - I think every one must see it . but 
 I be not sure , " say little Bilham , " that I do not   like he about as 
 well in his other state . " 
 " then this be really a new state altogether ? " 
 " well , " the young man after a moment return , " I be not sure he be 
 really mean by nature to be quite so good . it be like the new edition 
 of an old book that one have be fond of - revise and amend , bring 
 up to date , but not quite the thing one know and love . however that 
 may be at all event , " he pursue , " I do not   think , you know , that he be 
 really play , as you call it , any game . I believe he really want to 
 go back and take up a career . he be capable of one , you know , that will 
 improve and enlarge he still more . he will not   then , " little Bilham 
 continue to remark , " be my pleasant well - rub old - fashioned volume 
 at all . but of course I be beastly immoral . I be afraid it would be a 
 funny world altogether - a world with thing the way I like they . I 
 ought , I dare say , to go home and go into business myself . only I would 
 simply rather die - simply . and I have   not the least difficulty in make 
 up my mind not to , and in know exactly why , and in defend my 
 ground against all comer . all the same , " he wind up , " I assure you I 
 do not   say a word against it - for himself , I mean - to Chad . I seem to 
 see it as much the good thing for he . you see he be not happy . " 
 " do I ? " - Strether star . " I have   be suppose I see just the 
 opposite - an extraordinary case of the equilibrium arrive at and 
 assure . " 
 " oh there be a lot behind it . " 
 " ah there you be ! " Strether exclaim . " that be just what I want to 
 get at . you speak of your familiar volume alter out of recognition . 
 well , who be the editor ? " 
 little Bilham look before he a minute in silence . " he ought to get 
 married . that would do it . and he want to . " 
 " want to marry she ? " 
 again little Bilham wait , and , with a sense that he have information , 
 Strether scarce know what be come . " he want to be free . he be not 
 use , you see , " the young man explain in his lucid way , " to be so 
 good . " 
 Strether hesitate . " then I may take it from you that he be good ? " 
 his companion match his pause , but make it up with a quiet fulness . 
 " do take it from I . " 
 " well then why be not   he free ? he swear to I he be , but meanwhile 
 do nothing - except of course that he be so kind to I - to prove it ; 
 and could not   really act much otherwise if he be not . my question to 
 you just now be exactly on this queer impression of his diplomacy : as 
 if instead of really give ground his line be to keep I on here and 
 set I a bad example . " 
 as the half - hour meanwhile have ebb Strether pay his score , and the 
 waiter be presently in the act of count out change . our friend 
 push back to he a fraction of it , with which , after an emphatic 
 recognition , the personage in question retreat . " you give too much , " 
 little Bilham permit himself benevolently to observe . 
 " oh I always give too much ! " Strether helplessly sigh . " but you 
 do not , " he go on as if to get quickly away from the contemplation of 
 that doom , " answer my question . why be not   he free ? " 
 little Bilham have get up as if the transaction with the waiter have be 
 a signal , and have already edge out between the table and the divan . 
 the effect of this be that a minute later they have quit the place , 
 the gratified waiter alert again at the open door . Strether have find 
 himself defer to his companion 's abruptness as to a hint that he 
 should be answer as soon as they be more isolated . this happen 
 when after a few step in the outer air they have turn the next comer . 
 there our friend have keep it up . " why be not   he free if he be good ? " 
 little Bilham look he full in the face . " because it be a virtuous 
 attachment . " 
 this have settle the question so effectually for the time - that be for 
 the next few day - that it have give Strether almost a new lease of 
 life . it must be add however that , thank to his constant habit of 
 shake the bottle in which life hand he the wine of experience , he 
 presently find the taste of the lee rise as usual into his draught . 
 his imagination have in other word already deal with his young 
 friend 's assertion ; of which it have make something that sufficiently 
 come out on the very next occasion of his see Maria Gostrey . this 
 occasion moreover have be determine promptly by a new circumstance - a 
 circumstance he be the last man to leave she for a day in ignorance 
 of . " when I say to he last night , " he immediately begin , " that 
 without some definite word from he now that will enable I to speak to 
 they over there of our sailing - or at least of mine , give they some 
 sort of date - my responsibility become uncomfortable and my situation 
 awkward ; when I say that to he what do you think be his reply ? " and 
 then as she this time give it up : " why that he have two particular 
 friend , two lady , mother and daughter , about to arrive in 
 Paris - come back from an absence ; and that he want I so furiously 
 to meet they , know they and like they , that I shall oblige he by 
 kindly not bring our business to a crisis till he have have a chance 
 to see they again himself . be that , " Strether enquire , " the way he be 
 go to try to get off ? these be the people , " he explain , " that he 
 must have go down to see before I arrive . they be the good friend 
 he have in the world , and they take more interest than any one else in 
 what concern he . as I be his next good he see a thousand reason why 
 we should comfortably meet . he have not   broach the question soon 
 because their return be uncertain - seem in fact for the present 
 impossible . but he more than intimate that - if you can believe 
 it - their desire to make my acquaintance have have to do with their 
 surmount difficulty . " 
 " they be die to see you ? " Miss Gostrey ask . 
 " die . of course , " say Strether , " they be the virtuous attachment . " 
 he have already tell she about that - have see she the day after his talk 
 with little Bilham ; and they have then thresh out together the bearing 
 of the revelation . she have help he to put into it the logic in 
 which little Bilham have leave it slightly deficient Strether have not 
 press he as to the object of the preference so unexpectedly 
 describe ; feel in the presence of it , with one of his irrepressible 
 scruple , a delicacy from which he have in the quest of the quite other 
 article work himself sufficiently free . he have hold off , as on a 
 small principle of pride , from permit his young friend to mention a 
 name ; wish to make with this the great point that Chad 's virtuous 
 attachment be none of his business . he have want from the first 
 not to think too much of his dignity , but that be no reason for not 
 allow it any little benefit that might turn up . he have often enough 
 wonder to what degree his interference might pass for interested ; so 
 that there be no want of luxury in let it be see whenever he 
 could that he do not   interfere . that have of course at the same time 
 not deprive he of the further luxury of much private astonishment ; 
 which however he have reduce to some order before communicate his 
 knowledge . when he have do this at last it be with the remark that , 
 surprised as Miss Gostrey might , like himself , at first be , she would 
 probably agree with he on reflexion that such an account of the matter 
 do after all fit the confirm appearance . nothing certainly , on all 
 the indication , could have be a great change for he than a 
 virtuous attachment , and since they have be in search of the " word " as 
 the French call it , of that change , little Bilham 's 
 announcement - though so long and so oddly delay - would serve as well 
 as another . she have assure Strether in fact after a pause that the 
 more she think of it the more it do serve ; and yet her assurance 
 have not   so weigh with he as that before they part he have not 
 venture to challenge her sincerity . do not   she believe the attachment 
 be virtuous ? - he have make sure of she again with the aid of that 
 question . the tiding he bring she on this second occasion be 
 moreover such as would help he to make surer still . 
 she show at first none the less as only amused . " you say there be 
 two ? an attachment to they both then would , I suppose , almost 
 necessarily be innocent . " 
 our friend take the point , but he have his clue . " may not   he be still in 
 the stage of not quite know which of they , mother or daughter , he 
 like well ? " 
 she give it more think . " oh it must be the daughter - at his age . " 
 " possibly . yet what do we know , " Strether ask , " about her ? she may 
 be old enough . " 
 " old enough for what ? " 
 " why to marry Chad . that may be , you know , what they want . and if 
 Chad want it too , and little Bilham want it , and even we , at a pinch , 
 could do with it - that be if she do not   prevent repatriation - why it 
 may be plain sailing yet . " 
 it be always the case for he in these counsel that each of his 
 remark , as it come , seem to drop into a deep well . he have at all 
 event to wait a moment to hear the slight splash of this one . " I do not 
 see why if Mr. Newsome want to marry the young lady he have not   already 
 do it or have not   be prepare with some statement to you about it . 
 and if he both want to marry she and be on good term with they why 
 be not   he ' free ' ? " 
 Strether , responsively , wonder indeed . " perhaps the girl herself 
 do not   like he . " 
 " then why do he speak of they to you as he do ? " 
 Strether 's mind echo the question , but also again meet it . " perhaps 
 it be with the mother he be on good term . " 
 " as against the daughter ? " 
 " well , if she be try to persuade the daughter to consent to he , what 
 could make he like the mother more ? only , " Strether throw out , " why 
 should not   the daughter consent to he ? " 
 " oh , " say Miss Gostrey , " may not   it be that every one else be not   quite 
 so strike with he as you ? " 
 " do not   regard he you mean as such an ' eligible ' young man ? be that 
 what I have   come to ? " he audibly and rather gravely seek to know . 
 " however , " he go on , " his marriage be what his mother most 
 desire - that be if it will help . and ought not   any marriage to help ? 
 they must want he " - he have already work it out - " to be well off . 
 almost any girl he may marry will have a direct interest in his taking 
 up his chance . it will not   suit she at least that he shall miss they . " 
 Miss Gostrey cast about . " no - you reason well ! but of course on the 
 other hand there be always dear old Woollett itself . " 
 " oh yes , " he muse - " there be always dear old Woollett itself . " 
 she wait a moment . " the young lady may not   find herself able to 
 swallow that quantity . she may think it be pay too much ; she may 
 weigh one thing against another . " 
 Strether , ever restless in such debate , take a vague turn " it will all 
 depend on who she be . that of course - the prove ability to deal with 
 dear old Woollett , since I be sure she do deal with it - be what make 
 so strongly for Mamie . " 
 " Mamie ? " 
 he stop short , at her tone , before she ; then , though see that it 
 represent not vagueness , but a momentary embarrassed fulness , let his 
 exclamation come . " you surely have not   forget about Mamie ! " 
 " no , I have not   forget about Mamie , " she smile . " there be no doubt 
 whatever that there be ever so much to be say for she . Mamie 's MY 
 girl ! " she roundly declare . 
 Strether resume for a minute his walk . " she be really perfectly 
 lovely , you know . far pretty than any girl I have   see over here yet . " 
 " that be precisely on what I perhaps most build . " and she muse a 
 moment in her friend 's way . " I should positively like to take she in 
 hand ! " 
 he humour the fancy , though indeed finally to deprecate it . " oh but 
 do not , in your zeal , go over to she ! I need you most and can not , you 
 know , be leave . " 
 but she keep it up . " I wish they would send she out to I ! " 
 " if they know you , " he return , " they would . " 
 " ah but do not   they ? - after all that , as I have   understand you you have   tell 
 they about I ? " 
 he have pause before she again , but he continue his course " they 
 will - before , as you say , I have   do . " then he come out with the point 
 he have wish after all most to make . " it seem to give away now his 
 game . this be what he have be do - keep I along for . he have 
 be wait for they . " 
 Miss Gostrey draw in her lip . " you see a good deal in it ! " 
 " I doubt if I see as much as you . do you pretend , " he go on , " that 
 you do not   see - ? " 
 " well , what ? " - she press he as he pause . 
 " why that there must be a lot between they - and that it have be go 
 on from the first ; even from before I come . " 
 she take a minute to answer . " who be they then - if it be so grave ? " 
 " it may not   be grave - it may be gay . but at any rate it be mark . only 
 I do not   know , " Strether have to confess , " anything about they . their 
 name for instance be a thing that , after little Bilham 's information , 
 I find it a kind of refreshment not to feel obliged to follow up . " 
 " oh , " she return , " if you think you have   get off - ! " 
 her laugh produce in he a momentary gloom . " I do not   think I have   get 
 off . I only think I be breathe for about five minute . I dare say I 
 shall have , at the good , still to get on . " a look , over it all , pass 
 between they , and the next minute he have come back to good humour . " I 
 do not   meanwhile take the small interest in their name . " 
 " nor in their nationality ? - American , French , English , Polish ? " 
 " I do not   care the least little ' hang , ' " he smile , " for their 
 nationality . it would be nice if they be polish ! " he almost 
 immediately add . 
 " very nice indeed . " the transition keep up her spirit . " so you see 
 you do care . " 
 he do this contention a modify justice . " I think I should if they 
 be Polish . yes , " he think - " there might be joy in that . " 
 " let we then hope for it . " but she come after this near to the 
 question . " if the girl 's of the right age of course the mother can not 
 be . I mean for the virtuous attachment . if the girl 's twenty - and she 
 can not   be less - the mother must be at least forty . so it put the mother 
 out . SHE be too old for he . " 
 Strether , arrest again , consider and demur . " do you think so ? 
 do you think any one would be too old for he ? I'M eighty , and I be too 
 young . but perhaps the girl , " he continue , " isn't   twenty . perhaps 
 she be only ten - but such a little dear that Chad find himself count 
 she in as an attraction of the acquaintance . perhaps she be only five . 
 perhaps the mother 's but five - and - twenty - a charming young widow . " 
 Miss Gostrey entertain the suggestion . " she be a widow then ? " 
 " I have not   the least idea ! " they once more , in spite of this 
 vagueness , exchange a look - a look that be perhaps the long yet . 
 it seem in fact , the next thing , to require to explain itself ; which 
 it do as it could . " I only feel what I have   tell you - that he have some 
 reason . " 
 Miss Gostrey 's imagination have take its own flight . " perhaps she be 
 not a widow . " 
 Strether seem to accept the possibility with reserve . still he 
 accept it . " then that be why the attachment - if it be to she - be 
 virtuous . " 
 but she look as if she scarce follow . " why be it virtuous 
 if - since she be free - there be nothing to impose on it any condition ? " 
 he laugh at her question . " oh I perhaps do not   mean as virtuous as 
 that ! your idea be that it can be virtuous - in any sense worthy of the 
 name - only if she be not free ? but what do it become then , " he ask , 
 " for she ? " 
 " ah that be another matter . " he say nothing for a moment , and she soon 
 go on . " I dare say you be right , at any rate , about Mr. Newsome 's 
 little plan . he have be try you - have be report on you to 
 these friend . " 
 Strether meanwhile have have time to think more . " then where be his 
 straightness ? " 
 " well , as we say , it be struggle up , break out , assert itself as 
 it can . we can be on the side , you see , of his straightness . we can 
 help he . but he have make out , " say Miss Gostrey , " that you will do . " 
 " do for what ? " 
 " why , for THEM - for ce dame . he have watch you , study you , like 
 you - and recognise that they must . it be a great compliment to you , my 
 dear man ; for I be sure they be particular . you come out for a success . 
 well , " she gaily declare , " you be have it ! " 
 he take it from she with momentary patience and then turn abruptly 
 away . it be always convenient to he that there be so many fine 
 thing in her room to look at . but the examination of two or three of 
 they appear soon to have determine a speech that have little to do 
 with they . " you do not   believe in it ! " 
 " in what ? " 
 " in the character of the attachment . in its innocence . " 
 but she defend herself . " I do not   pretend to know anything about it . 
 everything be possible . we must see . " 
 " see ? " he echo with a groan . " have not   we see enough ? " 
 " I have not , " she smile . 
 " but do you suppose then little Bilham have lie ? " 
 " you must find out . " 
 it make he almost turn pale . " find out any MORE ? " 
 he have drop on a sofa for dismay ; but she seem , as she stand over 
 he , to have the last word . " be not   what you come out for to find out 
 all ? " 
 Book Fifth 
 I 
 the Sunday of the next week be a wonderful day , and Chad Newsome have 
 let his friend know in advance that he have provide for it . there have 
 already be a question of his take he to see the great Gloriani , 
 who be at home on Sunday afternoon and at whose house , for the most 
 part , few bore be to be meet than elsewhere ; but the project , 
 through some accident , have not have instant effect , and now revive in 
 happy condition . Chad have make the point that the celebrated 
 sculptor have a queer old garden , for which the weather - spring at last 
 frank and fair - be propitious ; and two or three of his other allusion 
 have confirm for Strether the expectation of something special . he 
 have by this time , for all introduction and adventure , let himself 
 recklessly go , cherish the sense that whatever the young man show 
 he he be show at least himself . he could have wish indeed , so 
 far as this go , that Chad be less of a mere cicerone ; for he be 
 not without the impression - now that the vision of his game , his plan , 
 his deep diplomacy , do recurrently assert itself - of his take refuge 
 from the reality of their intercourse in profusely dispense , as our 
 friend mentally phrased et panem et circense . our friend continue to 
 feel rather smothered in flower , though he make in his other moment 
 the almost angry inference that this be only because of his odious 
 ascetic suspicion of any form of beauty . he periodically assure 
 himself - for his reaction be sharp - that he should not   reach the 
 truth of anything till he have at least get rid of that . 
 he have know beforehand that Madame de Vionnet and her daughter would 
 probably be on view , an intimation to that effect have constitute 
 the only reference again make by Chad to his good friend from the 
 south . the effect of Strether 's talk about they with Miss Gostrey have 
 be quite to consecrate his reluctance to pry ; something in the very 
 air of Chad 's silence - judge in the light of that talk - offer it to 
 he as a reserve he could markedly match . it shroud they about with 
 he scarce know what , a consideration , a distinction ; he be in presence 
 at any rate - so far as it place he there - of lady ; and the one 
 thing that be definite for he be that they themselves should be , to 
 the extent of his responsibility , in presence of a gentleman . be it 
 because they be very beautiful , very clever , or even very good - be 
 it for one of these reason that Chad be , so to speak , nurse his 
 effect ? do he wish to spring they , in the Woollett phrase , with a 
 full force - to confound his critic , slight though as yet the 
 criticism , with some form of merit exquisitely incalculable ? the most 
 the critic have at all event ask be whether the person in question 
 be french ; and that enquiry have be but a proper comment on the 
 sound of their name . " yes . that be no ! " have be Chad 's reply ; but he 
 have immediately add that their English be the most charming in the 
 world , so that if Strether be want an excuse for not get on 
 with they he would not   in the least find one . never in fact have 
 Strether - in the mood into which the place have quickly launch 
 he - feel , for himself , less the need of an excuse . those he might 
 have find would have be , at the bad , all for the other , the 
 people before he , in whose liberty to be as they be he be aware 
 that he positively rejoice . his fellow guest be multiply , and 
 these thing , their liberty , their intensity , their variety , their 
 condition at large , be in fusion in the admirable medium of the 
 scene . 
 the place itself be a great impression - a small pavilion , clear - face 
 and sequester , an effect of polished parquet , of fine white panel and 
 spare sallow gilt , of decoration delicate and rare , in the heart of the 
 Faubourg Saint - Germain and on the edge of a cluster of garden attach 
 to old noble house . far back from street and unsuspecte by crowd , 
 reach by a long passage and a quiet court , it be as strike to the 
 unprepared mind , he immediately see , as a treasure dig up ; give he 
 too , more than anything yet , the note of the range of the immeasurable 
 town and sweep away , as by a last brave brush , his usual landmark 
 and term . it be in the garden , a spacious cherished remnant , out of 
 which a dozen person have already pass , that Chad 's host presently 
 meet they while the tall bird - haunt tree , all of a twitter with the 
 spring and the weather , and the high party - wall , on the other side of 
 which grave hotel stand off for privacy , speak of survival , 
 transmission , association , a strong indifferent persistent order . the 
 day be so soft that the little party have practically adjourn to the 
 open air but the open air be in such condition all a chamber of 
 state . Strether have presently the sense of a great convent , a convent 
 of mission , famous for he scarce know what , a nursery of young 
 priest , of scattered shade , of straight alley and chapel - bell , that 
 spread its mass in one quarter ; he have the sense of name in the air , 
 of ghost at the window , of sign and token , a whole range of 
 expression , all about he , too thick for prompt discrimination . 
 this assault of image become for a moment , in the address of the 
 distinguished sculptor , almost formidable : Gloriani show he , in 
 such perfect confidence , on Chad 's introduction of he , a fine worn 
 handsome face , a face that be like an open letter in a foreign tongue . 
 with his genius in his eye , his manner on his lip , his long career 
 behind he and his honour and reward all round , the great artist , in 
 the course of a single sustained look and a few word of delight at 
 receive he , affect our friend as a dazzling prodigy of type . 
 Strether have see in museum - in the Luxembourg as well as , more 
 reverently , later on , in the New York of the billionaire - the work of 
 his hand ; know too that after an early time in his native Rome he 
 have migrate , in mid - career , to Paris , where , with a personal lustre 
 almost violent , he shine in a constellation : all of which be more 
 than enough to crown he , for his guest , with the light , with the 
 romance , of glory . Strether , in contact with that element as he have 
 never yet so intimately be , have the consciousness of opening to it , 
 for the happy instant , all the window of his mind , of let this 
 rather grey interior drink in for once the sun of a clime not mark in 
 his old geography . he be to remember again repeatedly the medal - like 
 italian face , in which every line be an artist 's own , in which time 
 tell only as tone and consecration ; and he be to recall in especial , 
 as the penetrate radiance , as the communication of the illustrious 
 spirit itself , the manner in which , while they stand briefly , in 
 welcome and response , face to face , he be hold by the sculptor 's eye . 
 he be not   soon to forget they , be to think of they , all unconscious , 
 unintending , preoccupy though they be , as the source of the deep 
 intellectual sounding to which he have ever be expose . he be in 
 fact quite to cherish his vision of it , to play with it in idle hour ; 
 only speak of it to no one and quite aware he could not   have speak 
 without appear to talk nonsense . be what it have tell he or what 
 it have ask he the great of the mystery ? be it the most special 
 flare , unequalled , supreme , of the aesthetic torch , light that 
 wondrous world for ever , or be it above all the long straight shaft 
 sink by a personal acuteness that life have season to steel ? nothing 
 on earth could have be strange and no one doubtless more surprised 
 than the artist himself , but it be for all the world to Strether just 
 then as if in the matter of his accept duty he have positively be on 
 trial . the deep human expertness in Gloriani 's charming smile - oh the 
 terrible life behind it ! - be flash upon he as a test of his stuff . 
 Chad meanwhile , after have easily name his companion , have still more 
 easily turn away and be already greet other person present . he 
 be as easy , clever Chad , with the great artist as with his obscure 
 compatriot , and as easy with every one else as with either : this fall 
 into its place for Strether and make almost a new light , give he , as 
 a concatenation , something more he could enjoy . he like Gloriani , but 
 should never see he again ; of that he be sufficiently sure . Chad 
 accordingly , who be wonderful with both of they , be a kind of link 
 for hopeless fancy , an implication of possibility - oh if everything 
 have be different ! Strether note at all event that he be thus on 
 term with illustrious spirit , and also that - yes , distinctly - he 
 have not   in the least swagger about it . our friend have not   come there 
 only for this figure of Abel Newsome 's son , but that presence 
 threaten to affect the observant mind as positively central . Gloriani 
 indeed , remember something and excuse himself , pursue Chad to 
 speak to he , and Strether be leave muse on many thing . one of they 
 be the question of whether , since he have be test , he have pass . 
 do the artist drop he from have make out that he would not   do ? he 
 really feel just to - day that he might do well than usual . had not   he 
 do well enough , so far as that go , in be exactly so dazzle ? and 
 in not have too , as he almost believe , wholly hide from his host 
 that he feel the latter 's plummet ? suddenly , across the garden , he see 
 little Bilham approach , and it be a part of the fit that be on he 
 that as their eye meet he guess also his knowledge . if he have say to 
 he on the instant what be uppermost he would have say : " have I 
 pass ? - for of course I know one have to pass here . " Little Bilham 
 would have reassure he , have tell he that he exaggerate , and have 
 adduce happily enough the argument of little Bilham 's own very 
 presence ; which , in truth , he could see , be as easy a one as 
 Gloriani 's own or as Chad 's . he himself would perhaps then after a 
 while cease to be frightened , would get the point of view for some of 
 the face - type tremendously alien , alien to Woollett - that he have 
 already begin to take in . who be they all , the disperse group and 
 couple , the lady even more unlike those of Woollett than the 
 gentleman ? - this be the enquiry that , when his young friend have 
 greet he , he do find himself make . 
 " oh they be every one - all sort and size ; of course I mean within 
 limit , though limit down perhaps rather more than limit up . there 
 be always artist - he be beautiful and inimitable to the cher confrere ; 
 and then gros bonnet of many kind - ambassador , cabinet minister , 
 banker , general , what do I know ? even Jews . above all always some 
 awfully nice woman - and not too many ; sometimes an actress , an artist , 
 a great performer - but only when they be not monster ; and in 
 particular the right femme du monde . you can fancy his history on that 
 side - I believe it be fabulous : they never give he up . yet he keep 
 they down : no one know how he manage ; it be too beautiful and bland . 
 never too many - and a mighty good thing too ; just a perfect choice . but 
 there be not in any way many bore ; it have always be so ; he have some 
 secret . it be extraordinary . and you do not   find it out . he be the same 
 to every one . he do not   ask question . ' 
 " ah do not   he ? " Strether laugh . 
 Bilham meet it with all his candour . " how then should I be here ? 
 " oh for what you tell I . you be part of the perfect choice . " 
 well , the young man take in the scene . " it seem rather good to - day . " 
 Strether follow the direction of his eye . " be they all , this time , 
 femme du monde ? " 
 little Bilham show his competence . " pretty well . " 
 this be a category our friend have a feeling for ; a light , romantic and 
 mysterious , on the feminine element , in which he enjoy for a little 
 watch it . " be there any Poles ? " 
 his companion consider . " I think I make out a ' Portuguee . ' but I have 
 see Turks . " 
 Strether wonder , desire justice . " they seem - all the woman - very 
 harmonious . " 
 " oh in close quarter they come out ! " and then , while Strether be 
 aware of fear close quarter , though give himself again to the 
 harmony , " well , " little Bilham go on , " it be at the bad rather 
 good , you know . if you like it , you feel it , this way , that show 
 you be not in the least out but you always know thing , " he handsomely 
 add , " immediately . " 
 Strether like it and feel it only too much ; so " I say , do not   lay trap 
 for I ! " he rather helplessly murmur . 
 " well , " his companion return , " he be wonderfully kind to we . " 
 " to we Americans you mean ? " 
 " oh no - he do not   know anything about that . that be half the battle 
 here - that you can never hear politic . we do not   talk they . I mean to 
 poor young wretch of all sort . and yet it be always as charming as 
 this ; it be as if , by something in the air , our squalor do not   show . it 
 put we all back - into the last century . " 
 " I be afraid , " Strether say , amuse , " that it put I rather forward : 
 oh ever so far ! " 
 " into the next ? but be not   that only , " little Bilham ask , " because 
 you be really of the century before ? " 
 " the century before the last ? thank you ! " Strether laugh . " if I ask 
 you about some of the lady it can not   be then that I may hope , as such 
 a speciman of the rococo , to please they . " 
 " on the contrary they adore - we all adore here - the rococo , and where 
 be there a well setting for it than the whole thing , the pavilion and 
 the garden , together ? there be lot of people with collection , " 
 little Bilham smile as he glance round . " you will be secure ! " 
 it make Strether for a moment give himself again to contemplation . 
 there be face he scarce know what to make of . be they charming or 
 be they only strange ? he might not   talk politic , yet he suspect a 
 Pole or two . the upshot be the question at the back of his head from 
 the moment his friend have join he . " have Madame de Vionnet and her 
 daughter arrive ? " 
 " I have not   see they yet , but Miss Gostrey have come . she be in the 
 pavilion look at object . one can see SHE be a collector , " little 
 Bilham add without offence . 
 " oh yes , she be a collector , and I know she be to come . be Madame de 
 Vionnet a collector ? " Strether go on . 
 " rather , I believe ; almost celebrate . " the young man meet , on it , a 
 little , his friend 's eye . " I happen to know - from Chad , whom I see 
 last night - that they have   come back ; but only yesterday . he be not 
 sure - up to the last . this , accordingly , " little Bilham go on , " will 
 be - if they be here - their first appearance after their return . " 
 Strether , very quickly , turn these thing over . " Chad tell you last 
 night ? to I , on our way here , he say nothing about it . " 
 " but do you ask he ? " 
 Strether do he the justice . " I dare say not . " 
 " well , " say little Bilham , " you be not a person to whom it be easy to 
 tell thing you do not   want to know . though it be easy , I admit - it be 
 quite beautiful , " he benevolently add , " when you do want to . " 
 Strether look at he with an indulgence that match his 
 intelligence . " be that the deep reasoning on which - about these 
 lady - you have   be yourself so silent ? " 
 little Bilham consider the depth of his reasoning . " I have not   be 
 silent . I speak of they to you the other day , the day we sit together 
 after Chad 's tea - party . " 
 Strether come round to it . " they then be the virtuous attachment ? " 
 " I can only tell you that it be what they pass for . but be not   that 
 enough ? what more than a vain appearance do the wise of we know ? I 
 commend you , " the young man declare with a pleasant emphasis , " the 
 vain appearance . " 
 Strether look more widely round , and what he see , from face to face , 
 deepen the effect of his young friend 's word . " be it so good ? " 
 " magnificent . " 
 Strether have a pause . " the husband 's dead ? " 
 " dear no . alive . " 
 " oh ! " say Strether . after which , as his companion laugh : " how then 
 can it be so good ? " 
 " you will see for yourself . one do see . " 
 " Chad 's in love with the daughter ? " 
 " that be what I mean . " 
 Strether wonder . " then where be the difficulty ? " 
 " why , be not   you and I - with our grander bolder idea ? " 
 " oh mine - ! " Strether say rather strangely . but then as if to 
 attenuate : " you mean they will not   hear of Woollett ? " 
 little Bilham smile . " be not   that just what you must see about ? " 
 it have bring they , as she catch the last word , into relation with 
 Miss Barrace , whom Strether have already observe - as he have never 
 before see a lady at a party - move about alone . come within sound 
 of they she have already speak , and she take again , through her 
 long - handle glass , all her amused and amusing possession . " how much , 
 poor Mr. Strether , you seem to have to see about ! but you can not   say , " 
 she gaily declare , " that I do not   do what I can to help you . Mr. 
 Waymarsh be place . I have   leave he in the house with Miss Gostrey . " 
 " the way , " little Bilham exclaim , " Mr. Strether get the lady to 
 work for he ! he be just prepare to draw in another ; to pounce - do not 
 you see he ? - on Madame de Vionnet . " 
 " Madame de Vionnet ? oh , oh , oh ! " Miss Barrace cry in a wonderful 
 crescendo . there be more in it , our friend make out , than meet the 
 ear . be it after all a joke that he should be serious about anything ? 
 he envy Miss Barrace at any rate her power of not be . she seem , 
 with little cry and protest and quick recognition , movement like 
 the dart of some fine high - feather free - pecking bird , to stand 
 before life as before some full shop - window . you could fairly hear , as 
 she select and point , the tap of her tortoise - shell against the 
 glass . " it be certain that we do need see about ; only I be glad it be 
 not I who have to do it . one do , no doubt , begin that way ; then 
 suddenly one find that one have give it up . it be too much , it be too 
 difficult . you be wonderful , you people , " she continue to Strether , 
 " for not feel those thing - by which I mean impossibility . you 
 never feel they . you face they with a fortitude that make it a lesson 
 to watch you . " 
 " ah but " - little Bilham put it with discouragement - " what do we achieve 
 after all ? we see about you and report - when we even go so far as 
 report . but nothing be do . " 
 " oh you , Mr. Bilham , " she reply as with an impatient rap on the 
 glass , " you be not worth sixpence ! you come over to convert the 
 savage - for I know you verily do , I remember you - and the savage 
 simply convert you . " 
 " not even ! " the young man woefully confess : " they have not   go 
 through that form . they have   simply - the cannibal ! - eat I ; convert 
 I if you like , but convert I into food . I be but the bleached bone 
 of a Christian . " 
 " well then there we be ! only " - and Miss Barrace appeal again to 
 Strether - " do not   let it discourage you . you will break down soon enough , 
 but you will meanwhile have have your moment . Il faut en avoir . I 
 always like to see you while you last . and I will tell you who will 
 last . " 
 " waymarsh ? " - he have already take she up . 
 she laugh out as at the alarm of it . " he will resist even Miss 
 Gostrey : so grand be it not to understand . he be wonderful . " 
 " he be indeed , " Strether concede . " he would not   tell I of this 
 affair - only say he have an engagement ; but with such a gloom , you must 
 let I insist , as if it have be an engagement to be hang . then 
 silently and secretly he turn up here with you . do you call that 
 ' last ' ? " 
 " oh I hope it be last ! " Miss Barrace say . " but he only , at the 
 good , bear with I . he do not   understand - not one little scrap . he be 
 delightful . he be wonderful , " she repeat . 
 " michelangelesque ! " - little Bilham complete her meaning . " he be a 
 success . Moses , on the ceiling , bring down to the floor ; 
 overwhelming , colossal , but somehow portable . " 
 " certainly , if you mean by portable , " she return , " look so well in 
 one 's carriage . he be too funny beside I in his comer ; he look like 
 somebody , somebody foreign and famous , en exil ; so that people 
 wonder - it be very amusing - whom I be take about . I show he Paris , 
 show he everything , and he never turn a hair . he be like the indian 
 chief one read about , who , when he come up to Washington to see the 
 Great Father , stand wrapt in his blanket and give no sign . I might 
 be the Great Father - from the way he take everything . " she be 
 delighted at this hit of her identity with that personage - it fit so 
 her character ; she declare it be the title she mean henceforth to 
 adopt . " and the way he sit , too , in the corner of my room , only 
 look at my visitor very hard and as if he want to start 
 something ! they wonder what he do want to start . but he be 
 wonderful , " Miss Barrace once more insisted . " he have never start 
 anything yet . " 
 it present he none the less , in truth , to her actual friend , who 
 look at each other in intelligence , with frank amusement on Bilham 's 
 part and a shade of sadness on Strether 's . Strether 's sadness 
 sprang - for the image have its grandeur - from his thinking how little he 
 himself be wrapt in his blanket , how little , in marble hall , all too 
 oblivious of the Great Father , he resemble a really majestic 
 aboriginal . but he have also another reflexion . " you have   all of you here 
 so much visual sense that you have   somehow all ' run ' to it . there be 
 moment when it strike one that you have not   any other . " 
 " any moral , " little Bilham explain , watch serenely , across the 
 garden , the several femme du monde . " but Miss Barrace have a moral 
 distinction , " he kindly continue ; speak as if for Strether 's 
 benefit not less than for her own . 
 " have you ? " Strether , scarce know what he be about , ask of she 
 almost eagerly . 
 " oh not a distinction " - she be mightily amuse at his tone - " Mr. 
 Bilham 's too good . but I think I may say a sufficiency . yes , a 
 sufficiency . have you suppose strange thing of I ? " - and she fix 
 he again , through all her tortoise - shell , with the droll interest of 
 it . " you be all indeed wonderful . I should awfully disappoint you . I 
 do take my stand on my sufficiency . but I know , I confess , " she go 
 on , ' strange people . I do not   know how it happen ; I do not   do it on 
 purpose ; it seem to be my doom - as if I be always one of their 
 habit : it be wonderful ! I dare say moreover , " she pursue with an 
 interested gravity , " that I do , that we all do here , run too much to 
 mere eye . but how can it be help ? we be all look at each 
 other - and in the light of Paris one see what thing resemble . that be 
 what the light of Paris seem always to show . it be the fault of the 
 light of Paris - dear old light ! " 
 " dear old Paris ! " little Bilham echo . 
 " everything , every one show , " Miss Barrace go on . 
 " but for what they really be ? " Strether ask . 
 " oh I like your Boston ' really ' ! but sometimes - yes . " 
 " dear old Paris then ! " Strether resignedly sigh while for a moment 
 they look at each other . then he break out : " do Madame de Vionnet 
 do that ? I mean really show for what she be ? " 
 her answer be prompt . " she be charming . she be perfect . " 
 " then why do you a minute ago say ' oh , oh , oh ! ' at her name ? " 
 she easily remember . " why just because - ! she be wonderful . " 
 " ah she too ? " - Strether have almost a groan . 
 but Miss Barrace have meanwhile perceive relief . " why not put your 
 question straight to the person who can answer it well ? " 
 " no , " say little Bilham ; " do not   put any question ; wait , rather - it 
 will be much more fun - to judge for yourself . he have come to take you 
 to she . " 
 II 
 on which Strether see that Chad be again at hand , and he afterwards 
 scarce know , absurd as it may seem , what have then quickly occur . the 
 moment concern he , he feel , more deeply than he could have 
 explain , and he have a subsequent passage of speculation as to 
 whether , on walk off with Chad , he have not   look either pale or red . 
 the only thing he be clear about be that , luckily , nothing indiscreet 
 have in fact be say and that Chad himself be more than ever , in Miss 
 Barrace 's great sense , wonderful . it be one of the connexion - though 
 really why it should be , after all , be none so apparent - in which the 
 whole change in he come out as most striking . Strether recall as 
 they approach the house that he have impress he that first night as 
 know how to enter a box . well , he impress he scarce less now as 
 know how to make a presentation . it do something for Strether 's 
 own quality - mark it as estimate ; so that our poor friend , conscious 
 and passive , really seem to feel himself quite hand over and 
 deliver ; absolutely , as he would have say , make a present of , give 
 away . as they reach the house a young woman , about to come forth , 
 appear , unaccompanie , on the step ; at the exchange with whom of a 
 word on Chad 's part Strether immediately perceive that , obligingly , 
 kindly , she be there to meet they . Chad have leave she in the house , but 
 she have afterwards come halfway and then the next moment have join 
 they in the garden . her air of youth , for Strether , be at first almost 
 disconcerting , while his second impression be , not less sharply , a 
 degree of relief at there not have just be , with the other , any 
 freedom use about she . it be upon he at a touch that she be no 
 subject for that , and meanwhile , on Chad 's introduce he , she have 
 speak to he , very simply and gently , in an English clearly of the 
 easy to she , yet unlike any other he have ever hear . it be not   as 
 if she try ; nothing , he could see after they have be a few minute 
 together , be as if she try ; but her speech , charming correct and 
 odd , be like a precaution against her pass for a Pole . there be 
 precaution , he seem indeed to see , only when there be really 
 danger . 
 later on he be to feel many more of they , but by that time he be to 
 feel other thing besides . she be dress in black , but in black that 
 strike he as light and transparent ; she be exceedingly fair , and , 
 though she be as markedly slim , her face have a roundness , with eye 
 far apart and a little strange . her smile be natural and dim ; her hat 
 not extravagant ; he have only perhaps a sense of the clink , beneath her 
 fine black sleeve , of more gold bracelet and bangle than he have ever 
 see a lady wear . Chad be excellently free and light about their 
 encounter ; it be one of the occasion on which Strether most wish he 
 himself might have arrive at such ease and such humour : " here you be 
 then , face to face at last ; you be make for each other - vous allez 
 voir ; and I bless your union . " it be indeed , after he have go off , 
 as if he have be partly serious too . this latter motion have be 
 determine by an enquiry from he about " Jeanne " ; to which her mother 
 have reply that she be probably still in the house with Miss Gostrey , 
 to whom she have lately commit she . " ah but you know , " the young man 
 have rejoin , " he must see she " ; with which , while Strether prick up 
 his ear , he have start as if to bring she , leave the other object 
 of his interest together . Strether wonder to find Miss Gostrey 
 already involve , feel that he miss a link ; but feel also , with 
 small delay , how much he should like to talk with she of Madame de 
 Vionnet on this basis of evidence . 
 the evidence as yet in truth be meagre ; which , for that matter , be 
 perhaps a little why his expectation have have a drop . there be somehow 
 not quite a wealth in she ; and a wealth be all that , in his 
 simplicity , he have definitely prefigure . still , it be too much to be 
 sure already that there be but a poverty . they move away from the 
 house , and , with eye on a bench at some distance , he propose that 
 they should sit down . " I have   hear a great deal about you , " she say as 
 they go ; but he have an answer to it that make her stop short . " well , 
 about you , Madame de Vionnet , I have   hear , I be bind to say , almost 
 nothing " - those strike he as the only word he himself could utter 
 with any lucidity ; conscious as he be , and as with more reason , of the 
 determination to be in respect to the rest of his business perfectly 
 plain and go perfectly straight . it have not   at any rate be in the 
 least his idea to spy on Chad 's proper freedom . it be possibly , 
 however , at this very instant and under the impression of Madame de 
 Vionnet 's pause , that go straight begin to announce itself as a 
 matter for care . she have only after all to smile at he ever so gently 
 in order to make he ask himself if he be not   already go crook . 
 it might be go crook to find it of a sudden just only clear that 
 she intend very definitely to be what he would have call nice to 
 he . this be what pass between they while , for another instant , 
 they stand still ; he could not   at least remember afterwards what else it 
 might have be . the thing indeed really unmistakeable be its rolling 
 over he as a wave that he have be , in condition incalculable and 
 unimaginable , a subject of discussion . he have be , on some ground 
 that concern she , answer for ; which give she an advantage he should 
 never be able to match . 
 " have not   Miss Gostrey , " she ask , ' say a good word for I ? " 
 what have strike he first be the way he be bracket with that lady ; 
 and he wonder what account Chad would have give of their 
 acquaintance . something not as yet traceable , at all event , have 
 obviously happen . " I do not   even know of she know you . " 
 " well , now she will tell you all . I be so glad you be in relation with 
 she . " 
 this be one of the thing - the " all " Miss Gostrey would now tell 
 he - that , with every deference to present preoccupation , be uppermost 
 for Strether after they have take their seat . one of the other be , 
 at the end of five minute , that she - oh incontestably , yes - differed 
 less ; differed , that be , scarcely at all - well , superficially speak , 
 from Mrs. Newsome or even from Mrs. Pocock . she be ever so much 
 young than the one and not so young as the other ; but what be there 
 in she , if anything , that would have make it impossible he should meet 
 she at Woollett ? and wherein be her talk during their moment on the 
 bench together not the same as would have be find adequate for a 
 Woollett garden - party ? - unless perhaps truly in not be quite so 
 bright . she observe to he that Mr. Newsome have , to her knowledge , 
 take extraordinary pleasure in his visit ; but there be no good lady 
 at Woollett who would not   have be at least up to that . be there in 
 Chad , by chance , after all , deep down , a principle of aboriginal 
 loyalty that have make he , for sentimental end , attach himself to 
 element , happily encounter , that would remind he most of the old 
 air and the old soil ? why accordingly be in a flutter - Strether could 
 even put it that way - about this unfamiliar phenomenon of the femme du 
 monde ? on these term Mrs. Newsome herself be as much of one . little 
 Bilham verily have testify that they come out , the lady of the type , 
 in close quarter ; but it be just in these quarter - now comparatively 
 close - that he feel Madame de Vionnet 's common humanity . she do come 
 out , and certainly to his relief , but she come out as the usual thing . 
 there might be motif behind , but so could there often be even at 
 Woollett . the only thing be that if she show he she wish to like 
 he - as the motif behind might conceivably prompt - it would possibly 
 have be more thrilling for he that she should have show as more 
 vividly alien . ah she be neither Turk nor Pole ! - which would be 
 indeed flat once more for Mrs. Newsome and Mrs. Pocock . a lady and two 
 gentleman have meanwhile , however , approach their bench , and this 
 accident stay for the time further development . 
 they presently address his companion , the brilliant stranger ; she 
 rise to speak to they , and Strether note how the escort lady , though 
 mature and by no mean beautiful , have more of the bold high look , the 
 range of expensive reference , that he have , as might have be say , 
 make his plan for . Madame de Vionnet greet she as " Duchesse " and 
 be greet in turn , while talk start in French , as " Ma toute - belle " ; 
 little fact that have their due , their vivid interest for Strether . 
 Madame de Vionnet do not , none the less , introduce he - a note he be 
 conscious of as false to the Woollett scale and the Woollett humanity ; 
 though it do not   prevent the Duchess , who strike he as confident and 
 free , very much what he have obscurely suppose duchess , from look 
 at he as straight and as hard - for it be hard - as if she would have 
 like , all the same , to know he . " oh yes , my dear , it be all right , 
 it be ME ; and who be you , with your interesting wrinkle and your most 
 effective   be it the handsome , be it the ugly ?   of nose ? " - some 
 such loose handful of bright flower she seem , fragrantly enough , to 
 fle at he . Strether almost wonder - at such a pace be he 
 go - if some divination of the influence of either party be what 
 determine Madame de Vionnet 's abstention . one of the gentleman , in 
 any case , succeed in place himself in close relation with our 
 friend 's companion ; a gentleman rather stout and importantly short , in 
 a hat with a wonderful wide curl to its brim and a frock coat button 
 with an effect of superlative decision . his French have quickly turn 
 to equal English , and it occur to Strether that he might well be one 
 of the ambassador . his design be evidently to assert a claim to 
 Madame de Vionnet 's undivided countenance , and he make it good in the 
 course of a minute - lead she away with a trick of three word ; a trick 
 play with a social art of which Strether , look after they as the 
 four , whose back be now all turn , move off , feel himself no 
 master . 
 he sink again upon his bench and , while his eye follow the party , 
 reflect , as he have do before , on Chad 's strange community . he 
 sit there alone for five minute , with plenty to think of ; above all 
 with his sense of have suddenly be drop by a charming woman 
 overlay now by other impression and in fact quite clear and 
 indifferent . he have not   yet have so quiet a surrender ; he do not   in the 
 least care if nobody speak to he more . he might have be , by his 
 attitude , in for something of a march so broad that the want of 
 ceremony with which he have just be use could fall into its place as 
 but a minor incident of the procession . besides , there would be 
 incident enough , as he feel when this term of contemplation be close 
 by the reappearance of little Bilham , who stand before he a moment 
 with a suggestive " well ? " in which he see himself reflect as 
 disorganise , as possibly floor . he reply with a " well ! " intend 
 to show that he be not   floor in the least . no indeed ; he give it 
 out , as the young man sit down beside he , that if , at the bad , he 
 have be overturn at all , he have be overturn into the upper air , 
 the sublimer element with which he have an affinity and in which he 
 might be trust a while to float . it be not   a descent to earth to say 
 after an instant and in sustained response to the reference : " you be 
 quite sure her husband 's living ? " 
 " oh dear , yes . " 
 " ah then - ! " 
 " ah then what ? " 
 Strether have after all to think . " well , I be sorry for they . " but it 
 do not   for the moment matter more than that . he assure his young 
 friend he be quite content . they would not   stir ; be all right as 
 they be . he do not   want to be introduce ; have be introduce 
 already about as far as he could go . he have see moreover an 
 immensity ; like Gloriani , who , as Miss Barrace keep say , be 
 wonderful ; have make out , he be sure , the half - dozen other ' man who 
 be distinguish , the artist , the critic and oh the great 
 dramatist - HIM it be easy to spot ; but want - no , thank , really - to 
 talk with none of they ; have nothing at all to say and find it 
 would do beautifully as it be ; do beautifully because what it 
 be - well , be just simply too late . and when after this little Bilham , 
 submissive and responsive , but with an eye to the consolation nearest , 
 easily throw off some " well late than never ! " all he get in return 
 for it be a sharp " well early than late ! " this note indeed the next 
 thing overflow for Strether into a quiet stream of demonstration that 
 as soon as he have let himself go he feel as the real relief . it have 
 consciously gather to a head , but the reservoir have fill soon 
 than he know , and his companion 's touch be to make the water spread . 
 there be some thing that have to come in time if they be to come at 
 all . if they do not   come in time they be lose for ever . it be the 
 general sense of they that have overwhelm he with its long slow rush . 
 " it be not too late for you , on any side , and you do not   strike I as in 
 danger of miss the train ; besides which people can be in general 
 pretty well trust , of course - with the clock of their freedom tick 
 as loud as it seem to do here - to keep an eye on the fleeting hour . 
 all the same do not   forget that you be young - blessedly young ; be glad 
 of it on the contrary and live up to it . live all you can ; it be a 
 mistake not to . it do not   so much matter what you do in particular , 
 so long as you have your life . if you have not   have that what have you 
 have ? this place and these impression - mild as you may find they to 
 wind a man up so ; all my impression of Chad and of people I have   see at 
 his place - well , have have their abundant message for I , have just 
 drop that into my mind . I see it now . I have not   do so enough 
 before - and now I be old ; too old at any rate for what I see . oh I do 
 see , at least ; and more than you would believe or I can express . it be too 
 late . and it be as if the train have fairly wait at the station for I 
 without my have have the gumption to know it be there . now I hear its 
 faint recede whistle mile and mile down the line . what one lose 
 one lose ; make no mistake about that . the affair - I mean the affair 
 of life - could not , no doubt , have be different for I ; for it be at 
 the good a tin mould , either flute and emboss , with ornamental 
 excrescence , or else smooth and dreadfully plain , into which , a 
 helpless jelly , one 's consciousness be pour - so that one ' take ' the 
 form as the great cook say , and be more or less compactly hold by it : 
 one live in fine as one can . still , one have the illusion of freedom ; 
 therefore do not   be , like I , without the memory of that illusion . I 
 be either , at the right time , too stupid or too intelligent to have 
 it ; I do not   quite know which . of course at present I be a case of 
 reaction against the mistake ; and the voice of reaction should , no 
 doubt , always be take with an allowance . but that do not   affect the 
 point that the right time be now your . the right time be any time 
 that one be still so lucky as to have . you have   plenty ; that be the great 
 thing ; you be , as I say , damn you , so happily and hatefully young . 
 do not   at any rate miss thing out of stupidity . of course I do not   take 
 you for a fool , or I should not   be address you thus awfully . do what 
 you like so long as you do not   make MY mistake . for it be a mistake . 
 Live ! " ... slowly and sociably , with full pause and straight 
 dash , Strether have so deliver himself ; hold little Bilham from 
 step to step deeply and gravely attentive . the end of all be that the 
 young man have turn quite solemn , and that this be a contradiction of 
 the innocent gaiety the speaker have wish to promote . he watch for 
 a moment the consequence of his word , and then , lay a hand on his 
 listener 's knee and as if to end with the proper joke : " and now for 
 the eye I shall keep on you ! " 
 " oh but I do not   know that I want to be , at your age , too different from 
 you ! " 
 " ah prepare while you be about it , " say Strether , " to be more amusing . " 
 little Bilham continue to think , but at last have a smile . " well , you 
 be amusing - to I . " 
 " impayable , as you say , no doubt . but what be I to myself ? " Strether 
 have rise with this , give his attention now to an encounter that , in 
 the middle of the garden , be in the act of take place between their 
 host and the lady at whose side Madame de Vionnet have quit he . this 
 lady , who appear within a few minute to have leave her friend , 
 await Gloriani 's eager approach with word on her lip that Strether 
 could not   catch , but of which her interesting witty face seem to give 
 he the echo . he be sure she be prompt and fine , but also that she 
 have meet her match , and he like - in the light of what he be quite sure 
 be the Duchess 's latent insolence - the good humour with which the 
 great artist assert equal resource . be they , this pair , of the 
 " great world " ? - and be he himself , for the moment and thus relate to 
 they by his observation , in it ? then there be something in the great 
 world covertly tigerish , which come to he across the lawn and in the 
 charming air as a waft from the jungle . yet it make he admire most of 
 the two , make he envy , the glossy male tiger , magnificently marked . 
 these absurdity of the stir sense , fruit of suggestion ripen 
 on the instant , be all reflect in his next word to little Bilham . 
 " I know - if we talk of that - whom I should enjoy be like ! " 
 little Bilham follow his eye ; but then as with a shade of know 
 surprise : " gloriani ? " 
 our friend have in fact already hesitate , though not on the hint of his 
 companion 's doubt , in which there be depth of critical reserve . he 
 have just make out , in the now full picture , something and somebody 
 else ; another impression have be superimpose . a young girl in a 
 white dress and a softly plume white hat have suddenly come into view , 
 and what be presently clear be that her course be toward they . what 
 be clear still be that the handsome young man at her side be Chad 
 Newsome , and what be clear of all be that she be therefore 
 Mademoiselle de Vionnet , that she be unmistakeably pretty - bright 
 gentle shy happy wonderful - and that Chad now , with a consummate 
 calculation of effect , be about to present she to his old friend 's 
 vision . what be clear of all indeed be something much more than 
 this , something at the single stroke of which - and be not   it simply 
 juxtaposition ? - all vagueness vanish . it be the click of a 
 spring - he see the truth . he have by this time also meet Chad 's look ; 
 there be more of it in that ; and the truth , accordingly , so far as 
 Bilham 's enquiry be concern , have thrust in the answer . " oh 
 Chad ! " - it be that rare youth he should have enjoy be " like . " the 
 virtuous attachment would be all there before he ; the virtuous 
 attachment would be in the very act of appeal for his blessing ; Jeanne 
 de Vionnet , this charming creature , would be exquisitely , intensely 
 now - the object of it . Chad bring she straight up to he , and Chad 
 be , oh yes , at this moment - for the glory of Woollett or 
 whatever - well still even than gloriani . he have pluck this 
 blossom ; he have keep it over - night in water ; and at last as he hold it 
 up to wonder he do enjoy his effect . that be why Strether have feel 
 at first the breath of calculation - and why moreover , as he now know , 
 his look at the girl would be , for the young man , a sign of the 
 latter 's success . what young man have ever parade about that way , 
 without a reason , a maiden in her flower ? and there be nothing in his 
 reason at present obscure . her type sufficiently tell of it - they 
 would not , they could not , want she to go to Woollett . Poor Woollett , 
 and what it might miss ! - though brave Chad indeed too , and what it 
 might gain ! Brave Chad however have just excellently speak . " this be a 
 good little friend of mine who know all about you and have moreover a 
 message for you . and this , my dear " - he have turn to the child 
 herself - " be the good man in the world , who have it in his power to do a 
 great deal for we and whom I want you to like and revere as nearly as 
 possible as much as I do . " 
 she stand there quite pink , a little frightened , pretty and pretty 
 and not a bit like her mother . there be in this last particular no 
 resemblance but that of youth to youth ; and here be in fact suddenly 
 Strether 's sharp impression . it go wonder , daze , embarrassed , 
 back to the woman he have just be talk with ; it be a revelation in 
 the light of which he already see she would become more interesting . so 
 slim and fresh and fair , she have yet put forth this perfection ; so that 
 for really believe it of she , for see she to any such develop 
 degree as a mother , comparison would be urgent . well , what be it now 
 but fairly thrust upon he ? " Mamma wish I to tell you before we 
 go , " the girl say , " that she hop very much you will come to see we 
 very soon . she have something important to say to you . " 
 " she quite reproach herself , " Chad helpfully explain : " you be 
 interesting she so much when she accidentally suffer you to be 
 interrupt . " 
 " ah do not   mention it ! " Strether murmur , look kindly from one to 
 the other and wonder at many thing . 
 " and I be to ask you for myself , " Jeanne continue with her hand 
 clasp together as if in some small learn prayer - " I be to ask you for 
 myself if you will not   positively come . " 
 " leave it to I , dear - I will take care of it ! " Chad genially declare in 
 answer to this , while Strether himself almost hold his breath . what 
 be in the girl be indeed too soft , too unknown for direct dealing ; so 
 that one could only gaze at it as at a picture , quite stay one 's own 
 hand . but with Chad he be now on ground - Chad he could meet ; so 
 pleasant a confidence in that and in everything do the young man 
 freely exhale . there be the whole of a story in his tone to his 
 companion , and he speak indeed as if already of the family . it make 
 Strether guess the more quickly what it might be about which Madame de 
 Vionnet be so urgent . have see he then she have find he easy ; 
 she wish to have it out with he that some way for the young people 
 must be discover , some way that would not impose as a condition the 
 transplantation of her daughter . he already see himself discuss 
 with this lady the attraction of Woollett as a residence for Chad 's 
 companion . be that youth go now to trust she with the affair - so 
 that it would be after all with one of his " lady - friend " that his 
 mother 's missionary should be condemn to deal ? it be quite as if 
 for an instant the two man look at each other on this question . but 
 there be no mistaking at last Chad 's pride in the display of such a 
 connexion . this be what have make he so carry himself while , three 
 minute before , he be bring it into view ; what have cause his 
 friend , first catch sight of he , to be so strike with his air . it 
 be , in a word , just when he thus finally feel Chad put thing 
 straight off on he that he envy he , as he have mention to little 
 Bilham , most . the whole exhibition however be but a matter of three 
 or four minute , and the author of it have soon explain that , as 
 Madame de Vionnet be immediately go " on , " this could be for Jeanne 
 but a snatch . they would all meet again soon , and Strether be 
 meanwhile to stay and amuse himself - " I will pick you up again in plenty 
 of time . " he take the girl off as he have bring she , and Strether , 
 with the faint sweet foreignness of her " Au revoir , monsieur ! " in his 
 ear as a note almost unprecedented , watch they recede side by side 
 and feel how , once more , her companion 's relation to she get an accent 
 from it . they disappear among the other and apparently into the 
 house ; whereupon our friend turn round to give out to little Bilham 
 the conviction of which he be full . but there be no little Bilham 
 any more ; little Bilham have within the few moment , for reason of his 
 own , proceed far : a circumstance by which , in its order , 
 Strether be also sensibly affect . 
 III 
 Chad be not in fact on this occasion to keep his promise of come 
 back ; but Miss Gostrey have soon present herself with an explanation 
 of his failure . there have be reason at the last for his go off 
 with ce dame ; and he have ask she with much instance to come out and 
 take charge of their friend . she do so , Strether feel as she take she 
 place beside he , in a manner that leave nothing to desire . he have 
 drop back on his bench , alone again for a time , and the more 
 conscious for little Bilham 's defection of his unexpressed thought ; in 
 respect to which however this next converser be a still more capacious 
 vessel . " it be the child ! " he have exclaim to she almost as soon as 
 she appear ; and though her direct response be for some time delay 
 he could feel in she meanwhile the working of this truth . it might 
 have be simply , as she wait , that they be now in presence 
 altogether of truth spread like a flood and not for the moment to be 
 offer she in the mere cupful ; inasmuch as who should ce dame prove 
 to be but person about whom - once thus face to face with they - she 
 find she might from the first have tell he almost everything ? this 
 would have freely come have he take the simple precaution of give she 
 their name . there could be no well example - and she appear to note 
 it with high amusement - than the way , make thing out already so much 
 for himself , he be at last throw precaution to the wind . they 
 be neither more nor less , she and the child 's mother , than old 
 school - friend - friend who have scarcely meet for year but whom this 
 unlooked - for chance have bring together with a rush . it be a relief , 
 Miss Gostrey hint , to feel herself no long grope ; she be 
 unaccustomed to grope and as a general thing , he might well have see , 
 make straight enough for her clue . with the one she have now pick up 
 in her hand there need be at least no waste of wonder . " she be come 
 to see I - that be for you , " Strether 's counsellor continue ; " but I 
 do not   require it to know where I be . " 
 the waste of wonder might be proscribe ; but Strether , 
 characteristically , be even by this time in the immensity of space . 
 " by which you mean that you know where she be ? " 
 she just hesitate . " I mean that if she come to see I I shall - now 
 that I have   pull myself round a bit after the shock - not be at home . " 
 Strether hang poise . " you call it - your recognition - a shock ? " 
 she give one of her rare flicker of impatience . " it be a surprise , 
 an emotion . do not   be so literal . I wash my hand of she . " 
 Poor Strether 's face lengthen . " she be impossible - ? " 
 " she be even more charming than I remember she . " 
 " then what be the matter ? " 
 she have to think how to put it . " well , I'M impossible . it be 
 impossible . everything be impossible . " 
 he look at her an instant . " I see where you be come out . 
 everything be possible . " their eye have on it in fact an exchange of 
 some duration ; after which he pursue : " be not   it that beautiful 
 child ? " then as she still say nothing : " why do not   you mean to receive 
 she ? " 
 her answer in an instant rang clear . " because I wish to keep out of 
 the business . " 
 it provoke in he a weak wail . " you be go to abandon I now ? " 
 " no , I be only go to abandon she . she will want I to help she with 
 you . and I will not . " 
 " you will only help I with she ? well then - ! " Most of the person 
 previously gather have , in the interest of tea , pass into the house , 
 and they have the garden mainly to themselves . the shadow be long , 
 the last call of the bird , who have make a home of their own in the 
 noble interspace quarter , sound from the high tree in the other 
 garden as well , those of the old convent and of the old hotel ; it be 
 as if our friend have wait for the full charm to come out . Strether 's 
 impression be still present ; it be as if something have happen 
 that " nail " they , make they more intense ; but he be to ask himself 
 soon afterwards , that evening , what really have happen - conscious as 
 he could after all remain that for a gentleman take , and take the 
 first time , into the " great world , " the world of ambassador and 
 duchess , the item make a meagre total . it be nothing new to he , 
 however , as we know , that a man might have - at all event such a man as 
 he - an amount of experience out of any proportion to his adventure ; so 
 that , though it be doubtless no great adventure to sit on there with 
 Miss Gostrey and hear about Madame de Vionnet , the hour , the picture , 
 the immediate , the recent , the possible - as well as the communication 
 itself , not a note of which fail to reverberate - only give the 
 moment more of the taste of history . 
 it be history , to begin with , that Jeanne 's mother have be 
 three - and - twenty year before , at Geneva , schoolmate and good 
 girlfriend to Maria Gostrey , who have moreover enjoy since then , 
 though interruptedly and above all with a long recent drop , other 
 glimpse of she . twenty - three year put they both on , no doubt ; and 
 Madame de Vionnet - though she have marry straight after 
 school - could not   be today an hour less than thirty - eight . this make she 
 ten year old than Chad - though ten year , also , if Strether like , 
 old than she look ; the least , at any rate , that a prospective 
 mother - in - law could be expect to do with . she would be of all 
 mother - in - law the most charming ; unless indeed , through some 
 perversity as yet insupposeable , she should utterly belie herself in 
 that relation . there be none surely in which , as Maria remember 
 she , she must not   be charming ; and this frankly in spite of the stigma 
 of failure in the tie where failure always most show . it be no test 
 there - when indeed be it a test there ? - for Monsieur de Vionnet have 
 be a brute . she have live for year apart from he - which be of 
 course always a horrid position ; but Miss Gostrey 's impression of the 
 matter have be that she could scarce have make a well thing of it 
 have she do it on purpose to show she be amiable . she be so amiable 
 that nobody have have a word to say ; which be luckily not the case for 
 her husband . he be so impossible that she have the advantage of all 
 her merit . 
 it be still history for Strether that the Comte de Vionnet - it be 
 also history that the lady in question be a Countess - should now , 
 under Miss Gostrey 's sharp touch , rise before he as a high 
 distinguish polished impertinent reprobate , the product of a 
 mysterious order ; it be history , far , that the charming girl so 
 freely sketch by his companion should have be marry out of hand 
 by a mother , another figure of strike outline , full of dark personal 
 motive ; it be perhaps history most of all that this company be , as a 
 matter of course , govern by such consideration as put divorce out of 
 the question . " ces gen - la do not   divorce , you know , any more than they 
 emigrate or abjure - they think it impious and vulgar " ; a fact in the 
 light of which they seem but the more richly special . it be all 
 special ; it be all , for Strether 's imagination , more or less rich . the 
 girl at the genevese school , an isolated interesting attach 
 creature , then both sensitive and violent , audacious but always 
 forgive , be the daughter of a french father and an english mother 
 who , early leave a widow , have marry again - try afresh with a 
 foreigner ; in her career with whom she have apparently give her child 
 no example of comfort . all these people - the people of the English 
 mother 's side - have be of condition more or less eminent ; yet with 
 oddity and disparity that have often since make Maria , think they 
 over , wonder what they really quite rhyme to . it be in any case she 
 belief that the mother , interested and prone to adventure , have be 
 without conscience , have only thought of rid herself most quickly of 
 a possible , an actual encumbrance . the father , by her impression , a 
 Frenchman with a name one know , have be a different matter , leave 
 his child , she clearly recall , a memory all fondness , as well as an 
 assure little fortune which be unluckily to make she more or less of 
 a prey later on . she have be in particular , at school , dazzlingly , 
 though quite booklessly , clever ; as polyglot as a little Jewess   which 
 she be not , oh no !   and chatter French , English , german , italian , 
 anything one would , in a way that make a clean sweep , if not of prize 
 and parchment , at least of every " part , " whether memorised or 
 improvise , in the curtain costume school repertory , and in especial 
 of all mystery of race and vagueness of reference , all swagger about 
 " home , " among their variegate mate . 
 it would doubtless be difficult to - day , as between French and English , 
 to name she and place she ; she would certainly show , on knowledge , Miss 
 Gostrey feel , as one of those convenient type who do not   keep you 
 explain - mind with door as numerous as the many - tongue cluster of 
 confessional at Saint Peter 's . you might confess to she with 
 confidence in Roumelian , and even roumelian sin . therefore - ! but 
 Strether 's narrator cover her implication with a laugh ; a laugh by 
 which his betrayal of a sense of the lurid in the picture be also 
 perhaps sufficiently protect . he have a moment of wonder , while 
 his friend go on , what sin might be especially Roumelian . she go 
 on at all event to the mention of she have meet the young 
 thing - again by some swiss lake - in her first married state , which have 
 appear for the few intermediate year not at least violently 
 disturb . she have be lovely at that moment , delightful to she , full 
 of responsive emotion , of amused recognition and amusing reminder , 
 and then once more , much later , after a long interval , equally but 
 differently charming - touching and rather mystify for the five 
 minute of an encounter at a railway - station en province , during which 
 it have come out that her life be all change . Miss Gostrey have 
 understand enough to see , essentially , what have happen , and yet have 
 beautifully dream that she be herself faultless . there be 
 doubtless depth in she , but she be all right ; Strether would see if 
 she be not . she be another person however - that have be promptly 
 mark - from the small child of nature at the Geneva school , a little 
 person quite make over   as foreign woman be , compare with American 
 by marriage . her situation too have evidently clear itself up ; there 
 would have be - all that be possible - a judicial separation . she have 
 settle in Paris , bring up her daughter , steer her boat . it be no 
 very pleasant boat - especially there - to be in ; but Marie de Vionnet 
 would have head straight . she would have friend , certainly - and 
 very good one . there she be at all event - and it be very 
 interesting . her know Mr. Chad do not   in the least prove she have not 
 friend ; what it prove be what good one he have . " I see that , " say 
 Miss Gostrey , " that night at the Francais ; it come out for I in three 
 minute . I see she - or somebody like she . and so , " she immediately 
 add , " do you . " 
 " oh no - not anybody like she ! " Strether laugh . " but you mean , " he as 
 promptly go on , " that she have have such an influence on he ? " 
 Miss Gostrey be on her foot ; it be time for they to go . " she have 
 bring he up for her daughter . " 
 their eye , as so often , in candid conference , through their settle 
 glass , meet over it long ; after which Strether 's again take in the 
 whole place . they be quite alone there now . " must not   she rather - in 
 the time then - have rush it ? " 
 " ah she will not   of course have lose an hour . but that be just the good 
 mother - the good french one . you must remember that of she - that as a 
 mother she be french , and that for they there be a special providence . it 
 precisely however - that she may not   have be able to begin as far back 
 as she would have like - make she grateful for aid . " 
 Strether take this in as they slowly move to the house on their way 
 out . " she count on I then to put the thing through ? " 
 " yes - she count on you . oh and first of all of course , " Miss Gostrey 
 add , " on she - well , convince you . " 
 " ah , " her friend return , ' she catch Chad young ! " 
 " yes , but there be woman who be for all your ' time of life . ' they be 
 the most wonderful sort . " 
 she have laugh the word out , but they bring her companion , the next 
 thing , to a stand . " be what you mean that she will try to make a fool of 
 I ? " 
 " well , I be wonder what she will - with an opportunity - make . " 
 " what do you call , " Strether ask , " an opportunity ? my go to see 
 she ? " 
 " ah you must go to see she " - Miss Gostrey be a trifle evasive . " you 
 can not   not do that . you would have go to see the other woman . I mean if 
 there have be one - a different sort . it be what you come out for . " 
 it might be ; but Strether distinguish . " I do not   come out to see 
 this sort . " 
 she have a wonderful look at he now . " be you disappointed she be not 
 bad ? " 
 he for a moment entertain the question , then find for it the 
 frankest of answer . " yes . if she be bad she would be well for our 
 purpose . it would be simple . " 
 " perhaps , " she admit . " but will not   this be pleasanter ? " 
 " ah you know , " he promptly reply , " I do not   come out - be not   that 
 just what you originally reproach I with ? - for the pleasant . " 
 " precisely . therefore I say again what I say at first . you must take 
 thing as they come . besides , " Miss Gostrey add , " I be not afraid for 
 myself . " 
 " for yourself - ? " 
 " of your see she . I trust she . there be nothing she will say about 
 I . in fact there be nothing she can . " 
 Strether wonder - little as he have think of this . then he break 
 out . " oh you woman ! " 
 there be something in it at which she flush . " yes - there we be . 
 we be abyss . " at last she smile . " but I risk she ! " 
 he give himself a shake . " well then so do I ! " but he add as they 
 pass into the house that he would see Chad the first thing in the 
 morning . 
 this be the next day the more easily effect that the young man , as 
 it happen , even before he be down , turn up at his hotel . Strether 
 take his coffee , by habit , in the public room ; but on his descending 
 for this purpose Chad instantly propose an adjournment to what he 
 call great privacy . he have himself as yet have nothing - they would 
 sit down somewhere together ; and when after a few step and a turn into 
 the Boulevard they have , for their great privacy , sit down among 
 twenty other , our friend see in his companion 's move a fear of the 
 advent of Waymarsh . it be the first time Chad have to that extent 
 give this personage " away " ; and Strether find himself wonder of 
 what it be symptomatic . he make out in a moment that the youth be in 
 earnest as he have not   yet see he ; which in its turn throw a ray 
 perhaps a trifle startling on what they have each up to that time be 
 treat as earnestness . it be sufficiently flattering however that 
 the real thing - if this be at last the real thing - should have be 
 determine , as appear , precisely by an accretion of Strether 's 
 importance . for this be what it quickly enough come to - that Chad , 
 rise with the lark , have rush down to let he know while his morning 
 consciousness be yet young that he have literally make the afternoon 
 before a tremendous impression . Madame de Vionnet would not , could not 
 rest till she should have some assurance from he that he would consent 
 again to see she . the announcement be make , across their 
 marble - top table , while the foam of the hot milk be in their cup 
 and its plash still in the air , with the smile of Chad 's easy 
 urbanity ; and this expression of his face cause our friend 's doubt to 
 gather on the spot into a challenge of the lip . " see here " - that be 
 all ; he only for the moment say again " see here . " Chad meet it with all 
 his air of straight intelligence , while Strether remember again that 
 fancy of the first impression of he , the happy young Pagan , handsome 
 and hard but oddly indulgent , whose mysterious measure he have under the 
 street - lamp try mentally to take . the young Pagan , while a long look 
 pass between they , sufficiently understand . Strether scarce need 
 at last to say the rest - " I want to know where I be . " but he say it , 
 add before any answer something more . " be you engaged to be 
 married - be that your secret ? - to the young lady ? " 
 Chad shake his head with the slow amenity that be one of his way of 
 convey that there be time for everything . " I have no 
 secret - though I may have secret ! I have not   at any rate that one . 
 we be not engage . no . " 
 " then where be the hitch ? " 
 " do you mean why I have not   already start with you ? " Chad , begin 
 his coffee and butter his roll , be quite ready to explain . " nothing 
 would have induce I - nothing will still induce I - not to try to keep 
 you here as long as you can be make to stay . it be too visibly good for 
 you . " Strether have himself plenty to say about this , but it be amusing 
 also to measure the march of Chad 's tone . he have never be more a man 
 of the world , and it be always in his company present to our friend 
 that one be see how in successive connexion a man of the world 
 acquit himself . Chad keep it up beautifully . " my idea - voyon ! - be 
 simply that you should let Madame de Vionnet know you , simply that you 
 should consent to know she . I do not   in the least mind tell you 
 that , clever and charming as she be , she be ever so much in my 
 confidence . all I ask of you be to let she talk to you . you have   ask I 
 about what you call my hitch , and so far as it go she will explain it 
 to you . she be herself my hitch , hang it - if you must really have it 
 all out . but in a sense , " he hasten in the most wonderful manner to 
 add , " that you will quite make out for yourself . she be too good a friend , 
 confound she . too good , I mean , for I to leave without - without - " it 
 be his first hesitation . 
 " without what ? " 
 " well , without my arranging somehow or other the damnable term of my 
 sacrifice . " 
 " it will be a sacrifice then ? " 
 " it will be the great loss I ever suffer . I owe she so much . " 
 it be beautiful , the way Chad say these thing , and his plea be now 
 confessedly - oh quite flagrantly and publicly - interesting . the moment 
 really take on for Strether an intensity . Chad owe Madame de Vionnet 
 so much ? what do that do then but clear up the whole mystery ? he be 
 indebted for alteration , and she be thereby in a position to have 
 send in her bill for expense incur in reconstruction . what be 
 this at bottom but what have be to be arrive at ? Strether sit there 
 arrive at it while he munch toast and stir his second cup . to 
 do this with the aid of Chad 's pleasant earnest face be also to do 
 more besides . no , never before have he be so ready to take he as he 
 be . what be it that have suddenly so clear up ? it be just 
 everybody 's character ; that be everybody 's but - in a measure - his own . 
 Strether feel his character receive for the instant a smutch from all 
 the wrong thing he have suspect or believe . the person to whom Chad 
 owe it that he could positively turn out such a comfort to other 
 person - such a person be sufficiently raise above any " breath " by 
 the nature of her work and the young man 's steady light . all of which 
 be vivid enough to come and go quickly ; though indeed in the midst of 
 it Strether could utter a question . " have I your word of honour that 
 if I surrender myself to Madame de Vionnet you will surrender yourself to 
 I ? " 
 Chad lay his hand firmly on his friend 's . " my dear man , you have it . " 
 there be finally something in his felicity almost embarrassing and 
 oppressive - Strether have begin to fidget under it for the open air and 
 the erect posture . he have sign to the waiter that he wish to pay , 
 and this transaction take some moment , during which he thoroughly 
 feel , while he put down money and pretend - it be quite hollow - to 
 estimate change , that Chad 's high spirit , his youth , his practice , 
 his paganism , his felicity , his assurance , his impudence , whatever it 
 might be , have consciously score a success . well , that be all right so 
 far as it go ; his sense of the thing in question cover our friend 
 for a minute like a veil through which - as if he have be muffle - he 
 hear his interlocutor ask he if he might not   take he over about five . 
 " over " be over the river , and over the river be where Madame de 
 Vionnet live , and five be that very afternoon . they get at last out 
 of the place - get out before he answer . he light , in the street , a 
 cigarette , which again give he more time . but it be already sharp 
 for he that there be no use in time . " what do she propose to do to 
 I ? " he have presently demand . 
 Chad have no delay . " be you afraid of she ? " 
 " oh immensely . do not   you see it ? " 
 " well , " say Chad , ' she will not   do anything bad to you than make you 
 like she . " 
 " it be just of that I be afraid . " 
 " then it be not fair to I . " 
 Strether cast about . " it be fair to your mother . " 
 " oh , " say Chad , " be you afraid of she ? " 
 " scarcely less . or perhaps even more . but be this lady against your 
 interest at home ? " Strether go on . 
 " not directly , no doubt ; but she be greatly in favour of they here . " 
 " and what - ' here ' - do she consider they to be ? " 
 " well , good relation ! " 
 " with herself ? " 
 " with herself . " 
 " and what be it that make they so good ? " 
 " what ? well , that be exactly what you will make out if you will only go , as 
 I be supplicate you , to see she . " 
 Strether star at he with a little of the wanness , no doubt , that the 
 vision of more to " make out " could scarce help produce . " I mean how 
 good be they ? " 
 " oh awfully good . " 
 again Strether have falter , but it be brief . it be all very well , 
 but there be nothing now he would not   risk . " excuse I , but I must 
 really - as I begin by tell you - know where I be . be she bad ? " 
 " ' bad ' ? " - Chad echo it , but without a shock . " be that what be 
 imply - ? " 
 " when relation be good ? " Strether feel a little silly , and be even 
 conscious of a foolish laugh , at have it impose on he to have 
 appear to speak so . what indeed be he talk about ? his stare have 
 relax ; he look now all round he . but something in he bring he 
 back , though he still do not   know quite how to turn it . the two or 
 three way he think of , and one of they in particular , be , even 
 with scruple dismiss , too ugly . he none the less at last find 
 something . " be her life without reproach ? " 
 it strike he , directly he have find it , as pompous and priggish ; so 
 much so that he be thankful to Chad for take it only in the right 
 spirit . the young man speak so immensely to the point that the effect 
 be practically of positive blandness . " absolutely without reproach . a 
 beautiful life . Allez donc voir ! " 
 these last word be , in the liberality of their confidence , so 
 imperative that Strether go through no form of assent ; but before 
 they separate it have be confirm that he should be pick up at a 
 quarter to five . 
 Book Sixth 
 I 
 it be quite by half - past five - after the two man have be together in 
 Madame de Vionnet 's drawing - room not more than a dozen minute - that 
 Chad , with a look at his watch and then another at their hostess , say 
 genially , gaily : " I have   an engagement , and I know you will not   complain if 
 I leave he with you . he will interest you immensely ; and as for she , " 
 he declare to Strether , " I assure you , if you be at all nervous , she be 
 perfectly safe . " 
 he have leave they to be embarrassed or not by this guarantee , as they 
 could well manage , and embarrassment be a thing that Strether be not 
 at first sure Madame de Vionnet escape . he escape it himself , to his 
 surprise ; but he have grow use by this time to think of himself as 
 brazen . she occupy , his hostess , in the Rue de Bellechasse , the 
 first floor of an old house to which our visitor have have access from 
 an old clean court . the court be large and open , full of revelation , 
 for our friend , of the habit of privacy , the peace of interval , the 
 dignity of distance and approach ; the house , to his restless sense , 
 be in the high homely style of an eld day , and the ancient Paris 
 that he be always look for - sometimes intensely feel , sometimes 
 more acutely miss - be in the immemorial polish of the wide waxed 
 staircase and in the fine boiserie , the medallion , moulding , 
 mirror , great clear space , of the greyish - white salon into which he 
 have be show . he seem at the very outset to see she in the midst 
 of possession not vulgarly numerous , but hereditary cherish 
 charming . while his eye turn after a little from those of his 
 hostess and Chad freely talk - not in the least about HIM , but about 
 other people , people he do not   know , and quite as if he do know 
 they - he find himself make out , as a background of the occupant , 
 some glory , some prosperity of the First Empire , some napoleonic 
 glamour , some dim lustre of the great legend ; element cling still 
 to all the consular chair and mythological brass and sphinx ' head 
 and fade surface of satin strip with alternate silk . 
 the place itself go far back - that he guess , and how old Paris 
 continue in a manner to echo there ; but the post - revolutionary period , 
 the world he vaguely think of as the world of Chateaubriand , of 
 Madame de Stael , even of the young Lamartine , have leave its stamp of 
 harp and urn and torch , a stamp impress on sundry small object , 
 ornament and relic . he have never before , to his knowledge , have 
 present to he relic , of any special dignity , of a private 
 order - little old miniature , medallion , picture , book ; book in 
 leather binding , pinkish and greenish , with gilt garland on the back , 
 range , together with other promiscuous property , under the glass of 
 brass - mount cabinet . his attention take they all tenderly into 
 account . they be among the matter that mark Madame de Vionnet 's 
 apartment as something quite different from Miss Gostrey 's little 
 museum of bargain and from Chad 's lovely home ; he recognise it as 
 found much more on old accumulation that have possibly from time to 
 time shrink than on any contemporary method of acquisition or form of 
 curiosity . Chad and Miss Gostrey have rummage and purchase and pick 
 up and exchange , sift , select , compare ; whereas the mistress 
 of the scene before he , beautifully passive under the spell of 
 transmission - transmission from her father 's line , he quite make up his 
 mind - have only receive , accept and be quiet . when she have not   be 
 quiet she have be move at the most to some occult charity for some 
 fall fortune . there have be object she or her predecessor might 
 even conceivably have part with under need , but Strether could not 
 suspect they of have sell old piece to get " well " one . they 
 would have feel no difference as to well or bad . he could but 
 imagine their have feel - perhaps in emigration , in proscription , for 
 his sketch be slight and confused - the pressure of want or the 
 obligation of sacrifice . 
 the pressure of want - whatever might be the case with the other 
 force - be , however , presumably not active now , for the token of a 
 chasten ease still abound after all , many mark of a taste whose 
 discrimination might perhaps have be call eccentric . he guess 
 at intense little preference and sharp little exclusion , a deep 
 suspicion of the vulgar and a personal view of the right . the general 
 result of this be something for which he have no name on the spot quite 
 ready , but something he would have come nearest to name in speak 
 of it as the air of supreme respectability , the consciousness , small , 
 still , reserve , but none the less distinct and diffused , of private 
 honour . the air of supreme respectability - that be a strange blank 
 wall for his adventure to have bring he to break his nose against . 
 it have in fact , as he be now aware , fill all the approach , hover 
 in the court as he pass , hang on the staircase as he mount , sound 
 in the grave rumble of the old bell , as little electric as possible , of 
 which Chad , at the door , have pull the ancient but neatly - keep tassel ; 
 it form in short the clear medium of its particular kind that he 
 have ever breathe . he would have answer for it at the end of a 
 quarter of an hour that some of the glass case contain sword and 
 epaulette of ancient colonel and general ; medal and order once 
 pin over heart that have long since cease to beat ; snuff - box 
 bestow on minister and envoy ; copy of work present , with 
 inscription , by author now classic . at bottom of it all for he be 
 the sense of her rare unlikeness to the woman he have know . this sense 
 have grow , since the day before , the more he recall she , and have be 
 above all singularly feed by his talk with Chad in the morning . 
 everything in fine make she immeasurably new , and nothing so new as the 
 old house and the old object . there be book , two or three , on a 
 small table near his chair , but they have not   the lemon - colour cover 
 with which his eye have begin to dally from the hour of his arrival and 
 to the opportunity of a further acquaintance with which he have for a 
 fortnight now altogether succumb . on another table , across the room , 
 he make out the great Revue ; but even that familiar face , conspicuous 
 in Mrs. Newsome 's parlour , scarce count here as a modern note . he 
 be sure on the spot - and he afterwards know he be right - that this 
 be a touch of Chad 's own hand . what would Mrs. Newsome say to the 
 circumstance that Chad 's interested " influence " keep her paper - knife in 
 the Revue ? the interested influence at any rate have , as we say , go 
 straight to the point - have in fact soon leave it quite behind . 
 she be seat , near the fire , on a small stuff and fringe chair one 
 of the few modern article in the room , and she lean back in it with 
 her hand clasp in her lap and no movement , in all her person , but 
 the fine prompt play of her deep young face . the fire , under the low 
 white marble , undraped and academic , have burn down to the silver ash 
 of light wood , one of the window , at a distance , stand open to the 
 mildness and stillness , out of which , in the short pause , come the 
 faint sound , pleasant and homely , almost rustic , of a plash and a 
 clatter of sabot from some coach - house on the other side of the court . 
 Madame de Vionnet , while Strether sit there , be not   to shift her 
 posture by an inch . " I do not   think you seriously believe in what you be 
 do , " she say ; " but all the same , you know , I be go to treat you 
 quite as if I do . " 
 " by which you mean , " Strether directly reply , " quite as if you 
 do not ! I assure you it will not   make the least difference with I how 
 you treat I . " 
 " well , " she say , take that menace bravely and philosophically 
 enough , " the only thing that really matter be that you shall get on 
 with I . " 
 " ah but I do not ! " he immediately return . 
 it give she another pause ; which , however , she happily enough shake 
 off . " will you consent to go on with I a little - provisionally - as if 
 you do ? " 
 then it be that he see how she have decidedly come all the way ; and 
 there accompany it an extraordinary sense of she raise from 
 somewhere below he her beautiful suppliant eye . he might have be 
 perch at his door - step or at his window and she stand in the road . 
 for a moment he let she stand and could not   moreover have speak . it 
 have be sad , of a sudden , with a sadness that be like a cold breath 
 in his face . " what can I do , " he finally ask , " but listen to you as 
 I promise Chadwick ? " 
 " ah but what I be ask you , " she quickly say , " be not   what Mr. Newsome 
 have in mind . " she speak at present , he see , as if to take courageously 
 all her risk . " this be my own idea and a different thing . " 
 it give poor Strether in truth - uneasy as it make he too - something of 
 the thrill of a bold perception justify . " well , " he answer kindly 
 enough , " I be sure a moment since that some idea of your own have come 
 to you . " 
 she seem still to look up at he , but now more serenely . " I make out 
 you be sure - and that help it to come . so you see , " she continue , 
 " we do get on . " 
 " oh but it appear to I I do not   at all meet your request . how can I 
 when I do not   understand it ? " 
 " it be not   at all necessary you should understand ; it will do quite well 
 enough if you simply remember it . only feel I trust you - and for 
 nothing so tremendous after all . just , " she say with a wonderful 
 smile , " for common civility . " 
 Strether have a long pause while they sit again face to face , as they 
 have sit , scarce less conscious , before the poor lady have cross the 
 stream . she be the poor lady for Strether now because clearly she have 
 some trouble , and her appeal to he could only mean that her trouble 
 be deep . he could not   help it ; it be not   his fault ; he have do 
 nothing ; but by a turn of the hand she have somehow make their encounter 
 a relation . and the relation profit by a mass of thing that be 
 not strictly in it or of it ; by the very air in which they sit , by the 
 high cold delicate room , by the world outside and the little plash in 
 the court , by the First Empire and the relic in the stiff cabinet , by 
 matter as far off as those and by other as near as the unbroken clasp 
 of her hand in her lap and the look her expression have of be most 
 natural when her eye be most fix . " you count upon I of course 
 for something really much great than it sound . " 
 " oh it sound great enough too ! " she laugh at this . 
 he find himself in time on the point of tell she that she be , as 
 Miss Barrace call it , wonderful ; but , catch himself up , he say 
 something else instead . " what be it Chad 's idea then that you should 
 say to I ? " 
 " ah his idea be simply what a man 's idea always be - to put every 
 effort off on the woman . " 
 " the ' woman ' - ? " Strether slowly echo . 
 " the woman he like - and just in proportion as he like she . in 
 proportion too - for shift the trouble - as she like HIM . " 
 Strether follow it ; then with an abruptness of his own : " how much do 
 you like Chad ? " 
 " just as much as that - to take all , with you , on myself . " but she get 
 at once again away from this . " I have   be tremble as if we be to 
 stand or fall by what you may think of I ; and I be even now , " she go 
 on wonderfully , " draw a long breath - and , yes , truly take a great 
 courage - from the hope that I do not   in fact strike you as impossible . " 
 " that be at all event , clearly , " he observe after an instant , " the way 
 I do not   strike you . " 
 " well , " she so far assent , " as you have not   yet say you WON'T have 
 the little patience with I I ask for - " 
 " you draw splendid conclusion ? perfectly . but I do not   understand 
 they , " Strether pursue . " you seem to I to ask for much more than you 
 need . what , at the bad for you , what at the good for myself , can I 
 after all do ? I can use no pressure that I have not   use . you come 
 really late with your request . I have   already do all that for myself 
 the case admit of . I have   say my say , and here I be . " 
 " yes , here you be , fortunately ! " Madame de Vionnet laugh . " Mrs. 
 Newsome , " she add in another tone , " do not   think you can do so 
 little . " 
 he have an hesitation , but he bring the word out . " well , she think 
 so now . " 
 " do you mean by that - ? " but she also hang fire . 
 " do I mean what ? " 
 she still rather falter . " pardon I if I touch on it , but if I be 
 say extraordinary thing , why , perhaps , may not   I ? besides , do not 
 it properly concern we to know ? " 
 " to know what ? " he insist as after thus beat about the bush she 
 have again drop . 
 she make the effort . " have she give you up ? " 
 he be amazed afterwards to think how simply and quietly he have meet it . 
 " not yet . " it be almost as if he be a trifle disappoint - have 
 expect still more of her freedom . but he go straight on . " be that 
 what Chad have tell you will happen to I ? " 
 she be evidently charm with the way he take it . " if you mean if 
 we have   talk of it - most certainly . and the question be not what have 
 have least to do with my wishing to see you . " 
 " to judge if I be the sort of man a woman can - ? " 
 " precisely , " she exclaim - " you wonderful gentleman ! I do judge - I 
 have judge . a woman can not . you be safe - with every right to be . 
 you would be much happy if you would only believe it . " 
 Strether be silent a little ; then he find himself speak with a 
 cynicism of confidence of which even at the moment the source be 
 strange to he . " I try to believe it . but it be a marvel , " he 
 exclaim , " how you already get at it ! " 
 oh she be able to say . " remember how much I be on the way to it 
 through Mr. Newsome - before I see you . he think everything of your 
 strength . " 
 " well , I can bear almost anything ! " our friend briskly interrupt . 
 Deep and beautiful on this her smile come back , and with the effect of 
 make he hear what he have say just as she have hear it . he easily 
 enough feel that it give he away , but what in truth have everything 
 do but that ? it have be all very well to think at moment that he 
 be hold her nose down and that he have coerce she : what have he by 
 this time do but let she practically see that he accept their 
 relation ? what be their relation moreover - though light and brief 
 enough in form as yet - but whatever she might choose to make it ? 
 nothing could prevent she - certainly he could not   - from make it 
 pleasant . at the back of his head , behind everything , be the sense 
 that she be - there , before he , close to he , in vivid imperative 
 form - one of the rare woman he have so often hear of , read of , think 
 of , but never meet , whose very presence , look , voice , the mere 
 contemporaneous fact of whom , from the moment it be at all present , 
 make a relation of mere recognition . that be not the kind of woman he 
 have ever find Mrs. Newsome , a contemporaneous fact who have be 
 distinctly slow to establish herself ; and at present , confront with 
 Madame de Vionnet , he feel the simplicity of his original impression of 
 Miss Gostrey . she certainly have be a fact of rapid growth ; but the 
 world be wide , each day be more and more a new lesson . there be at 
 any rate even among the stranger one relation and relation . " of 
 course I suit Chad 's grand way , " he quickly add . " he have not   have much 
 difficulty in work I in . " 
 she seem to deny a little , on the young man 's behalf , by the rise of 
 her eyebrow , an intention of any process at all inconsiderate . " you 
 must know how grieved he would be if you be to lose anything . he 
 believe you can keep his mother patient . " 
 Strether wonder with his eye on she . " I see . that be then what you 
 really want of I . and how be I to do it ? perhaps you will tell I 
 that . " 
 " simply tell she the truth . " 
 " and what do you call the truth ? " 
 " well , any truth - about we all - that you see yourself . I leave it to 
 you . " 
 " thank you very much . I like , " Strether laugh with a slight 
 harshness , " the way you leave thing ! " 
 but she insist kindly , gently , as if it be not   so bad . " be perfectly 
 honest . tell she all . " 
 " All ? " he oddly echo . 
 " tell she the simple truth , " Madame de Vionnet again plead . 
 " but what be the simple truth ? the simple truth be exactly what I be 
 try to discover . " 
 she look about a while , but presently she come back to he . " tell 
 she , fully and clearly , about US . " 
 Strether meanwhile have be star . " you and your daughter ? " 
 " yes - little Jeanne and I . tell she , " she just slightly quaver , 
 " you like we . " 
 " and what good will that do I ? or rather " - he catch himself 
 up - " what good will it do you ? " 
 she look graver . " none , you believe , really ? " 
 Strether debate . " she do not   send I out to ' like ' you . " 
 " oh , " she charmingly contend , ' she send you out to face the fact . " 
 he admit after an instant that there be something in that . " but 
 how can I face they till I know what they be ? do you want he , " he 
 then brace himself to ask , " to marry your daughter ? " 
 she give a headshake as noble as it be prompt . " no - not that . " 
 " and he really do not   want to himself ? " 
 she repeat the movement , but now with a strange light in her face . 
 " he like she too much . " 
 Strether wonder . " to be willing to consider , you mean , the question 
 of take she to America ? " 
 " to be willing to do anything with she but be immensely kind and 
 nice - really tender of she . we watch over she , and you must help we . 
 you must see she again . " 
 Strether feel awkward . " ah with pleasure - she be so remarkably 
 attractive . " 
 the mother 's eagerness with which Madame de Vionnet jump at this be 
 to come back to he later as beautiful in its grace . " the dear thing 
 do please you ? " then as he meet it with the large " oh ! " of 
 enthusiasm : " she be perfect . she be my joy . " 
 " well , I be sure that - if one be near she and see more of she - she would 
 be mine . " 
 " then , " say Madame de Vionnet , " tell Mrs. Newsome that ! " 
 he wonder the more . " what good will that do you ? " as she appear 
 unable at once to say , however , he bring out something else . " be 
 your daughter in love with our friend ? " 
 " ah , " she rather startlingly answer , " I wish you would find out ! " 
 he show his surprise . " I ? a stranger ? " 
 " oh you will not   be a stranger - presently . you shall see she quite , I 
 assure you , as if you be not . " 
 it remain for he none the less an extraordinary notion . " it seem 
 to I surely that if her mother can not   - " 
 " ah little girl and their mother to - day ! " she rather inconsequently 
 break in . but she check herself with something she seem to give 
 out as after all more to the point . " tell she I have   be good for he . 
 do not   you think I have ? " 
 it have its effect on he - more than at the moment he quite measure . 
 yet he be consciously enough touch . " oh if it be all you - ! " 
 " well , it may not be ' all , ' " she interrupt , " but it be to a great 
 extent . really and truly , " she add in a tone that be to take its 
 place with he among thing remember . 
 " then it be very wonderful . " he smile at she from a face that he feel 
 as strain , and her own face for a moment keep he so . at last she 
 also get up . " well , do not   you think that for that - " 
 " I ought to save you ? " so it be that the way to meet she - and the 
 way , as well , in a manner , to get off - come over he . he hear himself 
 use the exorbitant word , the very sound of which help to determine 
 his flight . " I will save you if I can . " 
 II 
 in Chad 's lovely home , however , one evening ten day later , he feel 
 himself present at the collapse of the question of Jeanne de Vionnet 's 
 shy secret . he have be din there in the company of that young lady 
 and her mother , as well as of other person , and he have go into the 
 petit salon , at Chad 's request , on purpose to talk with she . the young 
 man have put this to he as a favour - " I should like so awfully to know 
 what you think of she . it will really be a chance for you , " he have 
 say , " to see the jeune fille - I mean the type - as she actually be , and 
 I do not   think that , as an observer of manner , it be a thing you ought 
 to miss . it will be an impression that - whatever else you take - you 
 can carry home with you , where you will find again so much to compare it 
 with . " 
 Strether know well enough with what Chad wish he to compare it , and 
 though he entirely assent he have not   yet somehow be so deeply 
 remind that he be be , as he constantly though mutely express 
 it , use . he be as far as ever from make out exactly to what end ; 
 but he be none the less constantly accompany by a sense of the 
 service he render . he conceive only that this service be highly 
 agreeable to those who profit by it ; and he be indeed still wait 
 for the moment at which he should catch it in the act of prove 
 disagreeable , prove in some degree intolerable , to himself . he 
 fail quite to see how his situation could clear up at all logically 
 except by some turn of event that would give he the pretext of 
 disgust . he be build from day to day on the possibility of 
 disgust , but each day bring forth meanwhile a new and more engaging 
 bend of the road . that possibility be now ever so much far from 
 sight than on the eve of his arrival , and he perfectly feel that , 
 should it come at all , it would have to be at good inconsequent and 
 violent . he strike himself as a little near to it only when he ask 
 himself what service , in such a life of utility , he be after all 
 render Mrs. Newsome . when he wish to help himself to believe that 
 he be still all right he reflect - and in fact with wonder - on the 
 unimpaired frequency of their correspondence ; in relation to which what 
 be after all more natural than that it should become more frequent 
 just in proportion as their problem become more complicated ? 
 certain it be at any rate that he now often bring himself balm by the 
 question , with the rich consciousness of yesterday 's letter , " well , 
 what can I do more than that - what can I do more than tell she 
 everything ? " to persuade himself that he do tell she , have tell she , 
 everything , he use to try to think of particular thing he have not   tell 
 she . when at rare moment and in the watch of the night he pounce 
 on one it generally show itself to be - to a deep scrutiny - not 
 quite truly of the essence . when anything new strike he as come up , 
 or anything already note as reappear , he always immediately write , 
 as if for fear that if he do not   he would miss something ; and also that 
 he might be able to say to himself from time to time " she know it 
 now - even while I worry . " it be a great comfort to he in general not 
 to have leave past thing to be drag to light and explain ; not to 
 have to produce at so late a stage anything not produce , or anything 
 even veil and attenuate , at the moment . she know it now : that be 
 what he say to himself to - night in relation to the fresh fact of 
 Chad 's acquaintance with the two lady - not to speak of the fresher 
 one of his own . Mrs. Newsome know in other word that very night at 
 Woollett that he himself know Madame de Vionnet and that he have 
 conscientiously be to see she ; also that he have find she remarkably 
 attractive and that there would probably be a good deal more to tell . 
 but she far know , or would know very soon , that , again 
 conscientiously , he have not   repeat his visit ; and that when Chad have 
 ask he on the Countess 's behalf - Strether make she out vividly , with 
 a thought at the back of his head , a Countess - if he would not   name a 
 day for dining with she , he have reply lucidly : " thank you very 
 much - impossible . " he have beg the young man would present his 
 excuse and have trust he to understand that it could not   really 
 strike one as quite the straight thing . he have not   report to Mrs. 
 Newsome that he have promise to ' save " Madame de Vionnet ; but , so far 
 as he be concern with that reminiscence , he have not   at any rate 
 promise to haunt her house . what Chad have understand could only , in 
 truth , be infer from Chad 's behaviour , which have be in this 
 connexion as easy as in every other . he be easy , always , when he 
 understand ; he be easy still , if possible , when he do not ; he have 
 reply that he would make it all right ; and he have proceed to do 
 this by substitute the present occasion - as he be ready to 
 substitute other - for any , for every occasion as to which his old 
 friend should have a funny scruple . 
 " oh but I be not a little foreign girl ; I be just as English as I can 
 be , " Jeanne de Vionnet have say to he as soon as , in the petit salon , 
 he sink , shyly enough on his own side , into the place near she vacate 
 by Madame Gloriani at his approach . Madame Gloriani , who be in black 
 velvet , with white lace and powdered hair , and whose somewhat massive 
 majesty melt , at any contact , into the graciousness of some 
 incomprehensible tongue , move away to make room for the vague 
 gentleman , after benevolent greeting to he which embody , as he 
 believe , in baffle accent , some recognition of his face from a 
 couple of Sundays before . then he have remark - make the most of the 
 advantage of his year - that it frighten he quite enough to find 
 himself dedicated to the entertainment of a little foreign girl . there 
 be girl he be not   afraid of - he be quite bold with little 
 Americans . thus it be that she have defend herself to the end - " oh 
 but I be almost american too . that be what mamma have want I to be - I 
 mean like that ; for she have want I to have lot of freedom . she have 
 know such good result from it . " 
 she be fairly beautiful to he - a faint pastel in an oval frame : he 
 think of she already as of some lurk image in a long gallery , the 
 portrait of a small old - time princess of whom nothing be know but 
 that she have die young . little Jeanne be not , doubtless , to die 
 young , but one could not , all the same , bear on her lightly enough . it 
 be bear hard , it be bear as he , in any case , would not   bear , to 
 concern himself , in relation to she , with the question of a young man . 
 odious really the question of a young man ; one do not   treat such a 
 person as a maid - servant suspect of a " follower . " and then young 
 man , young man - well , the thing be their business simply , or be at 
 all event her . she be flutter , fairly fevere - to the point of a 
 little glitter that come and go in her eye and a pair of pink spot 
 that stay in her cheek - with the great adventure of dining out and 
 with the great one still , possibly , of find a gentleman whom she 
 must think of as very , very old , a gentleman with eye - glass , 
 wrinkle , a long grizzle moustache . she speak the prettiest English , 
 our friend think , that he have ever hear speak , just as he have 
 believe she a few minute before to be speak the prettiest French . 
 he wonder almost wistfully if such a sweep of the lyre do not   react 
 on the spirit itself ; and his fancy have in fact , before he know it , 
 begin so to stray and embroider that he finally find himself , absent 
 and extravagant , sit with the child in a friendly silence . only by 
 this time he feel her flutter to have fortunately drop and that she 
 be more at her ease . she trust he , like he , and it be to come 
 back to he afterwards that she have tell he thing . she have dip 
 into the wait medium at last and find neither surge nor 
 chill - nothing but the small splash she could herself make in the 
 pleasant warmth , nothing but the safety of dipping and dip again . 
 at the end of the ten minute he be to spend with her his 
 impression - with all it have throw off and all it have take in - be 
 complete . she have be free , as she know freedom , partly to show he 
 that , unlike other little person she know , she have imbibe that ideal . 
 she be delightfully quaint about herself , but the vision of what she 
 have imbibe be what most hold he . it really consist , he be soon 
 enough to feel , in just one great little matter , the fact that , 
 whatever her nature , she be thoroughly - he have to cast about for the 
 word , but it come - breed . he could not   of course on so short an 
 acquaintance speak for her nature , but the idea of breeding be what 
 she have meanwhile drop into his mind . he have never yet know it so 
 sharply present . her mother give it , no doubt ; but her mother , to 
 make that less sensible , give so much else besides , and on neither of 
 the two previous occasion , extraordinary woman , Strether feel , 
 anything like what she be give tonight . little Jeanne be a case , 
 an exquisite case of education ; whereas the Countess , whom it so amuse 
 he to think of by that denomination , be a case , also exquisite , 
 of - well , he do not   know what . 
 " he have wonderful taste , notre jeune homme " : this be what Gloriani 
 say to he on turn away from the inspection of a small picture 
 suspend near the door of the room . the high celebrity in question 
 have just come in , apparently in search of Mademoiselle de Vionnet , but 
 while Strether have get up from beside she their fellow guest , with his 
 eye sharply catch , have pause for a long look . the thing be a 
 landscape , of no size , but of the french school , as our friend be glad 
 to feel he know , and also of a quality - which he like to think he 
 should also have guess ; its frame be large out of proportion to the 
 canvas , and he have never see a person look at anything , he think , 
 just as Gloriani , with his nose very near and quick movement of the 
 head from side to side and bottom to top , examine this feature of 
 Chad 's collection . the artist use that word the next moment smile 
 courteously , wipe his nipper and look round he far - pay 
 the place in short by the very manner of his presence and by something 
 Strether fancy he could make out in this particular glance , such a 
 tribute as , to the latter 's sense , settle many thing once for all . 
 Strether be conscious at this instant , for that matter , as he have not 
 yet be , of how , round about he , quite without he , they be 
 consistently settle . Gloriani 's smile , deeply italian , he consider , 
 and finely inscrutable , have have for he , during dinner , at which they 
 be not neighbour , an indefinite greeting ; but the quality in it be 
 go that have appear on the other occasion to turn he inside out ; it 
 be as if even the momentary link supply by the doubt between they 
 have snap . he be conscious now of the final reality , which be that 
 there be not   so much a doubt as a difference altogether ; all the more 
 that over the difference the famous sculptor seem to signal almost 
 condolingly , yet oh how vacantly ! as across some great flat sheet of 
 water . he throw out the bridge of a charming hollow civility on which 
 Strether would not   have trust his own full weight a moment . that 
 idea , even though but transient and perhaps belate , have perform the 
 office of put Strether more at his ease , and the blurred picture 
 have already drop - drop with the sound of something else say and 
 with his become aware , by another quick turn , that Gloriani be now 
 on the sofa talk with Jeanne , while he himself have in his ear again 
 the familiar friendliness and the elusive meaning of the " oh , oh , oh ! " 
 that have make he , a fortnight before , challenge Miss Barrace in vain . 
 she have always the air , this picturesque and original lady , who strike 
 he , so oddly , as both antique and modern - she have always the air of 
 take up some joke that one have already have out with she . the point 
 itself , no doubt , be what be antique , and the use she make of it what 
 be modern . he feel just now that her good - natured irony do bear on 
 something , and it trouble he a little that she would not   be more 
 explicit only assure he , with the pleasure of observation so visible 
 in she , that she would not   tell he more for the world . he could take 
 refuge but in ask she what she have do with Waymarsh , though it 
 must be add that he feel himself a little on the way to a clue after 
 she have answer that this personage be , in the other room , engage in 
 conversation with Madame de Vionnet . he star a moment at the image 
 of such a conjunction ; then , for Miss Barrace 's benefit , he wonder . 
 " be she too then under the charm - ? " 
 " no , not a bit " - Miss Barrace be prompt . " she make nothing of he . 
 she be bored . she will not   help you with he . " 
 " oh , " Strether laugh , ' she can not   do everything . 
 " of course not - wonderful as she be . besides , he make nothing of she . 
 she will not   take he from I - though she would not , no doubt , have other 
 affair in hand , even if she could . I have   never , " say Miss Barrace , 
 ' see her fail with any one before . and to - night , when she be so 
 magnificent , it would seem to her strange - if she mind . so at any 
 rate I have he all . Je suis tranquille ! " 
 Strether understand , so far as that go ; but he be feel for his 
 clue . " she strike you to - night as particularly magnificent ? " 
 " surely . almost as I have   never see she . do not   she you ? why it be for 
 you . " 
 he persist in his candour . " ' for ' I - ? " 
 " oh , oh , oh ! " cry Miss Barrace , who persist in the opposite of that 
 quality . 
 " well , " he acutely admit , ' she be different . she be gay . " 
 " she be gay ! " Miss Barrace laugh . " and she have beautiful 
 shoulder - though there be nothing different in that . " 
 " no , " say Strether , " one be sure of her shoulder . it be not   her 
 shoulder . " 
 his companion , with renew mirth and the fine sense , between the 
 puff of her cigarette , of the drollery of thing , appear to find 
 their conversation highly delightful . " yes , it be not   her shoulder . " 
 " what then be it ? " Strether earnestly enquire . 
 " why , it be SHE - simply . it be her mood . it be her charm . " 
 " of course it be her charm , but we be speak of the difference . " 
 " well , " Miss Barrace explain , ' she be just brilliant , as we use to 
 say . that be all . she be various . she be fifty woman . " 
 " ah but only one " - Strether keep it clear - " at a time . " 
 " perhaps . but in fifty time - ! " 
 " oh we shall not   come to that , " our friend declare ; and the next moment 
 he have move in another direction . " will you answer I a plain 
 question ? will she ever divorce ? " 
 Miss Barrace look at he through all her tortoise - shell . " why should 
 she ? " 
 it be not   what he have ask for , he signify ; but he meet it well 
 enough . " to marry Chad . " 
 " why should she marry Chad ? " 
 " because I be convinced she be very fond of he . she have do wonder 
 for he . " 
 " well then , how could she do more ? marry a man , or woman either , " 
 Miss Barrace sagely go on , " be never the wonder for any Jack and Jill 
 can bring that off . the wonder be their do such thing without 
 marrying . " 
 Strether consider a moment this proposition . " you mean it be so 
 beautiful for our friend simply to go on so ? " 
 but whatever he say make her laugh . " beautiful . " 
 he nevertheless insist . " and that because it be disintereste ? " 
 she be now , however , suddenly tired of the question . " yes then - call 
 it that . besides , she will never divorce . do not , moreover , " she add , 
 " believe everything you hear about her husband . " 
 " he be not then , " Strether ask , " a wretch ? " 
 " oh yes . but charming . " 
 " do you know he ? " 
 " I have   meet he . he be bien aimable . " 
 " to every one but his wife ? " 
 " oh for all I know , to she too - to any , to every woman . I hope you at 
 any rate , " she pursue with a quick change , " appreciate the care I take 
 of Mr. Waymarsh . " 
 " oh immensely . " but Strether be not yet in line . " at all event , " he 
 roundly bring out , " the attachment be an innocent one . " 
 " Mine and his ? ah , " she laugh , " do not   rob it of all interest ! " 
 " I mean our friend 's here - to the lady we have   be speak of . " that 
 be what he have settle to as an indirect but none the less closely 
 involved consequence of his impression of Jeanne . that be where he 
 mean to stay . " it be innocent , " he repeat - " I see the whole thing . " 
 mystify by his abrupt declaration , she have glance over at Gloriani 
 as at the unnamed subject of his allusion , but the next moment she have 
 understand ; though indeed not before Strether have notice her momentary 
 mistake and wonder what might possibly be behind that too . he 
 already know that the sculptor admire Madame de Vionnet ; but do this 
 admiration also represent an attachment of which the innocence be 
 discussable ? he be move verily in a strange air and on ground not 
 of the firm . he look hard for an instant at Miss Barrace , but she 
 have already go on . " all right with Mr. Newsome ? why of course she 
 be ! " - and she get gaily back to the question of her own good friend . " I 
 dare say you be surprised that I be not wear out with all I see - it 
 be so much ! - of Sitting Bull . but I be not , you know - I do not   mind 
 he ; I bear up , and we get on beautifully . I be very strange ; I be like 
 that ; and often I can not   explain . there be people who be suppose 
 interesting or remarkable or whatever , and who bear I to death ; and 
 then there be other as to whom nobody can understand what anybody 
 see in they - in whom I see no end of thing . " then after she have 
 smoke a moment , " he be touching , you know , " she say . 
 " ' know ' ? " Strether echo - " do not   I , indeed ? we must move you almost 
 to tear . " 
 " oh but I do not   mean you ! " she laugh . 
 " you ought to then , for the bad sign of all - as I must have it for 
 you - be that you can not   help I . that be when a woman pity . " 
 " ah but I do help you ! " she cheerfully insist . 
 again he look at her hard , and then after a pause : " no you do not ! " 
 her tortoise - shell , on its long chain , rattle down . " I help you with 
 Sitting Bull . that be a good deal . " 
 " oh that , yes . " but Strether hesitate . " do you mean he talk of I ? " 
 " so that I have to defend you ? no , never . ' 
 " I see , " Strether muse . " it be too deep . " 
 " that be his only fault , " she return - " that everything , with he , be 
 too deep . he have depth of silence - which he break only at the 
 long interval by a remark . and when the remark come it be always 
 something he have see or feel for himself - never a bit banal that would 
 be what one might have fear and what would kill I but never . " she 
 smoke again as she thus , with amused complacency , appreciate she 
 acquisition . " and never about you . we keep clear of you . we be 
 wonderful . but I will tell you what he do do , " she continue : " he 
 try to make I present . " 
 " Presents ? " poor Strether echo , conscious with a pang that he have not 
 yet try that in any quarter . 
 " why you see , " she explain , " he be as fine as ever in the victoria ; so 
 that when I leave he , as I often do almost for hour - he like it 
 so - at the door of shop , the sight of he there help I , when I come 
 out , to know my carriage away off in the rank . but sometimes , for a 
 change , he go with I into the shop , and then I have   all I can do to 
 prevent his buy I thing . " 
 " he want to ' treat ' you ? " Strether almost gasp at all he himself 
 have not   think of . he have a sense of admiration . " oh he be much more 
 in the real tradition than I. Yes , " he muse , " it be the sacred rage . " 
 " the sacred rage , exactly ! " - and Miss Barrace , who have not   before hear 
 this term apply , recognise its bearing with a clap of her gem 
 hand . " now I do know why he be not banal . but I do prevent he all 
 the same - and if you see what he sometimes select - from buying . I 
 save he hundred and hundred . I only take flower . " 
 " flower ? " Strether echo again with a rueful reflexion . how many 
 nosegay have her present converser send ? 
 " innocent flower , " she pursue , " as much as he like . and he send I 
 splendour ; he know all the good place - he have find they for 
 himself ; he be wonderful . " 
 " he have not   tell they to I , " her friend smile , " he have a life of his 
 own . " but Strether have swing back to the consciousness that for 
 himself after all it never would have do . waymarsh have not   Mrs. 
 Waymarsh in the least to consider , whereas Lambert Strether have 
 constantly , in the inmost honour of his thought , to consider Mrs. 
 Newsome . he like moreover to feel how much his friend be in the real 
 tradition . yet he have his conclusion . " what a rage it be ! " he have 
 work it out . " it be an opposition . " 
 she follow , but at a distance . " that be what I feel . yet to what ? " 
 " well , he think , you know , that I'VE a life of my own . and I have not ! " 
 " you have not ? " she show doubt , and her laugh confirm it . " oh , oh , 
 oh ! " 
 " no - not for myself . I seem to have a life only for other people . " 
 " ah for they and with they ! just now for instance with - " 
 " well , with whom ? " he ask before she have have time to say . 
 his tone have the effect of make she hesitate and even , as he guess , 
 speak with a difference . " say with Miss Gostrey . what do you do for 
 she ? " it really make he wonder . " nothing at all ! " 
 III 
 Madame de Vionnet , have meanwhile come in , be at present close to 
 they , and Miss Barrace hereupon , instead of risk a rejoinder , become 
 again with a look that measure she from top to toe all mere 
 long - handle appreciative tortoise - shell . she have strike our friend , 
 from the first of her appear , as dress for a great occasion , and 
 she meet still more than on either of the other the conception 
 reawaken in he at their garden - party , the idea of the femme du monde 
 in her habit as she live . her bare shoulder and arm be white and 
 beautiful ; the material of her dress , a mixture , as he suppose , of 
 silk and crape , be of a silvery grey so artfully compose as to give 
 an impression of warm splendour ; and round her neck she wear a collar 
 of large old emerald , the green note of which be more dimly repeat , 
 at other point of her apparel , in embroidery , in enamel , in satin , in 
 substance and texture vaguely rich . her head , extremely fair and 
 exquisitely festal , be like a happy fancy , a notion of the antique , on 
 an old precious medal , some silver coin of the Renaissance ; while her 
 slim lightness and brightness , her gaiety , her expression , her 
 decision , contribute to an effect that might have be feel by a poet 
 as half mythological and half conventional . he could have compare she 
 to a goddess still partly engage in a morning cloud , or to a sea - nymph 
 waist - high in the summer surge . above all she suggest to he the 
 reflexion that the femme du monde - in these fine development of the 
 type - be , like Cleopatra in the play , indeed various and multifold . 
 she have aspect , character , day , night - or have they at least , show 
 they by a mysterious law of her own , when in addition to everything she 
 happen also to be a woman of genius . she be an obscure person , a 
 muffle person one day , and a showy person , an uncovered person the 
 next . he think of Madame de Vionnet to - night as showy and uncover , 
 though he feel the formula rough , because , thank to one of the 
 short - cut of genius she have take all his category by surprise . 
 twice during dinner he have meet Chad 's eye in a longish look ; but these 
 communication have in truth only stir up again old ambiguity - so 
 little be it clear from they whether they be an appeal or an 
 admonition . " you see how I be fix , " be what they appear to convey ; 
 yet how he be fix be exactly what Strether do not   see . however , 
 perhaps he should see now . 
 " be you capable of the very great kindness of go to relieve 
 Newsome , for a few minute , of the rather crush responsibility of 
 Madame Gloriani , while I say a word , if he will allow I , to Mr. 
 Strether , of whom I have   a question to ask ? our host ought to talk a bit 
 to those other lady , and I will come back in a minute to your rescue . " 
 she make this proposal to Miss Barrace as if her consciousness of a 
 special duty have just flicker - up , but that lady 's recognition of 
 Strether 's little start at it - as at a betrayal on the speaker 's part 
 of a domesticated state - be as mute as his own comment ; and after an 
 instant , when their fellow guest have good - naturedly leave they , he have 
 be give something else to think of . " why have Maria so suddenly 
 go ? do you know ? " that be the question Madame de Vionnet have 
 bring with she . 
 " I be afraid I have   no reason to give you but the simple reason I have   have 
 from she in a note - the sudden obligation to join in the south a sick 
 friend who have get bad . " 
 " ah then she have be write you ? " 
 " not since she go - I have only a brief explanatory word before she 
 start . I go to see she , " Strether explain - " it be the day after 
 I call on you - but she be already on her way , and her concierge tell 
 I that in case of my come I be to be inform she have write to 
 I . I find her note when I get home . " 
 Madame de Vionnet listen with interest and with her eye on 
 Strether 's face ; then she delicately decorate head have a small 
 melancholy motion . " she do not   write to I . I go to see she , " she 
 add , " almost immediately after I have see you , and as I assure she I 
 would do when I meet she at Gloriani 's . she have not   then tell I she be 
 to be absent , and I feel at her door as if I understand . she be 
 absent - with all respect to her sick friend , though I know indeed she 
 have plenty - so that I may not see she . she do not   want to meet I 
 again . well , " she continue with a beautiful conscious mildness , " I 
 like and admire she beyond every one in the old time , and she know 
 it - perhaps that be precisely what have make she go - and I dare say I 
 have not   lose she for ever . " Strether still say nothing ; he have a 
 horror , as he now think of himself , of be in question between 
 woman - be in fact already quite enough on his way to that , and there 
 be moreover , as it come to he , perceptibly , something behind these 
 allusion and profession that , should he take it in , would square but 
 ill with his present resolve to simplify . it be as if , for he , all 
 the same , her softness and sadness be sincere . he feel that not less 
 when she soon go on : " I be extremely glad of her happiness . " but it 
 also leave he mute - sharp and fine though the imputation it convey . 
 what it convey be that he be Maria Gostrey 's happiness , and for the 
 least little instant he have the impulse to challenge the thought . he 
 could have do so however only by say " what then do you suppose to 
 be between we ? " and he be wonderfully glad a moment later not to have 
 speak . he would rather seem stupid any day than fatuous , and he draw 
 back as well , with a smother inward shudder , from the consideration 
 of what woman - of highly - develop type in particular - might think of 
 each other . whatever he have come out for he have not   come to go into 
 that ; so that he absolutely take up nothing his interlocutress have now 
 let drop . yet , though he have keep away from she for day , have lay 
 wholly on herself the burden of their meeting again , she have not   a gleam 
 of irritation to show he . " well , about Jeanne now ? " she smile - it 
 have the gaiety with which she have originally come in . he feel it on the 
 instant to represent her motive and real errand . but he have be 
 school she of a truth to say much in proportion to his little . " do 
 you make out that she have a sentiment ? I mean for Mr. Newsome . " 
 almost resentful , Strether could at last be prompt . " how can I make 
 out such thing ? " 
 she remain perfectly good - natured . " ah but they be beautiful little 
 thing , and you make out - do not   pretend - everything in the world . 
 have not   you , " she ask , " be talk with she ? " 
 " yes , but not about Chad . at least not much . " 
 " oh you do not   require ' much ' ! " she reassuringly declare . but she 
 immediately change her ground . " I hope you remember your promise of 
 the other day . " 
 " to ' save ' you , as you call it ? " 
 " I call it so still . you will ? " she insist . " you have not   repent ? " 
 he wonder . " no - but I have   be think what I mean . " 
 she keep it up . " and not , a little , what I do ? " 
 " no - that be not necessary . it will be enough if I know what I mean 
 myself . " 
 " and do not   you know , " she ask , " by this time ? " 
 again he have a pause . " I think you ought to leave it to I . but how 
 long , " he add , " do you give I ? " 
 " it seem to I much more a question of how long you give I . do not 
 our friend here himself , at any rate , " she go on , " perpetually make 
 I present to you ? " 
 " not , " Strether reply , " by ever speak of you to I . " 
 " he never do that ? " 
 " never . " 
 she consider , and , if the fact be disconcert to she , effectually 
 conceal it . the next minute indeed she have recover . " no , he 
 would not . but do you need that ? " 
 her emphasis be wonderful , and though his eye have be wander he 
 look at her long now . " I see what you mean . " 
 " of course you see what I mean . " 
 her triumph be gentle , and she really have tone to make justice weep . 
 " I have   before I what he owe you . " 
 " admit then that that be something , " she say , yet still with the same 
 discretion in her pride . 
 he take in this note but go straight on . " you have   make of he what I 
 see , but what I do not   see be how in the world you have   do it . " 
 " ah that be another question ! " she smile . " the point be of what use be 
 your decline to know I when to know Mr. Newsome - as you do I the 
 honour to find he - be just to know I . " 
 " I see , " he muse , still with his eye on she . " I should not   have meet 
 you to - night . " 
 she raise and drop her link hand . " it do not   matter . if I 
 trust you why can not   you a little trust I too ? and why can not   you 
 also , " she ask in another tone , " trust yourself ? " but she give he 
 no time to reply . " oh I shall be so easy for you ! and I be glad at any 
 rate you have   see my child . " 
 " I be glad too , " he say ; " but she do you no good . " 
 " no good ? " - Madame de Vionnet have a clear stare . " why she be an angel 
 of light . " 
 " that be precisely the reason . leave she alone . do not   try to find out . 
 I mean , " he explain , " about what you speak to I of - the way she 
 feel . " 
 his companion wonder . " because one really will not ? " 
 " well , because I ask you , as a favour to myself , not to . she be the 
 most charming creature I have   ever see . therefore do not   touch she . 
 do not   know - do not   want to know . and moreover - yes - you will not . " 
 it be an appeal , of a sudden , and she take it in . " as a favour to 
 you ? " 
 " well - since you ask I . " 
 " anything , everything you ask , " she smile . " I shall not   know 
 then - never . thank you , " she add with peculiar gentleness as she 
 turn away . 
 the sound of it linger with he , make he fairly feel as if he have 
 be trip up and have a fall . in the very act of arrange with she 
 for his independence he have , under pressure from a particular 
 perception , inconsistently , quite stupidly , commit himself , and , 
 with her subtlety sensitive on the spot to an advantage , she have drive 
 in by a single word a little golden nail , the sharp intention of which 
 he signally feel . he have not   detach , he have more closely connect 
 himself , and his eye , as he consider with some intensity this 
 circumstance , meet another pair which have just come within their range 
 and which strike he as reflect his sense of what he have do . he 
 recognise they at the same moment as those of little Bilham , who have 
 apparently draw near on purpose to speak to he , and little Bilham 
 be not , in the condition , the person to whom his heart would be most 
 closed . they be seat together a minute later at the angle of the 
 room obliquely opposite the corner in which Gloriani be still engage 
 with Jeanne de Vionnet , to whom at first and in silence their attention 
 have be benevolently give . " I can not   see for my life , " Strether have 
 then observe , " how a young fellow of any spirit - such a one as you for 
 instance - can be admit to the sight of that young lady without be 
 hard hit . why do not   you go in , little Bilham ? " he remember the tone 
 into which he have be betray on the garden - bench at the sculptor 's 
 reception , and this might make up for that by be much more the right 
 sort of thing to say to a young man worthy of any advice at all . " there 
 would be some reason . " 
 " some reason for what ? " 
 " why for hang on here . " 
 " to offer my hand and fortune to Mademoiselle de Vionnet ? " 
 " well , " Strether ask , " to what lovelier apparition could you offer 
 they ? she be the sweetest little thing I have   ever see . " 
 " she be certainly immense . I mean she be the real thing . I believe the 
 pale pink petal be fold up there for some wondrous efflorescence in 
 time ; to open , that be , to some great golden sun . i'm unfortunately but 
 a small farthe candle . what chance in such a field for a poor little 
 painter - man ? " 
 " oh you be good enough , " Strether throw out . 
 " certainly I be good enough . we be good enough , I consider , nous 
 autre , for anything . but she be too good . there be the difference . 
 they would not   look at I . " 
 Strether , lounge on his divan and still charm by the young girl , 
 whose eye have consciously stray to he , he fancy , with a vague 
 smile - Strether , enjoy the whole occasion as with dormant pulse at 
 last awake and in spite of new material thrust upon he , think over 
 his companion 's word . " whom do you mean by ' they ' ? she and her 
 mother ? " 
 " she and her mother . and she have a father too , who , whatever else he 
 may be , certainly can not   be indifferent to the possibility she 
 represent . besides , there be Chad . " 
 Strether be silent a little . " ah but he do not   care for she - not , I 
 mean , it appear , after all , in the sense I be speak of . he be not in 
 love with she . " 
 " no - but he be her good friend ; after her mother . he be very fond of 
 she . he have his idea about what can be do for she . " 
 " well , it be very strange ! " Strether presently remark with a sighing 
 sense of fulness . 
 " very strange indeed . that be just the beauty of it . be not   it very 
 much the kind of beauty you have in mind , " little Bilham go on , " when 
 you be so wonderful and so inspiring to I the other day ? do not   you 
 adjure I , in accent I shall never forget , to see , while I have   a 
 chance , everything I can ? - and REALLY to see , for it must have be 
 that only you mean . well , you do I no end of good , and I be do my 
 well . I do make it out a situation . " 
 " so do I ! " Strether go on after a moment . but he have the next minute 
 an inconsequent question . " how come Chad so mix up , anyway ? " 
 " ah , ah , ah ! " - and little Bilham fall back on his cushion . 
 it remind our friend of Miss Barrace , and he feel again the brush of 
 his sense of move in a maze of mystic closed allusion . yet he keep 
 hold of his thread . " of course I understand really ; only the general 
 transformation make I occasionally gasp . Chad with such a voice in 
 the settlement of the future of a little countess - no , " he declare , 
 " it take more time ! you say moreover , " he resume , " that we be 
 inevitably , people like you and I , out of the running . the curious 
 fact remain that Chad himself be not . the situation do not   make for 
 it , but in a different one he could have she if he would . " 
 " yes , but that be only because he be rich and because there be a 
 possibility of his be rich . they will not   think of anything but a 
 great name or a great fortune . " 
 " well , " say Strether , " he will have no great fortune on these line . he 
 must stir his stump . " 
 " be that , " little Bilham enquire , " what you be say to Madame de 
 Vionnet ? " 
 " no - I do not   say much to she . of course , however , " Strether continue , 
 " he can make sacrifice if he like . " 
 little Bilham have a pause . " oh he be not keen for sacrifice ; or 
 think , that is , possibly , that he have make enough . " 
 " well , it be virtuous , " his companion observe with some decision . 
 " that be exactly , " the young man drop after a moment , " what I mean . " 
 it keep Strether himself silent a little . " I have   make it out for 
 myself , " he then go on ; " I have   really , within the last half - hour , get 
 hold of it . I understand it in short at last ; which at first - when you 
 originally speak to I - I do not . nor when Chad originally speak to I 
 either . " 
 " oh , " say little Bilham , " I do not   think that at that time you believe 
 I . " 
 " yes - I do ; and I believe Chad too . it would have be odious and 
 unmannerly - as well as quite perverse - if I have not . what interest have 
 you in deceive I ? " 
 the young man cast about . " what interest have I ? " 
 " yes . Chad might have . but you ? " 
 " ah , ah , ah ! " little Bilham exclaim . 
 it might , on repetition , as a mystification , have irritate our friend 
 a little , but he know , once more , as we have see , where he be , and 
 his be proof against everything be only another attestation that he 
 mean to stay there . " I could not , without my own impression , realise . 
 she be a tremendously clever brilliant capable woman , and with an 
 extraordinary charm on top of it all - the charm we surely all of we 
 this evening know what to think of . it be not   every clever brilliant 
 capable woman that have it . in fact it be rare with any woman . so there 
 you be , " Strether proceed as if not for little Bilham 's benefit 
 alone . " I understand what a relation with such a woman - what such a 
 high fine friendship - may be . it can not   be vulgar or coarse , 
 anyway - and that be the point . " 
 " yes , that be the point , " say little Bilham . " it can not   be vulgar or 
 coarse . and , bless we and save we , it isn't ! it be , upon my word , the 
 very fine thing I ever see in my life , and the most distinguished . " 
 Strether , from beside he and lean back with he as he lean , 
 drop on he a momentary look which fill a short interval and of 
 which he take no notice . he only gaze before he with intent 
 participation . " of course what it have do for he , " Strether at all 
 event presently pursue , " of course what it have do for he - that be 
 as to how it have so wonderfully work - be not   a thing I pretend to 
 understand . I have   to take it as I find it . there he be . " 
 " there he be ! " little Bilham echo . " and it be really and truly she . I 
 do not   understand either , even with my long and close opportunity . 
 but I be like you , " he add ; " I can admire and rejoice even when I be a 
 little in the dark . you see I have   watch it for some three year , and 
 especially for this last . he be not   so bad before it as I seem to have 
 make out that you think - " 
 " oh I do not   think anything now ! " Strether impatiently break in : " that 
 be but what I do think ! I mean that originally , for she to have care 
 for he - " 
 " there must have be stuff in he ? oh yes , there be stuff indeed , 
 and much more of it than ever show , I dare say , at home . still , you 
 know , " the young man in all fairness develop , " there be room for 
 she , and that be where she come in . she see her chance and take it . 
 that be what strike I as have be so fine . but of course , " he 
 wind up , " he like she first . " 
 " naturally , " say Strether . 
 " I mean that they first meet somehow and somewhere - I believe in some 
 american house - and she , without in the least then intend it , make 
 her impression . then with time and opportunity he make his ; and after 
 that she be as bad as he . " 
 Strether vaguely take it up . " as ' bad ' ? " 
 " she begin , that is , to care - to care very much . alone , and in her 
 horrid position , she find it , when once she have start , an interest . 
 it be , it be , an interest , and it do - it continue to do - a lot for 
 herself as well . so she still care . she care in fact , " say little 
 Bilham thoughtfully " more . " 
 Strether 's theory that it be none of his business be somehow not 
 damage by the way he take this . " More , you mean , than he ? " on which 
 his companion look round at he , and now for an instant their eye 
 meet . " More than he ? " he repeat . 
 Little Bilham , for as long , hung fire . " will you never tell any one ? " 
 Strether think . " whom should I tell ? " 
 " why I suppose you report regularly - " 
 " to people at home ? " - Strether take he up . " well , I will not   tell they 
 this . " 
 the young man at last look away . " then she do now care more than 
 he . " 
 " oh ! " Strether oddly exclaim . 
 but his companion immediately meet it . " have not   you after all have your 
 impression of it ? that be how you have   get hold of he . " 
 " ah but I have not   get hold of he ! " 
 " oh I say ! " but it be all little Bilham say . 
 " it be at any rate none of my business . I mean , " Strether explain , 
 " nothing else than get hold of he be . " it appear , however , to 
 strike he as his business to add : " the fact remain nevertheless that 
 she have save he . " 
 little Bilham just wait . " I think that be what you be to do . " 
 but Strether have his answer ready . " I be speak - in connexion with 
 she - of his manner and moral , his character and life . I be speak 
 of he as a person to deal with and talk with and live with - speak 
 of he as a social animal . " 
 " and be not   it as a social animal that you also want he ? " 
 " certainly ; so that it be as if she have save he for we . " 
 " it strike you accordingly then , " the young man throw out , " as for you 
 all to save she ? " 
 " oh for we ' all ' - ! " Strether could but laugh at that . it bring he 
 back , however , to the point he have really wish to make . " they have 
 accept their situation - hard as it be . they be not free - at least 
 she be not ; but they take what be leave to they . it be a friendship , of a 
 beautiful sort ; and that be what make they so strong . they be 
 straight , they feel ; and they keep each other up . it be doubtless she , 
 however , who , as you yourself have hint , feel it most . " 
 little Bilham appear to wonder what he have hint . " feel most that 
 they be straight ? " 
 " well , feel that she be , and the strength that come from it . she 
 keep HIM up - she keep the whole thing up . when people be able to 
 it be fine . she be wonderful , wonderful , as Miss Barrace say ; and he 
 be , in his way , too ; however , as a mere man , he may sometimes rebel and 
 not feel that he find his account in it . she have simply give he an 
 immense moral lift , and what that can explain be prodigious . that be why 
 I speak of it as a situation . it be one , if there ever be . " and 
 Strether , with his head back and his eye on the ceiling , seem to 
 lose himself in the vision of it . 
 his companion attend deeply . " you state it much well than I 
 could . " " oh you see it do not   concern you . " 
 little Bilham consider . " I think you say just now that it do not 
 concern you either . " 
 " well , it do not   a bit as Madame de Vionnet 's affair . but as we be 
 again say just now , what do I come out for but to save he ? " 
 " yes - to remove he . " 
 " to save he by removal ; to win he over to HIMSELF think it well he 
 shall take up business - thinking he must immediately do therefore 
 what be necessary to that end . " 
 " well , " say little Bilham after a moment , " you have win he over . he 
 do think it well . he have within a day or two again say to I as 
 much . " 
 " and that , " Strether ask , " be why you consider that he care less 
 than she ? " 
 " care less for she than she for he ? yes , that be one of the reason . 
 but other thing too have give I the impression . a man , do not   you 
 think ? " little Bilham presently pursue , " can't , in such condition , 
 care so much as a woman . it take different condition to make he , 
 and then perhaps he care more . Chad , " he wind up , " have his possible 
 future before he . " 
 " be you speak of his business future ? " 
 " no - on the contrary ; of the other , the future of what you so justly 
 call their situation . M. de Vionnet may live for ever . " 
 " so that they can not   marry ? " 
 the young man wait a moment . " not be able to marry be all they have 
 with any confidence to look forward to . a woman - a particular 
 woman - may stand that strain . but can a man ? " he propound . 
 Strether 's answer be as prompt as if he have already , for himself , 
 work it out . " not without a very high ideal of conduct . but that be 
 just what we be attribute to Chad . and how , for that matter , " he 
 muse , " do his go to America diminish the particular strain ? 
 would not   it seem rather to add to it ? " 
 " out of sight out of mind ! " his companion laugh . then more bravely : 
 " would not   distance lessen the torment ? " but before Strether could 
 reply , " the thing be , you see , Chad ought to marry ! " he wind up . 
 Strether , for a little , appear to think of it . " if you talk of 
 torment you do not   diminish mine ! " he then break out . the next moment 
 he be on his foot with a question . " he ought to marry whom ? " 
 little Bilham rise more slowly . " well , some one he can - some 
 thoroughly nice girl . " 
 Strether 's eye , as they stand together , turn again to Jeanne . " do 
 you mean she ? " 
 his friend make a sudden strange face . " after be in love with her 
 mother ? no . " 
 " but be not   it exactly your idea that he isn't   in love with her mother ? " 
 his friend once more have a pause . " well , he be not   at any rate in love 
 with Jeanne . " 
 " I dare say not . " 
 " how can he be with any other woman ? " 
 " oh that I admit . but be in love be not , you know , here " - little 
 Bilham speak in friendly reminder - " think necessary , in strictness , 
 for marriage . " 
 " and what torment - to call a torment - can there ever possibly be with a 
 woman like that ? " as if from the interest of his own question Strether 
 have go on without hear . " be it for she to have turn a man out 
 so wonderfully , too , only for somebody else ? " he appear to make a 
 point of this , and little Bilham look at he now . " when it be for 
 each other that people give thing up they do not   miss they . " then he 
 throw off as with an extravagance of which he be conscious : " let they 
 face the future together ! " 
 little Bilham look at he indeed . " you mean that after all he 
 should not   go back ? " 
 " I mean that if he give she up - ! " 
 " yes ? " 
 " well , he ought to be ashamed of himself . " but Strether speak with a 
 sound that might have pass for a laugh . 
 Volume II 
 Book Seventh 
 I 
 it be not   the first time Strether have sit alone in the great dim 
 church - still less be it the first of his give himself up , so far as 
 condition permit , to its beneficent action on his nerve . he have 
 be to Notre Dame with Waymarsh , he have be there with Miss Gostrey , 
 he have be there with Chad Newsome , and have find the place , even in 
 company , such a refuge from the obsession of his problem that , with 
 renew pressure from that source , he have not unnaturally recur to a 
 remedy meet the case , for the moment , so indirectly , no doubt , but 
 so relievingly . he be conscious enough that it be only for the 
 moment , but good moment - if he could call they good - still have their 
 value for a man who by this time strike himself as live almost 
 disgracefully from hand to mouth . have so well learn the way , he 
 have lately make the pilgrimage more than once by himself - have quite 
 steal off , take an unnoticed chance and make no point of speak 
 of the adventure when restore to his friend . 
 his great friend , for that matter , be still absent , as well as 
 remarkably silent ; even at the end of three week Miss Gostrey have not 
 come back . she write to he from Mentone , admit that he must judge 
 her grossly inconsequent - perhaps in fact for the time odiously 
 faithless ; but ask for patience , for a deferred sentence , throw 
 herself in short on his generosity . for she too , she could assure he , 
 life be complicated - more complicated than he could have guess ; she 
 have moreover make certain of he - certain of not wholly miss he on 
 her return - before her disappearance . if furthermore she do not   burden 
 he with letter it be frankly because of her sense of the other great 
 commerce he have to carry on . he himself , at the end of a fortnight , 
 have write twice , to show how his generosity could be trust ; but he 
 remind himself in each case of Mrs. Newsome 's epistolary manner at 
 the time when Mrs. Newsome keep off delicate ground . he sink his 
 problem , he talk of Waymarsh and Miss Barrace , of little Bilham and 
 the set over the river , with whom he have again have tea , and he be 
 easy , for convenience , about Chad and Madame de Vionnet and Jeanne . he 
 admit that he continue to see they , he be decidedly so confirm a 
 haunter of Chad 's premise and that young man 's practical intimacy with 
 they be so undeniably great ; but he have his reason for not attempt 
 to render for Miss Gostrey 's benefit the impression of these last day . 
 that would be to tell she too much about himself - it be at present 
 just from himself he be try to escape . 
 this small struggle spring not a little , in its way , from the same 
 impulse that have now carry he across to Notre Dame ; the impulse to 
 let thing be , to give they time to justify themselves or at least to 
 pass . he be aware of have no errand in such a place but the desire 
 not to be , for the hour , in certain other place ; a sense of safety , of 
 simplification , which each time he yield to it he amuse himself by 
 thinking of as a private concession to cowardice . the great church have 
 no altar for his worship , no direct voice for his soul ; but it be none 
 the less soothing even to sanctity ; for he could feel while there what 
 he could not   elsewhere , that he be a plain tired man take the holiday 
 he have earn . he be tired , but he be not   plain - that be the pity 
 and the trouble of it ; he be able , however , to drop his problem at the 
 door very much as if it have be the copper piece that he deposit , on 
 the threshold , in the receptacle of the inveterate blind beggar . he 
 trod the long dim nave , sit in the splendid choir , pause before the 
 cluttered chapel of the east end , and the mighty monument lay upon 
 he its spell . he might have be a student under the charm of a 
 museum - which be exactly what , in a foreign town , in the afternoon of 
 life , he would have like to be free to be . this form of sacrifice do 
 at any rate for the occasion as well as another ; it make he quite 
 sufficiently understand how , within the precinct , for the real refugee , 
 the thing of the world could fall into abeyance . that be the 
 cowardice , probably - to dodge they , to beg the question , not to deal 
 with it in the hard outer light ; but his own oblivion be too brief , 
 too vain , to hurt any one but himself , and he have a vague and fanciful 
 kindness for certain person whom he meet , figure of mystery and 
 anxiety , and whom , with observation for his pastime , he rank as those 
 who be flee from justice . Justice be outside , in the hard light , 
 and injustice too ; but one be as absent as the other from the air of 
 the long aisle and the brightness of the many altar . 
 thus it be at all event that , one morning some dozen day after the 
 dinner in the Boulevard Malesherbes at which Madame de Vionnet have be 
 present with her daughter , he be call upon to play his part in an 
 encounter that deeply stir his imagination . he have the habit , in 
 these contemplation , of watch a fellow visitant , here and there , 
 from a respectable distance , remark some note of behaviour , of 
 penitence , of prostration , of the absolve , relieved state ; this be 
 the manner in which his vague tenderness take its course , the degree of 
 demonstration to which it naturally have to confine itself . it have not 
 indeed so feel its responsibility as when on this occasion he suddenly 
 measure the suggestive effect of a lady whose supreme stillness , in 
 the shade of one of the chapel , he have two or three time notice as 
 he make , and make once more , his slow circuit . she be not 
 prostrate - not in any degree bow , but she be strangely fix , and 
 her prolonged immobility show she , while he pass and pause , as 
 wholly give up to the need , whatever it be , that have bring she 
 there . she only sit and gaze before she , as he himself often sit ; but 
 she have place herself , as he never do , within the focus of the 
 shrine , and she have lose herself , he could easily see , as he would only 
 have like to do . she be not a wandering alien , keep back more than 
 she give , but one of the familiar , the intimate , the fortunate , for 
 whom these dealing have a method and a meaning . she remind our 
 friend - since it be the way of nine tenth of his current impression 
 to act as recall of thing imagine - of some fine firm concentrated 
 heroine of an old story , something he have hear , read , something that , 
 have he have a hand for drama , he might himself have write , renew 
 her courage , renew her clearness , in splendidly - protect 
 meditation . her back , as she sit , be turn to he , but his 
 impression absolutely require that she should be young and 
 interesting , and she carry her head moreover , even in the sacred 
 shade , with a discernible faith in herself , a kind of imply 
 conviction of consistency , security , impunity . but what have such a 
 woman come for if she have not   come to pray ? Strether 's reading of such 
 matter be , it must be own , confuse ; but he wonder if her 
 attitude be some congruous fruit of absolution , of " indulgence . " he 
 know but dimly what indulgence , in such a place , might mean ; yet he 
 have , as with a soft sweep , a vision of how it might indeed add to the 
 zest of active rite . all this be a good deal to have be denote by 
 a mere lurking figure who be nothing to he ; but , the last thing 
 before leave the church , he have the surprise of a still deep 
 quickening . 
 he have drop upon a seat halfway down the nave and , again in the 
 museum mood , be try with head throw back and eye aloft , to 
 reconstitute a past , to reduce it in fact to the convenient term of 
 Victor Hugo , whom , a few day before , give the rein for once in a way 
 to the joy of life , he have purchase in seventy bind volume , a 
 miracle of cheapness , part with , he be assure by the shopman , at 
 the price of the red - and - gold alone . he look , doubtless , while he 
 play his eternal nipper over Gothic gloom , sufficiently rapt in 
 reverence ; but what his thought have finally bump against be the 
 question of where , among packed accumulation , so multiform a wedge 
 would be able to enter . be seventy volume in red - and - gold to be 
 perhaps what he should most substantially have to show at Woollett as 
 the fruit of his mission ? it be a possibility that hold he a 
 minute - hold he till he happen to feel that some one , unnoticed , have 
 approach he and pause . turn , he see that a lady stand there as 
 for a greeting , and he spring up as he next take she , securely , for 
 Madame de Vionnet , who appear to have recognise he as she pass 
 near he on her way to the door . she check , quickly and gaily , a 
 certain confusion in he , come to meet it , turn it back , by an art of 
 her own ; the confusion have threaten he as he know she for the 
 person he have lately be observe . she be the lurk figure of the 
 dim chapel ; she have occupy he more than she guess ; but it come to 
 he in time , luckily , that he need not   tell she and that no harm , after 
 all , have be do . she herself , for that matter , straightway show 
 she feel their encounter as the happy of accident , have for he a 
 " you come here too ? " that despoiled surprise of every awkwardness . 
 " I come often , " she say . " I love this place , but I be terrible , in 
 general , for church . the old woman who live in they all know I ; in 
 fact I be already myself one of the old woman . it be like that , at all 
 event , that I foresee I shall end . " look about for a chair , so 
 that he instantly pull one nearer , she sit down with he again to the 
 sound of an " oh , I like so much your also be fond - ! " 
 he confess the extent of his feeling , though she leave the object 
 vague ; and he be strike with the tact , the taste of her vagueness , 
 which simply take for grant in he a sense of beautiful thing . he 
 be conscious of how much it be affect , this sense , by something 
 subdued and discreet in the way she have arrange herself for her 
 special object and her morning walk - he believe she to have come on 
 foot ; the way her slightly thick veil be draw - a mere touch , but 
 everything ; the compose gravity of her dress , in which , here and 
 there , a dull wine - colour seem to gleam faintly through black ; the 
 charming discretion of her small compact head ; the quiet note , as she 
 sit , of she fold , grey - glove hand . it be , to Strether 's mind , as 
 if she sit on her own ground , the light honour of which , at an open 
 gate , she thus easily do he , while all the vastness and mystery of 
 the domain stretch off behind . when people be so completely in 
 possession they could be extraordinarily civil ; and our friend have 
 indeed at this hour a kind of revelation of her heritage . she be 
 romantic for he far beyond what she could have guess , and again he 
 find his small comfort in the conviction that , subtle though she be , 
 his impression must remain a secret from she . the thing that , once 
 more , make he uneasy for secret in general be this particular 
 patience she could have with his own want of colour ; albeit that on the 
 other hand his uneasiness pretty well drop after he have be for ten 
 minute as colourless as possible and at the same time as responsive . 
 the moment have already , for that matter , draw their deep tinge 
 from the special interest excite in he by his vision of his 
 companion 's identity with the person whose attitude before the 
 glimmering altar have so impress he . this attitude fit admirably 
 into the stand he have privately take about her connexion with Chad on 
 the last occasion of his see they together . it help he to stick 
 fast at the point he have then reach ; it be there he have resolve 
 that he would stick , and at no moment since have it seem as easy to do 
 so . unassailably innocent be a relation that could make one of the 
 party to it so carry herself . if it be not   innocent why do she haunt 
 the church ? - into which , give the woman he could believe he make 
 out , she would never have come to flaunt an insolence of guilt . she 
 haunt they for continued help , for strength , for peace - sublime 
 support which , if one be able to look at it so , she find from day to 
 day . they talk , in low easy tone and with lift linger look , 
 about the great monument and its history and its beauty - all of which , 
 Madame de Vionnet profess , come to she most in the other , the outer 
 view . " we will presently , after we go , " she say , " walk round it again 
 if you like . I be not in a particular hurry , and it will be pleasant to 
 look at it well with you . " he have speak of the great romancer and the 
 great romance , and of what , to his imagination , they have do for the 
 whole , mention to she moreover the exorbitance of his purchase , the 
 seventy blaze volume that be so out of proportion . 
 " out of proportion to what ? " 
 " well , to any other plunge . " yet he feel even as he speak how at that 
 instant he be plunge . he have make up his mind and be impatient to 
 get into the air ; for his purpose be a purpose to be utter outside , 
 and he have a fear that it might with delay still slip away from he . 
 she however take her time ; she draw out their quiet gossip as if she 
 have wish to profit by their meeting , and this confirm precisely an 
 interpretation of her manner , of her mystery . while she rise , as he 
 would have call it , to the question of Victor Hugo , her voice itself , 
 the light low quaver of her deference to the solemnity about they , 
 seem to make her word mean something that they do not   mean openly . 
 help , strength , peace , a sublime support - she have not   find so much of 
 these thing as that the amount would not   be sensibly great for any 
 scrap his appearance of faith in she might enable she to feel in her 
 hand . every little , in a long strain , help , and if he happen to 
 affect she as a firm object she could hold on by , he would not   jerk 
 himself out of her reach . People in difficulty hold on by what be 
 near , and he be perhaps after all not far off than source of 
 comfort more abstract . it be as to this he have make up his mind ; he 
 have make it up , that is , to give she a sign . the sign would be 
 that - though it be her own affair - he understand ; the sign would be 
 that - though it be her own affair - she be free to clutch . since she 
 take he for a firm object - much as he might to his own sense appear at 
 time to rock - he would do his good to be one . 
 the end of it be that half an hour later they be seat together for 
 an early luncheon at a wonderful , a delightful house of entertainment 
 on the left bank - a place of pilgrimage for the knowing , they be both 
 aware , the knowing who come , for its great renown , the homage of 
 restless day , from the other end of the town . Strether have already 
 be there three time - first with Miss Gostrey , then with Chad , then 
 with Chad again and with waymarsh and little Bilham , all of whom he have 
 himself sagaciously entertain ; and his pleasure be deep now on 
 learn that Madame de Vionnet have not   yet be initiate . when he have 
 say as they stroll round the church , by the river , act at last on 
 what , within , he have make up his mind to , " will you , if you have time , 
 come to dejeuner with I somewhere ? for instance , if you know it , over 
 there on the other side , which be so easy a walk " - and then have name 
 the place ; when he have do this she stop short as for quick 
 intensity , and yet deep difficulty , of response . she take in the 
 proposal as if it be almost too charming to be true ; and there have 
 perhaps never yet be for her companion so unexpected a moment of 
 pride - so fine , so odd a case , at any rate , as his find himself thus 
 able to offer to a person in such universal possession a new , a rare 
 amusement . she have hear of the happy spot , but she ask he in reply 
 to a further question how in the world he could suppose she to have 
 be there . he suppose himself to have suppose that Chad might have 
 take she , and she guess this the next moment to his no small 
 discomfort . 
 " ah , let I explain , " she smile , " that I do not   go about with he in 
 public ; I never have such chance - not have they otherwise - and it be 
 just the sort of thing that , as a quiet creature live in my hole , I 
 adore . " it be more than kind of he to have think of it - though , 
 frankly , if he ask whether she have time she have not   a single minute . 
 that however make no difference - she would throw everything over . every 
 duty at home , domestic , maternal , social , await she ; but it be a 
 case for a high line . her affair would go to smash , but have not   one a 
 right to one 's snatch of scandal when one be prepared to pay ? it be 
 on this pleasant basis of costly disorder , consequently , that they 
 eventually seat themselves , on either side of a small table , at a 
 window adjust to the busy quay and the shin barge - burden Seine ; 
 where , for an hour , in the matter of let himself go , of diving 
 deep , Strether be to feel he have touch bottom . he be to feel many 
 thing on this occasion , and one of the first of they be that he have 
 travel far since that evening in London , before the theatre , when 
 his dinner with Maria Gostrey , between the pink - shade candle , have 
 strike he as require so many explanation . he have at that time 
 gather they in , the explanation - he have store they up ; but it be 
 at present as if he have either soar above or sink below they - he 
 could not   tell which ; he could somehow think of none that do not   seem to 
 leave the appearance of collapse and cynicism easy for he than 
 lucidity . how could he wish it to be lucid for other , for any one , 
 that he , for the hour , see reason enough in the mere way the bright 
 clean order water - side life come in at the open window ? - the mere way 
 Madame de Vionnet , opposite he over their intensely white table - linen , 
 their omelette aux tomates , their bottle of straw - colour Chablis , 
 thank he for everything almost with the smile of a child , while her 
 grey eye move in and out of their talk , back to the quarter of the 
 warm spring air , in which early summer have already begin to throb , and 
 then back again to his face and their human question . 
 their human question become many before they have do - many more , as 
 one after the other come up , than our friend 's free fancy have at all 
 foresee . the sense he have have before , the sense he have have 
 repeatedly , the sense that the situation be run away with he , have 
 never be so sharp as now ; and all the more that he could perfectly 
 put his finger on the moment it have take the bit in its tooth . that 
 accident have definitely occur , the other evening , after Chad 's 
 dinner ; it have occur , as he fully know , at the moment when he 
 interpose between this lady and her child , when he suffer himself so 
 to discuss with she a matter closely concern they that her own 
 subtlety , mark by its significant " thank you ! " instantly seal the 
 occasion in her favour . again he have hold off for ten day , but the 
 situation have continue out of hand in spite of that ; the fact that it 
 be run so fast be indeed just why he have hold off . what have 
 come over he as he recognise she in the nave of the church be that 
 hold off could be but a lose game from the instant she be work 
 for not only by her subtlety , but by the hand of fate itself . if all 
 the accident be to fight on her side - and by the actual showing they 
 loom large - he could only give himself up . this be what he have do 
 in privately decide then and there to propose she should breakfast 
 with he . what do the success of his proposal in fact resemble but the 
 smash in which a regular runaway properly end ? the smash be their 
 walk , their dejeuner , their omelette , the Chablis , the place , the view , 
 their present talk and his present pleasure in it - to say nothing , 
 wonder of wonder , of her own . to this tune and nothing less , 
 accordingly , be his surrender make good . it sufficiently light up 
 at least the folly of hold off . ancient proverb sound , for his 
 memory , in the tone of their word and the clink of their glass , in 
 the hum of the town and the plash of the river . it be clearly well 
 to suffer as a sheep than as a lamb . one might as well perish by the 
 sword as by famine . 
 " Maria 's still away ? " - that be the first thing she have ask he ; and 
 when he have find the frankness to be cheerful about it in spite of the 
 meaning he know she to attach to Miss Gostrey 's absence , she have go 
 on to enquire if he do not   tremendously miss she . there be reason 
 that make he by no mean sure , yet he nevertheless answer 
 " tremendously " ; which she take in as if it be all she have wish to 
 prove . then , " a man in trouble must be possess somehow of a woman , " 
 she say ; " if she do not   come in one way she come in another . " 
 " why do you call I a man in trouble ? " 
 " ah because that be the way you strike I . " she speak ever so gently 
 and as if with all fear of wound he while she sit partake of his 
 bounty . " aren't   you in trouble ? " 
 he feel himself colour at the question , and then hat that - hat to 
 pass for anything so idiotic as woundable . woundable by Chad 's lady , 
 in respect to whom he have come out with such a fund of 
 indifference - be he already at that point ? perversely , none the less , 
 his pause give a strange air of truth to her supposition ; and what be 
 he in fact but disconcert at have strike she just in the way he have 
 most dreamed of not do ? " I be not in trouble yet , " he at last 
 smile . " I be not in trouble now . " 
 " well , I be always so . but that you sufficiently know . " she be a 
 woman who , between course , could be graceful with her elbow on the 
 table . it be a posture unknown to Mrs. Newsome , but it be easy for a 
 femme du monde . " yes - I be ' now ' ! " 
 " there be a question you put to I , " he presently return , " the night 
 of Chad 's dinner . I do not   answer it then , and it have be very 
 handsome of you not to have seek an occasion for press I about it 
 since . " 
 she be instantly all there . " of course I know what you allude to . I 
 ask you what you have mean by say , the day you come to see I , 
 just before you leave I , that you would save I . and you then say - at our 
 friend 's - that you would have really to wait to see , for yourself , what you 
 do mean . " 
 " yes , I ask for time , " say Strether . " and it sound now , as you put 
 it , like a very ridiculous speech . " 
 " oh ! " she murmur - she be full of attenuation . but she have another 
 thought . " if it do sound ridiculous why do you deny that you be in 
 trouble ? " 
 " ah if I be , " he reply , " it would not   be the trouble of fear 
 ridicule . I do not   fear it . " 
 " what then do you ? " 
 " nothing - now . " and he lean back in his chair . 
 " I like your ' now ' ! " she laugh across at he . 
 " well , it be precisely that it fully come to I at present that I have 
 keep you long enough . I know by this time , at any rate , what I mean 
 by my speech ; and I really know it the night of Chad 's dinner . " 
 " then why do not   you tell I ? " 
 " because it be difficult at the moment . I have already at that moment 
 do something for you , in the sense of what I have say the day I go 
 to see you ; but I be not   then sure of the importance I might represent 
 this as have . " 
 she be all eagerness . " and you be sure now ? " 
 " yes ; I see that , practically , I have   do for you - have do for you when 
 you put I your question - all that it be as yet possible to I to do . I 
 feel now , " he go on , " that it may go far than I think . what I 
 do after my visit to you , " he explain , " be to write straight off to 
 Mrs. Newsome about you , and I be at last , from one day to the other , 
 expect her answer . it be this answer that will represent , as I 
 believe , the consequence . " 
 Patient and beautiful be her interest . " I see - the consequence of 
 your speaking for I . " and she wait as if not to hustle he . 
 he acknowledge it by immediately go on . " the question , you 
 understand , be how I should save you . well , I be try it by thus 
 let she know that I consider you worth save . " 
 " I see - I see . " her eagerness break through . 
 " how can I thank you enough ? " he could not   tell she that , however , and 
 she quickly pursue . " you do really , for yourself , consider it ? " 
 his only answer at first be to help she to the dish that have be 
 freshly put before they . " I have   write to she again since then - I have 
 leave she in no doubt of what I think . I have   tell she all about you . " 
 " thank - not so much . ' all about ' I , " she go on - " yes . " 
 " all it seem to I you have   do for he . " 
 " ah and you might have add all it seem to I ! " she laugh again , 
 while she take up her knife and fork , as in the cheer of these 
 assurance . " but you be not sure how she will take it . " 
 " no , I will not pretend I be sure . " 
 " Voila . " and she wait a moment . " I wish you would tell I about she . " 
 " oh , " say Strether with a slightly strained smile , " all that need 
 concern you about she be that she be really a grand person . " 
 Madame de Vionnet seem to demur . " be that all that need concern I 
 about she ? " 
 but Strether neglect the question . " have not   Chad talk to you ? " 
 " of his mother ? yes , a great deal - immensely . but not from your point 
 of view . " 
 " he can not , " our friend return , " have say any ill of she . " 
 " not the least bit . he have give I , like you , the assurance that 
 she be really grand . but her be really grand be somehow just what 
 have not   seem to simplify our case . nothing , " she continue , " be 
 far from I than to wish to say a word against she ; but of course I 
 feel how little she can like be tell of she owe I anything . no 
 woman ever enjoy such an obligation to another woman . " 
 this be a proposition Strether could not   contradict . " and yet what 
 other way could I have express to she what I feel ? it be what there 
 be most to say about you . " 
 " do you mean then that she will be good to I ? " 
 " it be what I be wait to see . but I have   little doubt she would , " he 
 add , " if she could comfortably see you . " 
 it seem to strike she as a happy , a beneficent thought . " oh then 
 could not   that be manage ? would not   she come out ? would not   she if you 
 so put it to she ? do you by any possibility ? " she faintly quaver . 
 " oh no " - he be prompt . " not that . it would be , much more , to give an 
 account of you that - since there be no question of your pay the 
 visit - I should go home first . " 
 it instantly make she graver . " and be you think of that ? " 
 " oh all the while , naturally . " 
 " stay with we - stay with we ! " she exclaim on this . " that be your only 
 way to make sure . " 
 " to make sure of what ? " 
 " why that he do not   break up . you do not   come out to do that to he . " 
 " do not   it depend , " Strether return after a moment , " on what you 
 mean by break up ? " 
 " oh you know well enough what I mean ! " 
 his silence seem again for a little to denote an understanding . " you 
 take for grant remarkable thing . " 
 " yes , I do - to the extent that I do not   take for grant vulgar one . 
 you be perfectly capable of see that what you come out for be not 
 really at all to do what you have now have to do . " 
 " ah it be perfectly simple , " Strether good - humouredly plead . " I have 
 have but one thing to do - to put our case before he . to put it as it 
 could only be put here on the spot - by personal pressure . my dear 
 lady , " he lucidly pursue , " my work , you see , be really do , and my 
 reason for stay on even another day be none of the good . Chad 's 
 in possession of our case and professe to do it full justice . what 
 remain be with himself . I have   have my rest , my amusement and 
 refreshment ; I have   have , as we say at Woollett , a lovely time . nothing 
 in it have be more lovely than this happy meeting with you - in these 
 fantastic condition to which you have   so delightfully consented . I have   a 
 sense of success . it be what I want . my get all this good be 
 what Chad have wait for , and I gather that if I be ready to go he be the 
 same . " 
 she shake her head with a fine deep wisdom . " you be not ready . if 
 you be ready why do you write to Mrs. Newsome in the sense you have 
 mention to I ? " 
 Strether consider . " I shall not   go before I hear from she . you be too 
 much afraid of she , " he add . 
 it produce between they a long look from which neither shrank . " I 
 do not   think you believe that - believe I have   not really reason to fear 
 she . " 
 " she be capable of great generosity , " Strether presently state . 
 " well then let she trust I a little . that be all I ask . let she 
 recognise in spite of everything what I have   do . " 
 " ah remember , " our friend reply , " that she can not   effectually 
 recognise it without see it for herself . let Chad go over and show 
 she what you have   do , and let he plead with she there for it and , as 
 it be , for you . " 
 she measure the depth of this suggestion . " do you give I your word 
 of honour that if she once have he there she will not   do she good to marry 
 he ? " 
 it make her companion , this enquiry , look again a while out at the 
 view ; after which he speak without sharpness . " when she see for 
 herself what he be - " 
 but she have already break in . " it be when she see for herself what he 
 be that she will want to marry he most . " 
 Strether 's attitude , that of due deference to what she say , permit 
 he to attend for a minute to his luncheon . " I doubt if that will come 
 off . it will not   be easy to make it . " 
 " it will be easy if he remain there - and he will remain for the money . 
 the money appear to be , as a probability , so hideously much . " 
 " well , " Strether presently conclude , " nothing could really hurt you 
 but his marrying . " 
 she give a strange light laugh . " put aside what may really hurt 
 HIM . " 
 but her friend look at she as if he have think of that too . " the 
 question will come up , of course , of the future that you yourself offer 
 he . " 
 she be lean back now , but she fully face he . " well , let it come 
 up ! " 
 " the point be that it be for Chad to make of it what he can . his being 
 proof against marriage will show what he do make . " 
 " if he be proof , yes " - she accept the proposition . " but for myself , " 
 she add , " the question be what you make . " 
 " ah I make nothing . it be not my affair . " 
 " I beg your pardon . it be just there that , since you have   take it up and 
 be commit to it , it most intensely become yours . you be not 
 save I , I take it , for your interest in myself , but for your 
 interest in our friend . the one be at any rate wholly dependent on the 
 other . you can not   in honour not see I through , " she wind up , " because 
 you can not   in honour not see HIM . " 
 strange and beautiful to he be her quiet soft acuteness . the thing 
 that most move he be really that she be so deeply serious . she have 
 none of the portentous form of it , but he have never come in contact , 
 it strike he , with a force bring to so fine a head . Mrs. Newsome , 
 goodness know , be serious ; but it be nothing to this . he take it all 
 in , he see it all together . " no , " he muse , " I can not   in honour not see 
 he . " 
 her face affect he as with an exquisite light . " you will then ? " 
 " I will . " 
 at this she push back her chair and be the next moment on her foot . 
 " thank you ! " she say with her hand hold out to he across the table 
 and with no less a meaning in the word than her lip have so 
 particularly give they after Chad 's dinner . the golden nail she have 
 then drive in pierce a good inch deep . yet he reflect that he 
 himself have only meanwhile do what he have make up his mind to on the 
 same occasion . so far as the essence of the matter go he have simply 
 stand fast on the spot on which he have then plant his foot . 
 II 
 he receive three day after this a communication from America , in the 
 form of a scrap of blue paper fold and gum , not reach he 
 through his banker , but deliver at his hotel by a small boy in 
 uniform , who , under instruction from the concierge , approach he as 
 he slowly pace the little court . it be the evening hour , but 
 daylight be long now and Paris more than ever penetrate . the scent 
 of flower be in the street , he have the whiff of violet perpetually 
 in his nose ; and he have attach himself to sound and suggestion , 
 vibration of the air , human and dramatic , he imagine , as they be 
 not in other place , that come out for he more and more as the mild 
 afternoon deepen - a far - off hum , a sharp near click on the asphalt , 
 a voice call , reply , somewhere and as full of tone as an actor 's 
 in a play . he be to dine at home , as usual , with Waymarsh - they have 
 settle to that for thrift and simplicity ; and he now hang about before 
 his friend come down . 
 he read his telegram in the court , stand still a long time where he 
 have open it and give five minute afterwards to the renew study 
 of it . at last , quickly , he crumple it up as if to get it out of the 
 way ; in spite of which , however , he keep it there - still keep it when , 
 at the end of another turn , he have drop into a chair place near a 
 small table . here , with his scrap of paper compress in his fist and 
 far conceal by his fold his arm tight , he sit for some time 
 in thought , gaze before he so straight that Waymarsh appear and 
 approach he without catch his eye . the latter in fact , strike 
 with his appearance , look at he hard for a single instant and then , 
 as if determined to that course by some special vividness in it , 
 drop back into the salon de lecture without address he . but the 
 pilgrim from Milrose permit himself still to observe the scene from 
 behind the clear glass plate of that retreat . Strether end , as he 
 sit , by a fresh scrutiny of his compress missive , which he smooth 
 out carefully again as he place it on his table . there it remain 
 for some minute , until , at last look up , he see Waymarsh watch 
 he from within . it be on this that their eye meet - meet for a moment 
 during which neither move . but Strether then get up , fold his 
 telegram more carefully and put it into his waistcoat pocket . 
 a few minute later the friend be seat together at dinner ; but 
 Strether have meanwhile say nothing about it , and they eventually 
 part , after coffee in the court , with nothing say on either side . 
 our friend have moreover the consciousness that even less than usual be 
 on this occasion say between they , so that it be almost as if each 
 have be wait for something from the other . waymarsh have always 
 more or less the air of sit at the door of his tent , and silence , 
 after so many week , have come to play its part in their concert . this 
 note indeed , to Strether 's sense , have lately take a full tone , and 
 it be his fancy to - night that they have never quite so draw it out . 
 yet it befell , none the less that he close the door to confidence when 
 his companion finally ask he if there be anything particular the 
 matter with he . " nothing , " he reply , " more than usual . " 
 on the morrow , however , at an early hour , he find occasion to give an 
 answer more in consonance with the fact . what be the matter have 
 continue to be so all the previous evening , the first hour of which , 
 after dinner , in his room , he have devote to the copious composition of 
 a letter . he have quit Waymarsh for this purpose , leave he to his 
 own resource with less ceremony than their wo not , but finally come 
 down again with his letter unconcluded and go forth into the street 
 without enquiry for his comrade . he have take a long vague walk , and 
 one o'clock have strike before his return and his re - ascent to his room 
 by the aid of the glimmer candle - end leave for he on the shelf 
 outside the porter 's lodge . he have possess himself , on close his 
 door , of the numerous loose sheet of his unfinished composition , and 
 then , without read they over , have tear they into small piece . he 
 have thereupon sleep - as if it have be in some measure thank to that 
 sacrifice - the sleep of the just , and have prolong his rest 
 considerably beyond his custom . thus it be that when , between nine 
 and ten , the tap of the knob of a walking - stick sound on his door , he 
 have not yet make himself altogether presentable . Chad Newsome 's bright 
 deep voice determine quickly enough none the less the admission of the 
 visitor . the little blue paper of the evening before , plainly an 
 object the more precious for its escape from premature destruction , now 
 lie on the sill of the open window , smooth out afresh and keep from 
 blow away by the superincumbent weight of his watch . Chad , look 
 about with careless and competent criticism , as he look wherever he 
 go immediately espy it and permit himself to fix it for a moment 
 rather hard . after which he turn his eye to his host . " it have come 
 then at last ? " 
 Strether pause in the act of pin his necktie . " then you know - ? 
 you have   have one too ? " 
 " no , I have   have nothing , and I only know what I see . I see that thing 
 and I guess . well , " he add , " it come as pat as in a play , for I have 
 precisely turn up this morning - as I would have do yesterday , but 
 it be impossible - to take you . " 
 " to take I ? " Strether have turn again to his glass . 
 " back , at last , as I promise . I be ready - I have   really be ready this 
 month . I have   only be wait for you - as be perfectly right . but 
 you be well now ; you be safe - I see that for myself ; you have   get all 
 your good . you be look , this morning , as fit as a flea . " 
 Strether , at his glass , finish dressing ; consult that witness 
 moreover on this last opinion . be he look preternaturally fit ? 
 there be something in it perhaps for Chad 's wonderful eye , but he have 
 feel himself for hour rather in piece . such a judgement , however , 
 be after all but a contribution to his resolve ; it testify 
 unwittingly to his wisdom . he be still firm , apparently - since it 
 shine in he as a light - than he have flatter himself . his firmness 
 indeed be slightly compromise , as he face about to his friend , by 
 the way this very personage look - though the case would of course 
 have be bad have not   the secret of personal magnificence be at 
 every hour Chad 's unfailing possession . there he be in all the 
 pleasant morning freshness of it - strong and sleek and gay , easy and 
 fragrant and fathomless , with happy health in his colour , and pleasant 
 silver in his thick young hair , and the right word for everything on 
 the lip that his clear brownness cause to show as red . he have never 
 strike Strether as personally such a success ; it be as if now , for his 
 definite surrender , he have gather himself vividly together . this , 
 sharply and rather strangely , be the form in which he be to be 
 present to Woollett . our friend take he in again - he be always 
 take he in and yet find that part of he still remain out ; 
 though even thus his image show through a mist of other thing . " I have 
 have a cable , " Strether say , " from your mother . " 
 " I dare say , my dear man . I hope she be well . " 
 Strether hesitate . " no - she be not well , I be sorry to have to tell 
 you . " 
 " ah , " say Chad , " I must have have the instinct of it . all the more 
 reason then that we should start straight off . " 
 Strether have now get together hat , glove and stick , but Chad have 
 drop on the sofa as if to show where he wish to make his point . he 
 keep observe his companion 's thing ; he might have be judge how 
 quickly they could be pack . he might even have wish to hint that 
 he would send his own servant to assist . " what do you mean , " Strether 
 enquire , " by ' straight off ' ? " 
 " oh by one of next week 's boat . everything at this season go out so 
 light that berth will be easy anywhere . " 
 Strether have in his hand his telegram , which he have keep there after 
 attach his watch , and he now offer it to Chad , who , however , with 
 an odd movement , decline to take it . " thank , I would rather not . your 
 correspondence with Mother 's your own affair . I be only with you both 
 on it , whatever it be . " Strether , at this , while their eye meet , 
 slowly fold the missive and put it in his pocket ; after which , before 
 he have speak again , Chad break fresh ground . " have Miss Gostrey come 
 back ? " 
 but when Strether presently speak it be not   in answer . " it be not , I 
 gather , that your mother 's physically ill ; her health , on the whole , 
 this spring , seem to have be well than usual . but she be worried , 
 she be anxious , and it appear to have rise within the last few day to 
 a climax . we have   tired out , between we , her patience . " 
 " oh it be not   you ! " Chad generously protest . 
 " I beg your pardon - it be I . " Strether be mild and melancholy , but 
 firm . he see it far away and over his companion 's head . " it be very 
 particularly I . " 
 " well then all the more reason . marchon , marchon ! " say the young 
 man gaily . his host , however , at this , but continue to stand agaze ; 
 and he have the next thing repeat his question of a moment before . 
 " have Miss Gostrey come back ? " 
 " yes , two day ago . " 
 " then you have   see she ? " 
 " no - I be to see she to - day . " but Strether would not   linger now on Miss 
 Gostrey . " your mother send I an ultimatum . if I can not   bring you I be 
 to leave you ; I be to come at any rate myself . " 
 " ah but you can bring I now , " Chad , from his sofa , reassuringly 
 reply . 
 Strether have a pause . " I do not   think I understand you . why be it 
 that , more than a month ago , you put it to I so urgently to let Madame 
 de Vionnet speak for you ? " 
 " ' why ' ? " Chad consider , but he have it at his finger ' end . " why 
 but because I know how well she would do it ? it be the way to keep you 
 quiet and , to that extent , do you good . besides , " he happily and 
 comfortably explain , " I want you really to know she and to get the 
 impression of she - and you see the good that have do you . " 
 " well , " say Strether , " the way she have speak for you , all the 
 same - so far as I have   give she a chance - have only make I feel how much 
 she wish to keep you . if you make nothing of that I do not   see why 
 you want I to listen to she . " 
 " why my dear man , " Chad exclaim , " I make everything of it ! how can 
 you doubt - ? " 
 " I doubt only because you come to I this morning with your signal to 
 start . " 
 Chad star , then give a laugh . " and be not   my signal to start just 
 what you have   be wait for ? " 
 Strether debate ; he take another turn . " this last month I have   be 
 await , I think , more than anything else , the message I have here . " 
 " you mean you have   be afraid of it ? " 
 " well , I be do my business in my own way . and I suppose your 
 present announcement , " Strether go on , " be not   merely the result of 
 your sense of what I have   expect . otherwise you would not   have put I 
 in relation - " but he pause , pull up . 
 at this Chad rise . " ah she want I not to go have nothing to do with 
 it ! it be only because she be afraid - afraid of the way that , over there , 
 I may get catch . but her fear 's groundless . " 
 he have meet again his companion 's sufficiently search look . " be you 
 tired of she ? " 
 Chad give he in reply to this , with a movement of the head , the 
 strange slow smile he have ever have from he . " never . " 
 it have immediately , on Strether 's imagination , so deep and soft an 
 effect that our friend could only for the moment keep it before he . 
 " never ? " 
 " never , " Chad obligingly and serenely repeat . 
 it make his companion take several more step . " then YOU'RE not 
 afraid . " 
 " afraid to go ? " 
 Strether pull up again . " afraid to stay . " 
 the young man look brightly amazed . " you want I now to ' stay ' ? " 
 " if I do not   immediately sail the Pococks will immediately come out . 
 that be what I mean , " say Strether , " by your mother 's ultimatum . " 
 Chad show a still lively , but not an alarmed interest . " she have 
 turn on Sarah and Jim ? " 
 Strether join he for an instant in the vision . " oh and you may be 
 sure Mamie . that be whom she be turn on . " 
 this also Chad see - he laugh out . " mamie - to corrupt I ? " 
 " ah , " say Strether , ' she be very charming . " 
 " so you have   already more than once tell I . I should like to see she . " 
 something happy and easy , something above all unconscious , in the way 
 he say this , bring home again to his companion the facility of his 
 attitude and the enviability of his state . " see she then by all mean . 
 and consider too , " Strether go on , " that you really give your sister 
 a lift in let she come to you . you give she a couple of month of 
 Paris , which she have not   see , if I be not mistaken , since just after she 
 be marry , and which I be sure she want but the pretext to visit . " 
 Chad listen , but with all his own knowledge of the world . " she have 
 have it , the pretext , these several year , yet she have never take it . " 
 " do you mean you ? " Strether after an instant enquire . 
 " certainly - the lone exile . and whom do you mean ? " say Chad . 
 " oh I mean I . I be her pretext . that be - for it come to the same 
 thing - I be your mother 's . " 
 " then why , " Chad ask , " do not   Mother come herself ? " 
 his friend give he a long look . " should you like she to ? " and as he 
 for the moment say nothing : " it be perfectly open to you to cable for 
 she . " 
 Chad continue to think . " will she come if I do ? " 
 " quite possibly . but try , and you will see . " 
 " why do not   you try ? " Chad after a moment ask . 
 " because I do not   want to . " 
 Chad think . " do not   desire her presence here ? " 
 Strether face the question , and his answer be the more emphatic . 
 " do not   put it off , my dear boy , on I ! " 
 " well - I see what you mean . I be sure you would behave beautifully but you 
 don't want to see she . so I will not   play you that trick . ' 
 " ah , " Strether declare , " I should not   call it a trick . you have   a 
 perfect right , and it would be perfectly straight of you . " then he 
 add in a different tone : " you would have moreover , in the person of 
 Madame de Vionnet , a very interesting relation prepare for she . " 
 their eye , on this proposition , continue to meet , but Chad 's pleasant 
 and bold , never flinch for a moment . he get up at last and he say 
 something with which Strether be strike . " she would not   understand 
 she , but that make no difference . Madame de Vionnet would like to see 
 she . she would like to be charming to she . she believe she could work 
 it . " 
 Strether think a moment , affect by this , but finally turn away . 
 " she could not ! " 
 " you be quite sure ? " Chad ask . 
 " well , risk it if you like ! " 
 Strether , who utter this with serenity , have urge a plea for their 
 now get into the air ; but the young man still wait . " have you 
 send your answer ? " 
 " no , I have   do nothing yet . " 
 " be you wait to see I ? " 
 " no , not that . " 
 " only wait " - and Chad , with this , have a smile for he - " to see Miss 
 Gostrey ? " 
 " no - not even Miss Gostrey . I be not   wait to see any one . I have 
 only wait , till now , to make up my mind - in complete solitude ; and , 
 since I of course absolutely owe you the information , be on the point 
 of go out with it quite make up . have therefore a little more 
 patience with I . remember , " Strether go on , " that that be what you 
 originally ask I to have . I have   have it , you see , and you see what 
 have come of it . stay on with I . " 
 Chad look grave . " how much long ? " 
 " well , till I make you a sign . I can not   myself , you know , at the good , 
 or at the bad , stay for ever . let the Pococks come , " Strether 
 repeat . 
 " because it gain you time ? " 
 " yes - it gain I time . " 
 Chad , as if it still puzzle he , wait a minute . " you do not   want to 
 get back to Mother ? " 
 " not just yet . I be not ready . " 
 " you feel , " Chad ask in a tone of his own , " the charm of life over 
 here ? " 
 " Immensely . " Strether face it . " you have   help I so to feel it that 
 that surely need not   surprise you . " 
 " no , it do not   surprise I , and I be delighted . but what , my dear 
 man , " Chad go on with conscious queerness , " do it all lead to for 
 you ? " 
 the change of position and of relation , for each , be so oddly betray 
 in the question that Chad laugh out as soon as he have utter 
 it - which make Strether also laugh . " well , to my have a certitude 
 that have be test - that have pass through the fire . but oh , " he 
 could not   help break out , " if within my first month here you have be 
 willing to move with I - ! " 
 " well ? " say Chad , while he break down as for weight of thought . 
 " well , we should have be over there by now . " 
 " ah but you would not   have have your fun ! " 
 " I should have have a month of it ; and I be have now , if you want to 
 know , " Strether continue , " enough to last I for the rest of my day . " 
 Chad look amused and interested , yet still somewhat in the dark ; 
 partly perhaps because Strether 's estimate of fun have require of he 
 from the first a good deal of elucidation . " it would not   do if I leave 
 you - ? " 
 " left I ? " - Strether remain blank . 
 " only for a month or two - time to go and come . Madame de Vionnet , " 
 Chad smile , " would look after you in the interval . " 
 " to go back by yourself , I remain here ? " again for an instant their 
 eye have the question out ; after which Strether say : " Grotesque ! " 
 " but I want to see Mother , " Chad presently return . " remember how 
 long it be since I have   see Mother . " 
 " long indeed ; and that be exactly why I be originally so keen for 
 move you . had not   you show we enough how beautifully you could do 
 without it ? " 
 " oh but , " say Chad wonderfully , " I be well now . " 
 there be an easy triumph in it that make his friend laugh out again . 
 " oh if you be bad I should know what to do with you . in that case 
 I believe I would have you gag and strap down , carry on board 
 resisting , kicking . how MUCH , " Strether ask , " do you want to see 
 Mother ? " 
 " how much ? " - Chad seem to find it in fact difficult to say . 
 " how much . " 
 " why as much as you have   make I . I would give anything to see she . and 
 you have   leave I , " Chad go on , " in little enough doubt as to how much 
 she want it . " 
 Strether think a minute . " well then if those thing be really your 
 motive catch the french steamer and sail to - morrow . of course , when it 
 come to that , you be absolutely free to do as you choose . from the 
 moment you can not   hold yourself I can only accept your flight . " 
 " I will fly in a minute then , " say Chad , " if you will stay here . " 
 " I will stay here till the next steamer - then I will follow you . " 
 " and do you call that , " Chad ask , " accept my flight ? " 
 " certainly - it be the only thing to call it . the only way to keep I 
 here , accordingly , " Strether explain , " be by stay yourself . " 
 Chad take it in . " all the more that I have   really dish you , eh ? " 
 " dished I ? " Strether echo as inexpressively as possible . 
 " why if she send out the Pococks it will be that she do not   trust 
 you , and if she do not   trust you , that bear upon - well , you know 
 what . " 
 Strether decide after a moment that he do know what , and in 
 consonance with this he speak . " you see then all the more what you owe 
 I . " 
 " well , if I do see , how can I pay ? " 
 " by not desert I . by stand by I . " 
 " oh I say - ! " but Chad , as they go downstairs , clap a firm hand , 
 in the manner of a pledge , upon his shoulder . they descend slowly 
 together and have , in the court of the hotel , some further talk , of 
 which the upshot be that they presently separate . Chad Newsome 
 depart , and Strether , leave alone , look about , superficially , for 
 Waymarsh . but Waymarsh have not   yet , it appear , come down , and our 
 friend finally go forth without sight of he . 
 III 
 at four o'clock that afternoon he have still not see he , but he be 
 then , as to make up for this , engage in talk about he with Miss 
 Gostrey . Strether have keep away from home all day , give himself up to 
 the town and to his thought , wander and muse , be at once restless 
 and absorb - and all with the present climax of a rich little welcome 
 in the Quartier Marboeuf . " Waymarsh have be , ' unbeknown ' to I , I be 
 convince " - for Miss Gostrey have enquire - " in communication with 
 Woollett : the consequence of which be , last night , the loud 
 possible call for I . " 
 " do you mean a letter to bring you home ? " 
 " no - a cable , which I have at this moment in my pocket : a ' come back by 
 the first ship . ' " 
 Strether 's hostess , it might have be make out , just escape change 
 colour . reflexion arrive but in time and establish a provisional 
 serenity . it be perhaps exactly this that enable she to say with 
 duplicity : " and you be go - ? " 
 " you almost deserve it when you abandon I so . " 
 she shake her head as if this be not worth take up . " my absence 
 have help you - as I have   only to look at you to see . it be my 
 calculation , and I be justified . you be not where you be . and the 
 thing , " she smile , " be for I not to be there either . you can go of 
 yourself . " 
 " oh but I feel to - day , " he comfortably declare , " that I shall want you 
 yet . " 
 she take he all in again . " well , I promise you not again to leave 
 you , but it will only be to follow you . you have   get your momentum and 
 can toddle alone . " 
 he intelligently accept it . " yes - I suppose I can toddle . it be the 
 sight of that in fact that have upset Waymarsh . he can bear it - the way 
 I strike he as go - no long . that be only the climax of his 
 original feeling . he want I to quit ; and he must have write to 
 Woollett that I be in peril of perdition . " 
 " ah good ! " she murmur . " but be it only your supposition ? " 
 " I make it out - it explain . " 
 " then he deny ? - or you have not   ask he ? " 
 " I have   not have time , " Strether say ; " I make it out but last night , 
 put various thing together , and I have   not be since then face to 
 face with he . " 
 she wonder . " because you be too disgusted ? you can not   trust 
 yourself ? " 
 he settle his glass on his nose . " do I look in a great rage ? " 
 " you look divine ! " 
 " there be nothing , " he go on , " to be angry about . he have do I on 
 the contrary a service . " 
 she make it out . " by bring thing to a head ? " 
 " how well you understand ! " he almost groan . " Waymarsh will not   in the 
 least , at any rate , when I have it out with he , deny or extenuate . he 
 have act from the deep conviction , with the good conscience and 
 after wakeful night . he will recognise that he be fully responsible , and 
 will consider that he have be highly successful ; so that any 
 discussion we may have will bring we quite together again - bridge the 
 dark stream that have keep we so thoroughly apart . we shall have at 
 last , in the consequence of his act , something we can definitely talk 
 about . " 
 she be silent a little . " how wonderfully you take it ! but you be 
 always wonderful . " 
 he have a pause that match her own ; then he have , with an adequate 
 spirit , a complete admission . " it be quite true . I be extremely 
 wonderful just now . I dare say in fact I be quite fantastic , and I 
 should not   be at all surprised if I be mad . " 
 " then tell I ! " she earnestly press . as he , however , for the time 
 answer nothing , only return the look with which she watch he , 
 she present herself where it be easy to meet she . " what will Mr. 
 Waymarsh exactly have do ? " 
 " simply have write a letter . one will have be quite enough . he 
 have tell they I want look after . " 
 " and do you ? " - she be all interest . 
 " immensely . and I shall get it . " 
 " by which you mean you do not   budge ? " 
 " I do not   budge . " 
 " you have   cable ? " 
 " no - I have   make Chad do it . " 
 " that you decline to come ? " 
 " that he decline . we have it out this morning and I bring he round . 
 he have come in , before I be down , to tell I he be ready - ready , I 
 mean , to return . and he go off , after ten minute with I , to say he 
 would not . " 
 Miss Gostrey follow with intensity . " then you have   stop he ? " 
 Strether settle himself afresh in his chair . " I have   stop he . that 
 be for the time . that " - he give it to she more vividly - " be where I 
 be . " 
 " I see , I see . but where be Mr. Newsome ? he be ready , " she ask , " to 
 go ? " 
 " all ready . " 
 " and sincerely - believe you'd be ? " 
 " perfectly , I think ; so that he be amazed to find the hand I have lay 
 on he to pull he over suddenly convert into an engine for keep 
 he still . " 
 it be an account of the matter Miss Gostrey could weigh . " do he 
 think the conversion sudden ? " 
 " well , " say Strether , " I be not altogether sure what he think . I be 
 not sure of anything that concern he , except that the more I have   see 
 of he the less I have   find he what I originally expect . he be 
 obscure , and that be why I be wait . " 
 she wonder . " but for what in particular ? " 
 " for the answer to his cable . " 
 " and what be his cable ? " 
 " I do not   know , " Strether reply ; " it be to be , when he leave I , 
 accord to his own taste . I simply say to he : ' I want to stay , and 
 the only way for I to do so be for you to . ' that I want to stay 
 seem to interest he , and he act on that . " 
 Miss Gostrey turn it over . " he want then himself to stay . " 
 " he half want it . that is he half want to go . my original appeal 
 have to that extent work in he . nevertheless , " Strether pursue , " he 
 will not   go . not , at least , so long as I be here . " 
 " but you can not , " his companion suggest , ' stay here always . I wish 
 you could . " 
 " by no mean . still , I want to see he a little far . he be not in 
 the least the case I suppose , he be quite another case . and it be as 
 such that he interest I . " it be almost as if for his own 
 intelligence that , deliberate and lucid , our friend thus express the 
 matter . " I do not   want to give he up . " 
 Miss Gostrey but desire to help his lucidity . she have however to be 
 light and tactful . " up , you mean - a - to his mother ? " 
 " well , I be not think of his mother now . I be think of the plan of 
 which I be the mouthpiece , which , as soon as we meet , I put before he 
 as persuasively as I know how , and which be draw up , as it be , in 
 complete ignorance of all that , in this last long period , have be 
 happen to he . it take no account whatever of the impression I be 
 here on the spot immediately to begin to receive from he - impression 
 of which I feel sure I be far from have have the last . " 
 Miss Gostrey have a smile of the most genial criticism . " so your idea 
 be - more or less - to stay out of curiosity ? " 
 " call it what you like ! I do not   care what it be call - " 
 " so long as you do stay ? certainly not then . I call it , all the same , 
 immense fun , " Maria Gostrey declare ; " and to see you work it out will 
 be one of the sensation of my life . it be clear you can toddle alone ! " 
 he receive this tribute without elation . " I shall not   be alone when the 
 pocock have come . " 
 her eyebrow go up . " the Pococks be come ? " 
 " that , I mean , be what will happen - and happen as quickly as 
 possible - in consequence of Chad 's cable . they will simply embark . Sarah 
 will come to speak for her mother - with an effect different from my 
 muddle . " 
 Miss Gostrey more gravely wonder . " she then will take he back ? " 
 " very possibly - and we shall see . she must at any rate have the 
 chance , and she may be trust to do all she can . " 
 " and do you want that ? " 
 " of course , " say Strether , " I want it . I want to play fair . " 
 but she have lose for a moment the thread . " if it devolve on the 
 Pococks why do you stay ? " 
 " just to see that I do play fair - and a little also , no doubt , that 
 they do . " Strether be luminous as he have never be . " I come out to 
 find myself in presence of new fact - fact that have keep strike I 
 as less and less meet by our old reason . the matter 's perfectly 
 simple . new reason - reason as new as the fact themselves - be 
 want ; and of this our friend at Woollett - Chad 's and mine - be at 
 the early moment definitely notify . if any be producible Mrs. 
 Pocock will produce they ; she will bring over the whole collection . 
 they will be , " he add with a pensive smile " a part of the ' fun ' you 
 speak of . " 
 she be quite in the current now and float by his side . " it be 
 Mamie - so far as I have   have it from you - who will be their great card . " and 
 then as his contemplative silence be not   a denial she significantly 
 add : " I think I be sorry for she . " 
 " I think I be ! " - and Strether spring up , move about a little as her 
 eye follow he . " but it can not   be help . " 
 " you mean she come out can not   be ? " 
 he explain after another turn what he mean . " the only way for she 
 not to come be for I to go home - as I believe that on the spot I could 
 prevent it . but the difficulty as to that be that if I do go home - " 
 " I see , I see " - she have easily understand . " Mr. Newsome will do the 
 same , and that be not " - she laugh out now - " to be think of . " 
 Strether have no laugh ; he have only a quiet comparatively placid look 
 that might have show he as proof against ridicule . " strange , be not 
 it ? " 
 they have , in the matter that so much interested they , come so far as 
 this without sound another name - to which however their present 
 momentary silence be full of a conscious reference . Strether 's 
 question be a sufficient implication of the weight it have gain with 
 he during the absence of his hostess ; and just for that reason a 
 single gesture from she could pass for he as a vivid answer . yet he 
 be answer still well when she say in a moment : " will Mr. Newsome 
 introduce his sister - ? " 
 " to Madame de Vionnet ? " Strether speak the name at last . " I shall be 
 greatly surprised if he do not . " 
 she seem to gaze at the possibility . " you mean you have   think of it 
 and you be prepared . " 
 " I have   think of it and I be prepared . " 
 it be to her visitor now that she apply her consideration . " Bon ! 
 you be magnificent ! " 
 " well , " he answer after a pause and a little wearily , but still 
 stand there before she - " well , that be what , just once in all my dull 
 day , I think I shall like to have be ! " 
 two day later he have news from Chad of a communication from Woollett 
 in response to their determinant telegram , this missive be address 
 to Chad himself and announce the immediate departure for France of 
 Sarah and Jim and Mamie . Strether have meanwhile on his own side 
 cable ; he have but delay that act till after his visit to Miss 
 Gostrey , an interview by which , as so often before , he feel his sense 
 of thing clear up and settle . his message to Mrs. Newsome , in 
 answer to her own , have consist of the word : " judge well to take 
 another month , but with full appreciation of all re - enforcement . " he 
 have add that he be write , but he be of course always write ; it 
 be a practice that continue , oddly enough , to relieve he , to make 
 he come near than anything else to the consciousness of do 
 something : so that he often wonder if he have not   really , under his 
 recent stress , acquire some hollow trick , one of the specious art of 
 make - believe . would not   the page he still so freely dispatch by the 
 american post have be worthy of a showy journalist , some master of 
 the great new science of beat the sense out of word ? be not   he 
 write against time , and mainly to show he be kind ? - since it have 
 become quite his habit not to like to read himself over . on those 
 line he could still be liberal , yet it be at good a sort of whistle 
 in the dark . it be unmistakeable moreover that the sense of be in 
 the dark now press on he more sharply - create thereby the need for 
 a loud and lively whistle . he whistle long and hard after send 
 his message ; he whistle again and again in celebration of Chad 's news ; 
 there be an interval of a fortnight in which this exercise help he . 
 he have no great notion of what , on the spot , Sarah Pocock would have to 
 say , though he have indeed confused premonition ; but it should not   be in 
 her power to say - it should not   be in any one 's anywhere to say - that he 
 be neglect her mother . he might have write before more freely , 
 but he have never write more copiously ; and he frankly give for a 
 reason at Woollett that he wish to fill the void create there by 
 Sarah 's departure . 
 the increase of his darkness , however , and the quickening , as I have 
 call it , of his tune , reside in the fact that he be hear almost 
 nothing . he have for some time be aware that he be hear less than 
 before , and he be now clearly follow a process by which Mrs. 
 Newsome 's letter could but logically stop . he have not   have a line for 
 many day , and he need no proof - though he be , in time , to have 
 plenty - that she would not   have put pen to paper after receive the 
 hint that have determine her telegram . she would not   write till Sarah 
 should have see he and report on he . it be strange , though it 
 might well be less so than his own behaviour appear at Woollett . it 
 be at any rate significant , and what be remarkable be the way his 
 friend 's nature and manner put on for he , through this very drop of 
 demonstration , a great intensity . it strike he really that he have 
 never so live with she as during this period of her silence ; the 
 silence be a sacred hush , a finer clear medium , in which her 
 idiosyncrasy show . he walk about with she , sit with she , drive 
 with she and din face - to - face with she - a rare treat " in his life , " 
 as he could perhaps have scarce escape phrase it ; and if he have 
 never see she so soundless he have never , on the other hand , feel she 
 so highly , so almost austerely , herself : pure and by the vulgar 
 estimate " cold , " but deep devote delicate sensitive noble . her 
 vividness in these respect become for he , in the special condition , 
 almost an obsession ; and though the obsession sharpen his pulse , 
 add really to the excitement of life , there be hour at which , to 
 be less on the stretch , he directly seek forgetfulness . he know it 
 for the queer of adventure - a circumstance capable of play such 
 a part only for Lambert Strether - that in Paris itself , of all place , 
 he should find this ghost of the lady of Woollett more importunate than 
 any other presence . 
 when he go back to Maria Gostrey it be for the change to something 
 else . and yet after all the change scarcely operate for he talk to 
 she of Mrs. Newsome in these day as he have never talk before . he 
 have hitherto observe in that particular a discretion and a law ; 
 consideration that at present break down quite as if relation have 
 alter . they have not   REALLY alter , he say to himself , so much as 
 that come to ; for if what have occur be of course that Mrs. Newsome 
 have cease to trust he , there be nothing on the other hand to prove 
 that he should not   win back her confidence . it be quite his present 
 theory that he would leave no stone unturned to do so ; and in fact if 
 he now tell Maria thing about she that he have never tell before this 
 be largely because it keep before he the idea of the honour of such a 
 woman 's esteem . his relation with Maria as well be , strangely enough , 
 no long quite the same ; this truth - though not too 
 disconcertingly - have come up between they on the renewal of their 
 meeting . it be all contain in what she have then almost immediately 
 say to he ; it be represent by the remark she have need but ten 
 minute to make and that he have not   be dispose to gainsay . he could 
 toddle alone , and the difference that show be extraordinary . the 
 turn take by their talk have promptly confirm this difference ; his 
 large confidence on the score of Mrs. Newsome do the rest ; and the 
 time seem already far off when he have hold out his small thirsty cup 
 to the spout of her pail . her pail be scarce touch now , and other 
 fountain have flow for he ; she fall into her place as but one of his 
 tributary ; and there be a strange sweetness - a melancholy mildness 
 that touch he - in her acceptance of the altered order . 
 it mark for himself the flight of time , or at any rate what he be 
 pleased to think of with irony and pity as the rush of experience ; it 
 have be but the day before yesterday that he sit at her foot and 
 hold on by her garment and be feed by her hand . it be the proportion 
 that be change , and the proportion be at all time , he 
 philosophise , the very condition of perception , the term of thought . 
 it be as if , with her effective little entresol and and her wide 
 acquaintance , her activity , variety , promiscuity , the duty and 
 devotion that take up nine tenth of her time and of which he get , 
 guardedly , but the side - wind - it be as if she have shrink to a 
 secondary element and have consent to the shrinkage with the 
 perfection of tact . this perfection have never fail she ; it have 
 originally be great than his prime measure for it ; it have keep he 
 quite apart , keep he out of the shop , as she call her huge general 
 acquaintance , make their commerce as quiet , as much a thing of the home 
 alone - the opposite of the shop - as if she have never another customer . 
 she have be wonderful to he at first , with the memory of her little 
 entresol , the image to which , on most morning at that time , his eye 
 directly open ; but now she mainly figure for he as but part of the 
 bristling total - though of course always as a person to whom he should 
 never cease to be indebte . it would never be give to he certainly 
 to inspire a great kindness . she have deck he out for other , and 
 he see at this point at least nothing she would ever ask for . she only 
 wonder and question and listen , render he the homage of a 
 wistful speculation . she express it repeatedly ; he be already far 
 beyond she , and she must prepare herself to lose he . there be but 
 one little chance for she . 
 often as she have say it he meet it - for it be a touch he like - each 
 time the same way . " my come to grief ? " 
 " yes - then I might patch you up . " 
 " oh for my real smash , if it take place , there will be no patching . " 
 " but you surely do not   mean it will kill you . " 
 " no - bad . it will make I old . " 
 " ah nothing can do that ! the wonderful and special thing about you be 
 that you ARE , at this time of day , youth . " then she always make , 
 far , one of those remark that she have completely cease to adorn 
 with hesitation or apology , and that have , by the same token , in 
 spite of their extreme straightness , cease to produce in Strether the 
 least embarrassment . she make he believe they , and they became 
 thereby as impersonal as truth itself . " it be just your particular 
 charm . " 
 his answer too be always the same . " of course I be youth - youth for 
 the trip to Europe . I begin to be young , or at least to get the 
 benefit of it , the moment I meet you at Chester , and that be what have 
 be take place ever since . I never have the benefit at the proper 
 time - which come to say that I never have the thing itself . I be 
 have the benefit at this moment ; I have it the other day when I say 
 to Chad ' wait ' ; I shall have it still again when Sarah Pocock arrive . 
 it be a benefit that would make a poor show for many people ; and I do not 
 know who else but you and I , frankly , could begin to see in it what I 
 feel . I do not   get drunk ; I do not   pursue the lady ; I do not   spend 
 money ; I do not   even write sonnet . but nevertheless I be make up late 
 for what I do not   have early . I cultivate my little benefit in my own 
 little way . it amuse I more than anything that have happen to I in 
 all my life . they may say what they like - it be my surrender , it be my 
 tribute , to youth . one put that in where one can - it have to come in 
 somewhere , if only out of the life , the condition , the feeling of 
 other person . Chad give I the sense of it , for all his grey hair , 
 which merely make it solid in he and safe and serene ; and she do the 
 same , for all her be old than he , for all her marriageable 
 daughter , her separated husband , her agitated history . though they be 
 young enough , my pair , I do not   say they be , in the fresh way , their 
 own absolutely prime adolescence ; for that have nothing to do with it . 
 the point be that they be mine . yes , they be my youth ; since somehow 
 at the right time nothing else ever be . what I mean just now 
 therefore be that it would all go - go before do its work - if they 
 be to fail I . " 
 on which , just here , Miss Gostrey inveterately question . " what do 
 you , in particular , call its work ? " 
 " well , to see I through . " 
 " but through what ? " - she like to get it all out of he . 
 " why through this experience . " that be all that would come . 
 it regularly give she none the less the last word . " do not   you remember 
 how in those first day of our meeting it be I who be to see you 
 through ? " 
 " remember ? tenderly , deeply " - he always rise to it . " you be just 
 do your part in let I maunder to you thus . " 
 " ah do not   speak as if my part be small ; since whatever else fail 
 you - " 
 " you will not , ever , ever , ever ? " - he thus take she up . " oh I beg your 
 pardon ; you necessarily , you inevitably will . your condition - that be 
 what I mean - will not   allow I anything to do for you . " 
 " let alone - I see what you mean - that I be drearily dreadfully old . I 
 AM , but there be a service - possible for you to render - that I know , all 
 the same , I shall think of . " 
 " and what will it be ? " 
 this , in fine , however , she would never tell he . " you shall hear only 
 if your smash take place . as that be really out of the question , I 
 will not   expose myself " - a point at which , for reason of his own , 
 Strether cease to press . 
 he come round , for publicity - it be the easy thing - to the idea 
 that his smash be out of the question , and this render idle the 
 discussion of what might follow it . he attach an add importance , 
 as the day elapse , to the arrival of the Pococks ; he have even a 
 shameful sense of wait for it insincerely and incorrectly . he 
 accuse himself of make believe to his own mind that Sarah 's 
 presence , her impression , her judgement would simplify and harmonise , 
 he accuse himself of be so afraid of what they might do that he 
 seek refuge , to beg the whole question , in a vain fury . he have 
 abundantly see at home what they be in the habit of do , and he 
 have not at present the small ground . his clear vision be when 
 he make out that what he most desire be an account more full and free 
 of Mrs. Newsome 's state of mind than any he feel he could now expect 
 from herself ; that calculation at least go hand in hand with the 
 sharp consciousness of wish to prove to himself that he be not 
 afraid to look his behaviour in the face . if he be by an inexorable 
 logic to pay for it he be literally impatient to know the cost , and he 
 hold himself ready to pay in instalment . the first instalment would 
 be precisely this entertainment of Sarah ; as a consequence of which 
 moreover , he should know vastly well how he stand . 
 Book Eighth 
 I 
 Strether ramble alone during these few day , the effect of the 
 incident of the previous week have be to simplify in a marked 
 fashion his mixed relation with Waymarsh . nothing have pass between 
 they in reference to Mrs. Newsome 's summon but that our friend have 
 mention to his own the departure of the deputation actually at 
 sea - give he thus an opportunity to confess to the occult 
 intervention he impute to he . waymarsh however in the event 
 confess to nothing ; and though this falsify in some degree 
 Strether 's forecast the latter amusedly see in it the same depth of 
 good conscience out of which the dear man 's impertinence have originally 
 sprung . he be patient with the dear man now and delight to observe 
 how unmistakeably he have put on flesh ; he feel his own holiday so 
 successfully large and free that he be full of allowance and 
 charity in respect to those cabin and confine ' his instinct toward 
 a spirit so strap down as Waymarsh 's be to walk round it on tiptoe 
 for fear of wake it up to a sense of loss by this time 
 irretrievable . it be all very funny he know , and but the difference , 
 as he often say to himself , of tweedledum and tweedledee - an 
 emancipation so purely comparative that it be like the advance of the 
 door - mat on the scraper ; yet the present crisis be happily to profit 
 by it and the pilgrim from Milrose to know himself more than ever in 
 the right . 
 Strether feel that when he hear of the approach of the Pococks the 
 impulse of pity quite spring up in he beside the impulse of triumph . 
 that be exactly why Waymarsh have look at he with eye in which the 
 heat of justice be measure and shade . he have look very hard , as 
 if affectionately sorry for the friend - the friend of fifty - five - whose 
 frivolity have have thus to be record ; become , however , but obscurely 
 sententious and leave his companion to formulate a charge . it be in 
 this general attitude that he have of late altogether take refuge ; with 
 the drop of discussion they be solemnly sadly superficial ; Strether 
 recognise in he the mere portentous rumination to which Miss Barrace 
 have so good - humouredly describe herself as assign a corner of her 
 salon . it be quite as if he know his surreptitious step have be 
 divine , and it be also as if he miss the chance to explain the 
 purity of his motive ; but this privation of relief should be precisely 
 his small penance : it be not amiss for Strether that he should find 
 himself to that degree uneasy . if he have be challenge or accuse , 
 rebuke for meddle or otherwise pull up , he would probably have 
 show , on his own system , all the height of his consistency , all the 
 depth of his good faith . explicit resentment of his course would have 
 make he take the floor , and the thump of his fist on the table would 
 have affirm he as consciously incorruptible . have what now really 
 prevail with Strether be but a dread of that thump - a dread of 
 wince a little painfully at what it might invidiously demonstrate ? 
 however this might be , at any rate , one of the mark of the crisis be 
 a visible , a study lapse , in Waymarsh , of betray concern . as if to 
 make up to his comrade for the stroke by which he have play providence 
 he now conspicuously ignore his movement , withdraw himself from the 
 pretension to share they , stiffen up his sensibility to neglect , and , 
 clasp his large empty hand and swing his large restless foot , 
 clearly look to another quarter for justice . 
 this make for independence on Strether 's part , and he have in truth at 
 no moment of his stay be so free to go and come . the early summer 
 brush the picture over and blur everything but the near ; it make a 
 vast warm fragrant medium in which the element float together on the 
 good of term , in which reward be immediate and reckoning 
 postpone . Chad be out of town again , for the first time since his 
 visitor 's first view of he ; he have explain this necessity - without 
 detail , yet also without embarrassment , the circumstance be one of 
 those which , in the young man 's life , testify to the variety of his 
 tie . Strether be not   otherwise concerned with it than for its so 
 testify - a pleasant multitudinous image in which he take comfort . he 
 take comfort , by the same stroke , in the swing of Chad 's pendulum back 
 from that other swing , the sharp jerk towards Woollett , so stay by 
 his own hand . he have the entertainment of thinking that if he have for 
 that moment stop the clock it be to promote the next minute this 
 still lively motion . he himself do what he have not   do before ; he 
 take two or three time whole day off - irrespective of other , of two 
 or three take with Miss Gostrey , two or three take with little 
 Bilham : he go to chartre and cultivate , before the front of the 
 cathedral , a general easy beatitude ; he go to Fontainebleau and 
 imagine himself on the way to Italy ; he go to Rouen with a little 
 handbag and inordinately spend the night . 
 one afternoon he do something quite different ; find himself in the 
 neighbourhood of a fine old house across the river , he pass under the 
 great arch of its doorway and ask at the porter 's lodge for Madame de 
 Vionnet . he have already hover more than once about that possibility , 
 be aware of it , in the course of ostensible stroll , as lurk but 
 round the corner . only it have perversely happen , after his morning 
 at Notre Dame , that his consistency , as he consider and intend it , 
 have come back to he ; whereby he have reflect that the encounter in 
 question have be none of his making ; cling again intensely to the 
 strength of his position , which be precisely that there be nothing in 
 it for himself . from the moment he actively pursue the charming 
 associate of his adventure , from that moment his position weaken , for 
 he be then act in an interested way . it be only within a few day 
 that he have fix himself a limit : he promise himself his consistency 
 should end with Sarah 's arrival . it be argue correctly to feel the 
 title to a free hand confer on he by this event . if he be not   to 
 be let alone he should be merely a dupe to act with delicacy . if he 
 be not   to be trust he could at least take his ease . if he be to be 
 place under control he gain leave to try what his position might 
 agreeably give he . an ideal rigour would perhaps postpone the trial 
 till after the Pococks have show their spirit ; and it be to an ideal 
 rigour that he have quite promise himself to conform . 
 suddenly , however , on this particular day , he feel a particular fear 
 under which everything collapse . he know abruptly that he be afraid 
 of himself - and yet not in relation to the effect on his sensibility 
 of another hour of Madame de Vionnet . what he dread be the effect 
 of a single hour of Sarah Pocock , as to whom he be visit , in 
 troubled night , with fantastic wake dream . she loom at he 
 large than life ; she increase in volume as she draw nearer ; she so 
 meet his eye that , his imagination taking , after the first step , all , 
 and more than all , the stride , he already feel she come down on he , 
 already burn , under her reprobation , with the blush of guilt , already 
 consent , by way of penance , to the instant forfeiture of everything . 
 he see himself , under her direction , recommit to Woollett as 
 juvenile offender be commit to reformatory . it be not   of course 
 that Woollett be really a place of discipline ; but he know in advance 
 that Sarah 's salon at the hotel would be . his danger , at any rate , in 
 such mood of alarm , be some concession , on this ground , that would 
 involve a sharp rupture with the actual ; therefore if he wait to take 
 leave of that actual he might wholly miss his chance . it be 
 represent with supreme vividness by Madame de Vionnet , and that be 
 why , in a word , he wait no long . he have see in a flash that he 
 must anticipate Mrs. Pocock . he be accordingly much disappointed on 
 now learn from the portress that the lady of his quest be not in 
 Paris . she have go for some day to the country . there be nothing 
 in this accident but what be natural ; yet it produce for poor 
 Strether a drop of all confidence . it be suddenly as if he should 
 never see she again , and as if moreover he have bring it on himself by 
 not have be quite kind to she . 
 it be the advantage of his have let his fancy lose itself for a 
 little in the gloom that , as by reaction , the prospect begin really to 
 brighten from the moment the deputation from Woollett alight on the 
 platform of the station . they have come straight from Havre , have 
 sail from New York to that port , and have also , thank to a happy 
 voyage , make land with a promptitude that leave Chad Newsome , who have 
 mean to meet they at the dock , belate . he have receive their 
 telegram , with the announcement of their immediate further advance , 
 just as he be take the train for Havre , so that nothing have remain 
 for he but to await they in Paris . he hastily pick up Strether , at 
 the hotel , for this purpose , and he even , with easy pleasantry , 
 suggest the attendance of Waymarsh as well - waymarsh , at the moment 
 his cab rattle up , be engage , under Strether 's contemplative 
 range , in a grave perambulation of the familiar court . Waymarsh have 
 learn from his companion , who have already have a note , deliver by 
 hand , from Chad , that the Pococks be due , and have ambiguously , 
 though , as always , impressively , glower at he over the circumstance ; 
 carry himself in a manner in which Strether be now expert enough to 
 recognise his uncertainty , in the premise , as to the good tone . the 
 only tone he aim at with confidence be a full tone - which be 
 necessarily difficult in the absence of a full knowledge . the Pococks 
 be a quantity as yet unmeasured , and , as he have practically bring 
 they over , so this witness have to that extent expose himself . he 
 want to feel right about it , but could only , at the good , for the 
 time , feel vague . " I shall look to you , you know , immensely , " our 
 friend have say , " to help I with they , " and he have be quite 
 conscious of the effect of the remark , and of other of the same sort , 
 on his comrade 's sombre sensibility . he have insist on the fact that 
 Waymarsh would quite like Mrs. Pocock - one could be certain he would : 
 he would be with she about everything , and she would also be with HIM , 
 and Miss Barrace 's nose , in short , would find itself out of joint . 
 Strether have weave this web of cheerfulness while they wait in the 
 court for Chad ; he have sit smoke cigarette to keep himself quiet 
 while , cage and leonine , his fellow traveller pace and turn before 
 he . Chad Newsome be doubtless to be strike , when he arrive , with 
 the sharpness of their opposition at this particular hour ; he be to 
 remember , as a part of it , how Waymarsh come with he and with Strether 
 to the street and stand there with a face half - wistful and half - rueful . 
 they talk of he , the two other , as they drive , and Strether put 
 Chad in possession of much of his own strained sense of thing . he have 
 already , a few day before , name to he the wire he be convince 
 their friend have pull - a confidence that have make on the young man 's 
 part quite hugely for curiosity and diversion . the action of the 
 matter , moreover , Strether could see , be to penetrate ; he see that be , 
 how Chad judge a system of influence in which Waymarsh have serve as a 
 determinant - an impression just now quicken again ; with the whole 
 bearing of such a fact on the youth 's view of his relative . as it 
 come up between they that they might now take their friend for a 
 feature of the control of these latter now seek to be exert from 
 Woollett , Strether feel indeed how it would be stamp all over he , 
 half an hour later for Sarah Pocock 's eye , that he be as much on 
 Chad 's ' side " as Waymarsh have probably describe he . he be let 
 himself at present , go ; there be no deny it ; it might be 
 desperation , it might be confidence ; he should offer himself to the 
 arrive traveller bristle with all the lucidity he have cultivate . 
 he repeat to Chad what he have be say in the court to Waymarsh ; 
 how there be no doubt whatever that his sister would find the latter a 
 kindre spirit , no doubt of the alliance , base on an exchange of 
 view , that the pair would successfully strike up . they would become 
 as thick as thief - which moreover be but a development of what 
 Strether remember to have say in one of his first discussion with 
 his mate , strike as he have then already be with the element of 
 affinity between that personage and Mrs. Newsome herself . " I tell he , 
 one day , when he have question I on your mother , that she be a 
 person who , when he should know she , would rouse in he , I be sure , a 
 special enthusiasm ; and that hang together with the conviction we now 
 feel - this certitude that Mrs. Pocock will take he into her boat . for 
 it be your mother 's own boat that she be pull . " 
 " ah , " say Chad , " Mother 's worth fifty of Sally ! " 
 " a thousand ; but when you presently meet she , all the same you will be 
 meet your mother 's representative - just as I shall . I feel like the 
 outgoing ambassador , " say Strether , " do honour to his appoint 
 successor . " a moment after speak as he have just do he feel he have 
 inadvertently rather cheapened Mrs. Newsome to her son ; an impression 
 audibly reflect , as at first see , in Chad 's prompt protest . he have 
 recently rather fail of apprehension of the young man 's attitude and 
 temper - remain principally conscious of how little worry , at the 
 bad , he waste , and he study he at this critical hour with renew 
 interest . Chad have do exactly what he have promise he a fortnight 
 previous - have accept without another question his plea for delay . he 
 be wait cheerfully and handsomely , but also inscrutably and with a 
 slight increase perhaps of the hardness originally involve in his 
 acquire high polish . he be neither excited nor depressed ; be easy 
 and acute and deliberate - unhurried unflurried unworried , only at most 
 a little less amused than usual . Strether feel he more than ever a 
 justification of the extraordinary process of which his own absurd 
 spirit have be the arena ; he know as their cab roll along , know as 
 he have not   even yet know , that nothing else than what Chad have do and 
 have be would have lead to his present showing . they have make he , 
 these thing , what he be , and the business have not   be easy ; it have 
 take time and trouble , it have cost , above all , a price . the result at 
 any rate be now to be offer to Sally ; which Strether , so far as that 
 be concern , be glad to be there to witness . would she in the least 
 make it out or take it in , the result , or would she in the least care 
 for it if she do ? he scratch his chin as he ask himself by what 
 name , when challenge - as he be sure he should be - he could call it 
 for she . oh those be determination she must herself arrive at ; 
 since she want so much to see , let she see then and welcome . she have 
 come out in the pride of her competence , yet it hum in Strether 's 
 inner sense that she practically would not   see . 
 that this be moreover what Chad shrewdly suspect be clear from a 
 word that next drop from he . " they be child ; they play at 
 life ! " - and the exclamation be significant and reassuring . it imply 
 that he have not   then , for his companion 's sensibility , appear to give 
 Mrs. Newsome away ; and it facilitate our friend 's presently ask he 
 if it be his idea that Mrs. Pocock and Madame de Vionnet should 
 become acquainted . Strether be still more sharply strike , hereupon , 
 with Chad 's lucidity . " why , be not   that exactly - to get a sight of the 
 company I keep - what she have come out for ? " 
 " yes - I be afraid it be , " Strether unguardedly reply . 
 Chad 's quick rejoinder light his precipitation . " why do you say 
 you be afraid ? " 
 " well , because I feel a certain responsibility . it be my testimony , I 
 imagine , that will have be at the bottom of Mrs. Pocock 's curiosity . 
 my letter , as I have   suppose you to understand from the beginning , have 
 speak freely . I have   certainly say my little say about Madame de 
 Vionnet . " 
 all that , for Chad , be beautifully obvious . " yes , but you have   only 
 speak handsomely . " 
 " never more handsomely of any woman . but it be just that tone - ! " 
 " that tone , " say Chad , " that have fetch she ? I dare say ; but I have   no 
 quarrel with you about it . and no more have Madame de Vionnet . do not 
 you know by this time how she like you ? " 
 " oh ! " - and Strether have , with his groan , a real pang of melancholy . 
 " for all I have   do for she ! " 
 " ah you have   do a great deal . " 
 Chad 's urbanity fairly sham he , and he be at this moment absolutely 
 impatient to see the face Sarah Pocock would present to a sort of 
 thing , as he synthetically phrase it to himself , with no adequate 
 forecast of which , despite his admonition , she would certainly arrive . 
 " I have   do this ! " 
 " well , this be all right . she like , " Chad comfortably remark , 
 " to be like . " 
 it give his companion a moment 's thought . " and she be sure Mrs. Pocock 
 will - ? " 
 " no , I say that for you . she like your like she ; it be so much , as 
 it be , " Chad laugh , " to the good . however , she do not   despair of 
 Sarah either , and be prepare , on her own side , to go all length . " 
 " in the way of appreciation ? " 
 " yes , and of everything else . in the way of general amiability , 
 hospitality and welcome . she be under arm , " Chad laugh again ; ' she be 
 prepare . " 
 Strether take it in ; then as if an echo of Miss Barrace be in the 
 air : " she be wonderful . " 
 " you do not   begin to know how wonderful ! " 
 there be a depth in it , to Strether 's ear , of confirm luxury - almost 
 a kind of unconscious insolence of proprietorship ; but the effect of 
 the glimpse be not at this moment to foster speculation : there be 
 something so conclusive in so much graceful and generous assurance . it 
 be in fact a fresh evocation ; and the evocation have before many 
 minute another consequence . " well , I shall see her oftener now . I 
 shall see she as much as I like - by your leave ; which be what I 
 hitherto have not   do . " 
 " it have be , " say Chad , but without reproach , " only your own fault . I 
 try to bring you together , and SHE , my dear fellow - I never see she 
 more charming to any man . but you have   get your extraordinary idea . " 
 " well , I do have , " Strether murmur , while he feel both how they have 
 possess he and how they have now lose their authority . he could not 
 have trace the sequence to the end , but it be all because of Mrs. 
 Pocock . Mrs. Pocock might be because of Mrs. Newsome , but that be 
 still to be prove . what come over he be the sense of have 
 stupidly fail to profit where profit would have be precious . it 
 have be open to he to see so much more of she , and he have but let the 
 good day pass . fierce in he almost be the resolve to lose no more 
 of they , and he whimsically reflect , while at Chad 's side he draw 
 near to his destination , that it be after all Sarah who would have 
 quicken his chance . what her visit of inquisition might achieve in 
 other direction be as yet all obscure - only not obscure that it would 
 do supremely much to bring two earnest person together . he have but to 
 listen to Chad at this moment to feel it ; for Chad be in the act of 
 remark to he that they of course both count on he - he himself 
 and the other earnest person - for cheer and support . it be brave to 
 Strether to hear he talk as if the line of wisdom they have strike out 
 be to make thing ravish to the Pococks . no , if Madame de Vionnet 
 compass that , compass the ravishment of the Pococks , Madame de 
 Vionnet would be prodigious . it would be a beautiful plan if it 
 succeed , and it all come to the question of Sarah 's be really 
 bribeable . the precedent of his own case help Strether perhaps but 
 little to consider she might prove so ; it be distinct that her 
 character would rather make for every possible difference . this idea 
 of his own bribeability set he apart for himself ; with the further 
 mark in fact that his case be absolutely prove . he like always , 
 where Lambert Strether be concern , to know the bad , and what he 
 now seem to know be not only that he be bribeable , but that he have 
 be effectually bribe . the only difficulty be that he could not 
 quite have say with what . it be as if he have sell himself , but 
 have not   somehow get the cash . that , however , be what , 
 characteristically , would happen to he . it would naturally be his 
 kind of traffic . while he think of these thing he remind Chad of 
 the truth they must not   lose sight of - the truth that , with all 
 deference to her susceptibility to new interest , Sarah would have come 
 out with a high firm definite purpose . " she have not   come out , you know , 
 to be bamboozle . we may all be ravish - nothing perhaps can be more 
 easy for we ; but she have not   come out to be ravish . she have come out 
 just simply to take you home . " 
 " oh well , with she I will go , " say Chad good - humouredly . " I suppose 
 you will allow THAT . " and then as for a minute Strether say nothing : 
 " or be your idea that when I have   see she I shall not   want to go ? " as this 
 question , however , again leave his friend silent he presently go on : 
 " my own idea at any rate be that they shall have while they be here the 
 good sort of time . " 
 it be at this that Strether speak . " ah there you be ! I think if you 
 really want to go - ! " 
 " well ? " say Chad to bring it out . 
 " well , you would not   trouble about our good time . you would not   care 
 what sort of a time we have . " 
 Chad could always take in the easy way in the world any ingenious 
 suggestion . " I see . but can I help it ? I be too decent . " 
 " yes , you be too decent ! " Strether heavily sigh . and he feel for the 
 moment as if it be the preposterous end of his mission . 
 it minister for the time to this temporary effect that Chad make no 
 rejoinder . but he speak again as they come in sight of the station . 
 " do you mean to introduce she to Miss Gostrey ? " 
 as to this Strether be ready . " no . " 
 " but have not   you tell I they know about she ? " 
 " I think I have   tell you your mother know . " 
 " and will not   she have tell Sally ? " 
 " that be one of the thing I want to see . " 
 " and if you find she have - ? " 
 " will I then , you mean , bring they together ? " 
 " yes , " say Chad with his pleasant promptness : " to show she there be 
 nothing in it . " 
 Strether hesitate . " I do not   know that I care very much what she may 
 think there be in it . " 
 " not if it represent what Mother think ? " 
 " ah what do your mother think ? " there be in this some sound of 
 bewilderment . 
 but they be just drive up , and help , of a sort , might after all be 
 quite at hand . " be not   that , my dear man , what we be both just go to 
 make out ? " 
 II 
 Strether quit the station half an hour later in different company . 
 Chad have take charge , for the journey to the hotel , of Sarah , Mamie , 
 the maid and the luggage , all spaciously instal and convey ; and it 
 be only after the four have roll away that his companion get into a 
 cab with Jim . a strange new feeling have come over Strether , in 
 consequence of which his spirit have rise ; it be as if what have 
 occur on the alighting of his critic have be something other than 
 his fear , though his fear have vet not be of an instant scene of 
 violence . his impression have be nothing but what be inevitable - he 
 say that to himself ; yet relief and reassurance have softly drop 
 upon he . nothing could be so odd as to be indebted for these thing 
 to the look of face and the sound of voice that have be with he to 
 satiety , as he might have say , for year ; but he now know , all the 
 same , how uneasy he have feel ; that be bring home to he by his 
 present sense of a respite . it have come moreover in the flash of an 
 eye , it have come in the smile with which Sarah , whom , at the window of 
 her compartment , they have effusively greet from the platform , rustle 
 down to they a moment later , fresh and handsome from her cool June 
 progress through the charming land . it be only a sign , but enough : 
 she be go to be gracious and unallusive , she be go to play the 
 large game - which be still more apparent , after she have emerge from 
 Chad 's arm , in her direct greeting to the value friend of her family . 
 Strether be then as much as ever the value friend of her family , it 
 be something he could at all event go on with ; and the manner of his 
 response to it express even for himself how little he have enjoy the 
 prospect of cease to figure in that likeness . he have always see 
 Sarah gracious - have in fact rarely see she shy or dry , her marked 
 thin - lipped smile , intense without brightness and as prompt to act as 
 the scrape of a safety - match ; the protrusion of she rather remarkably 
 long chin , which in her case represent invitation and urbanity , and 
 not , as in most other , pugnacity and defiance ; the penetration of her 
 voice to a distance , the general encouragement and approval of her 
 manner , be all element with which intercourse have make he familiar , 
 but which he note today almost as if she have be a new acquaintance . 
 this first glimpse of she have give a brief but vivid accent to her 
 resemblance to her mother ; he could have take she for Mrs. Newsome 
 while she meet his eye as the train roll into the station . it be an 
 impression that quickly drop ; Mrs. Newsome be much handsomer , and 
 while Sarah incline to the massive her mother have , at an age , still 
 the girdle of a maid ; also the latter 's chin be rather short , than 
 long , and her smile , by good fortune , much more , oh ever so much more , 
 mercifully vague . Strether have see Mrs. Newsome reserve ; he have 
 literally hear she silent , though he have never know her unpleasant . 
 it be the case with Mrs. Pocock that he have know she unpleasant , even 
 though he have never know she not affable . she have form of affability 
 that be in a high degree assertive ; nothing for instance have ever 
 be more striking than that she be affable to Jim . 
 what have tell in any case at the window of the train be her high clear 
 forehead , that forehead which her friend , for some reason , always 
 think of as a " brow " ; the long reach of her eye - it come out at this 
 juncture in such a manner as to remind he , oddly enough , also of that 
 of Waymarsh 's ; and the unusual gloss of her dark hair , dress and 
 hat , after her mother 's refined example , with such an avoidance of 
 extreme that it be always speak of at Woollett as " their own . " 
 though this analogy drop as soon as she be on the platform it have 
 last long enough to make he feel all the advantage , as it be , of 
 his relief . the woman at home , the woman to whom he be attach , be 
 before he just long enough to give he again the measure of the 
 wretchedness , in fact really of the shame , of their have to recognise 
 the formation , between they , of a ' split . " he have take this measure 
 in solitude and meditation : but the catastrophe , as Sarah steam up , 
 look for its second unprecedentedly dreadful - or prove , more 
 exactly , altogether unthinkable ; so that his find something free and 
 familiar to respond to bring with it an instant renewal of his 
 loyalty . he have suddenly sound the whole depth , have gasp at what 
 he might have lose . 
 well , he could now , for the quarter of an hour of their detention hover 
 about the traveller as soothingly as if their direct message to he 
 be that he have lose nothing . he be not   go to have Sarah write to 
 her mother that night that he be in any way alter or strange . there 
 have be time enough for a month when it have seem to he that he be 
 strange , that he be alter , in every way ; but that be a matter for 
 himself ; he know at least whose business it be not ; it be not at all 
 event such a circumstance as Sarah 's own unaided light would help she 
 to . even if she have come out to flash those light more than yet 
 appear she would not   make much headway against mere pleasantness . he 
 count on be able to be merely pleasant to the end , and if only 
 from incapacity moreover to formulate anything different . he could not 
 even formulate to himself his be change and queer ; it have take 
 place , the process , somewhere deep down ; Maria Gostrey have catch 
 glimpse of it ; but how be he to fish it up , even if he desire , for 
 Mrs. Pocock ? this be then the spirit in which he hover , and with 
 the easy throb in it much indebted furthermore to the impression of 
 high and establish adequacy as a pretty girl promptly produce in he 
 by Mamie . he have wonder vaguely - turn over many thing in the 
 fidget of his thought - if Mamie be as pretty as Woollett publish 
 she ; as to which issue see she now again be to be so sweep away by 
 Woollett 's opinion that this consequence really let loose for the 
 imagination an avalanche of other . there be positively five minute 
 in which the last word seem of necessity to abide with a Woollett 
 represent by a Mamie . this be the sort of truth the place itself 
 would feel ; it would send she forth in confidence ; it would point to 
 she with triumph ; it would take its stand on she with assurance ; it 
 would be conscious of no requirement she do not   meet , of no question 
 she could not   answer . 
 well , it be right , Strether slip smoothly enough into the 
 cheerfulness of say : grant that a community might be well 
 represent by a young lady of twenty - two , Mamie perfectly play the 
 part , play it as if she be use to it , and look and speak and 
 dress the character . he wonder if she might not , in the high light 
 of Paris , a cool full studio - light , become yet treacherous , show as 
 too conscious of these matter ; but the next moment he feel satisfied 
 that her consciousness be after all empty for its size , rather too 
 simple than too mixed , and that the kind way with she would be not to 
 take many thing out of it , but to put as many as possible in . she be 
 robust and conveniently tall ; just a trifle too bloodlessly fair 
 perhaps , but with a pleasant public familiar radiance that affirm her 
 vitality . she might have be " receive " for Woollett , wherever she 
 find herself , and there be something in her manner , her tone , her 
 motion , her pretty blue eye , her pretty perfect tooth and her very 
 small , too small , nose , that immediately place she , to the fancy , 
 between the window of a hot bright room in which voice be high - up 
 at that end to which people be bring to be " present . " they be 
 there to congratulate , these image , and Strether 's renew vision , on 
 this hint , complete the idea . what Mamie be like be the happy 
 bride , the bride after the church and just before go away . she 
 be not   the mere maiden , and yet be only as much married as that 
 quantity come to . she be in the brilliant acclaim festal stage . 
 well , might it last her long ! 
 Strether rejoice in these thing for Chad , who be all genial 
 attention to the need of his friend , besides have arrange that his 
 servant should reinforce he ; the lady be certainly pleasant to 
 see , and Mamie would be at any time and anywhere pleasant to exhibit . 
 she would look extraordinarily like his young wife - the wife of a 
 honeymoon , should he go about with she ; but that be his own affair - or 
 perhaps it be her ; it be at any rate something she could not   help . 
 Strether remember how he have see he come up with Jeanne de Vionnet 
 in Gloriani 's garden , and the fancy he have have about that - the fancy 
 obscure now , thickly overlay with other ; the recollection be during 
 these minute his only note of trouble . he have often , in spite of 
 himself , wonder if Chad but too probably be not with Jeanne the 
 object of a still and shade flame . it be on the card that the child 
 might be tremulously in love , and this conviction now flicker up not 
 a bit the less for his disliking to think of it , for its being , in a 
 complicated situation , a complication the more , and for something 
 indescribable in Mamie , something at all event straightway lend she by 
 his own mind , something that give her value , give her intensity and 
 purpose , as the symbol of an opposition . little Jeanne be not   really 
 at all in question - how could she be ? - yet from the moment Miss Pocock 
 have shake her skirt on the platform , touch up the immense bow of 
 her hat and settle properly over her shoulder the strap of her 
 morocco - and - gilt travelling - satchel , from that moment little Jeanne be 
 opposed . 
 it be in the cab with Jim that impression really crowd on Strether , 
 give he the strange sense of length of absence from people among 
 whom he have live for year . have they thus come out to he be as 
 if he have return to find they : and the droll promptitude of Jim 's 
 mental reaction throw his own initiation far back into the past . 
 whoever might or might not   be suit by what be go on among they , 
 Jim , for one , would certainly be : his instant recognition - frank and 
 whimsical - of what the affair be for HIM give Strether a glow of 
 pleasure . " I say , you know , this be about my shape , and if it have not 
 be for you - ! " so he break out as the charming street meet his 
 healthy appetite ; and he wind up , after an expressive nudge , with a 
 clap of his companion 's knee and an " oh you , you - you be do it ! " 
 that be charge with rich meaning . Strether feel in it the intention 
 of homage , but , with a curiosity otherwise occupy , postpone take 
 it up . what he be ask himself for the time be how Sarah Pocock , 
 in the opportunity already give she , have judge her brother - from whom 
 he himself , as they finally , at the station , separate for their 
 different conveyance , have have a look into which he could read more 
 than one message . however Sarah be judge her brother , Chad 's 
 conclusion about his sister , and about her husband and her husband 's 
 sister , be at the least on the way not to fail of confidence . Strether 
 feel the confidence , and that , as the look between they be an 
 exchange , what he himself give back be relatively vague . this 
 comparison of note however could wait ; everything strike he as 
 depend on the effect produce by Chad . neither Sarah nor Mamie have 
 in any way , at the station - where they have have after all ample 
 time - break out about it ; which , to make up for this , be what our 
 friend have expect of Jim as soon as they should find themselves 
 together . 
 it be queer to he that he have that noiseless brush with Chad ; an 
 ironic intelligence with this youth on the subject of his relative , an 
 intelligence carry on under their nose and , as might be say , at 
 their expense - such a matter mark again for he strongly the number 
 of stage he have come ; albeit that if the number seem great the time 
 take for the final one be but the turn of a hand . he have before this 
 have many moment of wonder if he himself be not   perhaps change 
 even as Chad be change . only what in Chad be conspicuous 
 improvement - well , he have no name ready for the working , in his own 
 organism , of his own more timid dose . he should have to see first what 
 this action would amount to . and for his occult passage with the young 
 man , after all , the directness of it have no great oddity than the 
 fact that the young man 's way with the three traveller should have 
 be so happy a manifestation . Strether like he for it , on the spot , 
 as he have not   yet like he ; it affect he while it last as he might 
 have be affect by some light pleasant perfect work of art : to that 
 degree that he wonder if they be really worthy of it , take it in 
 and do it justice ; to that degree that it would have be scarce a 
 miracle if , there in the luggage - room , while they wait for their 
 thing , Sarah have pull his sleeve and draw he aside . " you be right ; 
 we have not   quite known what you mean , Mother and I , but now we see . 
 Chad 's magnificent ; what can one want more ? if this be the kind of 
 thing - ! " on which they might , as it be , have embrace and begin to 
 work together . 
 ah how much , as it be , for all her bridle brightness - which be 
 merely general and notice nothing - would they work together ? Strether 
 know he be unreasonable ; he set it down to his be nervous : people 
 could not   notice everything and speak of everything in a quarter of an 
 hour . possibly , no doubt , also , he make too much of Chad 's display . 
 yet , none the less , when , at the end of five minute , in the cab , Jim 
 Pocock have say nothing either - have not   say , that is , what Strether 
 want , though he have say much else - it all suddenly bounce back to 
 their be either stupid or wilful . it be more probably on the whole 
 the former ; so that that would be the drawback of the bridling 
 brightness . yes , they would bridle and be bright ; they would make the 
 good of what be before they , but their observation would fail ; it 
 would be beyond they ; they simply would not   understand . of what use 
 would it be then that they have come ? - if they be not   to be intelligent 
 up to that point : unless indeed he himself be utterly delude and 
 extravagant ? be he , on this question of Chad 's improvement , fantastic 
 and away from the truth ? do he live in a false world , a world that 
 have grow simply to suit he , and be his present slight irritation - in 
 the face now of Jim 's silence in particular - but the alarm of the vain 
 thing menace by the touch of the real ? be this contribution of the 
 real possibly the mission of the Pococks ? - have they come to make the 
 work of observation , as he have practise observation , crack and 
 crumble , and to reduce Chad to the plain term in which honest mind 
 could deal with he ? have they come in short to be sane where Strether 
 be destine to feel that he himself have only be silly ? 
 he glance at such a contingency , but it fail to hold he long when 
 once he have reflect that he would have be silly , in this case , with 
 Maria Gostrey and little Bilham , with Madame de Vionnet and little 
 Jeanne , with Lambert Strether , in fine , and above all with Chad Newsome 
 himself . would not   it be find to have make more for reality to be 
 silly with these person than sane with Sarah and Jim ? Jim in fact , he 
 presently make up his mind , be individually out of it ; Jim do not 
 care ; Jim have not   come out either for Chad or for he ; Jim in short leave 
 the moral side to Sally and indeed simply avail himself now , for the 
 sense of recreation , of the fact that he leave almost everything to 
 Sally . he be nothing compare to Sally , and not so much by reason of 
 Sally 's temper and will as by that of her more developed type and 
 great acquaintance with the world . he quite frankly and serenely 
 confess , as he sit there with Strether , that he feel his type hang 
 far in the rear of his wife 's and still far , if possible , in the 
 rear of his sister 's . their type , he well know , be recognise and 
 acclaim ; whereas the most a lead Woollett business - man could hope 
 to achieve socially , and for that matter industrially , be a certain 
 freedom to play into this general glamour . 
 the impression he make on our friend be another of the thing that 
 mark our friend 's road . it be a strange impression , especially as 
 so soon produce ; Strether have receive it , he judge , all in the 
 twenty minute ; it strike he at least as but in a minor degree the 
 work of the long Woollett year . Pocock be normally and consentingly 
 though not quite wittingly out of the question . it be despite his 
 be normal ; it be despite his be cheerful ; it be despite his 
 be a lead Woollett business - man ; and the determination of his 
 fate leave he thus perfectly usual - as everything else about it be 
 clearly , to his sense , not less so . he seem to say that there be a 
 whole side of life on which the perfectly usual be for lead 
 Woollett business - man to be out of the question . he make no more of it 
 than that , and Strether , so far as Jim be concern , desire to make 
 no more . only Strether 's imagination , as always , work , and he ask 
 himself if this side of life be not somehow connect , for those who 
 figure on it with the fact of marriage . would his relation to it , have 
 he marry ten year before , have become now the same as Pocock 's ? 
 might it even become the same should he marry in a few month ? should 
 he ever know himself as much out of the question for Mrs. Newsome as 
 Jim know himself - in a dim way - for Mrs. Jim ? 
 to turn his eye in that direction be to be personally reassure ; he 
 be different from Pocock ; he have affirm himself differently and be 
 hold after all in high esteem . what none the less come home to he , 
 however , at this hour , be that the society over there , that of which 
 Sarah and Mamie - and , in a more eminent way , Mrs. Newsome herself - be 
 specimen , be essentially a society of woman , and that poor Jim be not 
 in it . he himself Lambert Strether , be as yet in some degree - which 
 be an odd situation for a man ; but it keep come back to he in a 
 whimsical way that he should perhaps find his marriage have cost he his 
 place . this occasion indeed , whatever that fancy represent , be not 
 a time of sensible exclusion for Jim , who be in a state of manifest 
 response to the charm of his adventure . small and fat and constantly 
 facetious , straw - colour and destitute of mark , he would have be 
 practically indistinguishable have not   his constant preference for 
 light - grey clothe , for white hat , for very big cigar and very little 
 story , do what it could for his identity . there be sign in he , 
 though none of they plaintive , of always pay for other ; and the 
 principal one perhaps be just this failure of type . it be with this 
 that he pay , rather than with fatigue or waste ; and also doubtless a 
 little with the effort of humour - never irrelevant to the condition , 
 to the relation , with which he be acquaint . 
 he gurgle his joy as they roll through the happy street ; he 
 declare that his trip be a regular windfall , and that he be not 
 there , he be eager to remark , to hang back from anything : he do not 
 know quite what Sally have come for , but he have come for a good time . 
 Strether indulge he even while wonder if what Sally want she 
 brother to go back for be to become like her husband . he trust that 
 a good time be to be , out and out , the programme for all of they ; and 
 he assent liberally to Jim 's proposal that , disencumber and 
 irresponsible - his thing be in the omnibus with those of the 
 other - they should take a further turn round before go to the 
 hotel . it be not   for HIM to tackle Chad - it be Sally 's job ; and as it 
 would be like she , he feel , to open fire on the spot , it would not   be 
 amiss of they to hold off and give her time . Strether , on his side , 
 only ask to give her time ; so he jog with his companion along 
 boulevard and avenue , try to extract from meagre material some 
 forecast of his catastrophe . he be quick enough to see that Jim 
 Pocock decline judgement , have hover quite round the outer edge of 
 discussion and anxiety , leave all analysis of their question to the 
 lady alone and now only feel his way toward some small droll 
 cynicism . it break out afresh , the cynicism - it have already show a 
 flicker - in a but slightly defer : " well , hang if I would if I 
 be he ! " 
 " you mean you would not   in Chad 's place - ? " 
 " give up this to go back and boss the advertising ! " Poor Jim , with his 
 arm fold and his little leg out in the open fiacre , drink in the 
 sparkle Paris noon and carry his eye from one side of their vista 
 to the other . " why I want to come right out and live here myself . and 
 I want to live while I be here too . I feel with YOU - oh you have   be 
 grand , old man , and I have   twig - that it be not   right to worry Chad . I 
 do not   mean to persecute he ; I could not   in conscience . it be thank to 
 you at any rate that I be here , and I be sure I be much obliged . you be a 
 lovely pair . " 
 there be thing in this speech that Strether let pass for the time . 
 " do not   you then think it important the advertising should be thoroughly 
 take in hand ? Chad will be , so far as capacity be concern , " he go 
 on , " the man to do it . " 
 " where do he get his capacity , " Jim ask , " over here ? " 
 " he do not   get it over here , and the wonderful thing be that over here 
 he have not   inevitably lose it . he have a natural turn for business , an 
 extraordinary head . he come by that , " Strether explain , " honestly 
 enough . he be in that respect his father 's son , and also - for she be 
 wonderful in her way too - his mother 's . he have other taste and other 
 tendency ; but Mrs. Newsome and your wife be quite right about his 
 have that . he be very remarkable . " 
 " well , I guess he be ! " Jim Pocock comfortably sigh . " but if you have 
 believe so in his make we hum , why have you so prolonged the 
 discussion ? do not   you know we have   be quite anxious about you ? " 
 these question be not inform with earnestness , but Strether see he 
 must none the less make a choice and take a line . " because , you see , 
 I have   greatly like it . I have   like my Paris , I dare say I have   like it 
 too much . " 
 " oh you old wretch ! " Jim gaily exclaim . 
 " but nothing be conclude , " Strether go on . " the case be more complex 
 than it look from Woollett . " 
 " oh well , it look bad enough from Woollett ! " Jim declare . 
 " even after all I have   write ? " 
 Jim bethink himself . " be not   it what you have   write that have make 
 Mrs. Newsome pack we off ? that at least and Chad 's not turn up ? " 
 Strether make a reflexion of his own . " I see . that she should do 
 something be , no doubt , inevitable , and your wife have therefore of 
 course come out to act . " 
 " oh yes , " Jim concur - " to act . but Sally come out to act , you 
 know , " he lucidly add , " every time she leave the house . she never 
 come out but she do act . she be act moreover now for her mother , 
 and that fix the scale . " then he wind up , open all his sens to 
 it , with a renew embrace of pleasant Paris . " we have not   all the same 
 at Woollett get anything like this . " 
 Strether continue to consider . " I be bind to say for you all that you 
 strike I as have arrive in a very mild and reasonable frame of 
 mind . you do not   show your claw . I feel just now in Mrs. Pocock no 
 symptom of that . she be not   fierce , " he go on . " I be such a nervous 
 idiot that I think she might be . " 
 " oh do not   you know she well enough , " Pocock ask , " to have notice 
 that she never give herself away , any more than her mother ever do ? 
 they be not   fierce , either of them ; they let you come quite close . they 
 wear their fur the smooth side out - the warm side in . do you know what 
 they be ? " Jim pursue as he look about he , give the question , as 
 Strether feel , but half his care - " do you know what they be ? they be 
 about as intense as they can live . " 
 " yes " - and Strether 's concurrence have a positive precipitation ; 
 " they be about as intense as they can live . " 
 " they do not   lash about and shake the cage , " say Jim , who seem 
 pleased with his analogy ; " and it be at feeding - time that they be 
 quietest . but they always get there . " 
 " they do indeed - they always get there ! " Strether reply with a laugh 
 that justify his confession of nervousness . he dislike to be 
 talk sincerely of Mrs. Newsome with Pocock ; he could have talk 
 insincerely . but there be something he want to know , a need create 
 in he by her recent intermission , by his have give from the first 
 so much , as now more than ever appear to he , and get so little . it 
 be as if a queer truth in his companion 's metaphor have roll over he 
 with a rush . she had be quiet at feeding - time ; she have feed , and 
 Sarah have feed with she , out of the big bowl of all his recent free 
 communication , his vividness and pleasantness , his ingenuity and even 
 his eloquence , while the current of her response have steadily run thin . 
 Jim meanwhile however , it be true , slip characteristically into 
 shallowness from the moment he cease to speak out of the experience of 
 a husband . 
 " but of course Chad have now the advantage of be there before she . if 
 he do not   work that for all it be worth - ! " he sigh with contingent 
 pity at his brother - in - law 's possible want of resource . " he have work 
 it on you , pretty well , eh ? " and he ask the next moment if there be 
 anything new at the Varieties , which he pronounce in the american 
 manner . they talk about the Varieties - Strether confessing to a 
 knowledge which produce again on Pocock 's part a play of innuendo as 
 vague as a nursery - rhyme , yet as aggressive as an elbow in his side ; 
 and they finish their drive under the protection of easy theme . 
 Strether wait to the end , but still in vain , for any show that Jim 
 have see Chad as different ; and he could scarce have explain the 
 discouragement he draw from the absence of this testimony . it be what 
 he have take his own stand on , so far as he have take a stand ; and if 
 they be all only go to see nothing he have only waste his time . he 
 give his friend till the very last moment , till they have come into 
 sight of the hotel ; and when poor Pocock only continue cheerful and 
 envious and funny he fairly grow to dislike he , to feel he 
 extravagantly common . if they be all go to see 
 nothing ! - Strether know , as this come back to he , that he be also 
 let Pocock represent for he what Mrs. Newsome would not   see . he 
 go on disliking , in the light of Jim 's commonness , to talk to he 
 about that lady ; yet just before the cab pull up he know the extent 
 of his desire for the real word from Woollett . 
 " have Mrs. Newsome at all give way - ? " 
 " ' give way ' ? " - Jim echo it with the practical derision of his sense 
 of a long past . 
 " under the strain , I mean , of hope defer , of disappointment repeat 
 and thereby intensify . " 
 " oh be she prostrate , you mean ? " - he have his category in hand . " why 
 yes , she be prostrate - just as Sally be . but they be never so lively , 
 you know , as when they be prostrate . " 
 " ah Sarah 's prostrate ? " Strether vaguely murmur . 
 " it be when they be prostrate that they most sit up . " 
 " and Mrs. Newsome 's sit up ? " 
 " all night , my boy - for you ! " and Jim fetch he , with a vulgar 
 little guffaw , a thrust that give relief to the picture . but he have 
 get what he want . he feel on the spot that this be the real word 
 from Woollett . " so do not   you go home ! " Jim add while he alight and 
 while his friend , let he profusely pay the cabman , sit on in a 
 momentary muse . Strether wonder if that be the real word too . 
 III 
 as the door of Mrs. Pocock 's salon be push open for he , the next 
 day , well before noon , he be reach by a voice with a charming sound 
 that make he just falter before cross the threshold . Madame de 
 Vionnet be already on the field , and this give the drama a quick 
 pace than he feel it as yet - though his suspense have increase - in the 
 power of any act of his own to do . he have spend the previous evening 
 with all his old friend together yet he would still have describe 
 himself as quite in the dark in respect to a forecast of their 
 influence on his situation . it be strange now , none the less , that in 
 the light of this unexpected note of her presence he feel Madame de 
 Vionnet a part of that situation as she have not   even yet be . she be 
 alone , he find himself assume , with Sarah , and there be a bearing 
 in that - somehow beyond his control - on his personal fate . yet she be 
 only say something quite easy and independent - the thing she have 
 come , as a good friend of Chad 's , on purpose to say . " there be not 
 anything at all - ? I should be so delighted . " 
 it be clear enough , when they be there before he , how she have be 
 receive . he see this , as Sarah get up to greet he , from something 
 fairly hectic in Sarah 's face . he see furthermore that they be not , 
 as have first come to he , alone together ; he be at no loss as to the 
 identity of the broad high back present to he in the embrasure of 
 the window furthest from the door . waymarsh , whom he have to - day not yet 
 see , whom he only know to have leave the hotel before he , and who 
 have take part , the night previous , on Mrs. Pocock 's kind invitation , 
 convey by Chad , in the entertainment , informal but cordial , promptly 
 offer by that lady - Waymarsh have anticipate he even as Madame de 
 Vionnet have do , and , with his hand in his pocket and his attitude 
 unaffected by Strether 's entrance , be look out , in marked 
 detachment , at the Rue de Rivoli . the latter feel it in the air - it 
 be immense how Waymarsh could mark thing - -that he have remain 
 deeply dissociate from the overture to their hostess that we have 
 record on Madame de Vionnet 's side . he have , conspicuously , tact , 
 besides a stiff general view ; and this be why he have leave Mrs. Pocock 
 to struggle alone . he would outstay the visitor ; he would 
 unmistakeably wait ; to what have he be doom for month past but 
 wait ? therefore she be to feel that she have he in reserve . what 
 support she draw from this be still to be see , for , although Sarah 
 be vividly bright , she have give herself up for the moment to an 
 ambiguous flushed formalism . she have have to reckon more quickly than 
 she expect ; but it concern she first of all to signify that she be 
 not to be take unawares . Strether arrive precisely in time for she 
 show it . " oh you be too good ; but I do not   think I feel quite 
 helpless . I have my brother - and these american friend . and then you 
 know I have   be to Paris . I know Paris , " say Sally Pocock in a tone 
 that breathe a certain chill on Strether 's heart . 
 " ah but a woman , in this tiresome place where everything be always 
 change , a woman of good will , " Madame de Vionnet throw off , " can 
 always help a woman . I be sure you ' know ' - but we know perhaps 
 different thing . " she too , visibly , wish to make no mistake ; but it 
 be a fear of a different order and more keep out of sight . she smile 
 in welcome at Strether ; she greet he more familiarly than Mrs. 
 Pocock ; she put out her hand to he without move from her place ; and 
 it come to he in the course of a minute and in the oddest way 
 that - yes , positively - she be give he over to ruin . she be all 
 kindness and ease , but she could not   help so give he ; she be 
 exquisite , and her be just as she be pour for Sarah a sudden rush 
 of meaning into his own equivocation . how could she know how she be 
 hurt he ? she want to show as simple and humble - in the degree 
 compatible with operative charm ; but it be just this that seem to 
 put he on her side . she strike he as dress , as arrange , as 
 prepare infinitely to conciliate - with the very poetry of good taste 
 in her view of the condition of her early call . she be ready to 
 advise about dressmaker and shop ; she hold herself wholly at the 
 disposition of Chad 's family . Strether notice her card on the 
 table - her coronet and her " comtesse " - and the imagination be sharp in 
 he of certain private adjustment in Sarah 's mind . she have never , he 
 be sure , sit with a " Comtesse " before , and such be the speciman of 
 that class he have be keep to play on she . she have cross the sea 
 very particularly for a look at she ; but he read in Madame de Vionnet 's 
 own eye that this curiosity have not   be so successfully meet as that 
 she herself would not   now have more than ever need of he . she look 
 much as she have look to he that morning at Notre Dame ; he note in 
 fact the suggestive sameness of her discreet and delicate dress . it 
 seem to speak - perhaps a little prematurely or too finely - of the 
 sense in which she would help Mrs. Pocock with the shop . the way that 
 lady take she in , moreover , add depth to his impression of what Miss 
 Gostrey , by their common wisdom , have escape . he wince as he see 
 himself but for that timely prudence ushering in Maria as a guide and 
 an example . there be however a touch of relief for he in his 
 glimpse , so far as he have get it , of Sarah 's line . she " know Paris . " 
 Madame de Vionnet have , for that matter , lightly take this up . " ah 
 then you have   a turn for that , an affinity that belong to your family . 
 your brother , though his long experience make a difference , I admit , 
 have become one of we in a marvellous way . " and she appeal to Strether 
 in the manner of a woman who could always glide off with smoothness 
 into another subject . be not   he strike with the way Mr. Newsome have 
 make the place his own , and have not   he be in a position to profit by 
 his friend 's wondrous expertness ? 
 Strether feel the bravery , at the least , of she present herself so 
 promptly to sound that note , and yet ask himself what other note , 
 after all , she could strike from the moment she present herself at 
 all . she could meet Mrs. Pocock only on the ground of the obvious , and 
 what feature of Chad 's situation be more eminent than the fact that he 
 have create for himself a new set of circumstance ? unless she hide 
 herself altogether she could show but as one of these , an illustration 
 of his domicile and indeed of his confirmed condition . and the 
 consciousness of all this in her charming eye be so clear and fine 
 that as she thus publicly draw he into her boat she produce in he 
 such a silent agitation as he be not to fail afterwards to denounce as 
 pusillanimous . " ah do not   be so charming to I ! - for it make we 
 intimate , and after all what be between we when I have   be so 
 tremendously on my guard and have see you but half a dozen time ? " he 
 recognise once more the perverse law that so inveterately govern his 
 poor personal aspect : it would be exactly like the way thing always 
 turn out for he that he should affect Mrs. Pocock and Waymarsh as 
 launch in a relation in which he have really never be launch at 
 all . they be at this very moment - they could only be - attribute to 
 he the full licence of it , and all by the operation of her own tone 
 with he ; whereas his sole licence have be to cling with intensity to 
 the brink , not to dip so much as a toe into the flood . but the flicker 
 of his fear on this occasion be not , as may be add , to repeat 
 itself ; it spring up , for its moment , only to die down and then go out 
 for ever . to meet his fellow visitor 's invocation and , with Sarah 's 
 brilliant eye on he , answer , be quite sufficiently to step into her 
 boat . during the rest of the time her visit last he feel himself 
 proceed to each of the proper office , successively , for help to 
 keep the adventurous skiff afloat . it rock beneath he , but he 
 settle himself in his place . he take up an oar and , since he be to 
 have the credit of pull , pull . 
 " that will make it all the pleasanter if it so happen that we do 
 meet , " Madame de Vionnet have far observe in reference to Mrs. 
 Pocock 's mention of her initiate state ; and she have immediately add 
 that , after all , her hostess could not   be in need with the good office 
 of Mr. Strether so close at hand . " it be he , I gather , who have learn 
 to know his Paris , and to love it , well than any one ever before in 
 so short a time ; so that between he and your brother , when it come to 
 the point , how can you possibly want for good guidance ? the great 
 thing , Mr. Strether will show you , " she smile , " be just to let one 's 
 self go . " 
 " oh I have   not let myself go very far , " Strether answer , feel quite 
 as if he have be call upon to hint to Mrs. Pocock how parisian 
 could talk . " I be only afraid of show I have not   let myself go far 
 enough . I have   take a good deal of time , but I must quite have have the 
 air of not budge from one spot . " he look at Sarah in a manner that 
 he think she might take as engaging , and he make , under Madame de 
 Vionnet 's protection , as it be , his first personal point . " what have 
 really happen have be that , all the while , I have   do what I come out 
 for . " 
 yet it only at first give Madame de Vionnet a chance immediately to 
 take he up . " you have   renew acquaintance with your friend - you have 
 learn to know he again . " she speak with such cheerful helpfulness 
 that they might , in a common cause , have be call together and 
 pledge to mutual aid . 
 Waymarsh , at this , as if he have be in question , straightway turn 
 from the window . " oh yes , Countess - he have renew acquaintance with 
 ME , and he have , I guess , learn something about I , though I do not   know 
 how much he have like it . it be for Strether himself to say whether he 
 have feel it justify his course . " 
 " oh but you , " say the Countess gaily , " be not in the least what he 
 come out for - be he really , Strether ? and I have not   you at all in my 
 mind . I be think of Mr. Newsome , of whom we think so much and with 
 whom , precisely , Mrs. Pocock have give herself the opportunity to take 
 up thread . what a pleasure for you both ! " Madame de Vionnet , with her 
 eye on Sarah , bravely continue . 
 Mrs. Pocock meet she handsomely , but Strether quickly see she mean to 
 accept no version of her movement or plan from any other lip . she 
 require no patronage and no support , which be but other name for a 
 false position ; she would show in her own way what she choose to show , 
 and this she express with a dry glitter that recall to he a fine 
 Woollett winter morning . " I have   never want for opportunity to see 
 my brother . we have   many thing to think of at home , and great 
 responsibility and occupation , and our home be not an impossible 
 place . we have   plenty of reason , " Sarah continue a little piercingly , 
 " for everything we do " - and in short she would not   give herself the 
 least little scrap away . but she add as one who be always bland and 
 who could afford a concession : " I have   come because - well , because we do 
 come . " 
 " ah then fortunately ! " - Madame de Vionnet breathe it to the air . five 
 minute later they be on their foot for she to take leave , stand 
 together in an affability that have succeed in survive a further 
 exchange of remark ; only with the emphasise appearance on Waymarsh 's 
 part of a tendency to revert , in a ruminating manner and as with an 
 instinctive or a precautionary lightening of his tread , to an open 
 window and his point of vantage . the glaze and gilded room , all red 
 damask , ormolu , mirror , clock , look south , and the shutter be 
 bow upon the summer morning ; but the Tuileries garden and what be 
 beyond it , over which the whole place hung , be thing visible through 
 gap ; so that the far - spread presence of Paris come up in coolness , 
 dimness and invitation , in the twinkle of gilt - tip paling , the 
 crunch of gravel , the click of hoof , the crack of whip , thing that 
 suggest some parade of the circus . " I think it probable , " say Mrs. 
 Pocock , " that I shall have the opportunity of go to my brother 's 
 I have   no doubt it be very pleasant indeed . " she speak as to Strether , but 
 her face be turn with an intensity of brightness to Madame de 
 Vionnet , and there be a moment during which , while she thus front 
 she , our friend expect to hear she add : " I be much oblige to you , 
 I be sure , for invite I there . " he guess that for five second 
 these word be on the point of come ; he hear they as clearly as if 
 they have be speak ; but he presently know they have just fail - know 
 it by a glance , quick and fine , from Madame de Vionnet , which tell he 
 that she too have feel they in the air , but that the point have luckily 
 not be make in any manner require notice . this leave she free to 
 reply only to what have be say . 
 " that the Boulevard Malesherbes may be common ground for we offer I 
 the good prospect I see for the pleasure of meet you again . " 
 " oh I shall come to see you , since you have   be so good " : and Mrs. 
 Pocock look her invader well in the eye . the flush in Sarah 's 
 cheek have by this time settle to a small definite crimson spot that 
 be not without its own bravery ; she hold her head a good deal up , and 
 it come to Strether that of the two , at this moment , she be the one 
 who most carry out the idea of a Countess . he quite take in , 
 however , that she would really return her visitor 's civility : she 
 would not   report again at Woollett without at least so much producible 
 history as that in her pocket . 
 " I want extremely to be able to show you my little daughter . " Madame de 
 Vionnet go on ; " and I should have bring she with I if I have not 
 wish first to ask your leave . I be in hope I should perhaps find 
 Miss Pocock , of whose be with you I have   hear from Mr. Newsome and 
 whose acquaintance I should so much like my child to make . if I have 
 the pleasure of see she and you do permit it I shall venture to ask 
 she to be kind to Jeanne . Mr. Strether will tell you " - she beautifully 
 keep it up - " that my poor girl be gentle and good and rather lonely . 
 they have   make friend , he and she , ever so happily , and he do not , I 
 believe , think ill of she . as for Jeanne herself he have have the same 
 success with she that I know he have have here wherever he have turn . " 
 she seem to ask he for permission to say these thing , or seem 
 rather to take it , softly and happily , with the ease of intimacy , for 
 grant , and he have quite the consciousness now that not to meet she at 
 any point more than halfway would be odiously , basely to abandon she . 
 yes , he be with she , and , oppose even in this covert , this semi - safe 
 fashion to those who be not , he feel , strangely and confusedly , but 
 excitedly , inspiringly , how much and how far . it be as if he have 
 positively wait in suspense for something from she that would let he 
 in deep , so that he might show she how he could take it . and what 
 do in fact come as she draw out a little her farewell serve 
 sufficiently the purpose . " as his success be a matter that I be sure 
 he will never mention for himself , I feel , you see , the less scruple ; 
 which it be very good of I to say , you know , by the way , " she add as 
 she address herself to he ; " consider how little direct advantage 
 I have   gain from your triumph with I . when do one ever see you ? I 
 wait at home and I languish . you will have render I the service , Mrs. 
 Pocock , at least , " she wind up , " of give I one of my much - too - rare 
 glimpse of this gentleman . " 
 " I certainly should be sorry to deprive you of anything that seem so 
 much , as you describe it , your natural due . Mr. Strether and I be 
 very old friend , " Sarah allow , " but the privilege of his society 
 be not   a thing I shall quarrel about with any one . " 
 " and yet , dear Sarah , " he freely break in , " I feel , when I hear you say 
 that , that you do not   quite do justice to the important truth of the 
 extent to which - as you be also mine - I be your natural due . I should 
 like much well , " he laugh , " to see you fight for I . " 
 she meet he , Mrs. Pocock , on this , with an arrest of speech - with a 
 certain breathlessness , as he immediately fancy , on the score of a 
 freedom for which she be not   quite prepared . it have flare up - for all 
 the harm he have intend by it - because , confoundedly , he do not   want 
 any more to be afraid about she than he want to be afraid about 
 Madame de Vionnet . he have never , naturally , call she anything but 
 Sarah at home , and though he have perhaps never quite so markedly 
 invoke she as his " dear , " that be somehow partly because no occasion 
 have hitherto lay so effective a trap for it . but something admonish 
 he now that it be too late - unless indeed it be possibly too early ; 
 and that he at any rate should not   have please Mrs. Pocock the more by 
 it . " well , Mr. Strether - ! " she murmur with vagueness , yet with 
 sharpness , while her crimson spot burn a trifle bright and he be 
 aware that this must be for the present the limit of her response . 
 Madame de Vionnet have already , however , come to his aid , and Waymarsh , 
 as if for further participation , move again back to they . it be true 
 that the aid render by Madame de Vionnet be questionable ; it be a 
 sign that , for all one might confess to with she , and for all she might 
 complain of not enjoy , she could still insidiously show how much of 
 the material of conversation have accumulate between they . 
 " the real truth be , you know , that you sacrifice one without mercy to 
 dear old Maria . she leave no room in your life for anybody else . do 
 you know , " she enquire of Mrs. Pocock , " about dear old Maria ? the 
 bad be that Miss Gostrey be really a wonderful woman . " 
 " oh yes indeed , " Strether answer for she , " Mrs. Pocock know about 
 Miss Gostrey . your mother , Sarah , must have tell you about she ; your 
 mother know everything , " he sturdily pursue . " and I cordially 
 admit , " he add with his conscious gaiety of courage , " that she be as 
 wonderful a woman as you like . " 
 " ah it be not   I who ' like , ' dear Mr. Strether , anything to do with the 
 matter ! " Sarah Pocock promptly protest ; " and I be by no mean sure I 
 have - from my mother or from any one else - a notion of whom you be 
 talk about . " 
 " well , he will not   let you see she , you know , " Madame de Vionnet 
 sympathetically throw in . " he never let I - old friend as we be : I 
 mean as I be with Maria . he reserve she for his good hour ; keep she 
 consummately to himself ; only give we other the crumb of the feast . " 
 " well , Countess , I'VE have some of the crumb , " Waymarsh observe with 
 weight and cover she with his large look ; which lead she to break in 
 before he could go on . 
 " comment donc , he share she with you ? " she exclaim in droll 
 stupefaction . " take care you do not   have , before you go much far , 
 rather more of all ce dame than you may know what to do with ! " 
 but he only continue in his massive way . " I can post you about the 
 lady , Mrs. Pocock , so far as you may care to hear . I have   see her quite 
 a number of time , and I be practically present when they make 
 acquaintance . I have   keep my eye on her right along , but I do not   know as 
 there be any real harm in she . " 
 " ' harm ' ? " Madame de Vionnet quickly echo . " why she be the dear and 
 cleverest of all the clever and dear . " 
 " well , you run she pretty close , Countess , " Waymarsh return with 
 spirit ; " though there be no doubt she be pretty well up in thing . she 
 know her way round Europe . above all there be no doubt she do love 
 Strether . " 
 " ah but we all do that - we all love Strether : it be not   a merit ! " their 
 fellow visitor laugh , keep to her idea with a good conscience at 
 which our friend be aware that he marvel , though he trust also 
 for it , as he meet she exquisitely expressive eye , to some later light . 
 the prime effect of her tone , however - and it be a truth which his own 
 eye give back to she in sad ironic play - could only be to make he 
 feel that , to say such thing to a man in public , a woman must 
 practically think of he as ninety year old . he have turn awkwardly , 
 responsively red , he know , at her mention of Maria Gostrey ; Sarah 
 Pocock 's presence - the particular quality of it - have make this 
 inevitable ; and then he have grow still red in proportion as he 
 hat to have show anything at all . he feel indeed that he be 
 show much , as , uncomfortably and almost in pain , he offer up his 
 redness to Waymarsh , who , strangely enough , seem now to be look at 
 he with a certain explanatory yearning . something deep - something 
 build on their old old relation - pass , in this complexity , between 
 they ; he get the side - wind of a loyalty that stand behind all actual 
 queer question . Waymarsh 's dry bare humour - as it give itself to be 
 take - gloome out to demand justice . " well , if you talk of Miss 
 Barrace I have   my chance too , " it appear stiffly to nod , and it grant 
 that it be give he away , but struggle to add that it do so only 
 to save he . the sombre glow star it at he till it fairly sound 
 out - " to save you , poor old man , to save you ; to save you in spite of 
 yourself . " yet it be somehow just this communication that show he 
 to himself as more than ever lose . still another result of it be to 
 put before he as never yet that between his comrade and the interest 
 represent by Sarah there be already a basis . beyond all question 
 now , yes : Waymarsh have be in occult relation with Mrs. Newsome - out , 
 out it all come in the very effort of his face . " yes , you be feel 
 my hand " - he as good as proclaim it ; " but only because this at least 
 I shall have get out of the damned Old World : that I shall have pick 
 up the piece into which it have cause you to crumble . " it be as if in 
 short , after an instant , Strether have not only have it from he , but have 
 recognise that so far as this go the instant have clear the air . 
 our friend understand and approve ; he have the sense that they would not 
 otherwise speak of it . this would be all , and it would mark in himself 
 a kind of intelligent generosity . it be with grim Sarah then - Sarah 
 grim for all her grace - that Waymarsh have begin at ten o'clock in the 
 morning to save he . well - if he could , poor dear man , with his big 
 bleak kindness ! the upshot of which crowd perception be that 
 Strether , on his own side , still show no more than he absolutely have 
 to . he show the least possible by say to Mrs. Pocock after an 
 interval much briefer than our glance at the picture reflect in he : 
 " oh it be as true as they please ! - there be no Miss Gostrey for any one 
 but I - not the least little peep . I keep she to myself . " 
 " well , it be very good of you to notify I , " Sarah reply without 
 look at he and throw for a moment by this discrimination , as the 
 direction of her eye show , upon a dimly desperate little community 
 with Madame de Vionnet . " but I hope I shall not   miss she too much . " 
 Madame de Vionnet instantly rally . " and you know - though it might 
 occur to one - it be not   in the least that he be ashamed of she . she be 
 really - in a way - extremely good - look . " 
 " ah but extremely ! " Strether laugh while he wonder at the odd part 
 he find thus impose on he . 
 it continue to be so by every touch from Madame de Vionnet . " well , as 
 I say , you know , I wish you would keep I a little more to yourself . 
 could not   you name some day for I , some hour - and well soon than 
 late ? I will be at home whenever it good suit you . there - I can not   say 
 fairer . " 
 Strether think a moment while Waymarsh and Mrs. Pocock affect he 
 as stand attentive . " I do lately call on you . last week - while 
 Chad be out of town . " 
 " yes - and I be away , as it happen , too . you choose your moment 
 well . but do not   wait for my next absence , for I shall not   make another , " 
 Madame de Vionnet declare , " while Mrs. Pocock 's here . " 
 " that vow need not   keep you long , fortunately , " Sarah observe with 
 reassert suavity . " I shall be at present but a short time in Paris . 
 I have my plan for other country . I meet a number of charming 
 friend " - and her voice seem to caress that description of these 
 person . 
 " ah then , " her visitor cheerfully reply , " all the more reason ! 
 to - morrow , for instance , or next day ? " she continue to Strether . 
 " Tuesday would do for I beautifully . " 
 " Tuesday then with pleasure . " 
 " and at half - past five ? - or at six ? " 
 it be ridiculous , but Mrs. Pocock and Waymarsh strike he as fairly 
 wait for his answer . it be indeed as if they be arrange , 
 gather for a performance , the performance of " Europe " by his 
 confederate and himself . well , the performance could only go on . " say 
 five forty - five . " 
 " five forty - five - good . " and now at last Madame de Vionnet must leave 
 they , though it carry , for herself , the performance a little far . 
 " I do hope so much also to see Miss Pocock . may not   I still ? " 
 Sarah hesitate , but she rise equal . " she will return your visit with 
 I . she be at present out with Mr. Pocock and my brother . " 
 " I see - of course Mr. Newsome have everything to show they . he have tell 
 I so much about she . my great desire 's to give my daughter the 
 opportunity of make her acquaintance . I be always on the lookout for 
 such chance for she . if I do not   bring she to - day it be only to make 
 sure first that you would let I . " after which the charming woman risk a 
 more intense appeal . " it would not   suit you also to mention some near 
 time , so that we shall be sure not to lose you ? " Strether on his side 
 wait , for Sarah likewise have , after all , to perform ; and it occupy 
 he to have be thus remind that she have stay at home - and on she 
 first morning of Paris - while Chad lead the other forth . oh she be up 
 to her eye ; if she have stay at home she have stay by an 
 understanding , arrive at the evening before , that Waymarsh would come 
 and find she alone . this be begin well - for a first day in Paris ; 
 and the thing might be amusing yet . but Madame de Vionnet 's 
 earnestness be meanwhile beautiful . " you may think I indiscreet , but 
 I have   SUCH a desire my Jeanne shall know an american girl of the really 
 delightful kind . you see I throw myself for it on your charity . " 
 the manner of this speech give Strether such a sense of depth below it 
 and behind it as he have not   yet have - minister in a way that almost 
 frighten he to his dim divination of reason ; but if Sarah still , 
 in spite of it , falter , this be why he have time for a sign of 
 sympathy with her petitioner . " let I say then , dear lady , to back 
 your plea , that Miss Mamie be of the most delightful kind of all - be 
 charming among the charming . " 
 even waymarsh , though with more to produce on the subject , could get 
 into motion in time . " yes , Countess , the american girl be a thing that 
 your country must at least allow ours the privilege to say we can show 
 you . but her full beauty be only for those who know how to make use of 
 she . " 
 " ah then , " smile Madame de Vionnet , " that be exactly what I want to do . 
 I be sure she have much to teach we . " 
 it be wonderful , but what be scarce less so be that Strether find 
 himself , by the quick effect of it , move another way . " oh that may 
 be ! but do not   speak of your own exquisite daughter , you know , as if 
 she be not   pure perfection . I at least will not   take that from you . 
 Mademoiselle de Vionnet , " he explain , in considerable form , to Mrs. 
 Pocock , " be pure perfection . Mademoiselle de Vionnet be exquisite . " 
 it have be perhaps a little portentous , but " ah ? " Sarah simply 
 glitter . 
 waymarsh himself , for that matter , apparently recognise , in respect to 
 the fact , the need of a large justice , and he have with it an 
 inclination to Sarah . " Miss Jane 's strikingly handsome - in the regular 
 french style . " 
 it somehow make both Strether and Madame de Vionnet laugh out , though 
 at the very moment he catch in Sarah 's eye , as glance at the 
 speaker , a vague but unmistakeable " you too ? " it make waymarsh in fact 
 look consciously over her head . Madame de Vionnet meanwhile , however , 
 make her point in her own way . " I wish indeed I could offer you my 
 poor child as a dazzle attraction : it would make one 's position 
 simple enough ! she be as good as she can be , but of course she be 
 different , and the question be now - in the light of the way thing seem 
 to go - if she be not   after all TOO different : too different I mean from 
 the splendid type every one be so agree that your wonderful country 
 produce . on the other hand of course Mr. Newsome , who know it so 
 well , have , as a good friend , dear kind man that he be , do everything 
 he can - to keep we from fatal benightedness - for my small shy creature . 
 well , " she wind up after Mrs. Pocock have signify , in a murmur still 
 a little stiff , that she would speak to her own young charge on the 
 question - " well , we shall sit , my child and I , and wait and wait and 
 wait for you . " but her last fine turn be for Strether . " do speak of 
 we in such a way - ! " 
 " as that something can not   but come of it ? oh something shall come of 
 it ! I take a great interest ! " he far declare ; and in proof of it , 
 the next moment , he have go with she down to her carriage . 
 Book Ninth 
 I 
 " the difficulty be , " Strether say to Madame de Vionnet a couple of 
 day later , " that I can not   surprise they into the small sign of his 
 not be the same old Chad they have   be for the last three year 
 glower at across the sea . they simply will not   give any , and as a 
 policy , you know - what you call a parti pris , a deep game - that be 
 positively remarkable . " 
 it be so remarkable that our friend have pull up before his hostess 
 with the vision of it ; he have rise from his chair at the end of ten 
 minute and begin , as a help not to worry , to move about before she 
 quite as he move before Maria . he have keep his appointment with she 
 to the minute and have be intensely impatient , though divide in truth 
 between the sense of have everything to tell she and the sense of 
 have nothing at all . the short interval have , in the face of their 
 complication , multiply his impression - it be meanwhile to be 
 note , moreover , that he already frankly , already almost publicly , 
 view the complication as common to they . if Madame de Vionnet , under 
 Sarah 's eye , have pull he into her boat , there be by this time no 
 doubt whatever that he have remain in it and that what he have really 
 most be conscious of for many hour together be the movement of the 
 vessel itself . they be in it together this moment as they have not   yet 
 be , and he have not   at present utter the least of the word of alarm 
 or remonstrance that have die on his lip at the hotel . he have other 
 thing to say to she than that she have put he in a position ; so 
 quickly have his position grow to affect he as quite excitingly , 
 altogether richly , inevitable . that the outlook , however - give the 
 point of exposure - have not   clear up half so much as he have reckon 
 be the first warning she receive from he on his arrival . she have 
 reply with indulgence that he be in too great a hurry , and have 
 remark soothingly that if she know how to be patient surely he might 
 be . he feel her presence , on the spot , he feel her tone and everything 
 about she , as an aid to that effort ; and it be perhaps one of the 
 proof of her success with he that he seem so much to take his ease 
 while they talk . by the time he have explain to she why his 
 impression , though multiply , still baffle he , it be as if he have 
 be familiarly talk for hour . they baffle he because 
 Sarah - well , Sarah be deep , deep than she have ever yet have a chance 
 to show herself . he do not   say that this be partly the effect of her 
 opening so straight down , as it be , into her mother , and that , give 
 Mrs. Newsome 's profundity , the shaft thus sink might well have a reach ; 
 but he be not   without a resign apprehension that , at such a rate of 
 confidence between the two woman , he be likely soon to be move to 
 show how already , at moment , it have be for he as if he be deal 
 directly with Mrs. Newsome . Sarah , to a certainty , would have begin 
 herself to feel it in he - and this naturally put it in her power to 
 torment he the more . from the moment she know he could be torment - ! 
 " but why can you be ? " - his companion be surprised at his use of the 
 word . 
 " because I be make so - I think of everything . " 
 " ah one must never do that , " she smile . " one must think of as few 
 thing as possible . " 
 " then , " he answer , " one must pick they out right . but all I mean 
 be - for I express myself with violence - that she be in a position to 
 watch I . there be an element of suspense for I , and she can see I 
 wriggle . but my wriggling do not   matter , " he pursue . " I can bear 
 it . besides , I shall wriggle out . " 
 the picture at any rate stir in she an appreciation that he feel to 
 be sincere . " I do not   see how a man can be kind to a woman than you 
 be to I . " 
 well , kind be what he want to be ; yet even while her charming eye 
 rest on he with the truth of this he none the less have his humour of 
 honesty . " when I say suspense I mean , you know , " he laugh , ' suspense 
 about my own case too ! " 
 " oh yes - about your own case too ! " it diminish his magnanimity , but 
 she only look at he the more tenderly . 
 " not , however , " he go on , " that I want to talk to you about that . 
 it be my own little affair , and I mention it simply as part of Mrs. 
 Pocock 's advantage . " no , no ; though there be a queer present 
 temptation in it , and his suspense be so real that to fidget be a 
 relief , he would not   talk to she about Mrs. Newsome , would not   work off 
 on she the anxiety produce in he by Sarah 's calculated omission of 
 reference . the effect she produce of represent her mother have be 
 produce - and that be just the immense , the uncanny part of 
 it - without she have so much as mention that lady . she have bring 
 no message , have allude to no question , have only answer his enquiry 
 with hopeless limited propriety . she have invent a way of meeting 
 they - as if he have be a polite perfunctory poor relation , of distant 
 degree - that make they almost ridiculous in he . he could not   moreover 
 on his own side ask much without appear to publish how he have lately 
 lack news ; a circumstance of which it be Sarah 's profound policy not 
 to betray a suspicion . these thing , all the same , he would not   breathe 
 to Madame de Vionnet - much as they might make he walk up and down . and 
 what he do not   say - as well as what she do not , for she have also her 
 high decency - enhance the effect of his be there with she at the 
 end of ten minute more intimately on the basis of save she than he 
 have yet have occasion to be . it end in fact by be quite beautiful 
 between they , the number of thing they have a manifest consciousness of 
 not say . he would have like to turn she , critically , to the 
 subject of Mrs. Pocock , but he so stick to the line he feel to be the 
 point of honour and of delicacy that he scarce even ask she what her 
 personal impression have be . he know it , for that matter , without 
 put she to trouble : that she wonder how , with such element , 
 Sarah could still have no charm , be one of the principal thing she 
 hold her tongue about . Strether would have be interested in her 
 estimate of the element - indubitably there , some of they , and to be 
 appraise accord to taste - but he deny himself even the luxury of 
 this diversion . the way Madame de Vionnet affect he to - day be in 
 itself a kind of demonstration of the happy employment of gift . how 
 could a woman think Sarah have charm who strike one as have arrive at 
 it herself by such different road ? on the other hand of course Sarah 
 be not   oblige to have it . he feel as if somehow Madame de Vionnet 
 be . the great question meanwhile be what Chad think of his sister ; 
 which be naturally usher in by that of Sarah 's apprehension of Chad . 
 that they could talk of , and with a freedom purchase by their 
 discretion in other sens . the difficulty however be that they be 
 reduce as yet to conjecture . he have give they in the day or two as 
 little of a lead as Sarah , and Madame de Vionnet mention that she 
 have not   see he since his sister 's arrival . 
 " and do that strike you as such an age ? " 
 she meet it in all honesty . " oh I will not   pretend I do not   miss he . 
 sometimes I see he every day . our friendship be like that . make what 
 you will of it ! " she whimsically smile ; a little flicker of the kind , 
 occasional in she , that have more than once move he to wonder what he 
 might well make of she . " but he be perfectly right , " she hasten to 
 add , " and I would not   have he fail in any way at present for the world . 
 I would soon not see he for three month . I beg he to be beautiful 
 to they , and he fully feel it for himself . " 
 Strether turn away under his quick perception ; she be so odd a 
 mixture of lucidity and mystery . she fall in at moment with the 
 theory about she he most cherish , and she seem at other to blow it 
 into air . she speak now as if her art be all an innocence , and then 
 again as if her innocence be all an art . " oh he be give himself up , 
 and he will do so to the end . how can he but want , now that it be within 
 reach , his full impression ? - which be much more important , you know , 
 than either your or mine . but he be just soak , " Strether say as he 
 come back ; " he be go in conscientiously for a saturation . I be bind 
 to say he be very good . " 
 " ah , " she quietly reply , " to whom do you say it ? " and then more 
 quietly still : " he be capable of anything . " 
 Strether more than reaffirm - " oh he be excellent . I more and more 
 like , " he insist , " to see he with they ; " though the oddity of this 
 tone between they grow sharp for he even while they speak . it place 
 the young man so before they as the result of her interest and the 
 product of her genius , acknowledge so her part in the phenomenon and 
 make the phenomenon so rare , that more than ever yet he might have be 
 on the very point of ask she for some more detailed account of the 
 whole business than he have yet receive from she . the occasion almost 
 force upon he some question as to how she have manage and as to the 
 appearance such miracle present from her own singularly close place 
 of survey . the moment in fact however pass , give way to more 
 present history , and he continue simply to mark his appreciation of 
 the happy truth . " it be a tremendous comfort to feel how one can trust 
 he . " and then again while for a little she say nothing - as if after 
 all to her trust there might be a special limit : " I mean for make a 
 good show to they . " 
 " yes , " she thoughtfully return - " but if they shut their eye to it ! " 
 Strether for an instant have his own thought . " well perhaps that will not 
 matter ! " 
 " you mean because he probably - do what they will - will not   like they ? " 
 " oh ' do what they will ' - ! they will not   do much ; especially if Sarah 
 have not   more - well , more than one have yet make out - to give . " 
 Madame de Vionnet weigh it . " ah she have all her grace ! " it be a 
 statement over which , for a little , they could look at each other 
 sufficiently straight , and though it produce no protest from Strether 
 the effect be somehow as if he have treat it as a joke . " she may be 
 persuasive and caress with he ; she may be eloquent beyond word . 
 she may get hold of he , " she wind up - " well , as neither you nor I 
 have . " 
 " yes , she may " - and now Strether smile . " but he have spend all his 
 time each day with Jim . he be still show Jim round . " 
 she visibly wonder . " then how about Jim ? " 
 Strether take a turn before he answer . " have not   he give you Jim ? 
 have not   he before this ' do ' he for you ? " he be a little at a loss . 
 " do not   he tell you thing ? " 
 she hesitate . " no " - and their eye once more give and take . " not as 
 you do . you somehow make I see they - or at least feel they . and I 
 have not   ask too much , " she add ; " I have   of late want so not to 
 worry he . " 
 " ah for that , so have I , " he say with encourage assent ; so that - as 
 if she have answer everything - they be briefly sociable on it . it 
 throw he back on his other thought , with which he take another turn ; 
 stop again , however , presently with something of a glow . " you see 
 Jim 's really immense . I think it will be Jim who will do it . " 
 she wonder . " get hold of he ? " 
 " no - just the other thing . Counteract Sarah 's spell . " and he show 
 now , our friend , how far he have work it out . " Jim 's intensely 
 cynical . " 
 " oh dear Jim ! " Madame de Vionnet vaguely smile . 
 " yes , literally - dear Jim ! he be awful . what he want , heaven forgive 
 he , be to help we . " 
 " you mean " - she be eager - " help I ? " 
 " well , Chad and I in the first place . but he throw you in too , 
 though without as yet see you much . only , so far as he do see 
 you - if you do not   mind - he see you as awful . " 
 " ' Awful ' ? " - she want it all . 
 " a regular bad one - though of course of a tremendously superior kind . 
 dreadful , delightful , irresistible . " 
 " ah dear Jim ! I should like to know he . I must . " 
 " yes , naturally . but will it do ? you may , you know , " Strether 
 suggest , " disappoint he . " 
 she be droll and humble about it . " I can but try . but my wickedness 
 then , " she go on , " be my recommendation for he ? " 
 " your wickedness and the charm with which , in such a degree as your , 
 he associate it . he understand , you see , that Chad and I have above 
 all want to have a good time , and his view be simple and sharp . 
 nothing will persuade he - in the light , that be , of my behaviour - that 
 I really do not , quite as much as Chad , come over to have one before it 
 be too late . he would not   have expect it of I ; but man of my age , 
 at Woollett - and especially the least likely one - have be note as 
 liable to strange outbreak , belate uncanny clutch at the unusual , 
 the ideal . it be an effect that a lifetime of Woollett have quite be 
 observe as have ; and I thus give it to you , in Jim 's view , for what 
 it be worth . now his wife and his mother - in - law , " Strether continue to 
 explain , " have , as in honour bind , no patience with such phenomenon , 
 late or early - which put Jim , as against his relative , on the other 
 side . besides , " he add , " I do not   think he really want Chad back . if 
 Chad do not   come - " 
 " he will have " - Madame de Vionnet quite apprehend - " more of the free 
 hand ? " 
 " well , Chad 's the big man . " 
 " so he will work now , en dessous , to keep he quiet ? " 
 " no - he will not   ' work ' at all , and he will not   do anything en dessous . he be 
 very decent and will not   be a traitor in the camp . but he will be amuse 
 with his own little view of our duplicity , he will sniff up what he 
 suppose to be Paris from morning till night , and he will be , as to the 
 rest , for Chad - well , just what he be . " 
 she think it over . " a warning ? " 
 he meet it almost with glee . " you be as wonderful as everybody say ! " 
 and then to explain all he mean : " I drive he about for his first 
 hour , and do you know what - all beautifully unconscious - he most put 
 before I ? why that something like that be at bottom , as an 
 improvement to his present state , as in fact the real redemption of it , 
 what they think it may not be too late to make of our friend . " with 
 which , as , take it in , she seem , in her recurrent alarm , bravely to 
 gaze at the possibility , he complete his statement . " but it be too 
 late . thank to you ! " 
 it draw from she again one of her indefinite reflexion . " oh 
 ' I ' - after all ! " 
 he stand before she so exhilarate by his demonstration that he could 
 fairly be jocular . " everything 's comparative . you be well than 
 THAT . " 
 " you " - she could but answer he - " be well than anything . " but she 
 have another thought . " will Mrs. Pocock come to I ? " 
 " oh yes - she will do that . as soon , that is , as my friend Waymarsh - HER 
 friend now - leave her leisure . " 
 she show an interest . " be he so much her friend as that ? " 
 " why , do not   you see it all at the hotel ? " 
 " oh " - she be amuse - " ' all ' be a good deal to say . I do not   know - I 
 forget . I lose myself in she . " 
 " you be splendid , " Strether return - " but ' all ' be not   a good deal to 
 say : it be only a little . yet it be charming so far as it go . she 
 want a man to herself . " 
 " and have not   she get you ? " 
 " do you think she look at I - or even at you - as if she have ? " 
 Strether easily dismiss that irony . " every one , you see , must strike 
 she as have somebody . you have   get Chad - and Chad have get you . " 
 " I see " - she make of it what she could . " and you have   get Maria . " 
 well , he on his side accept that . " I have   get Maria . and Maria have 
 get I . so it go . " 
 " but Mr. Jim - whom have he get ? " 
 " oh he have get - or it be as if he have - the whole place . " 
 " but for Mr. Waymarsh " - she recall - " be not   Miss Barrace before any 
 one else ? " 
 he shake his head . " Miss Barrace be a raffinee , and her amusement 
 will not   lose by Mrs. Pocock . it will gain rather - especially if Sarah 
 triumph and she come in for a view of it . " 
 " how well you know we ! " Madame de Vionnet , at this , frankly sigh . 
 " no - it seem to I it be we that I know . I know Sarah - it be perhaps on 
 that ground only that my foot be firm . waymarsh will take she round 
 while Chad take Jim - and I shall be , I assure you delight for both 
 of they . Sarah will have have what she require - she will have pay she 
 tribute to the ideal ; and he will have do about the same . in Paris 
 it be in the air - so what can one do less ? if there be a point that , 
 beyond any other , Sarah want to make , it be that she do not   come out to 
 be narrow . we shall feel at least that . " 
 " oh , " she sigh , " the quantity we seem likely to ' feel ' ! but what 
 become , in these condition , of the girl ? " 
 " of Mamie - if we be all provide ? ah for that , " say Strether , " you 
 can trust Chad . " 
 " to be , you mean , all right to she ? " 
 " to pay she every attention as soon as he have polish off Jim . he 
 want what Jim can give he - and what Jim really will not   - though he have 
 have it all , and more than all , from I . he want in short his own 
 personal impression , and he will get it - strong . but as soon as he have 
 get it Mamie will not   suffer . " 
 " oh Mamie must not   suffer ! " Madame de Vionnet soothingly emphasise . 
 but Strether could reassure she . " do not   fear . as soon as he have do 
 with Jim , Jim will fall to I . and then you will see . " 
 it be as if in a moment she see already ; yet she still wait . then 
 " be she really quite charming ? " she ask . 
 he have get up with his last word and gather in his hat and glove . 
 " I do not   know ; I be watch . I be study the case , as it be - and I 
 dare say I shall be able to tell you . " 
 she wonder . " be it a case ? " 
 " yes - I think so . at any rate I shall see . ' 
 " but have not   you know she before ? " 
 " yes , " he smile - " but somehow at home she be not   a case . she have 
 become one since . " it be as if he make it out for himself . " she have 
 become one here . " 
 " so very very soon ? " 
 he measure it , laugh . " not soon than I do . " 
 " and you become one - ? " 
 " very very soon . the day I arrive . " 
 her intelligent eye show her thought of it . " ah but the day you 
 arrive you meet Maria . whom have Miss Pocock meet ? " 
 he pause again , but he bring it out . " have not   she meet Chad ? " 
 " certainly - but not for the first time . he be an old friend . " at which 
 Strether have a slow amuse significant headshake that make she go on : 
 " you mean that for she at least he be a new person - that she see he as 
 different ? " 
 " she see he as different . " 
 " and how do she see he ? " 
 Strether give it up . " how can one tell how a deep little girl see a 
 deep young man ? " 
 " be every one so deep ? be she too ? " 
 " so it strike I deeply than I think . but wait a little - between we 
 we will make it out . you will judge for that matter yourself . " 
 Madame de Vionnet look for the moment fairly bent on the chance . 
 " then she will come with she ? - I mean Mamie with Mrs. Pocock ? " 
 " certainly . her curiosity , if nothing else , will in any case work 
 that . but leave it all to Chad . " 
 " ah , " wail Madame de Vionnet , turn away a little wearily , " the 
 thing I leave to Chad ! " 
 the tone of it make he look at she with a kindness that show his 
 vision of her suspense . but he fall back on his confidence . " oh 
 well - trust he . trust he all the way . " he have indeed no soon so 
 speak than the queer displacement of his point of view appear again 
 to come up for he in the very sound , which draw from he a short 
 laugh , immediately check . he become still more advisory . " when they 
 do come give they plenty of Miss Jeanne . let Mamie see she well . " 
 she look for a moment as if she place they face to face . " for Mamie 
 to hate she ? " 
 he have another of his corrective headshake . " Mamie will not . trust THEM . " 
 she look at he hard , and then as if it be what she must always 
 come back to : " it be you I trust . but I be sincere , " she say , " at 
 the hotel . I do , I do , want my child - " 
 " well ? " - Strether wait with deference while she appear to hesitate 
 as to how to put it . 
 " well , to do what she can for I . " 
 Strether for a little meet her eye on it ; after which something that 
 might have be unexpected to she come from he . " poor little duck ! " 
 not more expect for himself indeed might well have be her echo of 
 it . " poor little duck ! but she immensely want herself , " she say , 
 " to see our friend 's cousin . " 
 " be that what she think she ? " 
 " it be what we call the young lady . " 
 he think again ; then with a laugh : " well , your daughter will help 
 you . " 
 and now at last he take leave of she , as he have be intend for five 
 minute . but she go part of the way with he , accompany he out 
 of the room and into the next and the next . her noble old apartment 
 offer a succession of three , the first two of which indeed , on 
 enter , small than the last , but each with its fade and formal 
 air , enlarge the office of the antechamber and enrich the sense of 
 approach . Strether fancy they , like they , and , pass through they 
 with she more slowly now , meet a sharp renewal of his original 
 impression . he stop , he look back ; the whole thing make a vista , 
 which he find high melancholy and sweet - full , once more , of dim 
 historic shade , of the faint faraway cannon - roar of the great Empire . 
 it be doubtless half the projection of his mind , but his mind be a 
 thing that , among old wax parquet , pale shade of pink and green , 
 pseudo - classic candelabra , he have always needfully to reckon with . they 
 could easily make he irrelevant . the oddity , the originality , the 
 poetry - he do not   know what to call it - of Chad 's connexion reaffirm 
 for he its romantic side . " they ought to see this , you know . they 
 must . " 
 " the Pococks ? " - she look about in deprecation ; she seem to see gap 
 he do not . 
 " Mamie and Sarah - Mamie in particular . " 
 " my shabby old place ? but their thing - ! " 
 " oh their thing ! you be talk of what will do something for you - " 
 " so that it strike you , " she break in , " that my poor place may ? oh , " 
 she ruefully muse , " that would be desperate ! " 
 " do you know what I wish ? " he go on . " I wish Mrs. Newsome herself 
 could have a look . " 
 she star , miss a little his logic . " it would make a difference ? " 
 her tone be so earnest that as he continue to look about he laugh . 
 " it might ! " 
 " but you have   tell she , you tell I - " 
 " all about you ? yes , a wonderful story . but there be all the 
 indescribable - what one get only on the spot . " 
 " thank you ! " she charmingly and sadly smile . 
 " it be all about I here , " he freely continue . " Mrs. Newsome feel 
 thing . " 
 but she seem doom always to come back to doubt . " no one feel so 
 much as you . no - not any one . " 
 " so much the bad then for every one . it be very easy . " 
 they be by this time in the antechamber , still alone together , as she 
 have not   rung for a servant . the antechamber be high and square , grave 
 and suggestive too , a little cold and slippery even in summer , and with 
 a few old print that be precious , Strether divine , on the wall . he 
 stand in the middle , slightly lingering , vaguely direct his glass , 
 while , lean against the door - post of the room , she gently press 
 her cheek to the side of the recess . " you would have be a friend . " 
 " I ? " - it startle he a little . 
 " for the reason you say . you be not stupid . " and then abruptly , as if 
 bring it out be somehow found on that fact : " we be marry 
 Jeanne . " 
 it affect he on the spot as a move in a game , and he be even then 
 not without the sense that that be not   the way Jeanne should be 
 marry . but he quickly show his interest , though - as quickly 
 afterwards strike he - with an absurd confusion of mind . " ' you ' ? you 
 and - a - not Chad ? " of course it be the child 's father who make the 
 ' we , ' but to the child 's father it would have cost he an effort to 
 allude . yet do not   it seem the next minute that Monsieur de Vionnet 
 be after all not in question ? - since she have go on to say that it 
 be indeed to Chad she refer and that he have be in the whole 
 matter kindness itself . 
 " if I must tell you all , it be he himself who have put we in the way . I 
 mean in the way of an opportunity that , so far as I can yet see , be all 
 I could possibly have dream of . for all the trouble Monsieur de 
 Vionnet will ever take ! " it be the first time she have speak to he 
 of her husband , and he could not   have express how much more intimate 
 with she it suddenly make he feel . it be not   much , in truth - there 
 be other thing in what she be say that be far more ; but it be 
 as if , while they stand there together so easily in these cold chamber 
 of the past , the single touch have show the reach of her confidence . 
 " but our friend , " she ask , " have not   then tell you ? " 
 " he have tell I nothing . " 
 " well , it have come with rather a rush - all in a very few day ; and 
 have not   moreover yet take a form that permit an announcement . it be 
 only for you - absolutely you alone - that I speak ; I so want you to 
 know . " the sense he have so often have , since the first hour of his 
 disembarkment , of be further and far " in , " treat he again at 
 this moment to another twinge ; but in this wonderful way of she put 
 he in there continue to be something exquisitely remorseless . 
 " Monsieur de Vionnet will accept what he must accept . he have propose 
 half a dozen thing - each one more impossible than the other ; and he 
 would not   have find this if he live to a hundred . Chad find it , " she 
 continue with she light , faintly flushed , her conscious confidential 
 face , " in the quiet way in the world . or rather it find HIM - for 
 everything find he ; I mean find he right . you will think we do such 
 thing strangely - but at my age , " she smile , " one have to accept one 's 
 condition . our young man 's people have see she ; one of his sister , a 
 charming woman - we know all about they - have observe she somewhere with 
 I . she have speak to her brother - turn he on ; and we be again 
 observe , poor Jeanne and I , without our in the least know it . it 
 be at the beginning of the winter ; it go on for some time ; it 
 outlast our absence ; it begin again on our return ; and it luckily 
 seem all right . the young man have meet Chad , and he get a friend to 
 approach he - as have a decent interest in we . Mr. Newsome look 
 well before he leap ; he keep beautifully quiet and satisfied himself 
 fully ; then only he speak . it be what have for some time past occupy 
 we . it seem as if it be what would do ; really , really all one could 
 wish . there be only two or three point to be settle - they depend on 
 her father . but this time I think we be safe . " 
 Strether , consciously gap a little , have fairly hang upon her lip . 
 " I hope so with all my heart . " and then he permit himself : " do 
 nothing depend on she ? " 
 " ah naturally ; everything do . but she be pleased comme tout . she have 
 be perfectly free ; and he - our young friend - be really a combination . 
 I quite adore he . " 
 Strether just make sure . " you mean your future son - in - law ? " 
 " future if we all bring it off . " 
 " ah well , " say Strether decorously , " I heartily hope you may . " there 
 seem little else for he to say , though her communication have the 
 oddest effect on he . vaguely and confusedly he be trouble by it ; 
 feel as if he have even himself be concern in something deep and 
 dim . he have allow for depth , but these be great : and it be as 
 if , oppressively - indeed absurdly - he be responsible for what they have 
 now throw up to the surface . it be - through something ancient and 
 cold in it - what he would have call the real thing . in short his 
 hostess 's news , though he could not   have explain why , be a sensible 
 shock , and his oppression a weight he feel he must somehow or other 
 immediately get rid of . there be too many connexion miss to make 
 it tolerable he should do anything else . he be prepared to 
 suffer - before his own inner tribunal - for Chad ; he be prepared to 
 suffer even for Madame de Vionnet . but he be not   prepared to suffer 
 for the little girl so now have say the proper thing , he want to 
 get away . she hold he an instant , however , with another appeal . 
 " do I seem to you very awful ? " 
 " Awful ? why so ? " but he call it to himself , even as he speak , his 
 big insincerity yet . 
 " our arrangement be so different from your . " 
 " mine ? " oh he could dismiss that too ! " I have not   any arrangement . " 
 " then you must accept mine ; all the more that they be excellent . 
 they be found on a vieille sagesse . there will be much more , if all 
 go well , for you to hear and to know , and everything , believe I , for 
 you to like . do not   be afraid ; you will be satisfy . " thus she could 
 talk to he of what , of her innermost life - for that be what it come 
 to - he must " accept " ; thus she could extraordinarily speak as if in 
 such an affair his be satisfied have an importance . it be all a 
 wonder and make the whole case large . he have strike himself at the 
 hotel , before Sarah and Waymarsh , as be in her boat ; but where on 
 earth be he now ? this question be in the air till her own lip 
 quench it with another . " and do you suppose HE - who love she 
 so - would do anything reckless or cruel ? " 
 he wonder what he suppose . " do you mean your young man - ? " 
 " I mean your . I mean Mr. Newsome . " it flash for Strether the next 
 moment a fine light , and the light deepen as she go on . " he take , 
 thank God , the true tender interest in she . " 
 it deepen indeed . " oh I be sure of that ! " 
 " you be talk , " she say , " about one 's trust he . you see then 
 how I do . " 
 he wait a moment - it all come . " I see - I see . " he feel he really do 
 see . 
 " he would not   hurt she for the world , nor - assume she marry at 
 all - risk anything that might make against her happiness . 
 and - willingly , at least - he would never hurt I . " 
 her face , with what he have by this time grasp , tell he more than her 
 word ; whether something have come into it , or whether he only read 
 clear , her whole story - what at least he then take for such - reach 
 out to he from it . with the initiative she now attribute to Chad it 
 all make a sense , and this sense - a light , a lead , be what have 
 abruptly rise before he . he want , once more , to get off with these 
 thing ; which be at last make easy , a servant have , for his 
 assistance , on hear voice in the hall , just come forward . all that 
 Strether have make out be , while the man open the door and 
 impersonally wait , sum up in his last word . " I do not   think , you 
 know , Chad will tell I anything . " 
 " no - perhaps not yet . " 
 " and I will not   as yet speak to he . " 
 " ah that be as you will think well . you must judge . " 
 she have finally give he her hand , which he hold a moment . " how MUCH 
 I have to judge ! " 
 " everything , " say Madame de Vionnet : a remark that be indeed - with 
 the refined disguised suppress passion of her face - what he most 
 carry away . 
 II 
 so far as a direct approach be concern Sarah have neglect he , for 
 the week now about to end , with a civil consistency of chill that , 
 give he a high idea of her social resource , throw he back on the 
 general reflexion that a woman could always be amazing . it indeed 
 help a little to console he that he feel sure she have for the same 
 period also leave Chad 's curiosity hanging ; though on the other hand , 
 for his personal relief , Chad could at least go through the various 
 motion - and he make they extraordinarily numerous - of see she have a 
 good time . there be not   a motion on which , in her presence , poor 
 Strether could so much as venture , and all he could do when he be out 
 of it be to walk over for a talk with Maria . he walk over of course 
 much less than usual , but he find a special compensation in a certain 
 half - hour during which , toward the close of a crowded empty expensive 
 day , his several companion seem to he so disposed of as to give his 
 form and usage a rest . he have be with they in the morning and have 
 nevertheless call on the Pococks in the afternoon ; but their whole 
 group , he then find , have disperse after a fashion of which it would 
 amuse Miss Gostrey to hear . he be sorry again , gratefully sorry she 
 be so out of it - she who have really put he in ; but she have 
 fortunately always her appetite for news . the pure flame of the 
 disintereste burn in her cave of treasure as a lamp in a Byzantine 
 vault . it be just now , as happen , that for so fine a sense as her 
 a near view would have begin to pay . within three day , precisely , the 
 situation on which he be to report have show sign of an equilibrium ; 
 the effect of his look in at the hotel be to confirm this appearance . 
 if the equilibrium might only prevail ! Sarah be out with Waymarsh , 
 Mamie be out with Chad , and Jim be out alone . later on indeed he 
 himself be book to Jim , be to take he that evening to the 
 Varieties - which Strether be careful to pronounce as Jim pronounce 
 they . 
 Miss Gostrey drink it in . " what then to - night do the other do ? " 
 " well , it have be arrange . Waymarsh take Sarah to dine at Bignons . " 
 she wonder . " and what do they do after ? they can not   come straight 
 home . " 
 " no , they can not   come straight home - at least Sarah can not . it be their 
 secret , but I think I have   guess it . " then as she wait : " the circus . " 
 it make she stare a moment long , then laugh almost to extravagance . 
 " there be no one like you ! " 
 " like I ? " - he only want to understand . 
 " like all of you together - like all of we : Woollett , Milrose and their 
 product . we be abysmal - but may we never be less so ! Mr. Newsome , " 
 she continue , " meanwhile take Miss Pocock - ? " 
 " precisely - to the Francais : to see what you take Waymarsh and I to , 
 a family - bill . " 
 " ah then may Mr. Chad enjoy it as I do ! " but she see so much in 
 thing . " do they spend their evening , your young people , like that , 
 alone together ? " 
 " well , they be young people - but they be old friend . " 
 " I see , I see . and do they dine - for a difference - at Brebant 's ? " 
 " oh where they dine be their secret too . but I have   my idea that it will 
 be , very quietly , at Chad 's own place . " 
 " she will come to he there alone ? " 
 they look at each other a moment . " he have know she from a child . 
 besides , " say Strether with emphasis , " Mamie 's remarkable . she be 
 splendid . " 
 she wonder . " do you mean she expect to bring it off ? " 
 " get hold of he ? no - I think not . " 
 " she do not   want he enough ? - or do not   believe in her power ? " on 
 which as he say nothing she continue : " she find she do not   care 
 for he ? " 
 " no - I think she find she do . but that be what I mean by so 
 describe she . it be if she do that she be splendid . but we will see , " 
 he wind up , " where she come out . " 
 " you seem to show I sufficiently , " Miss Gostrey laugh , " where she 
 go in ! but be her childhood 's friend , " she ask , " permit 
 himself recklessly to flirt with she ? " 
 " no - not that . Chad 's also splendid . they be all splendid ! " he 
 declare with a sudden strange sound of wistfulness and envy . " they be 
 at least happy . " 
 " happy ? " - it appear , with their various difficulty , to surprise she . 
 " well - I seem to myself among they the only one who be not . " 
 she demur . " with your constant tribute to the ideal ? " 
 he have a laugh at his tribute to the ideal , but he explain after a 
 moment his impression . " I mean they be live . they be rush about . 
 I have   already have my rushing . I be wait . " 
 " but be not   you , " she ask by way of cheer , " wait with I ? " 
 he look at she in all kindness . " yes - if it be not   for that ! " 
 " and you help I to wait , " she say . " however , " she go on , " I have 
 really something for you that will help you to wait and which you shall 
 have in a minute . only there be something more I want from you first . I 
 revel in Sarah . " 
 " so do I. if it be not , " he again amusedly sigh , " for that - ! " 
 " well , you owe more to woman than any man I ever see . we do seem to 
 keep you go . yet Sarah , as I see she , must be great . " 
 " she be " Strether fully assent : " great ! whatever happen , she 
 will not , with these unforgettable day , have live in vain . " 
 Miss Gostrey have a pause . " you mean she have fall in love ? " 
 " I mean she wonder if she have not   - and it serve all her purpose . " 
 " it have indeed , " Maria laugh , ' serve woman 's purpose before ! " 
 " yes - for give in . but I doubt if the idea - as an idea - have ever up 
 to now answer so well for hold out . that be her tribute to the 
 ideal - we each have our own . it be her romance - and it seem to I 
 well on the whole than mine . to have it in Paris too , " he 
 explain - " on this classic ground , in this charge infectious air , 
 with so sudden an intensity : well , it be more than she expect . she 
 have have in short to recognise the breaking out for she of a real 
 affinity - and with everything to enhance the drama . " 
 Miss Gostrey follow . " Jim for instance ? " 
 " Jim . Jim hugely enhance . Jim be make to enhance . and then Mr. 
 Waymarsh . it be the crown touch - it supply the colour . he be 
 positively separate . " 
 " and she herself unfortunately be not   - that supply the colour too . " 
 Miss Gostrey be all there . but somehow - ! " be he in love ? " 
 Strether look at she a long time ; then look all about the room ; 
 then come a little nearer . " will you never tell any one in the world 
 as long as ever you live ? " 
 " never . " it be charming . 
 " he think Sarah really be . but he have no fear , " Strether hasten to 
 add . 
 " of she be affect by it ? " 
 " of his be . he like it , but he know she can hold out . he be 
 help she , he be float she over , by kindness . " 
 Maria rather funnily consider it . " float she over in champagne ? 
 the kindness of din she , nose to nose , at the hour when all Paris be 
 crowd to profane delight , and in the - well , in the great temple , as 
 one hear of it , of pleasure ? " 
 " that be just it , for both of they , " Strether insist - " and all of a 
 supreme innocence . the parisian place , the feverish hour , the 
 put before she of a hundred franc ' worth of food and drink , which 
 they will scarcely touch - all that be the dear man 's own romance ; the 
 expensive kind , expensive in franc and centime , in which he abound . 
 and the circus afterwards - which be cheap , but which he will find some 
 mean of make as dear as possible - that be also his tribute to the 
 ideal . it do for he . he will see she through . they will not   talk of 
 anything bad than you and I . " 
 " well , we be bad enough perhaps , thank heaven , " she laugh , " to upset 
 they ! Mr. Waymarsh at any rate be a hideous old coquette . " and the 
 next moment she have drop everything for a different pursuit . " what 
 you do not   appear to know be that Jeanne de Vionnet have become engaged . 
 she be to marry - it have be definitely arrange - young Monsieur de 
 Montbron . " 
 he fairly blush . " then - if you know it - it be ' out ' ? " 
 " do not   I often know thing that be not out ? however , " she say , " this 
 will be out to - morrow . but I see I have   count too much on your 
 possible ignorance . you have   be before I , and I do not   make you jump 
 as I hop . " 
 he give a gasp at her insight . " you never fail ! I have   had my jump . I 
 have it when I first hear . " 
 " then if you know why do not   you tell I as soon as you come in ? " 
 " because I have it from she as a thing not yet to be speak of . " 
 Miss Gostrey wonder . " from Madame de Vionnet herself ? " 
 " as a probability - not quite a certainty : a good cause in which Chad 
 have be work . so I have   wait . " 
 " you need wait no long , " she return . " it reach I 
 yesterday - roundabout and accidental , but by a person who have have it 
 from one of the young man 's own people - as a thing quite settle . I 
 be only keep it for you . " 
 " you think Chad would not   have tell I ? " 
 she hesitate . " well , if he have not   - " 
 " he have not . and yet the thing appear to have be practically his 
 doing . so there we be . " 
 " there we be ! " Maria candidly echo . 
 " that be why I jump . I jump , " he continue to explain , " because it 
 mean , this disposition of the daughter , that there be now nothing else : 
 nothing else but he and the mother . " 
 " still - it simplifie . " 
 " it simplifie " - he fully concur . " but that be precisely where we 
 be . it mark a stage in his relation . the act be his answer to Mrs. 
 Newsome 's demonstration . " 
 " it tell , " Maria ask , " the bad ? " 
 " the bad . " 
 " but be the bad what he want Sarah to know ? " 
 " he do not   care for Sarah . " 
 at which Miss Gostrey 's eyebrow go up . " you mean she have already 
 dish herself ? " 
 Strether take a turn about ; he have think it out again and again 
 before this , to the end ; but the vista seem each time long . " he 
 want his good friend to know the good . I mean the measure of his 
 attachment . she ask for a sign , and he think of that one . there 
 it be . " 
 " a concession to her jealousy ? " 
 Strether pull up . " yes - call it that . make it lurid - for that make 
 my problem rich . " 
 " certainly , let we have it lurid - for I quite agree with you that we 
 want none of our problem poor . but let we also have it clear . can he , 
 in the midst of such a preoccupation , or on the heel of it , have 
 seriously care for Jeanne ? - care , I mean , as a young man at liberty 
 would have care ? " 
 well , Strether have master it . " I think he can have think it would 
 be charming if he could care . it would be nicer . " 
 " Nicer than be tie up to Marie ? " 
 " yes - than the discomfort of an attachment to a person he can never 
 hope , short of a catastrophe , to marry . and he be quite right , " say 
 Strether . " it would certainly have be nice . even when a thing 's 
 already nice there mostly be some other thing that would have be 
 nice - or as to which we wonder if it would not . but his question be 
 all the same a dream . he couldn't   care in that way . he be tie up to 
 Marie . the relation be too special and have go too far . it be the 
 very basis , and his recent lively contribution toward establish 
 Jeanne in life have be his definite and final acknowledgement to 
 Madame de Vionnet that he have cease squirm . I doubt meanwhile , " he 
 go on , " if Sarah have at all directly attack he . " 
 his companion brood . " but will not   he wish for his own satisfaction to 
 make his ground good to she ? " 
 " no - he will leave it to I , he will leave everything to I . I ' sort of ' 
 feel " - he work it out - " that the whole thing will come upon I . yes , 
 I shall have every inch and every ounce of it . I shall be use for 
 it - ! " and Strether lose himself in the prospect . then he fancifully 
 express the issue . " to the last drop of my blood . " 
 Maria , however , roundly protest . " ah you will please keep a drop for 
 ME . I shall have a use for it ! " - which she do not   however follow up . 
 she have come back the next moment to another matter . " Mrs. Pocock , with 
 her brother , be trust only to her general charm ? " 
 " so it would seem . " 
 " and the charm be not work ? " 
 well , Strether put it otherwise , " she be sound the note of 
 home - which be the very good thing she can do . " 
 " the good for Madame de Vionnet ? " 
 " the good for home itself . the natural one ; the right one . " 
 " right , " Maria ask , " when it fail ? " 
 Strether have a pause . " the difficulty 's Jim . Jim 's the note of home . " 
 she debate . " ah surely not the note of Mrs. Newsome . " 
 but he have it all . " the note of the home for which Mrs. Newsome want 
 he - the home of the business . Jim stand , with his little leg apart , 
 at the door of that tent ; and Jim be , frankly speak , extremely 
 awful . " 
 Maria star . " and you in , you poor thing , for your evening with he ? " 
 " oh he be all right for I ! " Strether laugh . " any one 's good enough 
 for I . but Sarah should not , all the same , have bring he . she 
 do not   appreciate he . " 
 his friend be amuse with this statement of it . " do not   know , you 
 mean , how bad he be ? " 
 Strether shake his head with decision . " not really . " 
 she wonder . " then do not   Mrs. Newsome ? " 
 it make he frankly do the same . " well , no - since you ask I . " 
 Maria rub it in . " not really either ? " 
 " not at all . she rat he rather high . " with which indeed , 
 immediately , he take himself up . " well , he be good too , in his way . it 
 depend on what you want he for . " 
 Miss Gostrey , however , would not   let it depend on anything - would not 
 have it , and would not   want he , at any price . " it suit my book , " she 
 say , " that he should be impossible ; and it suit it still well , " she 
 more imaginatively add , " that Mrs. Newsome do not   know he be . " 
 Strether , in consequence , have to take it from she , but he fall back on 
 something else . " I will tell you who do really know . " 
 " Mr. Waymarsh ? never ! " 
 " never indeed . I be not always think of Mr. Waymarsh ; in fact I find 
 now I never be . " then he mention the person as if there be a good 
 deal in it . " Mamie . " 
 " his own sister ? " oddly enough it but let she down . " what good will 
 that do ? " 
 " none perhaps . but there - as usual - we be ! " 
 III 
 there they be yet again , accordingly , for two day more ; when 
 Strether , on be , at Mrs. Pocock 's hotel , usher into that lady 's 
 salon , find himself at first assume a mistake on the part of the 
 servant who have introduce he and retire . the occupant have not   come 
 in , for the room look empty as only a room can look in Paris , of a 
 fine afternoon when the faint murmur of the huge collective life , 
 carry on out of door , stray among scatter object even as a 
 summer air idle in a lonely garden . our friend look about and 
 hesitate ; observe , on the evidence of a table charge with purchase 
 and other matter , that Sarah have become possess - by no aid from 
 HIM - of the last number of the salmon - colour Revue ; note far 
 that Mamie appear to have receive a present of Fromentin 's " Maitres 
 d'Autrefois " from Chad , who have write her name on the cover ; and 
 pull up at the sight of a heavy letter address in a hand he know . 
 this letter , forward by a banker and arrive in Mrs. Pocock 's 
 absence , have be place in evidence , and it draw from the fact of its 
 be unopene a sudden queer power to intensify the reach of its 
 author . it bring home to he the scale on which Mrs. Newsome - for 
 she have be copious indeed this time - be write to her daughter 
 while she keep HIM in durance ; and it have altogether such an effect 
 upon he as make he for a few minute stand still and breathe low . in 
 his own room , at his own hotel , he have dozen of well - fill envelope 
 superscribe in that character ; and there be actually something in the 
 renewal of his interrupted vision of the character that play straight 
 into the so frequent question of whether he be not   already 
 disinherit beyond appeal . it be such an assurance as the sharp 
 downstroke of her pen have not   yet have occasion to give he ; but they 
 somehow at the present crisis stand for a probable absoluteness in any 
 decree of the writer . he look at Sarah 's name and address , in short , 
 as if he have be look hard into her mother 's face , and then turn 
 from it as if the face have decline to relax . but since it be in a 
 manner as if Mrs. Newsome be thereby all the more , instead of the 
 less , in the room , and be conscious , sharply and sorely conscious , of 
 himself , so he feel both hold and hush , summon to stay at least and 
 take his punishment . by stay , accordingly , he take it - creep 
 softly and vaguely about and wait for Sarah to come in . she would 
 come in if he stay long enough , and he have now more than ever the 
 sense of her success in leave he a prey to anxiety . it be not   to be 
 deny that she have have a happy instinct , from the point of view of 
 Woollett , in place he thus at the mercy of her own initiative . it 
 be very well to try to say he do not   care - that she might break ground 
 when she would , might never break it at all if she would not , and that 
 he have no confession whatever to wait upon she with : he breathe from 
 day to day an air that damnably require clearing , and there be 
 moment when he quite ache to precipitate that process . he could not 
 doubt that , should she only oblige he by surprise he just as he 
 then be , a clarify scene of some sort would result from the 
 concussion . 
 he humbly circulate in this spirit till he suddenly have a fresh 
 arrest . both the window of the room stand open to the balcony , but it 
 be only now that , in the glass of the leaf of one of they , fold 
 back , he catch a reflexion quickly recognise as the colour of a 
 lady 's dress . somebody have be then all the while on the balcony , and 
 the person , whoever it might be , be so place between the window as 
 to be hide from he ; while on the other hand the many sound of the 
 street have cover his own entrance and movement . if the person be 
 Sarah he might on the spot therefore be serve to his taste . he might 
 lead she by a move or two up to the remedy for his vain tension ; as to 
 which , should he get nothing else from it , he would at least have the 
 relief of pull down the roof on their head . there be fortunately 
 no one at hand to observe - in respect to his valour - that even on this 
 complete reasoning he still hang fire . he have be wait for Mrs. 
 Pocock and the sound of the oracle ; but he have to gird himself 
 afresh - which he do in the embrasure of the window , neither advance 
 nor retreat - before provoke the revelation . it be apparently for 
 Sarah to come more into view ; he be in that case there at her service . 
 she do however , as meanwhile happen , come more into view ; only she 
 luckily come at the last minute as a contradiction of Sarah . the 
 occupant of the balcony be after all quite another person , a person 
 present , on a second look , by a charming back and a slight shift of 
 her position , as beautiful brilliant unconscious Mamie - Mamie alone at 
 home , Mamie pass her time in her own innocent way , Mamie in short 
 rather shabbily use , but Mamie absorb interested and interesting . 
 with her arm on the balustrade and her attention drop to the street 
 she allow Strether to watch she , to consider several thing , without 
 her turn round . 
 but the oddity be that when he have so watch and consider he simply 
 step back into the room without follow up his advantage . he 
 revolve there again for several minute , quite as with something new 
 to think of and as if the bearing of the possibility of Sarah have be 
 supersede . for frankly , yes , it have bearing thus to find the girl in 
 solitary possession . there be something in it that touch he to a 
 point not to have be reckon beforehand , something that softly but 
 quite pressingly speak to he , and that speak the more each time he 
 pause again at the edge of the balcony and see she still unaware . her 
 companion be plainly scatter ; Sarah would be off somewhere with 
 Waymarsh and Chad off somewhere with Jim . Strether do not   at all 
 mentally impute to Chad that he be with his " good friend " ; he give he 
 the benefit of suppose he involve in appearance that , have he have 
 to describe they - for instance to Maria - he would have conveniently 
 qualified as more subtle . it come to he indeed the next thing that 
 there be perhaps almost an excess of refinement in have leave Mamie 
 in such weather up there alone ; however she might in fact have 
 extemporise , under the charm of the Rue de Rivoli , a little makeshift 
 Paris of wonder arid fancy . our friend in any case now recognise - and 
 it be as if at the recognition Mrs. Newsome 's fix intensity have 
 suddenly , with a deep audible gasp , grow thin and vague - that day 
 after day he have be conscious in respect to his young lady of 
 something odd and ambiguous , yet something into which he could at last 
 read a meaning . it have be at the most , this mystery , an 
 obsession - oh an obsession agreeable ; and it have just now fall into 
 its place as at the touch of a spring . it have represent the 
 possibility between they of some communication baffle by accident and 
 delay - the possibility even of some relation as yet unacknowledged . 
 there be always their old relation , the fruit of the Woollett year ; 
 but that - and it be what be strangest - have nothing whatever in common 
 with what be now in the air . as a child , as a " bud , " and then again 
 as a flower of expansion , Mamie have bloom for he , freely , in the 
 almost incessantly open doorway of home ; where he remember she as 
 first very forward , as then very backward - for he have carry on at one 
 period , in Mrs. Newsome 's parlour   oh Mrs. Newsome 's phase and his 
 own !   a course of English Literature re - enforce by exam and tea - and 
 once more , finally , as very much in advance . but he have keep no great 
 sense of point of contact ; it not be in the nature of thing at 
 Woollett that the fresh of the bud should find herself in the same 
 basket with the most withered of the winter apple . the child have 
 give sharpness , above all , to his sense of the flight of time ; it be 
 but the day before yesterday that he have trip up on her hoop , yet 
 his experience of remarkable woman - destine , it would seem , remarkably 
 to grow - feel itself ready this afternoon , quite brace itself , to 
 include she . she have in fine more to say to he than he have ever 
 dream the pretty girl of the moment could have ; and the proof of the 
 circumstance be that , visibly , unmistakeably , she have be able to say 
 it to no one else . it be something she could mention neither to her 
 brother , to her sister - in - law nor to Chad ; though he could just imagine 
 that have she still be at home she might have bring it out , as a 
 supreme tribute to age , authority and attitude , for Mrs. Newsome . it 
 be moreover something in which they all take an interest ; the strength 
 of their interest be in truth just the reason of her prudence . all 
 this then , for five minute , be vivid to Strether , and it put before 
 he that , poor child , she have now but her prudence to amuse she . that , 
 for a pretty girl in Paris , strike he , with a rush , as a sorry state ; 
 so that under the impression he go out to she with a step as 
 hypocritically alert , he be well aware , as if he have just come into 
 the room . she turn with a start at his voice ; preoccupy with he 
 though she might be , she be just a scrap disappoint . " oh I think 
 you be Mr. Bilham ! " 
 the remark have be at first surprising and our friend 's private 
 thought , under the influence of it , temporarily blight ; yet we be 
 able to add that he presently recover his inward tone and that many a 
 fresh flower of fancy be to bloom in the same air . little 
 Bilham - since little Bilham be , somewhat incongruously , 
 expect - appear behindhand ; a circumstance by which Strether be to 
 profit . they come back into the room together after a little , the 
 couple on the balcony , and amid its crimson - and - gold elegance , with the 
 other still absent , Strether pass forty minute that he appraise 
 even at the time as far , in the whole queer connexion , from his idlest . 
 yes indeed , since he have the other day so agree with Maria about the 
 inspiration of the lurid , here be something for his problem that 
 surely do not   make it shrink and that be float in upon he as part 
 of a sudden flood . he be doubtless not to know till afterwards , on 
 turn they over in thought , of how many element his impression be 
 compose ; but he none the less feel , as he sit with the charming girl , 
 the signal growth of a confidence . for she be charming , when all be 
 say - and none the less so for the visible habit and practice of 
 freedom and fluency . she be charming , he be aware , in spite of the 
 fact that if he have not   find she so he would have find she something 
 he should have be in peril of express as " funny . " yes , she be 
 funny , wonderful Mamie , and without dream it ; she be bland , she be 
 bridal - with never , that he could make out as yet , a bridegroom to 
 support it ; she be handsome and portly and easy and chatty , soft and 
 sweet and almost disconcertingly reassuring . she be dress , if we 
 might so far discriminate , less as a young lady than as an old one - have 
 an old one be supposable to Strether as so committed to vanity ; the 
 complexity of her hair miss moreover also the looseness of youth ; 
 and she have a mature manner of bend a little , as to encourage and 
 reward , while she hold neatly together in front of her a pair of 
 strikingly polished hand : the combination of all of which keep up 
 about she the glamour of she " receive , " place she again perpetually 
 between the window and within sound of the ice - cream plate , suggest 
 the enumeration of all the name , all the Mr. Brookses and Mr. 
 snookse , gregarious specimen of a single type , she be happy to 
 " meet . " but if all this be where she be funny , and if what be 
 funny than the rest be the contrast between her beautiful benevolent 
 patronage - such a hint of the polysyllabic as might make she something 
 of a bore toward middle age - and her rather flat little voice , the 
 voice , naturally , unaffectedly yet , of a girl of fifteen ; so Strether , 
 none the less , at the end of ten minute , feel in she a quiet dignity 
 that pull thing bravely together . if quiet dignity , almost more 
 than matronly , with voluminous , too voluminous clothe , be the effect 
 she propose to produce , that be an ideal one could like in she when 
 once one have get into relation . the great thing now for her visitor 
 be that this be exactly what he have do ; it make so extraordinary a 
 mixture of the brief and crowded hour . it be the mark of a relation 
 that he have begin so quickly to find himself sure she be , of all 
 people , as might have be say , on the side and of the party of Mrs. 
 Newsome 's original ambassador . she be in his interest and not in 
 Sarah 's , and some sign of that be precisely what he have be feel 
 in she , these last day , as imminent . finally place , in Paris , in 
 immediate presence of the situation and of the hero of it - by whom 
 Strether be incapable of mean any one but Chad - she have 
 accomplish , and really in a manner all unexpected to herself , a 
 change of base ; deep still thing have come to pass within she , and by 
 the time she have grow sure of they Strether have become aware of the 
 little drama . when she know where she be , in short , he have make it 
 out ; and he make it out at present still well ; though with never a 
 direct word pass between they all the while on the subject of his 
 own predicament . there have be at first , as he sit there with she , a 
 moment during which he wonder if she mean to break ground in respect 
 to his prime undertaking . that door stand so strangely ajar that he 
 be half - prepared to be conscious , at any juncture , of her having , of 
 any one 's having , quite bounce in . but , friendly , familiar , light of 
 touch and happy of tact , she exquisitely stay out ; so that it be for 
 all the world as if to show she could deal with he without be 
 reduce to - well , scarcely anything . 
 it fully come up for they then , by mean of their talking of everything 
 but Chad , that Mamie , unlike Sarah , unlike Jim , know perfectly what have 
 become of he . it fully come up that she have take to the last 
 fraction of an inch the measure of the change in he , and that she 
 want Strether to know what a secret she propose to make of it . they 
 talk most conveniently - as if they have have no chance yet - about 
 Woollett ; and that have virtually the effect of their keep the secret 
 more close . the hour take on for Strether , little by little , a queer 
 sad sweetness of quality , he have such a revulsion in Mamie 's favour and 
 on behalf of her social value as might have come from remorse at some 
 early injustice . she make he , as under the breath of some vague 
 western whiff , homesick and freshly restless ; he could really for the 
 time have fancy himself strand with she on a far shore , during an 
 ominous calm , in a quaint community of shipwreck . their little 
 interview be like a picnic on a coral strand ; they pass each other , 
 with melancholy smile and look sufficiently allusive , such cupful of 
 water as they have save . especially sharp in Strether meanwhile be 
 the conviction that his companion really know , as we have hint , where 
 she have come out . it be at a very particular place - only that she 
 would never tell he ; it would be above all what he should have to 
 puzzle for himself . this be what he hop for , because his interest 
 in the girl would not   be complete without it . no more would the 
 appreciation to which she be entitle - so assured be he that the more 
 he see of her process the more he should see of her pride . she see , 
 herself , everything ; but she know what she do not   want , and that it be 
 that have help she . what do not   she want ? - there be a pleasure lose 
 for her old friend in not yet know , as there would doubtless be a 
 thrill in get a glimpse . gently and sociably she keep that dark to 
 he , and it be as if she soothe and beguile he in other way to 
 make up for it . she come out with her impression of Madame de 
 Vionnet - of whom she have " hear so much " ; she come out with her 
 impression of Jeanne , whom she have be " die to see " : she bring it 
 out with a blandness by which her auditor be really stir that she 
 have be with Sarah early that very afternoon , and after dreadful 
 delay cause by all sort of thing , mainly , eternally , by the 
 purchase of clothe - clothe that unfortunately would not   be themselves 
 eternal - to call in the Rue de Bellechasse . 
 at the sound of these name Strether almost blush to feel that he 
 could not   have sound they first - and yet could not   either have 
 justify his squeamishness . Mamie make they easy as he could not   have 
 begin to do , and yet it could only have cost she more than he should 
 ever have have to spend . it be as friend of Chad 's , friend special , 
 distinguished , desirable , enviable , that she speak of they , and she 
 beautifully carry it off that much as she have hear of they - though 
 she do not   say how or where , which be a touch of her own - she have 
 find they beyond her supposition . she abound in praise of they , and 
 after the manner of Woollett - which make the manner of Woollett a 
 loveable thing again to Strether . he have never so feel the true 
 inwardness of it as when his bloom companion pronounce the elder of 
 the lady of the Rue de Bellechasse too fascinating for word and 
 declare of the young that she be perfectly ideal , a real little 
 monster of charm . " nothing , " she say of Jeanne , " ought ever to happen 
 to she - she be so awfully right as she be . another touch will spoil 
 she - so she ought not   to be touch . " 
 " ah but thing , here in Paris , " Strether observe , " do happen to little 
 girl . " and then for the joke 's and the occasion 's sake : " have not   you 
 find that yourself ? " 
 " that thing happen - ? oh I be not a little girl . I be a big battered 
 blowsy one . I do not   care , " Mamie laugh , " what happen . " 
 Strether have a pause while he wonder if it might not   happen that he 
 should give she the pleasure of learn that he find her nice than 
 he have really dream - a pause that end when he have say to himself 
 that , so far as it at all matter for she , she have in fact perhaps 
 already make this out . he risk accordingly a different 
 question - though conscious , as soon as he have speak , that he seem to 
 place it in relation to her last speech . " but that Mademoiselle de 
 Vionnet be to be marry - I suppose you have   hear of THAT . " for all , he 
 then find , he need fear ! " dear , yes ; the gentleman be there : 
 Monsieur de Montbron , whom Madame de Vionnet present to we . " 
 " and be he nice ? " 
 Mamie bloom and bridle with her good reception manner . " any man 's 
 nice when he be in love . " 
 it make Strether laugh . " but be Monsieur de Montbron in 
 love - already - with you ? " 
 " oh that be not necessary - it be so much well he should be so with she : 
 which , thank goodness , I lose no time in discover for myself . he be 
 perfectly go - and I could not   have bear it for she if he have not   be . 
 she be just too sweet . " 
 Strether hesitate . " and through be in love too ? " 
 on which with a smile that strike he as wonderful Mamie have a 
 wonderful answer . " she do not   know if she be or not . " 
 it make he again laugh out . " oh but you do ! " 
 she be willing to take it that way . " oh yes , I know everything . " and 
 as she sit there rub her polished hand and make the good of 
 it - only hold her elbow perhaps a little too much out - the 
 momentary effect for Strether be that every one else , in all their 
 affair , seem stupid . 
 " know that poor little Jeanne do not   know what be the matter with she ? " 
 it be as near as they come to say that she be probably in love 
 with Chad ; but it be quite near enough for what Strether want ; which 
 be to be confirm in his certitude that , whether in love or not , she 
 appeal to something large and easy in the girl before he . mamie 
 would be fat , too fat , at thirty ; but she would always be the person 
 who , at the present sharp hour , have be disinterestedly tender . " if I 
 see a little more of she , as I hope I shall , I think she will like I 
 enough - for she seem to like I to - day - to want I to tell she . " 
 " and shall you ? " 
 " perfectly . I shall tell she the matter with she be that she want 
 only too much to do right . to do right for she , naturally , " say 
 Mamie , " be to please . " 
 " her mother , do you mean ? " 
 " her mother first . " 
 Strether wait . " and then ? " 
 " well , ' then ' - Mr. Newsome . " 
 there be something really grand for he in the serenity of this 
 reference . " and last only Monsieur de Montbron ? " 
 " last only " - she good - humouredly keep it up . 
 Strether consider . " so that every one after all then will be suit ? " 
 she have one of her few hesitation , but it be a question only of a 
 moment ; and it be her near approach to be explicit with he 
 about what be between they . " I think I can speak for myself . I shall 
 be . " 
 it say indeed so much , tell such a story of she be ready to help 
 he , so committed to he that truth , in short , for such use as he might 
 make of it toward those end of his own with which , patiently and 
 trustfully , she have nothing to do - it so fully achieve all this that 
 he appear to himself simply to meet it in its own spirit by the last 
 frankness of admiration . admiration be of itself almost accusatory , 
 but nothing less would serve to show she how nearly he understand . he 
 put out his hand for good - bye with a " Splendid , splendid , splendid ! " 
 and he leave she , in her splendour , still wait for little Bilham . 
 Book tenth 
 I 
 Strether occupy beside little Bilham , three evening after his 
 interview with Mamie Pocock , the same deep divan they have enjoy 
 together on the first occasion of our friend 's meeting Madame de 
 Vionnet and her daughter in the apartment of the Boulevard Malesherbes , 
 where his position affirm itself again as minister to an easy 
 exchange of impression . the present evening have a different stamp ; if 
 the company be much more numerous , so , inevitably , be the idea set 
 in motion . it be on the other hand , however , now strongly mark that 
 the talker move , in respect to such matter , round an inner , a 
 protect circle . they know at any rate what really concern they 
 to - night , and Strether have begin by keep his companion close to it . 
 only a few of Chad 's guest have din - that be fifteen or twenty , a few 
 compare with the large concourse offer to sight by eleven o'clock ; 
 but number and mass , quantity and quality , light , fragrance , sound , the 
 overflow of hospitality meet the high tide of response , have all from 
 the first press upon Strether 's consciousness , and he feel himself 
 somehow part and parcel of the most festive scene , as the term be , in 
 which he have ever in his life be engage . he have perhaps see , on 
 Fourths of July and on dear old domestic commencement , more people 
 assemble , but he have never see so many in proportion to the space , or 
 have at all event never know so great a promiscuity to show so 
 markedly as pick . numerous as be the company , it have still be make 
 so by selection , and what be above all rare for Strether be that , by 
 no fault of his own , he be in the secret of the principle that have 
 work . he have not   enquire , he have avert his head , but Chad have put 
 he a pair of question that themselves smooth the ground . he have not 
 answer the question , he have reply that they be the young man 's 
 own affair ; and he have then see perfectly that the latter 's direction 
 be already settle . 
 Chad have apply for counsel only by way of intimate that he know 
 what to do ; and he have clearly never know it well than in now 
 present to his sister the whole circle of his society . this be all 
 in the sense and the spirit of the note strike by he on that lady 's 
 arrival ; he have take at the station itself a line that lead he without 
 a break , and that enable he to lead the Pococks - though daze a 
 little , no doubt , breathless , no doubt , and bewildered - to the 
 uttermost end of the passage accept by they perforce as pleasant . he 
 have make it for they violently pleasant and mercilessly full ; the 
 upshot of which be , to Strether 's vision , that they have come all the 
 way without discover it to be really no passage at all . it be a 
 brave blind alley , where to pass be impossible and where , unless they 
 stick fast , they would have - which be always awkward - publicly to back 
 out . they be touch bottom assuredly tonight ; the whole scene 
 represent the terminus of the cul - de - sac . so could thing go when 
 there be a hand to keep they consistent - a hand that pull the wire 
 with a skill at which the eld man more and more marvel . the elder 
 man feel responsible , but he also feel successful , since what have take 
 place be simply the issue of his own contention , six week before , 
 that they properly should wait to see what their friend would have 
 really to say . he have determine Chad to wait , he have determine he 
 to see ; he be therefore not to quarrel with the time give up to the 
 business . as much as ever , accordingly , now that a fortnight have 
 elapse , the situation create for Sarah , and against which she have 
 raise no protest , be that of she have accommodate herself to her 
 adventure as to a pleasure - party surrender perhaps even somewhat in 
 excess to bustle and to " pace . " if her brother have be at any point 
 the least bit open to criticism it might have be on the ground of his 
 spicing the draught too highly and pour the cup too full . frankly 
 treat the whole occasion of the presence of his relative as an 
 opportunity for amusement , he leave it , no doubt , but scant margin as an 
 opportunity for anything else . he suggest , invent , abound - yet 
 all the while with the loose easy rein . Strether , during his own 
 week , have gain a sense of know Paris ; but he see it afresh , and 
 with fresh emotion , in the form of the knowledge offer to his 
 colleague . 
 a thousand unuttered thought hum for he in the air of these 
 observation ; not the least frequent of which be that Sarah might well 
 of a truth not quite know whither she be drift . she be in no 
 position not to appear to expect that Chad should treat she handsomely ; 
 yet she strike our friend as privately stiffen a little each time 
 she miss the chance of mark the great nuance . the great nuance be 
 in brief that of course her brother must treat her handsomely - she 
 should like to see he not ; but that treat she handsomely , none the 
 less , be not   all in all - treat she handsomely butter no parsnip ; 
 and that in fine there be moment when she feel the fixed eye of 
 their admirable absent mother fairly screw into the flat of she back . 
 Strether , watch , after his habit , and overscore with thought , 
 positively have moment of his own in which he find himself sorry for 
 her - occasion on which she affect he as a person seat in a 
 runaway vehicle and turn over the question of a possible jump . WOULD 
 she jump , could she , would that be a safe place - this question , at 
 such instant , sit for he in her lapse into pallor , her tight lip , 
 her conscious eye . it come back to the main point at issue : would she 
 be , after all , to be square ? he believe on the whole she would jump ; 
 yet his alternation on this subject be the more especial stuff of 
 his suspense . one thing remain well before he - a conviction that 
 be in fact to gain sharpness from the impression of this evening : 
 that if she should gather in her skirt , close her eye and quit the 
 carriage while in motion , he would promptly enough become aware . she 
 would alight from her headlong course more or less directly upon he ; 
 it would be appoint to he , unquestionably , to receive her entire 
 weight . sign and portent of the experience thus in reserve for he 
 have as it happen , multiply even through the dazzle of Chad 's party . 
 it be partly under the nervous consciousness of such a prospect that , 
 leave almost every one in the two other room , leave those of the 
 guest already know to he as well as a mass of brilliant stranger of 
 both sex and of several variety of speech , he have desire five 
 quiet minute with little Bilham , whom he always find soothe and 
 even a little inspiring , and to whom he have actually moreover something 
 distinct and important to say . 
 he have feel of old - for it already seem long ago - rather humiliate 
 at discover he could learn in talk with a personage so much his 
 junior the lesson of a certain moral ease ; but he have now get use to 
 that - whether or no the mixture of the fact with other humiliation have 
 make it indistinct , whether or no directly from little Bilham 's 
 example , the example of his be contentedly just the obscure and 
 acute little Bilham he be . it work so for he , Strether seem to 
 see ; and our friend have at private hour a wan smile over the fact that 
 he himself , after so many more year , be still in search of something 
 that would work . however , as we have say , it work just now for they 
 equally to have find a corner a little apart . what particularly keep 
 it apart be the circumstance that the music in the salon be 
 admirable , with two or three such singer as it be a privilege to hear 
 in private . their presence give a distinction to Chad 's entertainment , 
 and the interest of calculate their effect on Sarah be actually so 
 sharp as to be almost painful . unmistakeably , in her single person , 
 the motive of the composition and dress in a splendour of crimson 
 which affect Strether as the sound of a fall through a skylight , she 
 would now be in the forefront of the listening circle and commit by 
 it up to her eye . those eye during the wonderful dinner itself he 
 have not   once meet ; have confessedly - perhaps a little 
 pusillanimously - arrange with Chad that he should be on the same side 
 of the table . but there be no use in have arrive now with little 
 Bilham at an unprecedented point of intimacy unless he could pitch 
 everything into the pot . " you who sit where you could see she , what 
 do she make of it all ? by which I mean on what term do she take 
 it ? " 
 " oh she take it , I judge , as prove that the claim of his family be 
 more than ever justified . " 
 " she be not   then pleased with what he have to show ? " 
 " on the contrary ; she be pleased with it as with his capacity to do this 
 kind of thing - more than she have be pleased with anything for a long 
 time . but she want he to show it there . he have no right to waste it 
 on the like of we . " 
 Strether wonder . " she want he to move the whole thing over ? " 
 " the whole thing - with an important exception . everything he have 
 ' pick up ' - and the way he know how . she see no difficulty in that . 
 she would run the show herself , and she will make the handsome concession 
 that Woollett would be on the whole in some way the well for it . not 
 that it would not   be also in some way the well for Woollett . the 
 people there be just as good . " 
 " just as good as you and these other ? ah that may be . but such an 
 occasion as this , whether or no , " Strether say , " be not   the people . 
 it be what have make the people possible . " 
 " well then , " his friend reply , " there you be ; I give you my 
 impression for what it be worth . Mrs. Pocock have see , and that be 
 to - night how she sit there . if you be to have a glimpse of her face 
 you would understand I . she have make up her mind - to the sound of 
 expensive music . " 
 Strether take it freely in . " ah then I shall have news of she . " 
 " I do not   want to frighten you , but I think that likely . however , " 
 little Bilham continue , " if I be of the least use to you to hold on 
 by - ! " 
 " you be not of the least ! " - and Strether lay an appreciative hand on 
 he to say it . " no one 's of the least . " with which , to mark how gaily 
 he could take it , he pat his companion 's knee . " I must meet my fate 
 alone , and I shall - oh you will see ! and yet , " he pursue the next 
 moment , " you can help I too . you once say to I " - he follow this 
 far - " that you hold Chad should marry . I do not   see then so well as 
 I know now that you mean he should marry Miss Pocock . do you still 
 consider that he should ? because if you do " - he keep it up - " I want 
 you immediately to change your mind . you can help I that way . " 
 " help you by think he should not marry ? " 
 " not marry at all event Mamie . " 
 " and who then ? " 
 " ah , " Strether return , " that I be not oblige to say . but Madame de 
 Vionnet - I suggest - when he can . ' 
 " oh ! " say little Bilham with some sharpness . 
 " oh precisely ! but he need not   marry at all - I be at any rate not 
 oblige to provide for it . whereas in your case I rather feel that I 
 AM . " 
 little Bilham be amuse . " oblige to provide for my marrying ? " 
 " yes - after all I have   do to you ! " 
 the young man weigh it . " have you do as much as that ? " 
 " well , " say Strether , thus challenge , " of course I must remember what 
 you have   also do to I . we may perhaps call it square . but all the 
 same , " he go on , " I wish awfully you would marry Mamie Pocock yourself . " 
 little Bilham laugh out . " why it be only the other night , in this 
 very place , that you be propose to I a different union altogether . " 
 " Mademoiselle de Vionnet ? " well , Strether easily confess it . " that , 
 I admit , be a vain image . this be practical politic . I want to do 
 something good for both of you - I wish you each so well ; and you can 
 see in a moment the trouble it will save I to polish you off by the 
 same stroke . she like you , you know . you console she . and she be 
 splendid . " 
 little Bilham star as a delicate appetite stare at an overheape 
 plate . " what do I console she for ? " 
 it just make his friend impatient . " oh come , you know " 
 " and what prove for you that she like I ? " 
 " why the fact that I find she three day ago stop at home alone 
 all the golden afternoon on the mere chance that you would come to she , and 
 hang over her balcony on that of see your cab drive up . I do not 
 know what you want more . " 
 little Bilham after a moment find it . " only just to know what prove 
 to you that I like she . " 
 " oh if what I have   just mention be not   enough to make you do it , you be 
 a stony - hearted little fiend . besides " - Strether encourage his 
 fancy 's flight - " you show your inclination in the way you keep she 
 waiting , keep she on purpose to see if she care enough for you . " 
 his companion pay his ingenuity the deference of a pause . " I do not 
 keep she wait . I come at the hour . I would not   have keep she 
 wait for the world , " the young man honourably declare . 
 " well still - then there you be ! " and Strether , charm , hold he 
 the fast . " even if you do not   do her justice , moreover , " he 
 continue , " I should insist on your immediately come round to it . I 
 want awfully to have work it . I want " - and our friend speak now with 
 a yearning that be really earnest - " at least to have do that . " 
 " to have marry I off - without a penny ? " 
 " well , I shall not   live long ; and I give you my word , now and here , that 
 I will leave you every penny of my own . I have not   many , unfortunately , 
 but you shall have they all . and Miss Pocock , I think , have a few . I 
 want , " Strether go on , " to have be at least to that extent 
 constructive even expiatory . I have   be sacrifice so to strange god 
 that I feel I want to put on record , somehow , my 
 fidelity - fundamentally unchanged after all - to our own . I feel as if 
 my hand be embrue with the blood of monstrous alien altar - of 
 another faith altogether . there it be - it be do . " and then he far 
 explain . " it take hold of I because the idea of get she quite 
 out of the way for Chad help to clear my ground . " 
 the young man , at this , bounce about , and it bring they face to face 
 in admit amusement . " you want I to marry as a convenience to Chad ? " 
 " no , " Strether debate - " he do not   care whether you marry or not . it be 
 as a convenience simply to my own plan for he . " 
 " ' simply ' ! " - and little Bilham 's concurrence be in itself a lively 
 comment . " thank you . but I think , " he continue , " you have exactly 
 no plan ' for ' he . " 
 " well then call it my plan for myself - which may be well , as you say , 
 to have none . his situation , do not   you see ? be reduce now to the bare 
 fact one have to recognise . Mamie do not   want he , and he do not 
 want mamie : so much as that these day have make clear . it be a thread 
 we can wind up and tuck in . " 
 but little Bilham still question . " you can - since you seem so much 
 to want to . but why should I ? " 
 Poor Strether think it over , but be oblige of course to admit that 
 his demonstration do superficially fail . " seriously , there be no 
 reason . it be my affair - I must do it alone . I have   only my fantastic 
 need of make my dose stiff . " 
 little Bilham wonder . " what do you call your dose ? " 
 " why what I have to swallow . I want my condition unmitigate . " 
 he have speak in the tone of talk for talk 's sake , and yet with an 
 obscure truth lurk in the loose fold ; a circumstance presently not 
 without its effect on his young friend . little Bilham 's eye rest on 
 he a moment with some intensity ; then suddenly , as if everything have 
 clear up , he give a happy laugh . it seem to say that if 
 pretend , or even try , or still even hop , to be able to care 
 for Mamie would be of use , he be all there for the job . " I will do 
 anything in the world for you ! " 
 " well , " Strether smile , " anything in the world be all I want . I do not 
 know anything that please I in she more , " he go on , " than the way 
 that , on my find she up there all alone , come on her unaware and 
 feel greatly for she be so out of it , she knock down my tall 
 house of card with her instant and cheerful allusion to the next young 
 man . it be somehow so the note I need - her stay at home to 
 receive he . " 
 " it be Chad of course , " say little Bilham , " who ask the next young 
 man - I like your name for I ! - to call . " 
 " so I suppose - all of which , thank God , be in our innocent and natural 
 manner . but do you know , " Strether ask , " if Chad know - ? " and 
 then as this interlocutor seem at a loss : " why where she have come 
 out . " 
 Little Bilham , at this , meet his face with a conscious look - it be as 
 if , more than anything yet , the allusion have penetrate . " do you know 
 yourself ? " 
 Strether lightly shake his head . " there I stop . oh , odd as it may 
 appear to you , there be thing I do not   know . I only get the sense 
 from she of something very sharp , and yet very deep down , that she be 
 keep all to herself . that be I have begin with the belief that she 
 had keep it to herself ; but face to face with she there I soon make out 
 that there be a person with whom she would have share it . I have 
 think she possibly might with me - but I see then that I be only half 
 in her confidence . when , turn to I to greet I - for she be on the 
 balcony and I have come in without she know it - she show I she have 
 be expect you and be proportionately disappointed , I get hold of 
 the tail of my conviction . half an hour later I be in possession of 
 all the rest of it . you know what have happen . " he look at his 
 young friend hard - then he feel sure . " for all you say , you be up to 
 your eye . so there you be . " 
 little Bilham after an instant pull half round . " I assure you she 
 have not   tell I anything . " 
 " of course she have not . for what do you suggest that I suppose she to 
 take you ? but you have   be with she every day , you have   see she freely , 
 you have   like she greatly - I stick to that - and you have   make your profit 
 of it . you know what she have be through as well as you know that she 
 have din here to - night - which must have put she , by the way , through a 
 good deal more . " 
 the young man face this blast ; after which he pull round the rest of 
 the way . " I have not   in the least say she have not   be nice to I . but 
 she be proud . " 
 " and quite properly . but not too proud for that . " 
 " it be just her pride that have make she . Chad , " little Bilham loyally 
 go on , " have really be as kind to she as possible . it be awkward for 
 a man when a girl be in love with he . " 
 " ah but she be not   - now . " 
 little Bilham sit star before he ; then he spring up as if his 
 friend 's penetration , recurrent and insistent , make he really after 
 all too nervous . " no - she be not   now . it be not   in the least , " he go 
 on , " Chad 's fault . he be really all right . I mean he would have be 
 willing . but she come over with idea . those she have get at home . 
 they have be her motive and support in join her brother and his 
 wife . she be to save our friend . " 
 " ah like I , poor thing ? " Strether also get to his foot . 
 " exactly - she have a bad moment . it be very soon distinct to she , to 
 pull she up , to let she down , that , alas , he be , he be , save . there be 
 nothing leave for she to do . " 
 " not even to love he ? " 
 " she would have love he well as she originally believe he . " 
 Strether wonder " of course one ask one 's self what notion a little 
 girl form , where a young man 's in question , of such a history and such 
 a state . " 
 " well , this little girl see they , no doubt , as obscure , but she see 
 they practically as wrong . the wrong for she be the obscure . Chad 
 turn out at any rate right and good and disconcert , while what she 
 be all prepare for , prim and gird and wound up for , be to deal 
 with he as the general opposite . " 
 " yet be not   her whole point " - Strether weigh it - " that he be to be , 
 that he could be , make well , redeem ? " 
 little Bilham fix it all a moment , and then with a small headshake 
 that diffuse a tenderness : " she be too late . too late for the 
 miracle . " 
 " yes " - his companion see enough . " still , if the bad fault of his 
 condition be that it may be all there for she to profit by - ? " 
 " oh she do not   want to ' profit , ' in that flat way . she do not   want 
 to profit by another woman 's work - she want the miracle to have be 
 her own miracle . that be what she be too late for . " 
 Strether quite feel how it all fit , yet there seem one loose 
 piece . " I be bind to say , you know , that she strike one , on these 
 line , as fastidious - what you call here difficile . " 
 little Bilham toss up his chin . " of course she be difficile - on any 
 line ! what else in the world be our Mamies - the real , the right 
 one ? " 
 " I see , I see , " our friend repeat , charm by the responsive wisdom 
 he have end by so richly extract . " mamie be one of the real and 
 the right . " 
 " the very thing itself . " 
 " and what it come to then , " Strether go on , " be that poor awful Chad 
 be simply too good for she . " 
 " ah too good be what he be after all to be ; but it be she herself , 
 and she herself only , who be to have make he so . " 
 it hang beautifully together , but with still a loose end . " would not   he 
 do for she even if he should after all break - " 
 " with his actual influence ? " oh little Bilham have for this enquiry the 
 sharp of all his control . " how can he ' do ' - on any term 
 whatever - when he be flagrantly spoil ? " 
 Strether could only meet the question with his passive , his receptive 
 pleasure . " well , thank goodness , YOU'RE not ! you remain for she to 
 save , and I come back , on so beautiful and full a demonstration , to my 
 contention of just now - that of your show distinct sign of she 
 have already begin . " 
 the most he could far say to himself - as his young friend turn 
 away - be that the charge encounter for the moment no renew denial . 
 Little Bilham , take his course back to the music , only shake his 
 good - natured ear an instant , in the manner of a terrier who have get 
 wet ; while Strether relapse into the sense - which have for he in these 
 day most of comfort - that he be free to believe in anything that from 
 hour to hour keep he go . he have positively motion and flutter of 
 this conscious hour - to - hour kind , temporary surrender to irony , to 
 fancy , frequent instinctive snatch at the grow rise of 
 observation , constantly strong for he , as he feel , in scent and 
 colour , and in which he could bury his nose even to wantonness . this 
 last resource be offer he , for that matter , in the very form of his 
 next clear perception - the vision of a prompt meeting , in the doorway 
 of the room , between little Bilham and brilliant Miss Barrace , who be 
 enter as Bilham withdraw . she have apparently put he a question , to 
 which he have reply by turn to indicate his late interlocutor ; 
 toward whom , after an interrogation far aid by a resort to that 
 optical machinery which seem , like her other ornament , curious and 
 archaic , the genial lady , suggest more than ever for her fellow 
 guest the old french print , the historic portrait , direct herself 
 with an intention that Strether instantly meet . he know in advance the 
 first note she would sound , and take in as she approach all her need 
 of sound it . nothing yet have be so " wonderful " between they as 
 the present occasion ; and it be her special sense of this quality in 
 occasion that she be there , as she be in most place , to feed . that 
 sense have already be so well feed by the situation about they that she 
 have quit the other room , forsake the music , drop out of the 
 play , abandon , in a word , the stage itself , that she might stand a 
 minute behind the scene with Strether and so perhaps figure as one of 
 the famous augur reply , behind the oracle , to the wink of the 
 other . seat near he presently where little Bilham have sit , she 
 reply in truth to many thing ; begin as soon as he have say to 
 she - what he hop he say without fatuity - " all you lady be 
 extraordinarily kind to I . " 
 she play her long handle , which shift her observation ; she see in 
 an instant all the absence that leave they free . " how can we be 
 anything else ? but be not   that exactly your plight ? ' we lady ' - oh 
 we be nice , and you must be have enough of we ! as one of we , you 
 know , I do not   pretend I be crazy about we . but Miss Gostrey at least 
 to - night have leave you alone , have not   she ? " with which she again look 
 about as if Maria might still lurk . 
 " oh yes , " say Strether ; ' she be only sit up for I at home . " and 
 then as this elicit from his companion her gay " oh , oh , oh ! " he 
 explain that he mean sit up in suspense and prayer . " we think 
 it on the whole well she should not   be present ; and either way of 
 course it be a terrible worry for she . " he abound in the sense of his 
 appeal to the lady , and they might take their choice of his do so 
 from humility or from pride . " yet she incline to believe I shall come 
 out . " 
 " oh I incline to believe too you will come out ! " - Miss Barrace , with she 
 laugh , be not to be behind . " only the question be about WHERE , be not 
 it ? however , " she happily continue , " if it be anywhere at all it must 
 be very far on , must not   it ? to do we justice , I think , you know , " she 
 laugh , " we do , among we all , want you rather far on . yes , yes , " she 
 repeat in her quick droll way ; " we want you very , very far on ! " after 
 which she wish to know why he have think it well Maria should not 
 be present . 
 " oh , " he reply , " it be really her own idea . I should have wish 
 it . but she dread responsibility . " 
 " and be not   that a new thing for she ? " 
 " to dread it ? no doubt - no doubt . but her nerve have give way . " 
 Miss Barrace look at he a moment . " she have too much at stake . " then 
 less gravely : " mine , luckily for I , hold out . " 
 " luckily for I too " - Strether come back to that . " my own be not   so 
 firm , MY appetite for responsibility be not   so sharp , as that I have not 
 feel the very principle of this occasion to be ' the more the merry . ' 
 if we be so merry it be because Chad have understand so well . " 
 " he have understand amazingly , " say Miss Barrace . 
 " it be wonderful - Strether anticipate for she . 
 " it be wonderful ! " she , to meet it , intensify ; so that , face to face 
 over it , they largely and recklessly laugh . but she presently add : 
 " oh I see the principle . if one do not   one would be lose . but when 
 once one have get hold of it - " 
 " it be as simple as twice two ! from the moment he have to do something - " 
 " a crowd " - she take he straight up - " be the only thing ? rather , 
 rather : a rumpus of sound , " she laugh , " or nothing . Mrs. Pocock 's 
 build in , or build out - whichever you call it ; she be pack so tight 
 she can not   move . she be in splendid isolation " - Miss Barrace embroider 
 the theme . 
 Strether follow , but scrupulous of justice . " yet with every one in 
 the place successively introduce to she . " 
 " wonderfully - but just so that it do build she out . she be bricke 
 up , she be bury alive ! " 
 Strether seem for a moment to look at it ; but it bring he to a 
 sigh . " oh but she be not dead ! it will take more than this to kill 
 she . " 
 his companion have a pause that might have be for pity . " no , I can not 
 pretend I think she be finish - or that it be for more than to - night . " 
 she remain pensive as if with the same compunction . " it be only up to 
 her chin . " then again for the fun of it : " she can breathe . " 
 " she can breathe ! " - he echo it in the same spirit . " and do you 
 know , " he go on , " what be really all this time happen to 
 I ? - through the beauty of music , the gaiety of voice , the uproar in 
 short of our revel and the felicity of your wit ? the sound of Mrs. 
 Pocock 's respiration drown for I , I assure you , every other . it be 
 literally all I hear . " 
 she focusse he with her clink of chain . " well - ! " she breathe ever 
 so kindly . 
 " well , what ? " 
 " she be free from her chin up , " she muse ; " and that will be enough for 
 she . " 
 " it will be enough for I ! " Strether ruefully laugh . " waymarsh have 
 really , " he then ask , " bring she to see you ? " 
 " yes - but that be the bad of it . I could do you no good . and yet I 
 try hard . " 
 Strether wonder . " and how do you try ? " 
 " why I do not   speak of you . " 
 " I see . that be well . " 
 " then what would have be bad ? for speak or silent , " she lightly 
 wail , " I somehow ' compromise . ' and it have never be any one but you . " 
 " that show " - he be magnanimous - " that it be something not in you , but 
 in one 's self . it be MY fault . " 
 she be silent a little . " no , it be Mr. Waymarsh 's . it be the fault of 
 his have bring she . " 
 " ah then , " say Strether good - naturedly , " why do he bring she ? " 
 " he could not   afford not to . " 
 " oh you be a trophy - one of the spoil of conquest ? but why in that 
 case , since you do ' compromise ' - " 
 " do not   I compromise HIM as well ? I do compromise he as well , " Miss 
 Barrace smile . " I compromise he as hard as I can . but for Mr. 
 Waymarsh it be not   fatal . it be - so far as his wonderful relation with 
 Mrs. Pocock be concern - favourable . " and then , as he still seem 
 slightly at sea : " the man who have succeed with I , do not   you see ? 
 for she to get he from I be such an add incentive . " 
 Strether see , but as if his path be still strew with surprise . " it be 
 ' from ' you then that she have get he ? " 
 she be amuse at his momentary muddle . " you can fancy my fight ! she 
 believe in her triumph . I think it have be part of her joy . 
 " oh her joy ! " Strether sceptically murmur . 
 " well , she think she have have her own way . and what be to - night for she 
 but a kind of apotheosis ? her frock be really good . " 
 " good enough to go to heaven in ? for after a real apotheosis , " 
 Strether go on , " there be nothing but heaven . for Sarah there be only 
 to - morrow . " 
 " and you mean that she will not   find to - morrow heavenly ? " 
 " well , I mean that I somehow feel to - night - on her behalf - too good to 
 be true . she have have her cake ; that be she be in the act now of have 
 it , of swallow the large and sweetest piece . there will not   be 
 another left for she . certainly I have not   one . it can only , at the 
 good , be Chad . " he continue to make it out as for their common 
 entertainment . " he may have one , as it be , up his sleeve ; yet it be 
 bear in upon I that if he have - " 
 " he would not " - she quite understand - " have take all this trouble ? I 
 dare say not , and , if I may be quite free and dreadful , I very much 
 hope he will not   take any more . of course I will not   pretend now , " she 
 add , " not to know what it be a question of . " 
 " oh every one must know now , " poor Strether thoughtfully admit ; " and 
 it be strange enough and funny enough that one should feel everybody 
 here at this very moment to be know and watch and wait . " 
 " yes - be not   it indeed funny ? " Miss Barrace quite rise to it . " that be 
 the way we be in Paris . " she be always pleased with a new 
 contribution to that queerness . " it be wonderful ! but , you know , " she 
 declare , " it all depend on you . I do not   want to turn the knife in 
 your vital , but that be naturally what you just now mean by our all 
 be on top of you . we know you as the hero of the drama , and we be 
 gather to see what you will do . " 
 Strether look at she a moment with a light perhaps slightly obscure . 
 " I think that must be why the hero have take refuge in this corner . 
 he be scared at his heroism - he shrink from his part . " 
 " ah but we nevertheless believe he will play it . that be why , " Miss 
 Barrace kindly go on , " we take such an interest in you . we feel 
 you will come up to the scratch . " and then as he seem perhaps not quite 
 to take fire : " do not   let he do it . " 
 " do not   let Chad go ? " 
 " yes , keep hold of he . with all this " - and she indicate the general 
 tribute - " he have do enough . we love he here - he be charming . " 
 " it be beautiful , " say Strether , " the way you all can simplify when you 
 will . " 
 but she give it to he back . " it be nothing to the way you will when 
 you must . " 
 he wince at it as at the very voice of prophecy , and it keep he a 
 moment quiet . he detain she , however , on she appear about to 
 leave he alone in the rather cold clearance their talk have make . 
 " there positively be not   a sign of a hero to - night ; the hero 's dodging 
 and shirk , the hero 's ashamed . therefore , you know , I think , what 
 you must all REALLY be occupy with be the heroine . " 
 Miss Barrace take a minute . " the heroine ? " 
 " the heroine . I have   treat she , " say Strether , " not a bit like a 
 hero . oh , " he sigh , " I do not   do it well ! " 
 she ease he off . " you do it as you can . " and then after another 
 hesitation : " I think she be satisfied . " 
 but he remain compunctious . " I have not   be near she . I have not 
 look at she . " 
 " ah then you have   lose a good deal ! " 
 he show he know it . " she be more wonderful than ever ? " 
 " than ever . with Mr. Pocock . " 
 Strether wonder . " Madame de Vionnet - with Jim ? " 
 " Madame de Vionnet - with ' Jim . ' " Miss Barrace be historic . 
 " and what be she do with he ? " 
 " ah you must ask HIM ! " 
 Strether 's face light again at the prospect . " it will be amusing to 
 do so . " yet he continue to wonder . " but she must have some idea . " 
 " of course she have - she have twenty idea . she have in the first place , " 
 say Miss Barrace , swing a little her tortoise - shell , " that of do 
 her part . her part be to help you . " 
 it come out as nothing have come yet ; link be miss and connexion 
 unnamed , but it be suddenly as if they be at the heart of their 
 subject . " yes ; how much more she do it , " Strether gravely reflect , 
 " than I help she ! " it all come over he as with the near presence of 
 the beauty , the grace , the intense , dissimulated spirit with which he 
 have , as he say , be put off contact . " she have courage . " 
 " ah she have courage ! " Miss Barrace quite agree ; and it be as if for a 
 moment they see the quantity in each other 's face . 
 but indeed the whole thing be present . " how much she must care ! " 
 " ah there it be . she do care . but it be not , be it , " Miss Barrace 
 considerately add , " as if you have ever have any doubt of that ? " 
 Strether seem suddenly to like to feel that he really never have . " why 
 of course it be the whole point . " 
 " Voila ! " Miss Barrace smile . 
 " it be why one come out , " Strether go on . " and it be why one have 
 stay so long . and it be also " - he abound - " why one be go home . 
 it be why , it be why - " 
 " it be why everything ! " she concur . " it be why she might be 
 to - night - for all she look and show , and for all your friend ' Jim ' 
 do - about twenty year old . that be another of her idea ; to be for 
 he , and to be quite easily and charmingly , as young as a little girl . " 
 Strether assist at his distance . " ' for he ' ? for Chad - ? " 
 " for Chad , in a manner , naturally , always . but in particular to - night 
 for Mr. Pocock . " and then as her friend still star : " yes , it be of 
 a bravery but that be what she have : her high sense of duty . " it be 
 more than sufficiently before they . " when Mr. Newsome have his hand so 
 embarrassed with his sister - " 
 " it be quite the least " - Strether fill it out - " that she should take 
 his sister 's husband ? certainly - quite the least . so she have take 
 he . " 
 " she have take he . " it be all Miss Barrace have mean . 
 still it remain enough . " it must be funny . " 
 " oh it be funny . " that of course essentially go with it . 
 but it bring they back . how indeed then she must cared , in answer to 
 which Strether 's entertainer drop a comprehensive " ah ! " expressive 
 perhaps of some impatience for the time he take to get use to it . she 
 herself have get use to it long before . 
 II 
 when one morning within the week he perceive the whole thing to be 
 really at last upon he Strether 's immediate feeling be all relief . he 
 have know this morning that something be about to happen - know it , in 
 a moment , by Waymarsh 's manner when Waymarsh appear before he during 
 his brief consumption of coffee and a roll in the small slippery 
 salle - a - manger so associate with rich rumination . Strether have take 
 there of late various lonely and absent - minded meal ; he commune 
 there , even at the end of June , with a suspect chill , the air of old 
 shiver mix with old savour , the air in which so many of his 
 impression have perversely mature ; the place meanwhile renew its 
 message to he by the very circumstance of his single state . he now 
 sit there , for the most part , to sigh softly , while he vaguely tilt 
 his carafe , over the vision of how much well Waymarsh be occupy . 
 that be really his success by the common measure - to have lead this 
 companion so on and on . he remember how at first there have be 
 scarce a squatting - place he could beguile he into pass ; the actual 
 outcome of which at last be that there be scarce one that could 
 arrest he in his rush . his rush - as Strether vividly and amusedly 
 figure it - continue to be all with Sarah , and contain perhaps 
 moreover the word of the whole enigma , whip up in its fine 
 full - flavour froth the very principle , for good or for ill , of his 
 own , of Strether 's destiny . it might after all , to the end , only be 
 that they have unite to save he , and indeed , so far as Waymarsh be 
 concern , that had to be the spring of action . Strether be glad at 
 all event , in connexion with the case , that the saving he require be 
 not more scant ; so constitute a luxury be it in certain light just 
 to lurk there out of the full glare . he have moment of quite seriously 
 wonder whether Waymarsh would not   in fact , thank to old friendship 
 and a conceivable indulgence , make about as good term for he as he 
 might make for himself . they would not   be the same term of course ; but 
 they might have the advantage that he himself probably should be able 
 to make none at all . 
 he be never in the morning very late , but Waymarsh have already be 
 out , and , after a peep into the dim refectory , he present himself 
 with much less than usual of his large looseness . he have make sure , 
 through the expanse of glass expose to the court , that they would be 
 alone ; and there be now in fact that about he that pretty well take 
 up the room . he be dress in the garment of summer ; and save that 
 his white waistcoat be redundant and bulge these thing favour , 
 they determine , his expression . he wear a straw hat such as his 
 friend have not   yet see in Paris , and he show a buttonhole freshly 
 adorn with a magnificent rose . Strether read on the instant his 
 story - how , astir for the previous hour , the sprinkled newness of the 
 day , so pleasant at that season in Paris , he be fairly pant with 
 the pulse of adventure and have be with Mrs. Pocock , unmistakeably , to 
 the Marche aux Fleurs . Strether really know in this vision of he a joy 
 that be akin to envy ; so reverse as he stand there do their old 
 position seem ; so comparatively doleful now show , by the sharp turn 
 of the wheel , the posture of the pilgrim from Woollett . he wonder , 
 this pilgrim , if he have originally look to Waymarsh so brave and 
 well , so remarkably launch , as it be at present the latter 's 
 privilege to appear . he recall that his friend have remark to he 
 even at Chester that his aspect belie his plea of prostration ; but 
 there certainly could not   have be , for an issue , an aspect less 
 concerned than Waymarsh 's with the menace of decay . Strether have at 
 any rate never resemble a southern planter of the great day - which 
 be the image picturesquely suggest by the happy relation between the 
 fuliginous face and the wide panama of his visitor . this type , it 
 far amuse he to guess , have be , on Waymarsh 's part , the object 
 of Sarah 's care ; he be convince that her taste have not be a 
 stranger to the conception and purchase of the hat , any more than her 
 fine finger have be guiltless of the bestowal of the rose . it come 
 to he in the current of thought , as thing so oddly do come , that he 
 have never rise with the lark to attend a brilliant woman to the Marche 
 aux Fleurs ; this could be fasten on he in connexion neither with 
 Miss Gostrey nor with Madame de Vionnet ; the practice of get up 
 early for adventure could indeed in no manner be fasten on he . it 
 come to he in fact that just here be his usual case : he be for ever 
 miss thing through his general genius for miss they , while 
 other be for ever pick they up through a contrary bent . and it 
 be other who look abstemious and he who look greedy ; it be he 
 somehow who finally pay , and it be other who mainly partook . yes , 
 he should go to the scaffold yet for he would not   know quite whom . he 
 almost , for that matter , feel on the scaffold now and really quite 
 enjoy it . it work out as because he be anxious there - it work 
 out as for this reason that Waymarsh be so blooming . it be his trip 
 for health , for a change , that prove the success - which be just what 
 Strether , plan and exert himself , have desire it should be . that 
 truth already sit full - blown on his companion 's lip ; benevolence 
 breathe from they as with the warmth of active exercise , and also a 
 little as with the bustle of haste . 
 " Mrs. Pocock , whom I leave a quarter of an hour ago at her hotel , have 
 ask I to mention to you that she would like to find you at home here 
 in about another hour . she want to see you ; she have something to 
 say - or consider , I believe , that you may have : so that I ask she 
 myself why she should not   come right round . she have not   be round 
 yet - to see our place ; and I take upon myself to say that I be sure 
 you would be glad to have she . the thing be therefore , you see , to keep 
 right here till she come . " 
 the announcement be sociably , even though , after Waymarsh 's will not , 
 somewhat solemnly make ; but Strether quickly feel other thing in it 
 than these light feature . it be the first approach , from that 
 quarter , to admit consciousness ; it quicken his pulse ; it simply 
 mean at last that he should have but himself to thank if he do not 
 know where he be . he have finish his breakfast ; he push it away 
 and be on his foot . there be plenty of element of surprise , but 
 only one of doubt . " the thing be for you to keep here too ? " Waymarsh 
 have be slightly ambiguous . 
 he be not   ambiguous , however , after this enquiry ; and Strether 's 
 understanding have probably never before open so wide and effective a 
 mouth as it be to open during the next five minute . it be no part of 
 his friend 's wish , as appear , to help to receive Mrs. Pocock ; he 
 quite understand the spirit in which she be to present herself , but 
 his connexion with her visit be limit to his having - well , as he 
 might say - perhaps a little promote it . he have think , and have let 
 she know it , that Strether possibly would think she might have be 
 round before . at any rate , as turn out , she have be want 
 herself , quite a while , to come . " I tell she , " say Waymarsh , " that it 
 would have be a bright idea if she have only carry it out before . " 
 Strether pronounce it so bright as to be almost dazzle . " but why 
 hasn't   she carry it out before ? she have see I every day - she have 
 only to name her hour . I have   be wait and wait . " 
 " well , I tell she you have . and she have be wait too . " it be , in 
 the oddest way in the world , on the showing of this tone , a genial new 
 press coax Waymarsh ; a waymarsh conscious with a different 
 consciousness from any he have yet betray , and actually render by it 
 almost insinuate . he lack only time for full persuasion , and 
 Strether be to see in a moment why . meantime , however , our friend 
 perceive , he be announce a step of some magnanimity on Mrs. 
 Pocock 's part , so that he could deprecate a sharp question . it be his 
 own high purpose in fact to have smooth sharp question to rest . he 
 look his old comrade very straight in the eye , and he have never 
 convey to he in so mute a manner so much kind confidence and so much 
 good advice . everything that be between they be again in his face , 
 but mature and shelve and finally dispose of . " at any rate , " he 
 add , ' she be come now . " 
 consider how many piece have to fit themselves , it all fall , in 
 Strether 's brain , into a close rapid order . he see on the spot what 
 have happen , and what probably would yet ; and it be all funny enough . 
 it be perhaps just this freedom of appreciation that wind he up to 
 his flare of high spirit . " what be she come for ? - to kill I ? " 
 " she be come to be very very kind to you , and you must let I say that 
 I greatly hope you will not be less so to herself . " 
 this be speak by Waymarsh with much gravity of admonition , and as 
 Strether stand there he know he have but to make a movement to take the 
 attitude of a man gracefully receive a present . the present be that 
 of the opportunity dear old Waymarsh have flatter himself he have 
 divine in he the slight soreness of not have yet thoroughly 
 enjoy ; so he have bring it to he thus , as on a little silver 
 breakfast - tray , familiarly though delicately - without oppressive pomp ; 
 and he be to bend and smile and acknowledge , be to take and use and 
 be grateful . he be not - that be the beauty of it - to be ask to 
 deflect too much from his dignity . no wonder the old boy bloom in 
 this bland air of his own distillation . Strether feel for a moment as 
 if Sarah be actually walk up and down outside . be not   she hang 
 about the porte - cochere while her friend thus summarily open a way ? 
 Strether would meet she but to take it , and everything would be for the 
 good in the good of possible world . he have never so much known what 
 any one mean as , in the light of this demonstration , he know what Mrs. 
 Newsome do . it have reach Waymarsh from Sarah , but it have reach 
 Sarah from her mother , and there be no break in the chain by which it 
 reach HIM . " have anything particular happen , " he ask after a 
 minute - ' so suddenly to determine she ? have she hear anything 
 unexpected from home ? " 
 Waymarsh , on this , it seem to he , look at he hard than ever . 
 " ' unexpected ' ? " he have a brief hesitation ; then , however , he be firm . 
 " we be leave Paris . " 
 " leave ? that be sudden . " 
 Waymarsh show a different opinion . " less so than it may seem . the 
 purpose of Mrs. Pocock 's visit be to explain to you in fact that it be 
 not . " 
 Strether do not   at all know if he have really an advantage - anything 
 that would practically count as one ; but he enjoy for the moment - as 
 for the first time in his life - the sense of so carry it off . he 
 wonder - it be amusing - if he feel as the impudent feel . " I shall 
 take great pleasure , I assure you , in any explanation . I shall be 
 delighted to receive Sarah . " 
 the sombre glow just darken in his comrade 's eye ; but he be strike 
 with the way it die out again . it be too mixed with another 
 consciousness - it be too smothered , as might be say , in flower . he 
 really for the time regret it - poor dear old sombre glow ! something 
 straight and simple , something heavy and empty , have be eclipse in 
 its company ; something by which he have well know his friend . waymarsh 
 would not   be his friend , somehow , without the occasional ornament of the 
 sacred rage , and the right to the sacred rage - inestimably precious for 
 Strether 's charity - he also seem in a manner , and at Mrs. Pocock 's 
 elbow , to have forfeit . Strether remember the occasion early in 
 their stay when on that very spot he have come out with his earnest , his 
 ominous " quit it ! " - and , so remembering , feel it hang by a hair that he 
 do not   himself now utter the same note . Waymarsh be have a good 
 time - this be the truth that be embarrassing for he , and he be 
 have it then and there , he be have it in Europe , he be have it 
 under the very protection of circumstance of which he do not   in the 
 least approve ; all of which place he in a false position , with no 
 issue possible - none at least by the grand manner . it be practically 
 in the manner of any one - it be all but in poor Strether 's own - that 
 instead of take anything up he merely make the most of have to be 
 himself explanatory . " I be not leave for the United States direct . 
 Mr. and Mrs. Pocock and Miss Mamie be think of a little trip before 
 their own return , and we have   be talk for some day past of our 
 join force . we have   settle it that we do join and that we sail 
 together the end of next month . but we start to - morrow for Switzerland . 
 Mrs. Pocock want some scenery . she have not   have much yet . " 
 he be brave in his way too , keep nothing back , confess all there 
 be , and only leave Strether to make certain connexion . " be what 
 Mrs. Newsome have cable her daughter an injunction to break off short ? " 
 the grand manner indeed at this just raise its head a little . " I know 
 nothing about Mrs. Newsome 's cable . " 
 their eye meet on it with some intensity - during the few second of 
 which something happen quite out of proportion to the time . it 
 happen that Strether , look thus at his friend , do not   take his 
 answer for truth - and that something more again occur in consequence 
 of that . yes - Waymarsh just do know about Mrs. Newsome 's cable : to 
 what other end than that have they din together at Bignon 's ? strether 
 almost feel for the instant that it be to Mrs. Newsome herself the 
 dinner have be give ; and , for that matter , quite feel how she must 
 have know about it and , as he might think , protect and consecrate 
 it . he have a quick blurred view of daily cable , question , answer , 
 signal : clear enough be his vision of the expense that , when so 
 wound up , the lady at home be prepared to incur . Vivid not less be 
 his memory of what , during his long observation of she , some of her 
 attainment of that high pitch have cost she . distinctly she be at the 
 high now , and Waymarsh , who imagine himself an independent 
 performer , be really , force his fine old natural voice , an 
 overstrained accompanist . the whole reference of his errand seem to 
 mark she for Strether as by this time consentingly familiar to he , and 
 nothing yet have so despoil she of a special shade of consideration . 
 " you do not   know , " he ask , " whether Sarah have be direct from home 
 to try I on the matter of my also go to Switzerland ? " 
 " I know , " say waymarsh as manfully as possible , " nothing whatever 
 about her private affair ; though I believe she to be act in 
 conformity with thing that have my high respect . " it be as manful 
 as possible , but it be still the false note - as it have to be to convey 
 so sorry a statement . he know everything , Strether more and more feel , 
 that he thus disclaim , and his little punishment be just in this 
 doom to a second fib . what false position - give the man - could the 
 most vindictive mind impose ? he end by squeeze through a passage in 
 which three month before he would certainly have stick fast . " Mrs 
 Pocock will probably be ready herself to answer any enquiry you may put 
 to she . but , " he continue , " but - ! " he falter on it . 
 " but what ? do not   put she too many ? " 
 Waymarsh look large , but the harm be do ; he could not , do what he 
 would , help look rosy . " do not   do anything you will be sorry for . " 
 it be an attenuation , Strether guess , of something else that have 
 be on his lip ; it be a sudden drop to directness , and be thereby 
 the voice of sincerity . he have fall to the supplicate note , and 
 that immediately , for our friend , make a difference and reinstate he . 
 they be in communication as they have be , that first morning , in 
 Sarah 's salon and in her presence and Madame de Vionnet 's ; and the same 
 recognition of a great good will be again , after all , possible . only 
 the amount of response Waymarsh have then take for grant be double , 
 decuple now . this come out when he presently say : " of course I 
 need not   assure you I hope you will come with we . " then it be that his 
 implication and expectation loom up for Strether as almost 
 pathetically gross . 
 the latter pat his shoulder while he thank he , give the go - by 
 to the question of join the Pococks ; he express the joy he feel at 
 see he go forth again so brave and free , and he in fact almost take 
 leave of he on the spot . " I shall see you again of course before you 
 go ; but I be meanwhile much oblige to you for arrange so conveniently 
 for what you have   tell I . I shall walk up and down in the court 
 there - dear little old court which we have   each bepace so , this last 
 couple of month , to the tune of our flight and our drop , our 
 hesitation and our plunge : I shall hang about there , all impatience 
 and excitement , please let Sarah know , till she graciously present 
 herself . leave I with she without fear , " he laugh ; " I assure you I 
 shall not   hurt she . I do not   think either she will hurt ME : I be in a 
 situation in which damage be some time ago discount . besides , that 
 be not   what worry you - but do not , do not   explain ! we be all right as we 
 be : which be the degree of success our adventure be pledge to for 
 each of we . we be not , it seem , all right as we be before ; and 
 we have   get over the ground , all thing consider , quickly . I hope 
 you will have a lovely time in the Alps . " 
 Waymarsh fairly look up at he as from the foot of they . " I do not 
 know as I ought really to go . " 
 it be the conscience of Milrose in the very voice of Milrose , but , oh 
 it be feeble and flat ! Strether suddenly feel quite ashamed for he ; 
 he breathe a great boldness . " let yourself , on the contrary , go - in 
 all agreeable direction . these be precious hour - at our age they 
 may not   recur . do not   have it to say to yourself at Milrose , next 
 winter , that you have not   courage for they . " and then as his comrade 
 queerly star : " live up to Mrs. Pocock . " 
 " live up to she ? " 
 " you be a great help to she . " 
 Waymarsh look at it as at one of the uncomfortable thing that be 
 certainly true and that it be yet ironical to say . " it be more then 
 than you be . " 
 " that be exactly your own chance and advantage . besides , " say 
 Strether , " I do in my way contribute . I know what I be about . " 
 Waymarsh have keep on his great panama , and , as he now stand near the 
 door , his last look beneath the shade of it have turn again to 
 darkness and warning . " so do I ! see here , Strether . " 
 " I know what you be go to say . ' quit this ' ? " 
 " quit this ! " but it lack its old intensity ; nothing of it remain ; 
 it go out of the room with he . 
 III 
 almost the first thing , strangely enough , that , about an hour later , 
 Strether find himself do in Sarah 's presence be to remark 
 articulately on this failure , in their friend , of what have be 
 superficially his great distinction . it be as if - he allude of 
 course to the grand manner - the dear man have sacrifice it to some 
 other advantage ; which would be of course only for himself to measure . 
 it might be simply that he be physically so much more sound than on 
 his first come out ; this be all prosaic , comparatively cheerful and 
 vulgar . and fortunately , if one come to that , his improvement in 
 health be really itself grander than any manner it could be conceive 
 as have cost he . " you yourself alone , dear Sarah " - Strether take 
 the plunge - " have do he , it strike I , in these three week , as 
 much good as all the rest of his time together . " 
 it be a plunge because somehow the range of reference be , in the 
 condition , " funny , " and make funny still by Sarah 's attitude , by the 
 turn the occasion have , with her appearance , so sensibly take . her 
 appearance be really indeed funny than anything else - the spirit in 
 which he feel she to be there as soon as she be there , the shade of 
 obscurity that clear up for he as soon as he be seat with she in 
 the small salon de lecture that have , for the most part , in all the 
 week , witness the wane of his early vivacity of discussion with 
 Waymarsh . it be an immense thing , quite a tremendous thing , for she 
 to have come : this truth open out to he in spite of his have 
 already arrive for himself at a fairly vivid view of it . he have do 
 exactly what he have give Waymarsh his word for - have walk and 
 re - walk the court while he await her advent ; acquire in this 
 exercise an amount of light that affect he at the time as flood 
 the scene . she have decide upon the step in order to give he the 
 benefit of a doubt , in order to be able to say to her mother that she 
 have , even to abjectness , smooth the way for he . the doubt have be 
 as to whether he might not   take she as not have smooth it - and the 
 admonition have possibly come from Waymarsh 's more detached spirit . 
 Waymarsh have at any rate , certainly , throw his weight into the 
 scale - he have point to the importance of deprive their friend of a 
 grievance . she have do justice to the plea , and it be to set herself 
 right with a high ideal that she actually sit there in her state . her 
 calculation be sharp in the immobility with which she hold her tall 
 parasol - stick upright and at arm 's length , quite as if she have strike 
 the place to plant her flag ; in the separate precaution she take not 
 to show as nervous ; in the aggressive repose in which she do quite 
 nothing but wait for he . Doubt cease to be possible from the moment 
 he have take in that she have arrive with no proposal whatever ; that 
 her concern be simply to show what she have come to receive . she have 
 come to receive his submission , and Waymarsh be to have make it plain 
 to he that she would expect nothing less . he see fifty thing , her 
 host , at this convenient stage ; but one of those he most see be that 
 their anxious friend have not   quite have the hand require of he . 
 waymarsh HAD , however , utter the request that she might find he 
 mild , and while hang about the court before her arrival he have 
 turn over with zeal the different way in which he could be so . the 
 difficulty be that if he be mild he be not , for her purpose , 
 conscious . if she wish he conscious - as everything about she cry 
 aloud that she do - she must accordingly be at cost to make he so . 
 conscious he be , for himself - but only of too many thing ; so she must 
 choose the one she require . 
 practically , however , it at last get itself name , and when once that 
 have happen they be quite at the centre of their situation . one 
 thing have really do as well as another ; when Strether have speak of 
 Waymarsh 's leave he , and that have necessarily bring on a reference 
 to Mrs. Pocock 's similar intention , the jump be but short to supreme 
 lucidity . light become indeed after that so intense that Strether 
 would doubtless have but half make out , in the prodigious glare , by 
 which of the two the issue have be in fact precipitate . it be , in 
 their contract quarter , as much there between they as if it have be 
 something suddenly spill with a crash and a splash on the floor . the 
 form of his submission be to be an engagement to acquit himself within 
 the twenty - four hour . " he will go in a moment if you give he the 
 word - he assure I on his honour he will do that " : this come in its 
 order , out of its order , in respect to Chad , after the crash have 
 occur . it come repeatedly during the time take by Strether to feel 
 that he be even more fixed in his rigour than he have suppose - the 
 time he be not above add to a little by tell she that such a way 
 of put it on her brother 's part leave he sufficiently surprised . 
 she be not   at all funny at last - she be really fine ; and he feel 
 easily where she be strong - strong for herself . it have not   yet so come 
 home to he that she be nobly and appointedly officious . she be 
 act in interest grander and clear than that of her poor little 
 personal , poor little parisian equilibrium , and all his consciousness 
 of her mother 's moral pressure profit by this proof of its sustain 
 force . she would be hold up ; she would be strengthen ; he need not   in 
 the least be anxious for she . what would once more have be distinct 
 to he have he try to make it so be that , as Mrs. Newsome be 
 essentially all moral pressure , the presence of this element be almost 
 identical with her own presence . it be not   perhaps that he feel he be 
 deal with her straight , but it be certainly as if she have be 
 deal straight with HIM . she be reach he somehow by the 
 lengthened arm of the spirit , and he be have to that extent to take 
 she into account ; but he be not   reach she in turn , not make she 
 take HIM ; he be only reach Sarah , who appear to take so little of 
 he . " something have clearly pass between you and Chad , " he presently 
 say , " that I think I ought to know something more about . do he put 
 it all , " he smile , " on I ? " 
 " do you come out , " she ask , " to put it all on HIM ? " 
 but he reply to this no far than , after an instant , by say : 
 " oh it be all right . Chad I mean 's all right in have say to 
 you - well anything he may have say . I will take it all - what he do 
 put on I . only I must see he before I see you again . " 
 she hesitate , but she bring it out . " be it absolutely necessary you 
 should see I again ? " 
 " certainly , if I be to give you any definite word about anything . " 
 " be it your idea then , " she return , " that I shall keep on meet you 
 only to be expose to fresh humiliation ? " 
 he fix she a long time . " be your instruction from Mrs. Newsome 
 that you shall , even at the bad , absolutely and irretrievably break 
 with I ? " 
 " my instruction from Mrs. Newsome be , if you please , my affair . you 
 know perfectly what your own be , and you can judge for yourself of 
 what it can do for you to have make what you have of they . you can 
 perfectly see , at any rate , I will go so far as to say , that if I wish 
 not to expose myself I must wish still less to expose she . " she have 
 already say more than she have quite expect ; but , though she have also 
 pull up , the colour in her face show he he should from one moment 
 to the other have it all . he now indeed feel the high importance of his 
 have it . " what be your conduct , " she break out as if to 
 explain - " what be your conduct but an outrage to woman like US ? I mean 
 your acting as if there can be a doubt - as between we and such 
 another - of his duty ? " 
 he think a moment . it be rather much to deal with at once ; not only 
 the question itself , but the sore abyss it reveal . " of course 
 they be totally different kind of duty . " 
 " and do you pretend that he have any at all - to such another ? " 
 " do you mean to Madame de Vionnet ? " he utter the name not to affront 
 she , but yet again to gain time - time that he need for take in 
 something still other and large than her demand of a moment before . it 
 be not   at once that he could see all that be in her actual challenge ; 
 but when he do he find himself just check a low vague sound , a 
 sound which be perhaps the near approach his vocal chord have ever 
 know to a growl . everything Mrs. Pocock have fail to give a sign of 
 recognise in Chad as a particular part of a 
 transformation - everything that have lend intention to this particular 
 failure - affect he as gather into a large loose bundle and throw , 
 in her word , into his face . the missile make he to that extent catch 
 his breath ; which however he presently recover . " why when a woman 's 
 at once so charming and so beneficent - " 
 " you can sacrifice mother and sister to she without a blush and can 
 make they cross the ocean on purpose to feel the more and take from you 
 the straighter , how you do it ? " 
 yes , she have take he up as short and as sharply as that , but he try 
 not to flounder in her grasp . " I do not   think there be anything I have 
 do in any such calculated way as you describe . everything have come as 
 a sort of indistinguishable part of everything else . your come out 
 belong closely to my have come before you , and my have come be a 
 result of our general state of mind . our general state of mind have 
 proceed , on its side , from our queer ignorance , our queer 
 misconception and confusion - from which , since then , an inexorable 
 tide of light seem to have float we into our perhaps still queerer 
 knowledge . do not   you like your brother as he be , " he go on , " and 
 have not   you give your mother an intelligible account of all that that 
 come to ? " 
 it put to she also , doubtless , his own tone , too many thing , this at 
 least would have be the case have not   his final challenge directly 
 help she . everything , at the stage they have reach , directly help 
 she , because everything betray in he such a basis of intention . he 
 see - the odd way thing come out ! - that he would have be hold less 
 monstrous have he only be a little wilder . what expose he be just 
 his poor old trick of quiet inwardness , what expose he be his 
 thinking such offence . he have not   in the least however the desire to 
 irritate that Sarah impute to he , and he could only at last 
 temporise , for the moment , with her indignant view . she be altogether 
 more inflame than he have expect , and he would probably understand 
 this well when he should learn what have occur for she with Chad . 
 till then her view of his particular blackness , her clear surprise at 
 his not clutch the pole she hold out , must pass as extravagant . " I 
 leave you to flatter yourself , " she return , " that what you speak of 
 be what YOU'VE beautifully do . when a thing have be already 
 describe in such a lovely way - ! " but she catch herself up , and her 
 comment on his description ring out sufficiently loud . " do you 
 consider she even an apology for a decent woman ? " 
 ah there it be at last ! she put the matter more crudely than , for his 
 own mixed purpose , he have yet have to do ; but essentially it be all 
 one matter . it be so much - so much ; and she treat it , poor lady , as 
 so little . he grow conscious , as he be now apt to do , of a strange 
 smile , and the next moment he find himself talk like Miss Barrace . 
 " she have strike I from the first as wonderful . I have   be think too 
 moreover that , after all , she would probably have represent even for 
 yourself something rather new and rather good . " 
 he be to have give Mrs. Pocock with this , however , but her good 
 opportunity for a sound of derision . " rather new ? I hope so with all 
 my heart ! " 
 " I mean , " he explain , " that she might have affect you by she 
 exquisite amiability - a real revelation , it have seem to myself ; her 
 high rarity , her distinction of every sort . " 
 he have be , with these word , consciously a little " precious " ; but he 
 have have to be - he could not   give she the truth of the case without they ; 
 and it seem to he moreover now that he do not   care . he have at all 
 event not serve his cause , for she spring at its expose side . " a 
 ' revelation ' - to I : I have   come to such a woman for a revelation ? you 
 talk to I about ' distinction ' - you , you who have   have your 
 privilege ? - when the most distinguished woman we shall either of we 
 have see in this world sit there insult , in her loneliness , by your 
 incredible comparison ! " 
 Strether forbore , with an effort , from stray ; but he look all 
 about he . " do your mother herself make the point that she sit 
 insult ? " 
 Sarah 's answer come so straight , so " pat , " as might have be say , 
 that he feel on the instant its origin . " she have confide to my 
 judgement and my tenderness the expression of her personal sense of 
 everything , and the assertion of her personal dignity . " 
 they be the very word of the lady of Woollett - he would have know 
 they in a thousand ; her parting charge to her child . Mrs. Pocock 
 accordingly speak to this extent by book , and the fact immensely move 
 he . " if she do really feel as you say it be of course very very 
 dreadful . I have   give sufficient proof , one would have think , " he 
 add , " of my deep admiration for Mrs. Newsome . " 
 " and pray what proof would one have think you would call sufficient ? that 
 of think this person here so far superior to she ? " 
 he wonder again ; he wait . " ah dear Sarah , you must leave I this 
 person here ! " 
 in his desire to avoid all vulgar retort , to show how , even 
 perversely , he cling to his rag of reason , he have softly almost wail 
 this plea . yet he know it to be perhaps the most positive declaration 
 he have ever make in his life , and his visitor 's reception of it 
 virtually give it that importance . " that be exactly what I be delighted 
 to do . God know we do not   want she ! you take good care not to meet , " 
 she observe in a still high key , " my question about their life . if 
 you do consider it a thing one can even speak of , I congratulate you on 
 your taste ! " 
 the life she allude to be of course Chad 's and Madame de Vionnet 's , 
 which she thus bracket together in a way that make he wince a 
 little ; there be nothing for he but to take home her full 
 intention . it be none the less his inconsequence that while he have 
 himself be enjoy for week the view of the brilliant woman 's 
 specific action , he just suffer from any characterisation of it by 
 other lip . " I think tremendously well of she , at the same time that I 
 seem to feel her ' life ' to be really none of my business . it be my 
 business , that be , only so far as Chad 's own life be affect by it ; 
 and what have happen , do not   you see ? be that Chad 's have be affect 
 so beautifully . the proof of the pudding 's in the eating " - he try , 
 with no great success , to help it out with a touch of pleasantry , while 
 she let he go on as if to sink and sink . he go on however well 
 enough , as well as he could do without fresh counsel ; he indeed 
 should not   stand quite firm , he feel , till he should have re - establish 
 his communication with Chad . still , he could always speak for the 
 woman he have so definitely promise to ' save . " this be not   quite for 
 she the air of salvation ; but as that chill fairly deepen what do it 
 become but a reminder that one might at the bad perish with she ? and 
 it be simple enough - it be rudimentary : not , not to give she away . 
 " I find in her more merit than you would probably have patience with 
 my counting over . and do you know , " he enquire , " the effect you 
 produce on I by allude to she in such term ? it be as if you have 
 some motive in not recognise all she have do for your brother , and 
 so shut your eye to each side of the matter , in order , whichever side 
 come up , to get rid of the other . I do not , you must allow I to say , 
 see how you can with any pretence to candour get rid of the side 
 near you . " 
 " near I - that sort of thing ? " and Sarah give a jerk back of her head 
 that well might have nullify any active proximity . 
 it keep her friend himself at his distance , and he respect for a 
 moment the interval . then with a last persuasive effort he bridge it . 
 " you do not , on your honour , appreciate Chad 's fortunate development ? " 
 " Fortunate ? " she echo again . and indeed she be prepare . " I call it 
 hideous . " 
 her departure have be for some minute mark as imminent , and she be 
 already at the door that stand open to the court , from the threshold of 
 which she deliver herself of this judgement . it ring out so loud as 
 to produce for the time the hush of everything else . Strether quite , 
 as an effect of it , breathe less bravely ; he could acknowledge it , but 
 simply enough . " oh if you think that - ! " 
 " then all be at an end ? so much the well . I do think that ! " she 
 pass out as she speak and take her way straight across the court , 
 beyond which , separate from they by the deep arch of the porte - cochere 
 the low victoria that have convey she from her own hotel be draw up . 
 she make for it with decision , and the manner of her break , the sharp 
 shaft of her rejoinder , have an intensity by which Strether be at first 
 keep in arrest . she have let fly at he as from a stretch cord , and 
 it take he a minute to recover from the sense of be pierce . it 
 be not the penetration of surprise ; it be that , much more , of 
 certainty ; his case be put for he as he have as yet only put it to 
 himself . she be away at any rate ; she have distance he - with rather 
 a grand spring , an effect of pride and ease , after all ; she have get 
 into her carriage before he could overtake she , and the vehicle be 
 already in motion . he stop halfway ; he stand there in the court 
 only see she go and note that she give he no other look . the way 
 he have put it to himself be that all quite might be at an end . each 
 of her movement , in this resolute rupture , reaffirm , re - enforce 
 that idea . Sarah pass out of sight in the sunny street while , plant 
 there in the centre of the comparatively grey court , he continue 
 merely to look before he . it probably be all at an end . 
 Book Eleventh 
  note : in the 1909 New York Edition the follow two chapter be 
 place in the reverse of the order appear below . since 1950 , most 
 scholar have agree , because of the internal evidence of the two 
 chapter , that an editorial error cause they to be print in reverse 
 order . this Etext , like other edition of the past four decade , 
 correct the apparent error . - Richard D. Hathaway , preparer of this 
 electronic text 
 I 
 he go late that evening to the Boulevard Malesherbes , have his 
 impression that it would be vain to go early , and have also , more 
 than once in the course of the day , make enquiry of the concierge . 
 Chad have not   come in and have leave no intimation ; he have affair , 
 apparently , at this juncture - as it occur to Strether he so well 
 might have - that keep he long abroad . our friend ask once for he 
 at the hotel in the Rue de Rivoli , but the only contribution offer 
 there be the fact that every one be out . it be with the idea that 
 he would have to come home to sleep that Strether go up to his room , 
 from which however he be still absent , though , from the balcony , a few 
 moment later , his visitor hear eleven o'clock strike . Chad 's servant 
 have by this time answer for his reappearance ; he HAD , the visitor 
 learn , come quickly in to dress for dinner and vanish again . Strether 
 spend an hour in wait for he - an hour full of strange suggestion , 
 persuasion , recognition ; one of those that he be to recall , at the 
 end of his adventure , as the particular handful that most have count . 
 the mellow lamplight and the easy chair have be place at his 
 disposal by Baptiste , subtle of servant ; the novel half - uncut , the 
 novel lemon - colour and tender , with the ivory knife athwart it like 
 the dagger in a contadina 's hair , have be push within the soft 
 circle - a circle which , for some reason , affect Strether as soft 
 still after the same Baptiste have remark that in the absence of a 
 further need of anything by Monsieur he would betake himself to bed . 
 the night be hot and heavy and the single lamp sufficient ; the great 
 flare of the lighted city , rise high , spend itself afar , play up 
 from the Boulevard and , through the vague vista of the successive 
 room , bring object into view and add to their dignity . Strether 
 find himself in possession as he never yet have be ; he have be there 
 alone , have turn over book and print , have invoke , in Chad 's 
 absence , the spirit of the place , but never at the witching hour and 
 never with a relish quite so like a pang . 
 he spend a long time on the balcony ; he hang over it as he have see 
 little Bilham hang the day of his first approach , as he have see Mamie 
 hang over her own the day little Bilham himself might have see she 
 from below ; he pass back into the room , the three that occupy the 
 front and that communicate by wide door ; and , while he circulate and 
 rest , try to recover the impression that they have make on he three 
 month before , to catch again the voice in which they have seem then 
 to speak to he . that voice , he have to note , fail audibly to sound ; 
 which he take as the proof of all the change in himself . he have hear , 
 of old , only what he could then hear ; what he could do now be to think 
 of three month ago as a point in the far past . all voice have grow 
 thick and mean more thing ; they crowd on he as he move 
 about - it be the way they sound together that would not   let he be 
 still . he feel , strangely , as sad as if he have come for some wrong , 
 and yet as excited as if he have come for some freedom . but the freedom 
 be what be most in the place and the hour , it be the freedom that 
 most bring he round again to the youth of his own that he have long 
 ago miss . he could have explain little enough to - day either why he 
 have miss it or why , after year and year , he should care that he 
 have ; the main truth of the actual appeal of everything be none the 
 less that everything represent the substance of his loss put it 
 within reach , within touch , make it , to a degree it have never be , an 
 affair of the sens . that be what it become for he at this singular 
 time , the youth he have long ago miss - a queer concrete presence , full 
 of mystery , yet full of reality , which he could handle , taste , smell , 
 the deep breathing of which he could positively hear . it be in the 
 outside air as well as within ; it be in the long watch , from the 
 balcony , in the summer night , of the wide late life of Paris , the 
 uncease soft quick rumble , below , of the little light carriage 
 that , in the press , always suggest the gambler he have see of old at 
 Monte Carlo push up to the table . this image be before he when 
 he at last become aware that Chad be behind . 
 " she tell I you put it all on I " - he have arrive after this promptly 
 enough at that information ; which express the case however quite as 
 the young man appear willing for the moment to leave it . other 
 thing , with this advantage of their virtually have the night before 
 they , come up for they , and have , as well , the odd effect of make the 
 occasion , instead of hurried and feverish , one of the large , loose 
 and easy to which Strether 's whole adventure be to have treat 
 he . he have be pursue Chad from an early hour and have overtake 
 he only now ; but now the delay be repair by their be so 
 exceptionally confront . they have foregather enough of course in 
 all the various time ; they have again and again , since that first night 
 at the theatre , be face to face over their question ; but they have 
 never be so alone together as they be actually alone - their talk 
 have not   yet be so supremely for themselves . and if many thing 
 moreover pass before they , none pass more distinctly for Strether 
 than that striking truth about Chad of which he have be so often move 
 to take note : the truth that everything come happily back with he to 
 his know how to live . it have be seat in his pleased smile - a 
 smile that please exactly in the right degree - as his visitor turn 
 round , on the balcony , to greet his advent ; his visitor in fact feel on 
 the spot that there be nothing their meeting would so much do as bear 
 witness to that facility . he surrender himself accordingly to so 
 approve a gift ; for what be the meaning of the facility but that 
 other do surrender themselves ? he do not   want , luckily , to prevent 
 Chad from living ; but he be quite aware that even if he have he would 
 himself have thoroughly go to piece . it be in truth essentially by 
 bring down his personal life to a function all subsidiary to the 
 young man 's own that he hold together . and the great point , above all , 
 the sign of how completely Chad possess the knowledge in question , 
 be that one thus become , not only with a proper cheerfulness , but with 
 wild native impulse , the feeder of his stream . their talk have 
 accordingly not last three minute without Strether 's feeling basis 
 enough for the excitement in which he have wait . this overflow fairly 
 deepen , wastefully abound , as he observe the smallness of anything 
 correspond to it on the part of his friend . that be exactly this 
 friend 's happy case ; he " put out " his excitement , or whatever other 
 emotion the matter involve , as he put out his washing ; than which no 
 arrangement could make more for domestic order . it be quite for 
 Strether himself in short to feel a personal analogy with the laundress 
 bring home the triumph of the mangle . 
 when he have report on Sarah 's visit , which he do very fully , Chad 
 answer his question with perfect candour . " I positively refer she 
 to you - tell she she must absolutely see you . this be last night , and 
 it all take place in ten minute . it be our first free talk - really 
 the first time she have tackle I . she know I also know what her line 
 have be with yourself ; know moreover how little you have be do to 
 make anything difficult for she . so I speak for you frankly - assure 
 she you be all at her service . I assure she I be too , " the young 
 man continue ; " and I point out how she could perfectly , at any time , 
 have get at I . her difficulty have be simply she not find the 
 moment she fancy . " 
 " her difficulty , " Strether return , " have be simply that she find 
 she be afraid of you . she be not afraid of I , Sarah , one little scrap ; 
 and it be just because she have see how I can fidget when I give my 
 mind to it that she have feel her good chance , rightly enough to be in 
 make I as uneasy as possible . I think she be at bottom as pleased to 
 have you put it on I as you yourself can possibly be to put it . " 
 " but what in the world , my dear man , " Chad enquire in objection to 
 this luminosity , " have I do to make Sally afraid ? " 
 " you have   be ' wonderful , wonderful , ' as we say - we poor people who 
 watch the play from the pit ; and that be what have , admirably , make she . 
 make she all the more effectually that she could see you do not   set 
 about it on purpose - I mean set about affect she as with fear . " 
 Chad cast a pleasant backward glance over his possibility of motive . 
 " I have   only want to be kind and friendly , to be decent and 
 attentive - and I still only want to be . " 
 Strether smile at his comfortable clearness . " well , there can 
 certainly be no way for it well than by my take the onus . it 
 reduce your personal friction and your personal offence to almost 
 nothing . " 
 ah but Chad , with his completer conception of the friendly , would not 
 quite have this ! they have remain on the balcony , where , after their 
 day of great and premature heat , the midnight air be delicious ; and 
 they lean back in turn against the balustrade , all in harmony with 
 the chair and the flower - pot , the cigarette and the starlight . " the 
 onus be not   really your - after our agree so to wait together and 
 judge together . that be all my answer to Sally , " Chad pursue - " that 
 we have be , that we be , just judge together . " 
 " I be not afraid of the burden , " Strether explain ; " I have not   come in 
 the least that you should take it off I . I have   come very much , it 
 seem to I , to double up my fore leg in the manner of the camel when 
 he get down on his knee to make his back convenient . but I have 
 suppose you all this while to have be do a lot of special and 
 private judging - about which I have not   trouble you ; and I have   only 
 wish to have your conclusion first from you . I do not   ask more than 
 that ; I be quite ready to take it as it have come . " 
 Chad turn up his face to the sky with a slow puff of his smoke . 
 " well , I have   see . " 
 Strether wait a little . " I have   leave you wholly alone ; have not , I 
 think I may say , since the first hour or two - when I merely preach 
 patience - so much as breathe on you . " 
 " oh you have   be awfully good ! " 
 " we have   both be good then - we have   play the game . we have   give they 
 the most liberal condition . " 
 " ah , " say Chad , ' splendid condition ! it be open to they , open to 
 they " - he seem to make it out , as he smoke , with his eye still on 
 the star . he might in quiet sport have be read their horoscope . 
 Strether wonder meanwhile what have be open to they , and he finally 
 let he have it . " it be open to they simply to let I alone ; to have 
 make up their mind , on really see I for themselves , that I could 
 go on well enough as I be . " 
 Strether assent to this proposition with full lucidity , his 
 companion 's plural pronoun , which stand all for Mrs. Newsome and her 
 daughter , have no ambiguity for he . there be nothing , apparently , 
 to stand for Mamie and Jim ; and this add to our friend 's sense of 
 Chad 's know what he think . " but they have   make up their mind to 
 the opposite - that you can't go on as you be . " 
 " no , " Chad continue in the same way ; " they will not   have it for a minute . " 
 Strether on his side also reflectively smoke . it be as if their high 
 place really represent some moral elevation from which they could 
 look down on their recent past . " there never be the small chance , 
 do you know , that they would have it for a moment . " 
 " of course not - no real chance . but if they be willing to think 
 there be - ! " 
 " they be not   willing . " Strether have work it all out . " it be not   for 
 you they come out , but for I . it be not   to see for themselves what 
 you be do , but what I be do . the first branch of their curiosity 
 be inevitably destine , under my culpable delay , to give way to the 
 second ; and it be on the second that , if I may use the expression and 
 you do not   mind my mark the invidious fact , they have   be of late 
 exclusively perch . when Sarah sail it be I , in other word , they 
 be after . " 
 Chad take it in both with intelligence and with indulgence . " it be 
 rather a business then - what I have   let you in for ! " 
 Strether have again a brief pause ; which end in a reply that seem to 
 dispose once for all of this element of compunction . Chad be to treat 
 it , at any rate , so far as they be again together , as have do so . 
 " I be ' in ' when you find I . " 
 " ah but it be you , " the young man laugh , " who find I . " 
 " I only find you out . it be you who find I in . it be all in the 
 day 's work for they , at all event , that they should come . and they have 
 greatly enjoy it , " Strether declare . 
 " well , I have   try to make they , " say Chad . 
 his companion do himself presently the same justice . " so have I. I 
 try even this very morning - while Mrs. Pocock be with I . she 
 enjoy for instance , almost as much as anything else , not be , as 
 I have   say , afraid of I ; and I think I give her help in that . " 
 Chad take a deep interest . " be she very very nasty ? " 
 Strether debate . " well , she be the most important thing - she be 
 definite . she be - at last - crystalline . and I feel no remorse . I see 
 that they must have come . " 
 " oh I want to see they for myself ; so that if it be only for 
 that - ! " Chad 's own remorse be as small . 
 this appear almost all Strether want . " be not   your have see they 
 for yourself then the thing , beyond all other , that have come of their 
 visit ? " 
 Chad look as if he think it nice of his old friend to put it so . 
 " do not   you count it as anything that you be dished - if you be dish ? 
 be you , my dear man , dish ? " 
 it sound as if he be ask if he have catch cold or hurt his foot , 
 and Strether for a minute but smoke and smoke . " I want to see she 
 again . I must see she . " 
 " of course you must . " then Chad hesitate . " do you mean - a - mother 
 herself ? " 
 " oh your mother - that will depend . " 
 it be as if Mrs. Newsome have somehow be place by the word very far 
 off . Chad however endeavour in spite of this to reach the place . 
 " what do you mean it will depend on ? " 
 Strether , for all answer , give he a longish look . " I be speak of 
 Sarah . I must positively - though she quite cast I off - see she again . 
 I can not   part with she that way . " 
 " then she be awfully unpleasant ? " 
 again Strether exhale . " she be what she have to be . I mean that from 
 the moment they be not delighted they can only be - well what I admit 
 she be . we give they , " he go on , " their chance to be delighted , and 
 they have   walk up to it , and look all round it , and not take it . " 
 " you can bring a horse to water - ! " Chad suggest . 
 " precisely . and the tune to which this morning Sarah be not 
 delighted - the tune to which , to adopt your metaphor , she refuse to 
 drink - leave we on that side nothing more to hope . " 
 Chad have a pause , and then as if consolingly : " it be never of course 
 really the least on the card that they would be ' delighted . ' " 
 " well , I do not   know , after all , " Strether muse . " I have   have to come as 
 far round . however " - he shake it off - " it be doubtless my performance 
 that be absurd . " 
 " there be certainly moment , " say Chad , " when you seem to I too good 
 to be true . yet if you be true , " he add , " that seem to be all that 
 need concern I . " 
 " I be true , but I be incredible . I be fantastic and ridiculous - I do not 
 explain myself even to myself . how can they then , " Strether ask , 
 " understand I ? so I do not   quarrel with they . " 
 " I see . they quarrel , " say Chad rather comfortably , " with US . " 
 Strether note once more the comfort , but his young friend have already 
 go on . " I should feel greatly ashamed , all the same , if I do not   put 
 it before you again that you ought to think , after all , tremendously 
 well . I mean before give up beyond recall - " with which insistence , 
 as from a certain delicacy , drop . 
 ah but Strether want it . " say it all , say it all . " 
 " well , at your age , and with what - when all be say and do - mother 
 might do for you and be for you . " 
 Chad have say it all , from his natural scruple , only to that extent ; so 
 that Strether after an instant himself take a hand . " my absence of an 
 assure future . the little I have to show toward the power to take 
 care of myself . the way , the wonderful way , she would certainly take 
 care of I . her fortune , her kindness , and the constant miracle of she 
 have be dispose to go even so far . of course , of course " - he 
 sum it up . " there be those sharp fact . " 
 Chad have meanwhile think of another still . " and do not   you really 
 care - ? " 
 his friend slowly turn round to he . " will you go ? " 
 " I will go if you will say you now consider I should . you know , " he go 
 on , " I be ready six week ago . " 
 " ah , " say Strether , " that be when you do not   know I be not ! you be 
 ready at present because you do know it . " 
 " that may be , " Chad return ; " but all the same I be sincere . you talk 
 about take the whole thing on your shoulder , but in what light do 
 you regard I that you think I capable of let you pay ? " Strether 
 pat his arm , as they stand together against the parapet , 
 reassuringly - seem to wish to contend that he have the wherewithal ; 
 but it be again round this question of purchase and price that the 
 young man 's sense of fairness continue to hover . " what it literally 
 come to for you , if you will pardon my put it so , be that you give 
 up money . possibly a good deal of money . " 
 " oh , " Strether laugh , " if it be only just enough you would still be 
 justify in put it so ! but I have   on my side to remind you too that 
 you give up money ; and more than ' possibly ' - quite certainly , as I 
 should suppose - a good deal . " 
 " true enough ; but I have   get a certain quantity , " Chad return after a 
 moment . " whereas you , my dear man , you - " 
 " I can not   be at all say " - Strether take he up - " to have a ' quantity ' 
 certain or uncertain ? very true . still , I shall not   starve . " 
 " oh you must not   STARVE ! " Chad pacifically emphasise ; and so , in the 
 pleasant condition , they continue to talk ; though there be , for that 
 matter , a pause in which the young companion might have be take as 
 weigh again the delicacy of his then and there promise the eld 
 some provision against the possibility just mention . this , however , 
 he presumably think well not to do , for at the end of another minute 
 they have move in quite a different direction . Strether have break in 
 by return to the subject of Chad 's passage with Sarah and enquire 
 if they have arrive , in the event , at anything in the nature of a 
 ' scene . " to this Chad reply that they have on the contrary kept 
 tremendously polite ; add moreover that Sally be after all not the 
 woman to have make the mistake of not be . " her hand be a good 
 deal tie , you see . I get so , from the first , " he sagaciously 
 observe , " the start of she . " 
 " you mean she have take so much from you ? " 
 " well , I could not   of course in common decency give less : only she 
 have not   expect , I think , that I would give she nearly so much . and she 
 begin to take it before she know it . " 
 " and she begin to like it , " say Strether , " as soon as she begin to 
 take it ! " 
 " yes , she have like it - also more than she expect . " after which Chad 
 observe : " but she do not   like I . in fact she hat I . " 
 Strether 's interest grow . " then why do she want you at home ? " 
 " because when you hate you want to triumph , and if she should get I 
 neatly stick there she would triumph . " 
 Strether follow afresh , but look as he go . " certainly - in a 
 manner . but it would scarce be a triumph worth have if , once 
 entangle , feel her dislike and possibly conscious in time of a 
 certain quantity of your own , you should on the spot make yourself 
 unpleasant to she . " 
 " ah , " say Chad , ' she can bear ME - could bear I at least at home . it be 
 my be there that would be her triumph . she hat I in Paris . " 
 " she hat in other word - " 
 " yes , that be it ! " - Chad have quickly understand this understanding ; 
 which form on the part of each as near an approach as they have yet 
 make to name Madame de Vionnet . the limitation of their 
 distinctness do not , however , prevent its fairly linger in the air 
 that it be this lady Mrs. Pocock hat . it add one more touch 
 moreover to their establish recognition of the rare intimacy of 
 Chad 's association with she . he have never yet more twitch away the 
 last light veil from this phenomenon than in present himself as 
 confound and submerge in the feeling she have create at Woollett . 
 " and I will tell you who hat I too , " he immediately go on . 
 Strether know as immediately whom he mean , but with as prompt a 
 protest . " ah no ! Mamie do not   hate - well , " he catch himself in 
 time - " anybody at all . Mamie 's beautiful . " 
 Chad shake his head . " that be just why I mind it . she certainly 
 do not   like I . " 
 " how much do you mind it ? what would you do for she ? " 
 " well , I would like she if she would like I . really , really , " Chad declare . 
 it give his companion a moment 's pause . " you ask I just now if I 
 do not , as you say , ' care ' about a certain person . you rather tempt I 
 therefore to put the question in my turn . do not   you care about a 
 certain other person ? " 
 Chad look at he hard in the lamplight of the window . " the 
 difference be that I do not   want to . " 
 Strether wonder . " ' do not   want ' to ? " 
 " I try not to - that be I have try . I have   do my good . you can not   be 
 surprised , " the young man easily go on , " when you yourself set I on 
 it . I be indeed , " he add , " already on it a little ; but you set I 
 hard . it be six week ago that I think I have come out . " 
 Strether take it well in . " but you have not   come out ! " 
 " I do not   know - it be what I want to know , " say Chad . " and if I could 
 have sufficiently want - by myself - to go back , I think I might have 
 find out . " 
 " possibly " - Strether consider . " but all you be able to achieve be 
 to want to want to ! and even then , " he pursue , " only till our friend 
 there come . do you want to want to still ? " as with a sound 
 half - dolorous , half - droll and all vague and equivocal , Chad bury his 
 face for a little in his hand , rub it in a whimsical way that 
 amount to an evasion , he bring it out more sharply : " do you ? " 
 Chad keep for a time his attitude , but at last he look up , and then 
 abruptly , " Jim be a damned dose ! " he declare . 
 " oh I do not   ask you to abuse or describe or in any way pronounce on 
 your relative ; I simply put it to you once more whether you be now 
 ready . you say you have   ' see . ' be what you have   see that you can not 
 resist ? " 
 Chad give he a strange smile - the near approach he have ever show 
 to a troubled one . " can not   you make I not resist ? " 
 " what it come to , " Strether go on very gravely now and as if he 
 have not   hear he , " what it come to be that more have be do for you , 
 I think , than I have   ever see do - attempt perhaps , but never so 
 successfully do - by one human being for another . " 
 " oh an immense deal certainly " - Chad do it full justice . " and you 
 yourself be add to it . " 
 it be without heed this either that his visitor continue . " and our 
 friend there will not   have it . " 
 " no , they simply will not . " 
 " they demand you on the basis , as it be , of repudiation and 
 ingratitude ; and what have be the matter with I , " Strether go on , 
 " be that I have not   see my way to work with you for repudiation . " 
 Chad appreciate this . " then as you have not   see yours you naturally 
 have not   see mine . there it be . " after which he proceed , with a 
 certain abruptness , to a sharp interrogation . " now do you say she 
 do not   hate I ? " 
 Strether hesitate . " ' she ' - ? " 
 " Yes - Mother . we call it Sarah , but it come to the same thing . " 
 " ah , " Strether object , " not to the same thing as she hat you . " 
 on which - though as if for an instant it have hang fire - Chad remarkably 
 reply : " well , if they hate my good friend , that come to the same 
 thing . " it have a note of inevitable truth that make Strether take it as 
 enough , feel he want nothing more . the young man speak in it for his 
 " good friend " more than he have ever yet directly speak , confess to 
 such deep identity between they as he might play with the idea of 
 work free from , but which at a give moment could still draw he 
 down like a whirlpool . and meanwhile he have go on . " their hating 
 you too moreover - that also come to a good deal . " 
 " ah , " say Strether , " your mother do not . " 
 Chad , however , loyally stick to it - loyally , that be , to Strether . " she 
 will if you do not   look out . " 
 " well , I do look out . I be , after all , look out . that be just why , " 
 our friend explain , " I want to see she again . " 
 it draw from Chad again the same question . " to see Mother ? " 
 " to see - for the present - Sarah . " 
 " ah then there you be ! and what I do not   for the life of I make out , " 
 Chad pursue with resign perplexity , " be what you GAIN by it . " 
 oh it would have take his companion too long to say ! " that be because 
 you have , I verily believe , no imagination . you have   other quality . 
 but no imagination , do not   you see ? at all . " 
 " I dare say . I do see . " it be an idea in which Chad show interest . 
 " but have not   you yourself rather too much ? " 
 " oh rather - ! " so that after an instant , under this reproach and as if 
 it be at last a fact really to escape from , Strether make his move 
 for departure . 
 II 
 one of the feature of the restless afternoon pass by he after Mrs. 
 Pocock 's visit be an hour spend , shortly before dinner , with Maria 
 Gostrey , whom of late , in spite of so sustain a call on his attention 
 from other quarter , he have by no mean neglect . and that he be 
 still not neglect she will appear from the fact that he be with she 
 again at the same hour on the very morrow - with no less fine a 
 consciousness moreover of be able to hold her ear . it continue 
 inveterately to occur , for that matter , that whenever he have take one 
 of his great turn he come back to where she so faithfully await 
 he . none of these excursion have on the whole be lively than the 
 pair of incident - the fruit of the short interval since his previous 
 visit - on which he have now to report to she . he have see Chad Newsome 
 late the night before , and he have have that morning , as a sequel to this 
 conversation , a second interview with Sarah . " but they be all off , " he 
 say , " at last . " 
 it puzzle she a moment . " All ? - Mr. Newsome with they ? " 
 " ah not yet ! Sarah and Jim and Mamie . but waymarsh with they - for 
 Sarah . it be too beautiful , " Strether continue ; " I find I do not   get 
 over that - it be always a fresh joy . but it be a fresh joy too , " he 
 add , " that - well , what do you think ? little Bilham also go . but he 
 of course go for Mamie . " 
 Miss Gostrey wonder . " ' for ' she ? do you mean they be already 
 engage ? " 
 " well , " say Strether , ' say then for I . he will do anything for I ; 
 just as I will , for that matter - anything I can - for he . or for Mamie 
 either . SHE'LL do anything for I . " 
 Miss Gostrey give a comprehensive sigh . " the way you reduce people to 
 subjection ! " 
 " it be certainly , on one side , wonderful . but it be quite equalled , on 
 another , by the way I do not . I have not   reduce Sarah , since yesterday ; 
 though I have   succeed in see she again , as I will presently tell you . 
 the other however be really all right . Mamie , by that blessed law of 
 our , absolutely must have a young man . " 
 " but what must poor Mr. Bilham have ? do you mean they will marry for 
 you ? " 
 " I mean that , by the same blessed law , it will not   matter a grain if they 
 do not   - I shall not   have in the least to worry . " 
 she see as usual what he mean . " and Mr. Jim ? - who go for he ? " 
 " oh , " Strether have to admit , " I could not   manage that . he be throw , as 
 usual , on the world ; the world which , after all , by his account - for he 
 have prodigious adventure - seem very good to he . he 
 fortunately - ' over here , ' as he say - find the world everywhere ; and 
 his most prodigious adventure of all , " he go on , " have be of course 
 of the last few day . " 
 Miss Gostrey , already know , instantly make the connexion . " he have 
 see Marie de Vionnet again ? " 
 " he go , all by himself , the day after Chad 's party - do not   I tell 
 you ? - to tea with she . by her invitation - all alone . " 
 " quite like yourself ! " Maria smile . 
 " oh but he be more wonderful about she than I be ! " and then as his 
 friend show how she could believe it , fill it out , fit it on 
 to old memory of the wonderful woman : " what I should have like to 
 manage would have be she go . " 
 " to Switzerland with the party ? " 
 " for Jim - and for symmetry . if it have be workable moreover for a 
 fortnight she would have go . she be ready " - he follow up his renew 
 vision of she - " for anything . " 
 Miss Gostrey go with he a minute . " she be too perfect ! " 
 " she will , I think , " he pursue , " go to - night to the station . " 
 " to see he off ? " 
 " with Chad - marvellously - as part of their general attention . and she 
 do it " - it keep before he - " with a light , light grace , a free , free 
 gaiety , that may well softly bewilder Mr. Pocock . " 
 it keep she so before he that his companion have after an instant a 
 friendly comment . " as in short it have softly bewilder a saner man . 
 be you really in love with she ? " Maria throw off . 
 " it be of no importance I should know , " he reply . " it matter so 
 little - have nothing to do , practically , with either of we . " 
 " all the same " - Maria continue to smile - " they go , the five , as I 
 understand you , and you and Madame de Vionnet stay . " 
 " oh and Chad . " to which Strether add : " and you . " 
 " ah ' I ' ! " - she give a small impatient wail again , in which something 
 of the unreconciled seem suddenly to break out . " I do not   stay , it 
 somehow seem to I , much to my advantage . in the presence of all you 
 cause to pass before I I have   a tremendous sense of privation . " 
 Strether hesitate . " but your privation , your keep out of 
 everything , have be - have not   it ? - by your own choice . " 
 " oh yes ; it have be necessary - that be it have be well for you . 
 what I mean be only that I seem to have cease to serve you . " 
 " how can you tell that ? " he ask . " you do not   know how you serve I . 
 when you cease - " 
 " well ? " she say as he drop . 
 " well , I will let you know . be quiet till then . " 
 she think a moment . " then you positively like I to stay ? " 
 " do not   I treat you as if I do ? " 
 " you be certainly very kind to I . but that , " say Maria , " be for 
 myself . it be get late , as you see , and Paris turn rather hot 
 and dusty . People be scatter , and some of they , in other place 
 want I . but if you want I here - ! " 
 she have speak as resign to his word , but he have of a sudden a still 
 sharp sense than he would have expect of desire not to lose she . 
 " I want you here . " 
 she take it as if the word be all she have wish ; as if they bring 
 she , give she something that be the compensation of her case . " thank 
 you , " she simply answer . and then as he look at she a little 
 hard , " thank you very much , " she repeat . 
 it have break as with a slight arrest into the current of their talk , 
 and it hold he a moment long . " why , two month , or whatever the 
 time be , ago , do you so suddenly dash off ? the reason you afterwards 
 give I for have keep away three week be not   the real one . " 
 she recall . " I never suppose you believe it be . yet , " she 
 continue , " if you do not   guess it that be just what help you . " 
 he look away from she on this ; he indulge , so far as space 
 permit , in one of his slow absence . " I have   often think of it , but 
 never to feel that I could guess it . and you see the consideration 
 with which I have   treat you in never ask till now . " 
 " now then why do you ask ? " 
 " to show you how I miss you when you be not here , and what it do for 
 I . " 
 " it do not   seem to have do , " she laugh , " all it might ! however , " 
 she add , " if you have   really never guess the truth I will tell it you . " 
 " I have   never guess it , " Strether declare . 
 " never ? " 
 " never . " 
 " well then I dash off , as you say , so as not to have the confusion of 
 be there if Marie de Vionnet should tell you anything to my 
 detriment . " 
 he look as if he considerably doubt . " you even then would have have 
 to face it on your return . " 
 " oh if I have find reason to believe it something very bad I would have 
 leave you altogether . " 
 " so then , " he continue , " it be only on guess she have be on the 
 whole merciful that you venture back ? " 
 Maria keep it together . " I owe she thank . whatever her temptation 
 she do not   separate we . that be one of my reason , " she go on " for 
 admire she so . " 
 " let it pass then , " say Strether , " for one of mine as well . but what 
 would have be her temptation ? " 
 " what be ever the temptation of woman ? " 
 he think - but have not , naturally , to think too long . " man ? " 
 " she would have have you , with it , more for herself . but she see she 
 could have you without it . " 
 " oh ' have ' I ! " Strether a trifle ambiguously sigh . " you , " he 
 handsomely declare , " would have have I at any rate with it . " 
 " oh ' have ' you ! " - she echo it as he have do . " I do have you , 
 however , " she less ironically say , " from the moment you express a 
 wish . " 
 he stop before she , full of the disposition . " I will express fifty . " 
 which indeed begot in she , with a certain inconsequence , a return of 
 her small wail . " ah there you be ! " 
 there , if it be so , he continue for the rest of the time to be , and 
 it be as if to show she how she could still serve he that , come 
 back to the departure of the Pococks , he give she the view , vivid with 
 a hundred more touch than we can reproduce , of what have happen for 
 he that morning . he have have ten minute with Sarah at her hotel , ten 
 minute reconquer , by irresistible pressure , from the time over which 
 he have already describe she to Miss Gostrey as have , at the end of 
 their interview on his own premise , pass the great sponge of the 
 future . he have catch she by not announce himself , have find she in 
 her sit - room with a dressmaker and a lingere whose account she 
 appear to have be more or less ingenuously settle and who soon 
 withdraw . then he have explain to she how he have succeed , late the 
 night before , in keep his promise of see Chad . " I tell she I would 
 take it all . " 
 " you would ' take ' it ? " 
 " why if he do not   go . " 
 Maria wait . " and who take it if he do ? " she enquire with a 
 certain grimness of gaiety . 
 " well , " say Strether , " I think I take , in any event , everything . " 
 " by which I suppose you mean , " his companion bring out after a 
 moment , " that you definitely understand you now lose everything . " 
 he stand before she again . " it do come perhaps to the same thing . 
 but Chad , now that he have see , do not   really want it . " 
 she could believe that , but she make , as always , for clearness . " still , 
 what , after all , have he see ? " 
 " what they want of he . and it be enough . " 
 " it contrast so unfavourably with what Madame de Vionnet want ? " 
 " it contrast - just so ; all round , and tremendously . " 
 " therefore , perhaps , most of all with what you want ? " 
 " oh , " say Strether , " what I want be a thing I have   cease to measure or 
 even to understand . " 
 but his friend none the less go on . " do you want Mrs. Newsome - after 
 such a way of treat you ? " 
 it be a straight mode of deal with this lady than they have as 
 yet - such be their high form - permit themselves ; but it seem not 
 wholly for this that he delay a moment . " I dare say it have be , 
 after all , the only way she could have imagine . " 
 " and do that make you want she any more ? " 
 " I have   tremendously disappoint she , " Strether think it worth while 
 to mention . 
 " of course you have . that be rudimentary ; that be plain to we long 
 ago . but be not   it almost as plain , " Maria go on , " that you have   even 
 yet your straight remedy ? really drag he away , as I believe you still 
 can , and you would cease to have to count with her disappointment . " 
 " ah then , " he laugh , " I should have to count with your ! " 
 but this barely strike she now . " what , in that case , should you call 
 counting ? you have not   come out where you be , I think , to please I . " 
 " oh , " he insist , " that too , you know , have be part of it . I can not 
 separate - it be all one ; and that be perhaps why , as I say , I do not 
 understand . " but he be ready to declare again that this do not   in the 
 least matter ; all the more that , as he affirm , he hadn't   really as 
 yet " come out . " " she give I after all , on its come to the pinch , a 
 last mercy , another chance . they do not   sail , you see , for five or six 
 week more , and they have not   - she admit that - expect Chad would take 
 part in their tour . it be still open to he to join they , at the last , 
 at Liverpool . " 
 Miss Gostrey consider . " how in the world be it ' open ' unless you 
 open it ? how can he join they at Liverpool if he but sink deeply into 
 his situation here ? " 
 " he have give she - as I explain to you that she let I know 
 yesterday - his word of honour to do as I say . " 
 Maria star . " but if you say nothing ! " 
 well , he as usual walk about on it . " I do say something this 
 morning . I give she my answer - the word I have promise she after 
 hear from himself what he have promise . what she demand of I 
 yesterday , you will remember , be the engagement then and there to make 
 he take up this vow . " 
 " well then , " Miss Gostrey enquire , " be the purpose of your visit to 
 she only to decline ? " 
 " no ; it be to ask , odd as that may seem to you , for another delay . " 
 " ah that be weak ! " 
 " precisely ! " she have speak with impatience , but , so far as that at 
 least , he know where he be . " if I be weak I want to find it out . if 
 I do not   find it out I shall have the comfort , the little glory , of 
 think I be strong . " 
 " it be all the comfort , I judge , " she return , " that you will have ! " 
 " at any rate , " he say , " it will have be a month more . Paris may 
 grow , from day to day , hot and dusty , as you say ; but there be other 
 thing that be hotter and dusty . I be not afraid to stay on ; the 
 summer here must be amusing in a wild - if it be not   a tame - way of its 
 own ; the place at no time more picturesque . I think I shall like it . 
 and then , " he benevolently smile for she , " there will be always you . " 
 " oh , " she object , " it will not   be as a part of the picturesqueness that 
 I shall stay , for I shall be the plain thing about you . you may , you 
 see , at any rate , " she pursue , " have nobody else . Madame de Vionnet 
 may very well be go off , may not   she ? - and Mr. Newsome by the same 
 stroke : unless indeed you have   have an assurance from they to the 
 contrary . so that if your idea 's to stay for they " - it be her duty to 
 suggest it - " you may be leave in the lurch . of course if they do 
 stay " - she keep it up - " they would be part of the picturesqueness . or 
 else indeed you might join they somewhere . " 
 Strether seem to face it as if it be a happy thought ; but the next 
 moment he speak more critically . " do you mean that they will probably go 
 off together ? " 
 she just consider . " I think it will be treat you quite without 
 ceremony if they do ; though after all , " she add , " it would be 
 difficult to see now quite what degree of ceremony properly meet your 
 case . " 
 " of course , " Strether concede , " my attitude toward they be 
 extraordinary . " 
 " just so ; so that one may ask one 's self what style of proceed on 
 their own part can altogether match it . the attitude of their own that 
 will not   pale in its light they have   doubtless still to work out . the 
 really handsome thing perhaps , " she presently throw off , " would be for 
 they to withdraw into more secluded condition , offer at the same 
 time to share they with you . " he look at she , on this , as if some 
 generous irritation - all in his interest - have suddenly again flicker 
 in she ; and what she next say indeed half - explain it . " do not   really 
 be afraid to tell I if what now hold you be the pleasant prospect of 
 the empty town , with plenty of seat in the shade , cool drink , 
 deserted museum , drive to the Bois in the evening , and our wonderful 
 woman all to yourself . " and she keep it up still more . " the handsome 
 thing of ALL , when one make it out , would , I dare say , be that Mr. 
 Chad should for a while go off by himself . it be a pity , from that 
 point of view , " she wind up , " that he do not   pay his mother a visit . 
 it would at least occupy your interval . " the thought in fact hold she a 
 moment . " why do not   he pay his mother a visit ? even a week , at this 
 good moment , would do . " 
 " my dear lady , " Strether reply - and he have it even to himself 
 surprisingly ready - " my dear lady , his mother have pay HIM a visit . 
 Mrs. Newsome have be with he , this month , with an intensity that I be 
 sure he have thoroughly feel ; he have lavishly entertain she , and she 
 have let he have she thank . do you suggest he shall go back for more 
 of they ? " 
 well , she succeed after a little in shake it off . " I see . it be 
 what you do not   suggest - what you have not   suggest . and you know . " 
 " so would you , my dear , " he kindly say , " if you have so much as see 
 she . " 
 " as see Mrs. Newsome ? " 
 " no , Sarah - which , both for Chad and for myself , have serve all the 
 purpose . " 
 " and serve it in a manner , " she responsively muse , ' so extraordinary ! " 
 " well , you see , " he partly explain , " what it come to be that she be 
 all cold thought - which Sarah could serve to we cold without its really 
 lose anything . so it be that we know what she think of we . " 
 Maria have follow , but she have an arrest . " what I have   never make out , 
 if you come to that , be what you think - I mean you personally - of she . 
 do not   you so much , when all be say , as care a little ? " 
 " that , " he answer with no loss of promptness , " be what even Chad 
 himself ask I last night . he ask I if I do not   mind the 
 loss - well , the loss of an opulent future . which moreover , " he 
 hasten to add , " be a perfectly natural question . " 
 " I call your attention , all the same , " say Miss Gostrey , " to the fact 
 that I do not   ask it . what I venture to ask be whether it be to Mrs. 
 Newsome herself that you be indifferent . " 
 " I have not   be so " - he speak with all assurance . " I have   be the very 
 opposite . I have   be , from the first moment , preoccupy with the 
 impression everything might be make on she - quite oppress , haunted , 
 torment by it . I have   be interested only in her see what I have 
 see . and I have   be as disappoint in her refusal to see it as she 
 have be in what have appear to she the perversity of my insistence . " 
 " do you mean that she have shock you as you have   shock she ? " 
 Strether weigh it . " I be probably not so shockable . but on the other 
 hand I have   go much far to meet she . she , on her side , have not 
 budge an inch . " 
 " so that you be now at last " - Maria point the moral - " in the sad 
 stage of recrimination . " 
 " no - it be only to you I speak . I have   be like a lamb to Sarah . I have 
 only put my back to the wall . it be to that one naturally stagger when 
 one have be violently push there . " 
 she watch he a moment . " throw over ? " 
 " well , as I feel I have   land somewhere I think I must have be throw . " 
 she turn it over , but as hop to clarify much rather than to 
 harmonise . " the thing be that I suppose you have   be disappointing - " 
 " quite from the very first of my arrival ? I dare say . I admit I be 
 surprising even to myself . " 
 " and then of course , " Maria go on , " I have much to do with it . " 
 " with my be surprising - ? " 
 " that will do , " she laugh , " if you be too delicate to call it my 
 be ! naturally , " she add , " you come over more or less for 
 surprise . " 
 " naturally ! " - he value the reminder . 
 " but they be to have be all for you " - she continue to piece it 
 out - " and none of they for she . " 
 once more he stop before she as if she have touch the point . 
 " that be just her difficulty - that she do not   admit surprise . it be a 
 fact that , I think , describe and represent she ; and it fall in with 
 what I tell you - that she be all , as I have   call it , fine cold thought . 
 she have , to her own mind , work the whole thing out in advance , and 
 work it out for I as well as for herself . whenever she have do 
 that , you see , there be no room leave ; no margin , as it be , for any 
 alteration . she be fill as full , pack as tight , as she will hold and 
 if you wish to get anything more or different either out or in - " 
 " you have   get to make over altogether the woman herself ? " 
 " what it come to , " say Strether , " be that you have   get morally and 
 intellectually to get rid of she . " 
 " which would appear , " Maria return , " to be practically what you have 
 do . " 
 but her friend throw back his head . " I have not   touch she . she will not 
 be touch . I see it now as I have   never do ; and she hang together 
 with a perfection of her own , " he go on , " that do suggest a kind of 
 wrong in any change of her composition . it be at any rate , " he wind 
 up , " the woman herself , as you call she the whole moral and 
 intellectual being or block , that Sarah bring I over to take or to 
 leave . " 
 it turn Miss Gostrey to deep thought . " Fancy have to take at the 
 point of the bayonet a whole moral and intellectual being or block ! " 
 " it be in fact , " say Strether , " what , at home , I had do . but 
 somehow over there I do not   quite know it . " 
 " one never do , I suppose , " Miss Gostrey concur , " realise in 
 advance , in such a case , the size , as you may say , of the block . little 
 by little it loom up . it have be loom for you more and more till 
 at last you see it all . " 
 " I see it all , " he absently echo , while his eye might have be 
 fix some particularly large iceberg in a cool blue northern sea . 
 " it be magnificent ! " he then rather oddly exclaim . 
 but his friend , who be use to this kind of inconsequence in he , keep 
 the thread . " there be nothing so magnificent - for make other feel 
 you - as to have no imagination . " 
 it bring he straight round . " ah there you be ! it be what I say 
 last night to Chad . that he himself , I mean , have none . " 
 " then it would appear , " Maria suggest , " that he have , after all , 
 something in common with his mother . " 
 " he have in common that he make one , as you say , ' feel ' he . and yet , " 
 he add , as if the question be interesting , " one feel other too , 
 even when they have plenty . " 
 Miss Gostrey continue suggestive . " Madame de Vionnet ? " 
 " she have plenty . " 
 " certainly - she have quantity of old . but there be different way of 
 make one 's self feel . " 
 " yes , it come , no doubt , to that . you now - " 
 he be benevolently go on , but she would not   have it . " oh I don't 
 make myself feel ; so my quantity need not   be settle . your , you know , " 
 she say , " be monstrous . no one have ever have so much . " 
 it strike he for a moment . " that be what Chad also think . " 
 " there you be then - though it be not   for he to complain of it ! " 
 " oh he do not   complain of it , " say Strether . 
 " that be all that would be want ! but apropos of what , " Maria go on , 
 " do the question come up ? " 
 " well , of his ask I what it be I gain . " 
 she have a pause . " then as I have   ask you too it settle my case . oh 
 you have , " she repeat , " treasure of imagination . " 
 but he have be for an instant thinking away from this , and he come up 
 in another place . " and yet Mrs. Newsome - it be a thing to remember - HAS 
 imagine , do , that is , imagine , and apparently still do , horror 
 about what I should have find . I be book , by her 
 vision - extraordinarily intense , after all - to find they ; and that I 
 do not , that I could not , that , as she evidently feel , I would not   - this 
 evidently do not   at all , as they say , ' suit ' her book . it be more than 
 she could bear . that be her disappointment . " 
 " you mean you be to have find Chad himself horrible ? " 
 " I be to have find the woman . " 
 " horrible ? " 
 " find she as she imagine she . " and Strether pause as if for his own 
 expression of it he could add no touch to that picture . 
 his companion have meanwhile think . " she imagine stupidly - so it 
 come to the same thing . " 
 " stupidly ? oh ! " say Strether . 
 but she insist . " she imagine meanly . " 
 he have it , however , well . " it could not   but be ignorantly . " 
 " well , intensity with ignorance - what do you want bad ? " 
 this question might have hold he , but he let it pass . " Sarah be not 
 ignorant - now ; she keep up the theory of the horrible . " 
 " ah but she be intense - and that by itself will do sometimes as well . if 
 it do not   do , in this case , at any rate , to deny that Marie 's 
 charming , it will do at least to deny that she be good . " 
 " what I claim be that she be good for Chad . " 
 " you do not   claim " - she seem to like it clear - " that she be good for 
 you . " 
 but he continue without heed . " that be what I want they to come 
 out for - to see for themselves if she be bad for he . " 
 " and now that they have   do so they will not   admit that she be good even for 
 anything ? " 
 " they do think , " Strether presently admit , " that she be on the whole 
 about as bad for I . but they be consistent of course , inasmuch as 
 they have   their clear view of what be good for both of we . " 
 " for you , to begin with " - Maria , all responsive , confine the question 
 for the moment - " to eliminate from your existence and if possible even 
 from your memory the dreadful creature that I must gruesomely shadow 
 forth for they , even more than to eliminate the distincter 
 evil - thereby a little less portentous - of the person whose confederate 
 you have   suffer yourself to become . however , that be comparatively 
 simple . you can easily , at the bad , after all , give I up . " 
 " I can easily at the bad , after all , give you up . " the irony be so 
 obvious that it need no care . " I can easily at the bad , after all , 
 even forget you . " 
 " call that then workable . but Mr. Newsome have much more to forget . how 
 can he do it ? " 
 " ah there again we be ! that be just what I be to have make he do ; 
 just where I be to have work with he and help . " 
 she take it in silence and without attenuation - as if perhaps from very 
 familiarity with the fact ; and her thought make a connexion without 
 show the link . " do you remember how we use to talk at Chester and 
 in London about my see you through ? " she speak as of far - off 
 thing and as if they have spend week at the place she name . 
 " it be just what you be do . " 
 " ah but the bad - since you have   leave such a margin - may be still to 
 come . you may yet break down . " 
 " yes , I may yet break down . but will you take I - ? " 
 he have hesitate , and she wait . " take you ? " 
 " for as long as I can bear it . " 
 she also debate " Mr. Newsome and Madame de Vionnet may , as we be 
 say , leave town . how long do you think you can bear it without 
 they ? " 
 Strether 's reply to this be at first another question . " do you mean 
 in order to get away from I ? " 
 her answer have an abruptness . " do not   find I rude if I say I should 
 think they would want to ! " 
 he look at her hard again - seem even for an instant to have an 
 intensity of thought under which his colour change . but he smile . 
 " you mean after what they have   do to I ? " 
 " after what she have . " 
 at this , however , with a laugh , he be all right again . " ah but she 
 have not   do it yet ! " 
 III 
 he have take the train a few day after this from a station - as well as 
 to a station - select almost at random ; such day , whatever should 
 happen , be number , and he have go forth under the impulse - artless 
 enough , no doubt - to give the whole of one of they to that french 
 ruralism , with its cool special green , into which he have hitherto 
 look only through the little oblong window of the picture - frame . it 
 have be as yet for the most part but a land of fancy for he - the 
 background of fiction , the medium of art , the nursery of letter ; 
 practically as distant as Greece , but practically also well - nigh as 
 consecrate . romance could weave itself , for Strether 's sense , out of 
 element mild enough ; and even after what he have , as he feel , lately 
 " be through , " he could thrill a little at the chance of see 
 something somewhere that would remind he of a certain small Lambinet 
 that have charm he , long year before , at a Boston dealer 's and that 
 he have quite absurdly never forget . it have be offer , he 
 remember , at a price he have be instruct to believe the low 
 ever name for a Lambinet , a price he have never feel so poor as on 
 have to recognise , all the same , as beyond a dream of possibility . he 
 have dream - have turn and twisted possibility for an hour : it have 
 be the only adventure of his life in connexion with the purchase of a 
 work of art . the adventure , it will be perceive , be modest ; but the 
 memory , beyond all reason and by some accident of association , be 
 sweet . the little Lambinet abode with he as the picture he would have 
 buy - the particular production that have make he for the moment 
 overstep the modesty of nature . he be quite aware that if he be to 
 see it again he should perhaps have a drop or a shock , and he never 
 find himself wish that the wheel of time would turn it up again , 
 just as he have see it in the maroon - colour , sky - light inner shrine 
 of Tremont Street . it would be a different thing , however , to see the 
 remember mixture resolve back into its element - to assist at the 
 restoration to nature of the whole far - away hour : the dusty day in 
 Boston , the background of the Fitchburg Depot , of the maroon - colour 
 sanctum , the special - green vision , the ridiculous price , the poplar , 
 the willow , the rush , the river , the sunny silvery sky , the shady 
 woody horizon . 
 he observe in respect to his train almost no condition save that it 
 should stop a few time after get out of the banlieue ; he throw 
 himself on the general amiability of the day for the hint of where to 
 alight . his theory of his excursion be that he could alight 
 anywhere - not near Paris than an hour 's run - on catch a suggestion 
 of the particular note require . it make its sign , the 
 suggestion - weather , air , light , colour and his mood all favour - at 
 the end of some eighty minute ; the train pull up just at the right 
 spot , and he find himself get out as securely as if to keep an 
 appointment . it will be feel of he that he could amuse himself , at 
 his age , with very small thing if it be again note that his 
 appointment be only with a supersede Boston fashion . he have not   go 
 far without the quick confidence that it would be quite sufficiently 
 keep . the oblong gilt frame dispose its enclose line ; the poplar 
 and willow , the reed and river - a river of which he do not   know , and 
 do not   want to know , the name - fall into a composition , full of 
 felicity , within they ; the sky be silver and turquoise and varnish ; 
 the village on the left be white and the church on the right be grey ; 
 it be all there , in short - it be what he want : it be Tremont 
 Street , it be France , it be Lambinet . moreover he be freely walk 
 about in it . he do this last , for an hour , to his heart 's content , 
 make for the shady woody horizon and bore so deep into his 
 impression and his idleness that he might fairly have get through they 
 again and reach the maroon - colour wall . it be a wonder , no doubt , 
 that the taste of idleness for he should not   need more time to sweeten ; 
 but it have in fact take the few previous day ; it have be sweeten 
 in truth ever since the retreat of the Pococks . he walk and walk as 
 if to show himself how little he have now to do ; he have nothing to do 
 but turn off to some hillside where he might stretch himself and hear 
 the poplar rustle , and whence - in the course of an afternoon so spend , 
 an afternoon richly suffuse too with the sense of a book in his 
 pocket - he should sufficiently command the scene to be able to pick out 
 just the right little rustic inn for an experiment in respect to 
 dinner . there be a train back to Paris at 9.20 , and he see himself 
 partaking , at the close of the day , with the enhancement of a coarse 
 white cloth and a sanded door , of something fry and felicitous , 
 wash down with authentic wine ; after which he might , as he like , 
 either stroll back to his station in the gloaming or propose for the 
 local carriole and converse with his driver , a driver who naturally 
 would not   fail of a stiff clean blouse , of a knitted nightcap and of the 
 genius of response - who , in fine , would sit on the shaft , tell he 
 what the french people be think , and remind he , as indeed the 
 whole episode would incidentally do , of Maupassant . Strether hear his 
 lip , for the first time in french air , as this vision assume 
 consistency , emit sound of expressive intention without fear of his 
 company . he have be afraid of Chad and of Maria and of Madame de 
 Vionnet ; he have be most of all afraid of Waymarsh , in whose presence , 
 so far as they have mix together in the light of the town , he have 
 never without somehow pay for it air either his vocabulary or his 
 accent . he usually pay for it by meet immediately afterwards 
 Waymarsh 's eye . 
 such be the liberty with which his fancy play after he have turn 
 off to the hillside that do really and truly , as well as most amiably , 
 await he beneath the poplar , the hillside that make he feel , for a 
 murmurous couple of hour , how happy have be his thought . he have the 
 sense of success , of a fine harmony in thing ; nothing but what have 
 turn out as yet accord to his plan . it most of all come home to 
 he , as he lie on his back on the grass , that Sarah have really go , 
 that his tension be really relaxed ; the peace diffuse in these idea 
 might be delusive , but it hang about he none the less for the time . it 
 fairly , for half an hour , send he to sleep ; he pull his straw hat 
 over his eye - he have buy it the day before with a reminiscence of 
 Waymarsh 's - and lose himself anew in Lambinet . it be as if he have 
 find out he be tired - tired not from his walk , but from that inward 
 exercise which have know , on the whole , for three month , so little 
 intermission . that be it - when once they be off he have drop ; 
 this moreover be what he have drop to , and now he be touching 
 bottom . he be keep luxuriously quiet , soothe and amuse by the 
 consciousness of what he have find at the end of his descent . it be 
 very much what he have tell Maria Gostrey he should like to stay on for , 
 the hugely - distribute Paris of summer , alternately dazzle and dusky , 
 with a weight lift for he off its column and cornice and with 
 shade and air in the flutter of awning as wide as avenue . it be 
 present to he without attenuation that , reach out , the day after 
 make the remark , for some proof of his freedom , he have go that very 
 afternoon to see Madame de Vionnet . he have go again the next day but 
 one , and the effect of the two visit , the after - sense of the couple of 
 hour spend with she , be almost that of fulness and frequency . the 
 brave intention of frequency , so great with he from the moment of his 
 find himself unjustly suspect at Woollett , have remain rather 
 theoretic , and one of the thing he could muse about under his poplar 
 be the source of the special shyness that have still make he careful . 
 he have surely get rid of it now , this special shyness ; what have become 
 of it if it have not   precisely , within the week , rub off ? 
 it strike he now in fact as sufficiently plain that if he have still 
 be careful he have be so for a reason . he have really fear , in his 
 behaviour , a lapse from good faith ; if there be a danger of one 's 
 like such a woman too much one 's good safety be in wait at least 
 till one have the right to do so . in the light of the last few day the 
 danger be fairly vivid ; so that it be proportionately fortunate that 
 the right be likewise establish . it seem to our friend that he have 
 on each occasion profit to the utmost by the latter : how could he 
 have do so more , he at all event ask himself , than in have 
 immediately let she know that , if it be all the same to she , he 
 prefer not to talk about anything tiresome ? he have never in his 
 life so sacrifice an armful of high interest as in that remark ; he 
 have never so prepared the way for the comparatively frivolous as in 
 address it to Madame de Vionnet 's intelligence . it have not   be till 
 later that he quite recall how in conjure away everything but the 
 pleasant he have conjure away almost all they have hitherto talk 
 about ; it be not till later even that he remember how , with their 
 new tone , they have not   so much as mention the name of Chad himself . 
 one of the thing that most linger with he on his hillside be this 
 delightful facility , with such a woman , of arrive at a new tone ; he 
 think , as he lie on his back , of all the tone she might make 
 possible if one be to try she , and at any rate of the probability 
 that one could trust she to fit they to occasion . he have want she 
 to feel that , as he be disintereste now , so she herself should be , 
 and she have show she feel it , and he have show he be grateful , and 
 it have be for all the world as if he be call for the first time . 
 they have have other , but irrelevant , meeting ; it be quite as if , have 
 they soon know how much they REALLY have in common , there be 
 quantity of comparatively dull matter they might have skip . well , 
 they be skip they now , even to graceful gratitude , even to 
 handsome " do not   mention it ! " - and it be amazing what could still come 
 up without reference to what have be go on between they . it might 
 have be , on analysis , nothing more than Shakespeare and the musical 
 glass ; but it have serve all the purpose of his appear to have 
 say to she : " do not   like I , if it be a question of like I , for 
 anything obvious and clumsy that I have , as they call it , ' do ' for you : 
 like I - well , like I , hang it , for anything else you choose . so , by 
 the same propriety , do not   be for I simply the person I have   come to know 
 through my awkward connexion with Chad - be ever anything , by the way , 
 more awkward ? be for I , please , with all your admirable tact and 
 trust , just whatever I may show you it be a present pleasure to I to 
 think you . " it have be a large indication to meet ; but if she have not 
 meet it what HAD she do , and how have their time together slip along 
 so smoothly , mild but not slow , and melting , liquefy , into his happy 
 illusion of idleness ? he could recognise on the other hand that he have 
 probably not be without reason , in his prior , his restricted state , 
 for keep an eye on his liability to lapse from good faith . 
 he really continue in the picture - that be for himself his 
 situation - all the rest of this ramble day ; so that the charm be 
 still , be indeed more than ever upon he when , toward six o'clock he 
 find himself amicably engage with a stout white - cap deep - voice 
 woman at the door of the auberge of the big village , a village that 
 affect he as a thing of whiteness , blueness and crookedness , set in 
 coppery green , and that have the river flow behind or before it - one 
 could not   say which ; at the bottom , in particular , of the inn - garden . he 
 have have other adventure before this ; have keep along the height , after 
 shake off slumber ; have admire , have almost covet , another small old 
 church , all steep roof and dim slate - colour without and all whitewash 
 and paper flower within ; have lose his way and have find it again ; have 
 converse with rustic who strike he perhaps a little more as man of 
 the world than he have expect ; have acquire at a bind a fearless 
 facility in French ; have have , as the afternoon wan , a watery bock , all 
 pale and parisian , in the cafe of the furth village , which be not 
 the big ; and have meanwhile not once overstep the oblong gilt 
 frame . the frame have draw itself out for he , as much as you please ; 
 but that be just his luck . he have finally come down again to the 
 valley , to keep within touch of station and train , turn his face 
 to the quarter from which he have start ; and thus it be that he have 
 at last pull up before the hostess of the Cheval Blanc , who meet he , 
 with a rough readiness that be like the clatter of sabot over stone , 
 on their common ground of a cotelette de veau a l'oseille and a 
 subsequent lift . he have walk many mile and do not   know he be 
 tired ; but he still know he be amuse , and even that , though he have 
 be alone all day , he have never yet so strike himself as engage with 
 other and in midstream of his drama . it might have pass for 
 finish his drama , with its catastrophe all but reach : it have , 
 however , none the less be vivid again for he as he thus give it its 
 fuller chance . he have only have to be at last well out of it to feel 
 it , oddly enough , still go on . 
 for this have be all day at bottom the spell of the picture - that it 
 be essentially more than anything else a scene and a stage , that the 
 very air of the play be in the rustle of the willow and the tone of 
 the sky . the play and the character have , without his know it till 
 now , people all his space for he , and it seem somehow quite happy 
 that they should offer themselves , in the condition so supply , with 
 a kind of inevitability . it be as if the condition make they not 
 only inevitable , but so much more nearly natural and right as that they 
 be at least easy , pleasanter , to put up with . the condition have 
 nowhere so assert their difference from those of Woollett as they 
 appear to he to assert it in the little court of the Cheval Blanc 
 while he arrange with his hostess for a comfortable climax . they be 
 few and simple , scant and humble , but they be the thing , as he would 
 have call it , even to a great degree than Madame de Vionnet 's old 
 high salon where the ghost of the Empire walk . " the " thing be the 
 thing that imply the great number of other thing of the sort he 
 have have to tackle ; and it be queer of course , but so it be - the 
 implication here be complete . not a single one of his observation 
 but somehow fall into a place in it ; not a breath of the cool evening 
 that be not   somehow a syllable of the text . the text be simply , when 
 condense , that in these place such thing be , and that if it be in 
 they one elect to move about one have to make one 's account with what 
 one light on . meanwhile at all event it be enough that they do 
 affect one - so far as the village aspect be concern - as whiteness , 
 crookedness and blueness set in coppery green ; there be positively , 
 for that matter , an outer wall of the White Horse that be paint the 
 most improbable shade . that be part of the amusement - as if to show 
 that the fun be harmless ; just as it be enough , far , that the 
 picture and the play seem supremely to melt together in the good 
 woman 's broad sketch of what she could do for her visitor 's appetite . 
 he feel in short a confidence , and it be general , and it be all he 
 want to feel . it suffer no shock even on her mentioning that she 
 have in fact just lay the cloth for two person who , unlike Monsieur , 
 have arrive by the river - in a boat of their own ; who have ask she , 
 half an hour before , what she could do for they , and have then paddle 
 away to look at something a little far up - from which promenade 
 they would presently return . Monsieur might meanwhile , if he like , 
 pass into the garden , such as it be , where she would serve he , should 
 he wish it - for there be table and bench in plenty - a " bitter " 
 before his repast . here she would also report to he on the possibility 
 of a conveyance to his station , and here at any rate he would have the 
 agrement of the river . 
 it may be mention without delay that Monsieur have the agrement of 
 everything , and in particular , for the next twenty minute , of a small 
 and primitive pavilion that , at the garden 's edge , almost overhang the 
 water , testify , in its somewhat battered state , to much fond 
 frequentation . it consist of little more than a platform , slightly 
 raise , with a couple of bench and a table , a protect rail and a 
 project roof ; but it rake the full grey - blue stream , which , take 
 a turn a short distance above , pass out of sight to reappear much 
 high up ; and it be clearly in esteemed requisition for Sundays and 
 other feast . Strether sit there and , though hungry , feel at peace ; 
 the confidence that have so gather for he deepen with the lap of 
 the water , the ripple of the surface , the rustle of the reed on the 
 opposite bank , the faint diffused coolness and the slight rock of a 
 couple of small boat attach to a rough landing - place hard by . the 
 valley on the further side be all copper - green level and glaze pearly 
 sky , a sky hatch across with screen of trim tree , which look 
 flat , like espalier ; and though the rest of the village straggle away 
 in the near quarter the view have an emptiness that make one of the 
 boat suggestive . such a river set one afloat almost before one could 
 take up the oar - the idle play of which would be moreover the aid to 
 the full impression . this perception go so far as to bring he to 
 his foot ; but that movement , in turn , make he feel afresh that he be 
 tired , and while he lean against a post and continue to look out he 
 see something that give he a sharp arrest . 
 IV 
 what he see be exactly the right thing - a boat advance round the 
 bend and contain a man who hold the paddle and a lady , at the 
 stern , with a pink parasol . it be suddenly as if these figure , or 
 something like they , have be want in the picture , have be want 
 more or less all day , and have now drift into sight , with the slow 
 current , on purpose to fill up the measure . they come slowly , float 
 down , evidently direct to the landing - place near their spectator and 
 present themselves to he not less clearly as the two person for 
 whom his hostess be already prepare a meal . for two very happy 
 person he find himself straightway take they - a young man in 
 shirt - sleeve , a young woman easy and fair , who have pull pleasantly 
 up from some other place and , be acquaint with the neighbourhood , 
 have know what this particular retreat could offer they . the air quite 
 thicken , at their approach , with further intimation ; the intimation 
 that they be expert , familiar , frequent - that this would not   at all 
 event be the first time . they know how to do it , he vaguely feel - and 
 it make they but the more idyllic , though at the very moment of the 
 impression , as happen , their boat seem to have begin to drift wide , 
 the oarsman let it go . it have by this time none the less come 
 much near - near enough for Strether to dream the lady in the stern 
 have for some reason take account of his be there to watch they . she 
 have remark on it sharply , yet her companion have not   turn round ; it 
 be in fact almost as if our friend have feel she bid he keep still . 
 she have take in something as a result of which their course have 
 waver , and it continue to waver while they just stand off . this 
 little effect be sudden and rapid , so rapid that Strether 's sense of 
 it be separate only for an instant from a sharp start of his own . he 
 too have within the minute take in something , take in that he know the 
 lady whose parasol , shift as if to hide her face , make so fine a 
 pink point in the shin scene . it be too prodigious , a chance in a 
 million , but , if he know the lady , the gentleman , who still present 
 his back and keep off , the gentleman , the coatless hero of the idyll , 
 who have respond to her start , be , to match the marvel , none other 
 than Chad . 
 Chad and Madame de Vionnet be then like himself take a day in the 
 country - though it be as queer as fiction , as farce , that their 
 country could happen to be exactly his ; and she have be the first at 
 recognition , the first to feel , across the water , the shock - for it 
 appear to come to that - of their wonderful accident . Strether become 
 aware , with this , of what be take place - that her recognition have 
 be even strange for the pair in the boat , that her immediate impulse 
 have be to control it , and that she be quickly and intensely debate 
 with Chad the risk of betrayal . he see they would show nothing if they 
 could feel sure he have not   make they out ; so that he have before he for 
 a few second his own hesitation . it be a sharp fantastic crisis that 
 have pop up as if in a dream , and it have have only to last the few 
 second to make he feel it as quite horrible . they be thus , on 
 either side , try the other side , and all for some reason that break 
 the stillness like some unprovoked harsh note . it seem to he again , 
 within the limit , that he have but one thing to do - to settle their 
 common question by some sign of surprise and joy . he hereupon give 
 large play to these thing , agitate his hat and his stick and loudly 
 call out - a demonstration that bring he relief as soon as he have 
 see it answer . the boat , in mid - stream , still go a little 
 wild - which seem natural , however , while Chad turn round , half 
 spring up ; and his good friend , after blankness and wonder , begin 
 gaily to wave her parasol . Chad drop afresh to his paddle and the 
 boat head round , amazement and pleasantry fill the air meanwhile , 
 and relief , as Strether continue to fancy , supersede mere violence . 
 our friend go down to the water under this odd impression as of 
 violence avert - the violence of their have " cut " he , out there in 
 the eye of nature , on the assumption that he would not   know it . he 
 await they with a face from which he be conscious of not be able 
 quite to banish this idea that they would have go on , not see and 
 not know , miss their dinner and disappoint their hostess , have 
 he himself take a line to match . that at least be what darken his 
 vision for the moment . afterwards , after they have bump at the 
 landing - place and he have assist their get ashore , everything 
 find itself sponge over by the mere miracle of the encounter . 
 they could so much well at last , on either side , treat it as a wild 
 extravagance of hazard , that the situation be make elastic by the 
 amount of explanation call into play . why indeed - apart from 
 oddity - the situation should have be really stiff be a question 
 naturally not practical at the moment , and in fact , so far as we be 
 concern , a question tackle , later on and in private , only by 
 Strether himself . he be to reflect later on and in private that it 
 be mainly he who have explain - as he have have moreover comparatively 
 little difficulty in do . he be to have at all event meanwhile the 
 worrying thought of their perhaps secretly suspect he of have 
 plot this coincidence , take such pain as might be to give it the 
 semblance of an accident . that possibility - as their 
 imputation - do not   of course bear look into for an instant ; yet the 
 whole incident be so manifestly , arrange it as they would , an awkward 
 one , that he could scarce keep disclaimer in respect to his own 
 presence from rise to his lip . disclaimer of intention would have 
 be as tactless as his presence be practically gross ; and the 
 narrow escape they either of they have be his lucky escape , in the 
 event , from make any . nothing of the sort , so far as surface and 
 sound be involve , be even in question ; surface and sound all make 
 for their common ridiculous good fortune , for the general 
 invraisemblance of the occasion , for the charming chance that they have , 
 the other , in pass , order some food to be ready , the charming 
 chance that he have himself not eat , the charming chance , even more , 
 that their little plan , their hour , their train , in short , from 
 la - bas , would all match for their return together to Paris . the chance 
 that be most charming of all , the chance that draw from Madame de 
 Vionnet her clear , gayest " Comme cela se trouve ! " be the 
 announcement make to Strether after they be seat at table , the word 
 give he by their hostess in respect to his carriage for the station , 
 on which he might now count . it settle the matter for his friend as 
 well ; the conveyance - it be all too lucky ! - would serve for they ; and 
 nothing be more delightful than his be in a position to make the 
 train so definite . it might have be , for themselves - to hear Madame 
 de Vionnet - almost unnaturally vague , a detail leave to be fix ; though 
 Strether indeed be afterwards to remember that Chad have promptly 
 enough intervene to forestall this appearance , laugh at his 
 companion 's flightiness and make the point that he have after all , in 
 spite of the bedazzlement of a day out with she , know what he be 
 about . 
 Strether be to remember afterwards far that this have have for he 
 the effect of form Chad 's almost sole intervention ; and indeed he 
 be to remember far still , in subsequent meditation , many thing 
 that , as it be , fit together . another of they be for instance 
 that the wonderful woman 's overflow of surprise and amusement be 
 wholly into French , which she strike he as speak with an 
 unprecedented command of idiomatic turn , but in which she get , as he 
 might have say , somewhat away from he , take all at once little 
 brilliant jump that he could but lamely match . the question of his 
 own French have never come up for they ; it be the one thing she 
 would not   have permit - it belong , for a person who have be through 
 much , to mere boredom ; but the present result be odd , fairly veil 
 her identity , shift she back into a mere voluble class or race to 
 the intense audibility of which he be by this time inure . when she 
 speak the charming slightly strange English he well know she by he 
 seem to feel she as a creature , among all the million , with a 
 language quite to herself , the real monopoly of a special shade of 
 speech , beautifully easy for she , yet of a colour and a cadence that 
 be both inimitable and matter of accident . she come back to these 
 thing after they have shake down in the inn - parlour and know , as it 
 be , what be to become of they ; it be inevitable that loud 
 ejaculation over the prodigy of their convergence should at last wear 
 itself out . then it be that his impression take full form - the 
 impression , destine only to deepen , to complete itself , that they have 
 something to put a face upon , to carry off and make the good of , and 
 that it be she who , admirably on the whole , be do this . it be 
 familiar to he of course that they have something to put a face upon ; 
 their friendship , their connexion , take any amount of explain - that 
 would have be make familiar by his twenty minute with Mrs. Pocock if 
 it have not   already be so . yet his theory , as we know , have bountifully 
 be that the fact be specifically none of his business , and be , 
 over and above , so far as one have to do with they , intrinsically 
 beautiful ; and this might have prepare he for anything , as well as 
 render he proof against mystification . when he reach home that 
 night , however , he know he have be , at bottom , neither prepared nor 
 proof ; and since we have speak of what he be , after his return , to 
 recall and interpret , it may as well immediately be say that his real 
 experience of these few hour put on , in that belate vision - for he 
 scarce go to bed till morning - the aspect that be most to our purpose . 
 he then know more or less how he have be affect - he but half know at 
 the time . there have be plenty to affect he even after , as have be 
 say , they have shake down ; for his consciousness , though muffle , have 
 its sharp moment during this passage , a marked drop into innocent 
 friendly Bohemia . they then have put their elbow on the table , 
 deplore the premature end of their two or three dish ; which they 
 have try to make up with another bottle while Chad joke a little 
 spasmodically , perhaps even a little irrelevantly , with the hostess . 
 what it all come to have be that fiction and fable WERE , inevitably , 
 in the air , and not as a simple term of comparison , but as a result of 
 thing say ; also that they be blink it , all round , and that they 
 yet need not , so much as that , have blink it - though indeed if they 
 have not   Strether do not   quite see what else they could have do . 
 Strether do not   quite see that even at an hour or two past midnight , 
 even when he have , at his hotel , for a long time , without a light and 
 without undressing , sit back on his bedroom sofa and star straight 
 before he . he be , at that point of vantage , in full possession , to 
 make of it all what he could . he keep make of it that there have be 
 simply a lie in the charming affair - a lie on which one could now , 
 detach and deliberate , perfectly put one 's finger . it be with the 
 lie that they have eat and drunk and talk and laugh , that they have 
 wait for their carriole rather impatiently , and have then get into the 
 vehicle and , sensibly subside , drive their three or four mile 
 through the darken summer night . the eating and drinking , which have 
 be a resource , have have the effect of have serve its turn ; the talk 
 and laughter have do as much ; and it be during their somewhat tedious 
 progress to the station , during the wait there , the further delay , 
 their submission to fatigue , their silence in the dim compartment of 
 the much - stop train , that he prepare himself for reflexion to 
 come . it have be a performance , Madame de Vionnet 's manner , and though 
 it have to that degree falter toward the end , as through her ceasing 
 to believe in it , as if she have ask herself , or Chad have find a 
 moment surreptitiously to ask she , what after all be the use , a 
 performance it have none the less quite handsomely remain , with the 
 final fact about it that it be on the whole easy to keep up than to 
 abandon . 
 from the point of view of presence of mind it have be very wonderful 
 indeed , wonderful for readiness , for beautiful assurance , for the way 
 her decision be take on the spot , without time to confer with Chad , 
 without time for anything . their only conference could have be the 
 brief instant in the boat before they confess to recognise the 
 spectator on the bank , for they have not   be alone together a moment 
 since and must have communicate all in silence . it be a part of the 
 deep impression for Strether , and not the least of the deep interest , 
 that they could so communicate - that Chad in particular could let she 
 know he leave it to she . he habitually leave thing to other , as 
 Strether be so well aware , and it in fact come over our friend in 
 these meditation that there have be as yet no such vivid illustration 
 of his famous knowing how to live . it be as if he have humour she to 
 the extent of let her lie without correction - almost as if , really , 
 he would be come round in the morning to set the matter , as between 
 Strether and himself , right . of course he could not   quite come ; it be 
 a case in which a man be oblige to accept the woman 's version , even 
 when fantastic ; if she have , with more flurry than she care to show , 
 elect , as the phrase be , to represent that they have leave Paris that 
 morning , and with no design but of get back within the day - if she 
 have so size - up , in the Woollett phrase , their necessity , she know good 
 her own measure . there be thing , all the same , it be impossible to 
 blink and which make this measure an odd one - the too evident fact for 
 instance that she have not   start out for the day dress and hatted and 
 shod , and even , for that matter , pink parasol'd , as she have be in the 
 boat . from what do the drop in her assurance proceed as the tension 
 increase - from what do this slightly baffle ingenuity spring but 
 from her consciousness of not present , as night close in , with not 
 so much as a shawl to wrap her round , an appearance that match her 
 story ? she admit that she be cold , but only to blame she 
 imprudence which Chad suffer she to give such account of as she 
 might . her shawl and Chad 's overcoat and her other garment , and his , 
 those they have each wear the day before , be at the place , well know 
 to themselves - a quiet retreat enough , no doubt - at which they have be 
 spend the twenty - four hour , to which they have fully mean to return 
 that evening , from which they have so remarkably swum into Strether 's 
 ken , and the tacit repudiation of which have be thus the essence of 
 her comedy . Strether see how she have perceive in a flash that they 
 could not   quite look to go back there under his nose ; though , 
 honestly , as he gouge deeply into the matter , he be somewhat 
 surprised , as Chad likewise have perhaps be , at the uprising of this 
 scruple . he seem even to divine that she have entertain it rather 
 for Chad than for herself , and that , as the young man have lack the 
 chance to enlighten she , she have have to go on with it , he meanwhile 
 mistake her motive . 
 he be rather glad , none the less , that they have in point of fact not 
 part at the Cheval Blanc , that he have not   be reduce to give they 
 his blessing for an idyllic retreat down the river . he have have in the 
 actual case to make - believe more than he like , but this be nothing , 
 it strike he , to what the other event would have require . could he , 
 literally , quite have face the other event ? would he have be 
 capable of make the good of it with they ? this be what he be 
 try to do now ; but with the advantage of his be able to give more 
 time to it a good deal counteract by his sense of what , over and 
 above the central fact itself , he have to swallow . it be the quantity 
 of make - believe involved and so vividly exemplified that most disagree 
 with his spiritual stomach . he move , however , from the consideration 
 of that quantity - to say nothing of the consciousness of that 
 organ - back to the other feature of the show , the deep , deep truth of 
 the intimacy reveal . that be what , in his vain vigil , he oftenest 
 revert to : intimacy , at such a point , be like that - and what in the 
 world else would one have wish it to be like ? it be all very well 
 for he to feel the pity of its be so much like lie ; he almost 
 blush , in the dark , for the way he have dress the possibility in 
 vagueness , as a little girl might have dress her doll . he have make 
 they - and by no fault of their own - momentarily pull it for he , the 
 possibility , out of this vagueness ; and must he not therefore take it 
 now as they have have simply , with whatever thin attenuation , to give it 
 to he ? the very question , it may be add , make he feel lonely and 
 cold . there be the element of the awkward all round , but Chad and 
 Madame de Vionnet have at least the comfort that they could talk it over 
 together . with whom could he talk of such thing ? - unless indeed 
 always , at almost any stage , with Maria ? he foresee that Miss Gostrey 
 would come again into requisition on the morrow ; though it be not   to be 
 deny that he be already a little afraid of she " what on 
 earth - that be what I want to know now - have you then suppose ? " he 
 recognise at last that he have really be try all along to suppose 
 nothing . verily , verily , his labour have be lose . he find himself 
 suppose innumerable and wonderful thing . 
 Book Twelfth 
 I 
 Strether could not   have say he have during the previous hour definitely 
 expect it ; yet when , later on , that morning - though no later indeed 
 than for his come forth at ten o'clock - he see the concierge produce , 
 on his approach , a petit bleu deliver since his letter have be send 
 up , he recognise the appearance as the first symptom of a sequel . he 
 then know he have be think of some early sign from Chad as more 
 likely , after all , than not ; and this would be precisely the early 
 sign . he take it so for grant that he open the petit bleu just 
 where he have stop , in the pleasant cool draught of the 
 porte - cochere - only curious to see where the young man would , at such a 
 juncture , break out . his curiosity , however , be more than gratify ; 
 the small missive , whose gum edge he have detach without attention 
 to the address , not be from the young man at all , but from the 
 person whom the case give he on the spot as still more worth while . 
 worth while or not , he go round to the near telegraph - office , the 
 big one on the Boulevard , with a directness that almost confessed to a 
 fear of the danger of delay . he might have be think that if he 
 do not   go before he could think he would not   perhaps go at all . he at 
 any rate keep , in the low side - pocket of his morning coat , a very 
 deliberate hand on his blue missive , crumple it up rather tenderly 
 than harshly . he write a reply , on the Boulevard , also in the form of 
 a petit bleu - which be quickly do , under pressure of the place , 
 inasmuch as , like Madame de Vionnet 's own communication , it consist 
 of the few word . she have ask he if he could do she the very 
 great kindness of come to see she that evening at half - past nine , and 
 he answer , as if nothing be easy , that he would present himself 
 at the hour she name . she have add a line of postscript , to the 
 effect that she would come to he elsewhere and at his own hour if he 
 prefer ; but he take no notice of this , feel that if he see she at 
 all half the value of it would be in see she where he have already 
 see she good . he might not   see she at all ; that be one of the 
 reflexion he make after writing and before he drop his closed card 
 into the box ; he might not   see any one at all any more at all ; he might 
 make an end as well now as ever , leave thing as they be , since he 
 be doubtless not to leave they well , and take his way home so far 
 as should appear that a home remain to he . this alternative be for 
 a few minute so sharp that if he at last do deposit his missive it 
 be perhaps because the pressure of the place have an effect . 
 there be none other , however , than the common and constant pressure , 
 familiar to our friend under the rubric of Postes et Telegraphes - the 
 something in the air of these establishment ; the vibration of the vast 
 strange life of the town , the influence of the type , the performer 
 concoct their message ; the little prompt Paris woman , arrange , 
 pretexte goodness know what , drive the dreadful needle - point 
 public pen at the dreadful sand - strew public table : implement that 
 symbolise for Strether 's too interpretative innocence something more 
 acute in manner , more sinister in moral , more fierce in the national 
 life . after he have put in his paper he have range himself , he be 
 really amuse to think , on the side of the fierce , the sinister , the 
 acute . he be carry on a correspondence , across the great city , 
 quite in the key of the Postes et Telegraphes in general ; and it be 
 fairly as if the acceptance of that fact have come from something in his 
 state that sort with the occupation of his neighbour . he be mixed 
 up with the typical tale of Paris , and so be they , poor thing - how 
 could they all together help be ? they be no bad than he , in 
 short , and he no worse than they - if , queerly enough , no well ; and at 
 all event he have settle his hash , so that he go out to begin , from 
 that moment , his day of waiting . the great settlement be , as he feel , 
 in his preference for see his correspondent in her own good 
 condition . that be part of the typical tale , the part most 
 significant in respect to himself . he like the place she live in , 
 the picture that each time square itself , large and high and clear , 
 around she : every occasion of see it be a pleasure of a different 
 shade . yet what precisely be he do with shade of pleasure now , 
 and why have not   he properly and logically compel she to commit 
 herself to whatever of disadvantage and penalty the situation might 
 throw up ? he might have propose , as for Sarah Pocock , the cold 
 hospitality of his own salon de lecture , in which the chill of Sarah 's 
 visit seem still to abide and shade of pleasure be dim ; he might 
 have suggest a stone bench in the dusty Tuileries or a penny chair at 
 the back part of the Champs Elysees . these thing would have be a 
 trifle stern , and sternness alone now would not   be sinister . an 
 instinct in he cast about for some form of discipline in which they 
 might meet - some awkwardness they would suffer from , some danger , or at 
 least some grave inconvenience , they would incur . this would give a 
 sense - which the spirit require , rather ache and sigh in the 
 absence of - that somebody be pay something somewhere and somehow , 
 that they be at least not all float together on the silver stream 
 of impunity . just instead of that to go and see she late in the 
 evening , as if , for all the world - well , as if he be as much in the 
 swim as anybody else : this have as little as possible in common with 
 the penal form . 
 even when he have feel that objection melt away , however , the practical 
 difference be small ; the long stretch of his interval take the colour 
 it would , and if he live on thus with the sinister from hour to hour 
 it prove an easy thing than one might have suppose in advance . he 
 revert in thought to his old tradition , the one he have be bring 
 up on and which even so many year of life have but little wear away ; 
 the notion that the state of the wrongdoer , or at least this person 's 
 happiness , present some special difficulty . what strike he now 
 rather be the ease of it - for nothing in truth appear easy . it 
 be an ease he himself fairly taste of for the rest of the day ; give 
 himself quite up ; not so much as try to dress it out , in any 
 particular whatever , as a difficulty ; not after all go to see 
 Maria - which would have be in a manner a result of such dressing ; 
 only idle , lounging , smoking , sit in the shade , drink lemonade 
 and consume ice . the day have turn to heat and eventual thunder , 
 and he now and again go back to his hotel to find that Chad have not 
 be there . he have not   yet strike himself , since leave Woollett , so 
 much as a loafer , though there have be time when he believe himself 
 touch bottom . this be a deep depth than any , and with no 
 foresight , scarcely with a care , as to what he should bring up . he 
 almost wonder if he do not   look demoralised and disreputable ; he have 
 the fanciful vision , as he sit and smoke , of some accidental , some 
 motive , return of the Pococks , who would be pass along the 
 Boulevard and would catch this view of he . they would have distinctly , 
 on his appearance , every ground for scandal . but fate fail to 
 administer even that sternness ; the Pococks never pass and Chad make 
 no sign . Strether meanwhile continue to hold off from Miss Gostrey , 
 keep she till to - morrow ; so that by evening his irresponsibility , 
 his impunity , his luxury , have become - there be no other word for 
 they - immense . 
 between nine and ten , at last , in the high clear picture - he be move 
 in these day , as in a gallery , from clever canvas to clever canvas - he 
 draw a long breath : it be so present to he from the first that the 
 spell of his luxury would not   be break . he would not   have , that is , to 
 become responsible - this be admirably in the air : she have send for he 
 precisely to let he feel it , so that he might go on with the comfort 
  comfort already establish , have not   it be ?   of regard his ordeal , 
 the ordeal of the week of Sarah 's stay and of their climax , as safely 
 traverse and leave behind he . do not   she just wish to assure he that 
 she now take it all and so keep it ; that he be absolutely not to worry 
 any more , be only to rest on his laurel and continue generously to 
 help she ? the light in her beautiful formal room be dim , though it 
 would do , as everything would always do ; the hot night have keep out 
 lamp , but there be a pair of cluster of candle that glimmer over 
 the chimney - piece like the tall taper of an altar . the window be 
 all open , their redundant hanging sway a little , and he hear once 
 more , from the empty court , the small plash of the fountain . from 
 beyond this , and as from a great distance - beyond the court , beyond the 
 corps de logis form the front - come , as if excited and exciting , the 
 vague voice of Paris . Strether have all along be subject to sudden 
 gust of fancy in connexion with such matter as these - odd start of 
 the historic sense , supposition and divination with no warrant but 
 their intensity . thus and so , on the eve of the great record date , 
 the day and night of revolution , the sound have come in , the omen , 
 the beginning break out . they be the smell of revolution , the 
 smell of the public temper - or perhaps simply the smell of blood . 
 it be at present queer beyond word , ' subtle , " he would have risk 
 say , that such suggestion should keep cross the scene ; but it 
 be doubtless the effect of the thunder in the air , which have hang 
 about all day without release . his hostess be dress as for 
 thunderous time , and it fall in with the kind of imagination we have 
 just attribute to he that she should be in simple cool white , of 
 a character so old - fashioned , if he be not mistaken , that Madame 
 Roland must on the scaffold have wear something like it . this effect 
 be enhance by a small black fichu or scarf , of crape or gauze , 
 dispose quaintly round her bosom and now complete as by a mystic 
 touch the pathetic , the noble analogy . poor Strether in fact scarce 
 know what analogy be evoke for he as the charming woman , receive 
 he and make he , as she could do such thing , at once familiarly and 
 gravely welcome , move over her great room with her image almost 
 repeat in its polished floor , which have be fully bar for summer . 
 the association of the place , all feel again ; the gleam here and 
 there , in the subdue light , of glass and gilt and parquet , with the 
 quietness of her own note as the centre - these thing be at first as 
 delicate as if they have be ghostly , and he be sure in a moment that , 
 whatever he should find he have come for , it would not   be for an 
 impression that have previously fail he . that conviction hold he 
 from the outset , and , seem singularly to simplify , certify to he 
 that the object about would help he , would really help they both . no , 
 he might never see they again - this be only too probably the last 
 time ; and he should certainly see nothing in the least degree like 
 they . he should soon be go to where such thing be not , and it 
 would be a small mercy for memory , for fancy , to have , in that stress , 
 a loaf on the shelf . he know in advance he should look back on the 
 perception actually sharpest with he as on the view of something old , 
 old , old , the old thing he have ever personally touch ; and he also 
 know , even while he take his companion in as the feature among 
 feature , that memory and fancy could not   help be enlist for she . 
 she might intend what she would , but this be beyond anything she could 
 intend , with thing from far back - tyranny of history , fact of type , 
 value , as the painter say , of expression - all work for she and 
 give she the supreme chance , the chance of the happy , the really 
 luxurious few , the chance , on a great occasion , to be natural and 
 simple . she have never , with he , be more so ; or if it be the 
 perfection of art it would never - and that come to the same thing - be 
 prove against she . 
 what be truly wonderful be her way of differ so from time to time 
 without detriment to her simplicity . caprice , he be sure she feel , 
 be before anything else bad manner , and that judgement in she be by 
 itself a thing make more for safety of intercourse than anything that 
 in his various own past intercourse he have have to reckon on . if 
 therefore her presence be now quite other than the one she have show 
 he the night before , there be nothing of violence in the change - it 
 be all harmony and reason . it give he a mild deep person , whereas he 
 have have on the occasion to which their interview be a direct reference 
 a person commit to movement and surface and abound in they ; but 
 she be in either character more remarkable for nothing than for she 
 bridging of interval , and this now fall in with what he understand he 
 be to leave to she . the only thing be that , if he be to leave it 
 all to she , why exactly have she send for he ? he have have , vaguely , in 
 advance , his explanation , his view of the probability of she wish to 
 set something right , to deal in some way with the fraud so lately 
 practise on his presume credulity . would she attempt to carry it 
 far or would she blot it out ? would she throw over it some more or 
 less happy colour ; or would she do nothing about it at all ? he 
 perceive soon enough at least that , however reasonable she might be , 
 she be not   vulgarly confuse , and it herewith press upon he that 
 their eminent " lie , " Chad 's and her , be simply after all such an 
 inevitable tribute to good taste as he could not   have wish they not to 
 render . away from they , during his vigil , he have seem to wince at 
 the amount of comedy involve ; whereas in his present posture he could 
 only ask himself how he should enjoy any attempt from she to take the 
 comedy back . he should not   enjoy it at all ; but , once more and yet once 
 more , he could trust she . that be he could trust she to make deception 
 right . as she present thing the ugliness - goodness know why - go 
 out of they ; none the less too that she could present they , with an art 
 of her own , by not so much as touch they . she let the matter , at 
 all event , lie where it be - where the previous twenty - four hour have 
 place it ; appear merely to circle about it respectfully , tenderly , 
 almost piously , while she take up another question . 
 she know she have not   really throw dust in his eye ; this , the previous 
 night , before they separate , have practically pass between they ; and , 
 as she have send for he to see what the difference thus make for he 
 might amount to , so he be conscious at the end of five minute that he 
 have be try and test . she have settle with Chad after he leave 
 they that she would , for her satisfaction , assure herself of this 
 quantity , and Chad have , as usual , let she have her way . Chad be 
 always let people have their way when he feel that it would somehow 
 turn his wheel for he ; it somehow always do turn his wheel . Strether 
 feel , oddly enough , before these fact , freshly and consentingly 
 passive ; they again so rub it into he that the couple thus fix 
 his attention be intimate , that his intervention have absolutely aid 
 and intensify their intimacy , and that in fine he must accept the 
 consequence of that . he have absolutely become , himself , with his 
 perception and his mistake , his concession and his reserve , the 
 droll mixture , as it must seem to they , of his bravery and his fear , 
 the general spectacle of his art and his innocence , almost an add 
 link and certainly a common priceless ground for they to meet upon . it 
 be as if he have be hear their very tone when she bring out a 
 reference that be comparatively straight . " the last twice that you have 
 be here , you know , I never ask you , " she say with an abrupt 
 transition - they have be pretend before this to talk simply of the 
 charm of yesterday and of the interest of the country they have see . 
 the effort be confessedly vain ; not for such talk have she invite he ; 
 and her impatient reminder be of their have do for it all the 
 needful on his come to she after Sarah 's flight . what she have not 
 ask he then be to state to she where and how he stand for she ; she 
 have be rest on Chad 's report of their midnight hour together in 
 the Boulevard Malesherbes . the thing therefore she at present desire 
 be usher in by this recall of the two occasion on which , 
 disinterested and merciful , she have not   worry he . to - night truly she 
 would worry he , and this be her appeal to he to let her risk it . he 
 be not   to mind if she bore he a little : she have behave , after 
 all - have not   she ? - so awfully , awfully well . 
 II 
 " oh , you be all right , you be all right , " he almost impatiently 
 declare ; his impatience be moreover not for her pressure , but for 
 her scruple . More and more distinct to he be the tune to which she 
 would have have the matter out with Chad : more and more vivid for he 
 the idea that she have be nervous as to what he might be able to 
 ' stand . " yes , it have be a question if he have ' stand " what the scene 
 on the river have give he , and , though the young man have doubtless 
 opine in favour of his recuperation , her own last word must have be 
 that she should feel easy in see for herself . that be it , 
 unmistakeably ; she be see for herself . what he could stand be 
 thus , in these moment , in the balance for Strether , who reflect , as 
 he become fully aware of it , that he must properly brace himself . he 
 want fully to appear to stand all he might ; and there be a certain 
 command of the situation for he in this very wish not to look too much 
 at sea . she be ready with everything , but so , sufficiently , be he ; 
 that be he be at one point the more prepared of the two , inasmuch as , 
 for all her cleverness , she could not   produce on the spot - and it be 
 surprising - an account of the motive of her note . he have the advantage 
 that his pronounce she " all right " give he for an enquiry . " may I 
 ask , delight as I have   be to come , if you have   wish to say something 
 special ? " he speak as if she might have see he have be wait for 
 it - not indeed with discomfort , but with natural interest . then he see 
 that she be a little take aback , be even surprise herself at the 
 detail she have neglect - the only one ever yet ; have somehow assume 
 he would know , would recognise , would leave some thing not to be say . 
 she look at he , however , an instant as if to convey that if he 
 want they all - ! 
 " selfish and vulgar - that be what I must seem to you . you have   do 
 everything for I , and here I be as if I be ask for more . but it 
 be not , " she go on , " because I be afraid - though I be of course afraid , 
 as a woman in my position always be . I mean it be not   because one life 
 in terror - it be not   because of that one be selfish , for I be ready to 
 give you my word to - night that I do not   care ; do not   care what still may 
 happen and what I may lose . I do not   ask you to raise your little 
 finger for I again , nor do I wish so much as to mention to you what 
 we have   talk of before , either my danger or my safety , or his mother , 
 or his sister , or the girl he may marry , or the fortune he may make or 
 miss , or the right or the wrong , of any kind , he may do . if after the 
 help one have have from you one can not   either take care of one 's self or 
 simply hold one 's tongue , one must renounce all claim to be an object 
 of interest . it be in the name of what I do care about that I have   try 
 still to keep hold of you . how can I be indifferent , " she ask , " to 
 how I appear to you ? " and as he find himself unable immediately to 
 say : " why , if you be go , need you , after all ? be it impossible you 
 should stay on - so that one may not   lose you ? " 
 " impossible I should live with you here instead of go home ? " 
 " not ' with ' us , if you object to that , but near enough to we , 
 somewhere , for we to see you - well , " she beautifully bring out , " when 
 we feel we must . how shall we not sometimes feel it ? I have   want to 
 see you often when I could not , " she pursue , " all these last week . how 
 shall not   I then miss you now , with the sense of your be go forever ? " 
 then as if the straightness of this appeal , take he unprepared , have 
 visibly leave he wonder : " where be your ' home ' moreover now - what 
 have become of it ? I have   make a change in your life , I know I have ; I have 
 upset everything in your mind as well ; in your sense of - what shall I 
 call it ? - all the decency and possibility . it give I a kind of 
 detestation - " she pull up short . 
 oh but he want to hear . " detestation of what ? " 
 " of everything - of life . " 
 " ah that be too much , " he laugh - " or too little ! " 
 " too little , precisely " - she be eager . " what I hate be myself - when I 
 think that one have to take so much , to be happy , out of the life of 
 other , and that one be not   happy even then . one do it to cheat one 's 
 self and to stop one 's mouth - but that be only at the good for a little . 
 the wretched self be always there , always make one somehow a fresh 
 anxiety . what it come to be that it be not , that it be never , a 
 happiness , any happiness at all , to take . the only safe thing be to 
 give . it be what play you least false . " interesting , touching , 
 strikingly sincere as she let these thing come from she , she yet 
 puzzle and trouble he - so fine be the quaver of her quietness . he 
 feel what he have feel before with she , that there be always more 
 behind what she show , and more and more again behind that . " you know 
 so , at least , " she add , " where you be ! " 
 " you ought to know it indeed then ; for be not   what you have   be give 
 exactly what have bring we together this way ? you have   be make , as 
 I have   so fully let you know I have   feel , " Strether say , " the most 
 precious present I have   ever see make , and if you can not   sit down 
 peacefully on that performance you ARE , no doubt , bear to torment 
 yourself . but you ought , " he wind up , " to be easy . " 
 " and not trouble you any more , no doubt - not thrust on you even the 
 wonder and the beauty of what I have   do ; only let you regard our 
 business as over , and well over , and see you depart in a peace that 
 match my own ? no doubt , no doubt , no doubt , " she nervously 
 repeat - " all the more that I do not   really pretend I believe you 
 could not , for yourself , not have do what you have . I do not   pretend 
 you feel yourself victimise , for this evidently be the way you live , 
 and it be what - we be agree - be the good way . yes , as you say , " she 
 continue after a moment , " I ought to be easy and rest on my work . well 
 then here be I do so . I be easy . you will have it for your last 
 impression . when be it you say you go ? " she ask with a quick change . 
 he take some time to reply - his last impression be more and more so 
 mix a one . it produce in he a vague disappointment , a drop that 
 be deep even than the fall of his elation the previous night . the 
 good of what he have do , if he have do so much , be not   there to 
 enliven he quite to the point that would have be ideal for a grand 
 gay finale . woman be thus endlessly absorbent , and to deal with they 
 be to walk on water . what be at bottom the matter with she , 
 embroider as she might and disclaim as she might - what be at bottom 
 the matter with she be simply Chad himself . it be of Chad she be 
 after all renewedly afraid ; the strange strength of her passion be the 
 very strength of her fear ; she cling to HIM , Lambert Strether , as to a 
 source of safety she have test , and , generous graceful truthful as she 
 might try to be , exquisite as she be , she dread the term of his 
 be within reach . with this sharp perception yet , it be like a 
 chill in the air to he , it be almost appalling , that a creature so 
 fine could be , by mysterious force , a creature so exploit . for at 
 the end of all thing they be mysterious : she have but make Chad what 
 he be - so why could she think she have make he infinite ? she have make 
 he well , she have make he well , she have make he anything one would ; 
 but it come to our friend with supreme queerness that he be none the 
 less only Chad . Strether have the sense that he , a little , have make he 
 too ; his high appreciation have as it be , consecrate her work the 
 work , however admirable , be nevertheless of the strict human order , 
 and in short it be marvellous that the companion of mere earthly joy , 
 of comfort , aberration   however one class they   within the common 
 experience should be so transcendently prize . it might have make 
 Strether hot or shy , as such secret of other bring home sometimes 
 do make we ; but he be hold there by something so hard that it be 
 fairly grim . this be not the discomposure of last night ; that have 
 quite pass - such discomposure be a detail ; the real coercion be 
 to see a man ineffably adore . there it be again - it take woman , it 
 take woman ; if to deal with they be to walk on water what wonder that 
 the water rise ? and it have never surely rise high than round this 
 woman . he presently find himself take a long look from she , and the 
 next thing he know he have utter all his thought . " you be afraid for 
 your life ! " 
 it draw out her long look , and he soon enough see why . a spasm come 
 into her face , the tear she have already be unable to hide overflow 
 at first in silence , and then , as the sound suddenly come from a 
 child , quicken to gasp , to sob . she sit and cover her face with 
 her hand , give up all attempt at a manner . " it be how you see I , 
 it be how you see I " - she catch her breath with it - " and it be as I be , 
 and as I must take myself , and of course it be no matter . " her emotion 
 be at first so incoherent that he could only stand there at a loss , 
 stand with his sense of have upset she , though of have do it by 
 the truth . he have to listen to she in a silence that he make no 
 immediate effort to attenuate , feel she doubly woeful amid all her 
 dim diffused elegance ; consent to it as he have consent to the 
 rest , and even conscious of some vague inward irony in the presence of 
 such a fine free range of bliss and bale . he could not   say it be not 
 no matter ; for he be serve she to the end , he now know , 
 anyway - quite as if what he think of she have nothing to do with it . 
 it be actually moreover as if he do not   think of she at all , as if he 
 could think of nothing but the passion , mature , abysmal , pitiful , she 
 represent , and the possibility she betray . she be old for he 
 to - night , visibly less exempt from the touch of time ; but she be as 
 much as ever the fine and subtle creature , the happy apparition , 
 it have be give he , in all his year , to meet ; and yet he could see 
 she there as vulgarly trouble , in very truth , as a maidservant crying 
 for her young man . the only thing be that she judge herself as the 
 maidservant would not ; the weakness of which wisdom too , the dishonour 
 of which judgement , seem but to sink she lower . her collapse , 
 however , no doubt , be brief and she have in a manner recover 
 herself before he intervene . " of course I be afraid for my life . but 
 that be nothing . it be not   that . " 
 he be silent a little long , as if think what it might be . 
 " there be something I have in mind that I can still do . " 
 but she throw off at last , with a sharp sad headshake , dry her eye , 
 what he could still do . " I do not   care for that . of course , as I have 
 say , you be act , in your wonderful way , for yourself ; and what be 
 for yourself be no more my business - though I may reach out unholy 
 hand so clumsily to touch it - than if it be something in timbuctoo . 
 it be only that you do not   snub I , as you have   have fifty chance to 
 do - it be only your beautiful patience that make one forget one 's 
 manner . in spite of your patience , all the same , " she go on , " you would 
 do anything rather than be with we here , even if that be possible . 
 you would do everything for we but be mix up with us - which be a 
 statement you can easily answer to the advantage of your own manner . 
 you can say ' what be the use of talk of thing that at the good be 
 impossible ? ' what be of course the use ? it be only my little madness . 
 you would talk if you be torment . and I do not   mean now about HIM . oh 
 for he - ! " positively , strangely , bitterly , as it seem to Strether , 
 she give " he , " for the moment , away . " you do not   care what I think of 
 you ; but I happen to care what you think of I . and what you might , " 
 she add . " what you perhaps even do . " 
 he gain time . " what I do - ? " 
 " do think before . before this . DIDn't   you think - ? " 
 but he have already stop she . " I do not   think anything . I never 
 think a step far than I be oblige to . " 
 " that be perfectly false , I believe , " she return - " except that you 
 may , no doubt , often pull up when thing become too ugly ; or even , I will 
 say , to save you a protest , too beautiful . at any rate , even so far as 
 it be true , we have   thrust on you appearance that you have   have to take in 
 and that have therefore make your obligation . ugly or beautiful - it 
 do not   matter what we call they - you be get on without they , and 
 that be where we be detestable . we bear you - that be where we be . and 
 we may well - for what we have   cost you . all you can do now be not to 
 think at all . and I who should have like to seem to you - well , 
 sublime ! " 
 he could only after a moment re - echo Miss Barrace . " you be wonderful ! " 
 " I be old and abject and hideous " - she go on as without hear he . 
 " Abject above all . or old above all . it be when one be old that it be 
 bad . I do not   care what become of it - let what WILL ; there it be . 
 it be a doom - I know it ; you can not   see it more than I do myself . thing 
 have to happen as they will . " with which she come back again to what , 
 face to face with he , have so quite break down . " of course you 
 would not , even if possible , and no matter what may happen to you , be 
 near we . but think of I , think of I - ! " she exhale it into air . 
 he take refuge in repeat something he have already say and that she 
 have make nothing of . " there be something I believe I can still do . " and 
 he put his hand out for good - bye . 
 she again make nothing of it ; she go on with her insistence . " that 
 will not   help you . there be nothing to help you . " 
 " well , it may help you , " he say . 
 she shake her head . " there be not a grain of certainty in my 
 future - for the only certainty be that I shall be the loser in the end . " 
 she have not   take his hand , but she move with he to the door . " that be 
 cheerful , " he laugh , " for your benefactor ! " 
 " what be cheerful for I , " she reply , " be that we might , you and I , 
 have be friend . that be it - that be it . you see how , as I say , I 
 want everything . I have   want you too . " 
 " ah but you have   had I ! " he declare , at the door , with an emphasis that 
 make an end . 
 III 
 his purpose have be to see Chad the next day , and he have prefigure 
 see he by an early call ; have in general never stand on ceremony 
 in respect to visit at the Boulevard Malesherbes . it have be more 
 often natural for he to go there than for Chad to come to the small 
 hotel , the attraction of which be scant ; yet it nevertheless , just 
 now , at the eleventh hour , do suggest itself to Strether to begin by 
 give the young man a chance . it strike he that , in the inevitable 
 course , Chad would be " round , " as Waymarsh use to say - waymarsh who 
 already , somehow , seem long ago . he have not   come the day before , 
 because it have be arrange between they that Madame de Vionnet should 
 see their friend first ; but now that this passage have take place he 
 would present himself , and their friend would not   have long to wait . 
 Strether assume , he become aware , on this reasoning , that the 
 interesting party to the arrangement would have meet betime , and that 
 the more interesting of the two - as she be after all - would have 
 communicate to the other the issue of her appeal . Chad would know 
 without delay that his mother 's messenger have be with she , and , 
 though it be perhaps not quite easy to see how she could qualify what 
 have occur , he would at least have be sufficiently advise to feel 
 he could go on . the day , however , bring , early or late , no word from 
 he , and Strether feel , as a result of this , that a change have 
 practically come over their intercourse . it be perhaps a premature 
 judgement ; or it only mean perhaps - how could he tell ? - that the 
 wonderful pair he protect have take up again together the excursion 
 he have accidentally check . they might have go back to the country , 
 and go back but with a long breath draw ; that indeed would well mark 
 Chad 's sense that reprobation have not   reward Madame de Vionnet 's 
 request for an interview . at the end of the twenty - four hour , at the 
 end of the forty - eight , there be still no overture ; so that Strether 
 fill up the time , as he have so often fill it before , by go to 
 see Miss Gostrey . 
 he propose amusement to she ; he feel expert now in propose 
 amusement ; and he have thus , for several day , an odd sense of lead 
 she about Paris , of drive she in the Bois , of show she the penny 
 steamboat - those from which the breeze of the Seine be to be good 
 enjoy - that might have belong to a kindly uncle do the honour 
 of the capital to an intelligent niece from the country . he find 
 mean even to take she to shop she do not   know , or that she pretend 
 she do not ; while she , on her side , be , like the country maiden , all 
 passive modest and grateful - go in fact so far as to emulate 
 rusticity in occasional fatigue and bewilderment . Strether describe 
 these vague proceeding to himself , describe they even to she , as a 
 happy interlude ; the sign of which be that the companion say for the 
 time no further word about the matter they have talk of to satiety . he 
 proclaim satiety at the outset , and she quickly take the hint ; as 
 docile both in this and in everything else as the intelligent obedient 
 niece . he tell she as yet nothing of his late adventure - for as an 
 adventure it now rank with he ; he push the whole business 
 temporarily aside and find his interest in the fact of her beautiful 
 assent . she leave question unasked - she who for so long have be all 
 question ; she give herself up to he with an understanding of which 
 mere mute gentleness might have seem the sufficient expression . she 
 know his sense of his situation have take still another step - of that 
 he be quite aware ; but she convey that , whatever have thus happen 
 for he , it be throw into the shade by what be happen for 
 herself . this - though it might not   to a detached spirit have seem 
 much - be the major interest , and she meet it with a new directness of 
 response , measure it from hour to hour with her grave hush of 
 acceptance . touch as he have so often be by she before , he be , for 
 his part too , touch afresh ; all the more that though he could be duly 
 aware of the principle of his own mood he could not   be equally so of the 
 principle of her . he know , that is , in a manner - know roughly and 
 resignedly - what he himself be hatch ; whereas he have to take the 
 chance of what he call to himself Maria 's calculation . it be all 
 he need that she like he enough for what they be do , and even 
 should they do a good deal more would still like he enough for that ; 
 the essential freshness of a relation so simple be a cool bath to the 
 soreness produce by other relation . these other appear to he now 
 horribly complex ; they bristle with fine point , point all 
 unimaginable beforehand , point that prick and draw blood ; a fact 
 that give to an hour with his present friend on a bateau - mouche , or in 
 the afternoon shade of the Champs Elysees , something of the innocent 
 pleasure of handle rounded ivory . his relation with Chad 
 personally - from the moment he have get his point of view - have be of 
 the simple ; yet this also strike he as bristle , after a third and 
 a fourth blank day have pass . it be as if at last however his care 
 for such indication have drop ; there come a fifth blank day and he 
 cease to enquire or to heed . 
 they now take on to his fancy , Miss Gostrey and he , the image of the 
 Babes in the wood ; they could trust the merciful element to let they 
 continue at peace . he have be great already , as he know , at 
 postponement ; but he have only to get afresh into the rhythm of one to 
 feel its fine attraction . it amuse he to say to himself that he 
 might for all the world have be go to die - die resignedly ; the 
 scene be fill for he with so deep a death - bed hush , so melancholy a 
 charm . that mean the postponement of everything else - which make so 
 for the quiet lapse of life ; and the postponement in especial of the 
 reckoning to come - unless indeed the reckoning to come be to be one 
 and the same thing with extinction . it face he , the reckoning , over 
 the shoulder of much interpose experience - which also face he ; and 
 one would float to it doubtless duly through these cavern of Kubla 
 Khan . it be really behind everything ; it have not   merge in what he have 
 do ; his final appreciation of what he have do - his appreciation on 
 the spot - would provide it with its main sharpness . the spot so 
 focusse be of course Woollett , and he be to see , at the good , what 
 Woollett would be with everything there change for he . would not   that 
 revelation practically amount to the wind - up of his career ? well , the 
 summer 's end would show ; his suspense have meanwhile exactly the 
 sweetness of vain delay ; and he have with it , we should mention , other 
 pastime than Maria 's company - plenty of separate musing in which his 
 luxury fail he but at one point . he be well in port , the outer sea 
 behind he , and it be only a matter of get ashore . there be a 
 question that come and go for he , however , as he rest against the 
 side of his ship , and it be a little to get rid of the obsession that 
 he prolong his hour with Miss Gostrey . it be a question about 
 himself , but it could only be settle by see Chad again ; it be 
 indeed his principal reason for want to see Chad . after that it 
 would not   signify - it be a ghost that certain word would easily lay to 
 rest . only the young man must be there to take the word . once they 
 be take he would not   have a question leave ; none , that be , in 
 connexion with this particular affair . it would not   then matter even to 
 himself that he might now have be guilty of speak because of what 
 he have forfeit . that be the refinement of his supreme scruple - he 
 wish so to leave what he have forfeit out of account . he wish not 
 to do anything because he have miss something else , because he be 
 sore or sorry or impoverish , because he be maltreat or desperate ; 
 he wish to do everything because he be lucid and quiet , just the 
 same for himself on all essential point as he have ever be . thus it 
 be that while he virtually hang about for Chad he keep mutely put 
 it : " you have   be chuck , old boy ; but what have that to do with it ? " 
 it would have sicken he to feel vindictive . 
 these tint of feeling indeed be doubtless but the iridescence of his 
 idleness , and they be presently lose in a new light from Maria . she 
 have a fresh fact for he before the week be out , and she practically 
 meet he with it on his appear one night . he have not   on this day see 
 she , but have plan present himself in due course to ask she to 
 dine with he somewhere out of door , on one of the terrace , in one of 
 the garden , of which the Paris of summer be profuse . it have then 
 come on to rain , so that , disconcert , he change his mind ; dining 
 alone at home , a little stuffily and stupidly , and wait on she 
 afterwards to make up his loss . he be sure within a minute that 
 something have happen ; it be so in the air of the rich little room 
 that he have scarcely to name his thought . softly light , the whole 
 colour of the place , with its vague value , be in cool fusion - an 
 effect that make the visitor stand for a little agaze . it be as if in 
 do so now he have feel a recent presence - his recognition of the 
 passage of which his hostess in turn divine . she have scarcely to say 
 it - " yes , she have be here , and this time I receive she . " it be not 
 till a minute later that she add : " there be , as I understand you , 
 no reason now - ! " 
 " none for your refusing ? " 
 " no - if you have   do what you have   have to do . " 
 " I have   certainly so far do it , " Strether say , " as that you need not 
 fear the effect , or the appearance of come between we . there be 
 nothing between we now but what we ourselves have put there , and not an 
 inch of room for anything else whatever . therefore you be only 
 beautifully with we as always - though doubtless now , if she have talk 
 to you , rather more with we than less . of course if she come , " he 
 add , " it be to talk to you . " 
 " it be to talk to I , " Maria return ; on which he be far sure 
 that she be practically in possession of what he himself have not   yet 
 tell she . he be even sure she be in possession of thing he himself 
 could not   have tell ; for the consciousness of they be now all in her 
 face and accompany there with a shade of sadness that mark in she 
 the close of all uncertainty . it come out for he more than ever yet 
 that she have have from the first a knowledge she believe he not to 
 have have , a knowledge the sharp acquisition of which might be destine 
 to make a difference for he . the difference for he might not 
 inconceivably be an arrest of his independence and a change in his 
 attitude - in other word a revulsion in favour of the principle of 
 Woollett . she have really prefigure the possibility of a shock that 
 would send he swing back to Mrs. Newsome . he have not , it be true , 
 week after week , show sign of receive it , but the possibility have 
 be none the less in the air . what Maria accordingly have have now to 
 take in be that the shock have descend and that he have not , all the 
 same , swing back . he have grow clear , in a flash , on a point long 
 since settle for herself ; but no reapproximation to Mrs. Newsome have 
 occur in consequence . Madame de Vionnet have by her visit hold up 
 the torch to these truth , and what now linger in poor Maria 's face 
 be the somewhat smoky light of the scene between they . if the light 
 however be not , as we have hint , the glow of joy , the reason for 
 this also be perhaps discernible to Strether even through the blur 
 cast over they by his natural modesty . she have hold herself for month 
 with a firm hand ; she have not   interfere on any chance - and chance be 
 specious enough - that she might interfere to her profit . she have 
 turn she back on the dream that Mrs. Newsome 's rupture , their 
 friend 's forfeiture - the engagement the relation itself , break beyond 
 all mending - might furnish forth her advantage ; and , to stay her hand 
 from promote these thing , she have on private , difficult , but rigid , 
 line , play strictly fair . she could not   therefore but feel that , 
 though , as the end of all , the fact in question have be stoutly 
 confirm , her ground for personal , for what might have be call 
 interested , elation remain rather vague . Strether might easily have 
 make out that she have be ask herself , in the hour she have just 
 sit through , if there be still for she , or be only not , a fair 
 shade of uncertainty . let we hasten to add , however , that what he at 
 first make out on this occasion he also at first keep to himself . he 
 only ask what in particular Madame de Vionnet have come for , and as to 
 this his companion be ready . 
 " she want tiding of Mr. Newsome , whom she appear not to have see 
 for some day . " 
 " then she have not   be away with he again ? " 
 " she seem to think , " Maria answer , " that he might have go away 
 with you . " 
 " and do you tell she I know nothing of he ? " 
 she have her indulgent headshake . " I have   know nothing of what you know . 
 I could only tell she I would ask you . " 
 " then I have   not see he for a week - and of course I have   wonder . " his 
 wonderment show at this moment as sharp , but he presently go on . 
 " still , I dare say I can put my hand on he . do she strike you , " he 
 ask , " as anxious ? " 
 " she be always anxious . " 
 " after all I have   do for she ? " and he have one of the last flicker of 
 his occasional mild mirth . " to think that be just what I come out to 
 prevent ! " 
 she take it up but to reply . " you do not   regard he then as safe ? " 
 " I be just go to ask you how in that respect you regard Madame de 
 Vionnet . " 
 she look at he a little . " what woman be ever safe ? she tell I , " 
 she add - and it be as if at the touch of the connexion - " of your 
 extraordinary meeting in the country . after that a quoi se fier ? " 
 " it be , as an accident , in all the possible or impossible chapter , " 
 Strether concede , " amazing enough . but still , but still - ! " 
 " but still she do not   mind ? " 
 " she do not   mind anything . " 
 " well , then , as you do not   either , we may all sink to rest ! " 
 he appear to agree with she , but he have his reservation . " I do mind 
 Chad 's disappearance . " 
 " oh you will get he back . but now you know , " she say , " why I go to 
 Mentone . " he have sufficiently let she see that he have by this time 
 gather thing together , but there be nature in her wish to make they 
 clear still . " I do not   want you to put it to I . " 
 " to put it to you - ? " 
 " the question of what you be at last - a week ago - to see for 
 yourself . I do not   want to have to lie for she . I feel that to be too 
 much for I . a man of course be always expect to do it - to do it , I 
 mean , for a woman ; but not a woman for another woman ; unless perhaps on 
 the tit - for - tat principle , as an indirect way of protect herself . I 
 do not   need protection , so that I be free to ' funk ' you - simply to 
 dodge your test . the responsibility be too much for I . I gain 
 time , and when I come back the need of a test have blow over . " 
 Strether think of it serenely . " yes ; when you come back little 
 Bilham have show I what be expect of a gentleman . little Bilham have 
 lie like one . " 
 " and like what you believe he ? " 
 " well , " say Strether , " it be but a technical lie - he class the 
 attachment as virtuous . that be a view for which there be much to be 
 say - and the virtue come out for I hugely there be of course a great 
 deal of it . I get it full in the face , and I have not , you see , do 
 with it yet . " 
 " what I see , what I see , " Maria return , " be that you dress up even 
 the virtue . you be wonderful - you be beautiful , as I have   have the 
 honour of tell you before ; but , if you wish really to know , " she 
 sadly confess , " I never quite know where you be . there be 
 moment , " she explain , " when you strike I as grandly cynical ; there 
 be other when you strike I as grandly vague . " 
 her friend consider . " I have phase . I have flight . " 
 " yes , but thing must have a basis . " 
 " a basis seem to I just what her beauty supply . " 
 " her beauty of person ? " 
 " well , her beauty of everything . the impression she make . she have 
 such variety and yet such harmony . " 
 she consider he with one of her deep return of indulgence - return 
 out of all proportion to the irritation they flood over . " you be 
 complete . " 
 " you be always too personal , " he good - humouredly say ; " but that be 
 precisely how I wonder and wander . " 
 " if you mean , " she go on , " that she be from the first for you the 
 most charming woman in the world , nothing be more simple . only that be 
 an odd foundation . " 
 " for what I rear on it ? " 
 " for what you do not ! " 
 " well , it be all not a fixed quantity . and it have for I - it have 
 still - such element of strangeness . her great age than his , her 
 different world , tradition , association ; her other opportunity , 
 liability , standard . " 
 his friend listen with respect to his enumeration of these 
 disparity ; then she dispose of they at a stroke . " those thing be 
 nothing when a woman 's hit . it be very awful . she be hit . " 
 Strether , on his side , do justice to that plea . " oh of course I see 
 she be hit . that she be hit be what we be busy with ; that she be 
 hit be our great affair . but somehow I could not   think of she as down 
 in the dust . and as put there by our little Chad ! " 
 " yet be not   ' your ' little Chad just your miracle ? " 
 Strether admit it . " of course I move among miracle . it be all 
 phantasmagoric . but the great fact be that so much of it be none of 
 my business - as I see my business . it be not   even now . " 
 his companion turn away on this , and it might well have be yet 
 again with the sharpness of a fear of how little his philosophy could 
 bring she personally . " I wish she could hear you ! " 
 " Mrs. Newsome ? " 
 " no - not Mrs. Newsome ; since I understand you that it do not   matter 
 now what Mrs. Newsome hear . have not   she hear everything ? " 
 " practically - yes . " he have think a moment , but he go on . " you wish 
 Madame de Vionnet could hear I ? " 
 " Madame de Vionnet . " she have come back to he . " she think just the 
 contrary of what you say . that you distinctly judge she . " 
 he turn over the scene as the two woman thus place together for he 
 seem to give it . " she might have know - ! " 
 " might have know you do not ? " Miss Gostrey ask as he let it drop . 
 " she be sure of it at first , " she pursue as he say nothing ; ' she 
 take it for grant , at least , as any woman in her position would . but 
 after that she change her mind ; she believe you believe - " 
 " well ? " - he be curious . 
 " why in her sublimity . and that belief have remain with she , I make 
 out , till the accident of the other day open your eye . for that it 
 do , " say Maria , " open they - " 
 " she can not   help " - he have take it up - " be aware ? no , " he muse ; " I 
 suppose she think of that even yet . " 
 " then they be close ? there you be ! however , if you see she as the 
 most charming woman in the world it come to the same thing . and if 
 you would like I to tell she that you do still so see she - ! " Miss 
 Gostrey , in short , offer herself for service to the end . 
 it be an offer he could temporarily entertain ; but he decide . " she 
 know perfectly how I see she . " 
 " not favourably enough , she mention to I , to wish ever to see she 
 again . she tell I you have take a final leave of she . she say 
 you have   do with she . " 
 " so I have . " 
 Maria have a pause ; then she speak as if for conscience . " she would not 
 have do with you . she feel she have lose you - yet that she might 
 have be well for you . " 
 " oh she have be quite good enough ! " Strether laugh . 
 " she think you and she might at any rate have be friend . " 
 " we might certainly . that be just " - he continue to laugh - " why I be 
 go . " 
 it be as if Maria could feel with this then at last that she have do 
 she good for each . but she have still an idea . " shall I tell she that ? " 
 " no . tell she nothing . " 
 " very well then . " to which in the next breath Miss Gostrey add : " poor 
 dear thing ! " 
 her friend wonder ; then with raise eyebrow : " I ? " 
 " oh no . Marie de Vionnet . " 
 he accept the correction , but he wonder still . " be you so sorry 
 for she as that ? " 
 it make she think a moment - make she even speak with a smile . but she 
 do not   really retract . " I be sorry for we all ! " 
 IV 
 he be to delay no long to re - establish communication with Chad , and 
 we have just see that he have speak to Miss Gostrey of this intention 
 on hear from she of the young man 's absence . it be not moreover 
 only the assurance so give that prompt he ; it be the need of 
 cause his conduct to square with another profession still - the motive 
 he have describe to she as his sharp for now get away . if he 
 be to get away because of some of the relation involve in stay , 
 the cold attitude toward they might look pedantic in the light of 
 linger on . he must do both thing ; he must see Chad , but he must 
 go . the more he think of the former of these duty the more he feel 
 himself make a subject of insistence of the latter . they be alike 
 intensely present to he as he sit in front of a quiet little cafe into 
 which he have drop on quit Maria 's entresol . the rain that have 
 spoil his evening with she be over ; for it be still to he as if 
 his evening have be spoil - though it might not   have be wholly the 
 rain . it be late when he leave the cafe , yet not too late ; he could not 
 in any case go straight to bed , and he would walk round by the 
 Boulevard Malesherbes - rather far round - on his way home . present 
 enough always be the small circumstance that have originally press 
 for he the spring of so big a difference - the accident of little 
 Bilham 's appearance on the balcony of the mystic troisieme at the 
 moment of his first visit , and the effect of it on his sense of what 
 be then before he . he recall his watch , his wait , and the 
 recognition that have proceed from the young stranger , that have play 
 frankly into the air and have presently bring he up - thing smooth 
 the way for his first straight step . he have since have occasion , a few 
 time , to pass the house without go in ; but he have never pass it 
 without again feel how it have then speak to he . he stop short 
 to - night on come to sight of it : it be as if his last day be 
 oddly copy his first . the window of Chad 's apartment be open to 
 the balcony - a pair of they light ; and a figure that have come out and 
 take up little Bilham 's attitude , a figure whose cigarette - spark he 
 could see lean on the rail and look down at he . it denote 
 however no reappearance of his young friend ; it quickly define 
 itself in the temper darkness as Chad 's more solid shape ; so that 
 Chad 's be the attention that after he have step forward into the 
 street and signal , he easily engage ; Chad 's be the voice that , 
 sound into the night with promptness and seemingly with joy , greet 
 he and call he up . 
 that the young man have be visible there just in this position 
 express somehow for Strether that , as Maria Gostrey have report , he 
 have be absent and silent ; and our friend draw breath on each 
 landing - the lift , at that hour , have cease to work - before the 
 implication of the fact . he have be for a week intensely away , away 
 to a distance and alone ; but he be more back than ever , and the 
 attitude in which Strether have surprise he be something more than a 
 return - it be clearly a conscious surrender . he have arrive but an 
 hour before , from London , from Lucerne , from Homburg , from no matter 
 where - though the visitor 's fancy , on the staircase , like to fill it 
 out ; and after a bath , a talk with Baptiste and a supper of light cold 
 clever french thing , which one could see the remain of there in the 
 circle of the lamp , pretty and ultra - parisian , he have come into the air 
 again for a smoke , be occupy at the moment of Strether 's approach in 
 what might have be call take up his life afresh . his life , his 
 life ! - Strether pause anew , on the last flight , at this final rather 
 breathless sense of what Chad 's life be do with Chad 's mother 's 
 emissary . it be drag he , at strange hour , up the staircase of 
 the rich ; it be keep he out of bed at the end of long hot day ; it 
 be transform beyond recognition the simple , subtle , conveniently 
 uniform thing that have anciently pass with he for a life of his own . 
 why should it concern he that Chad be to be fortify in the pleasant 
 practice of smoking on balcony , of sup on salad , of feel his 
 special condition agreeably reaffirm themselves , of find 
 reassurance in comparison and contrast ? there be no answer to such 
 a question but that he be still practically committed - he have perhaps 
 never yet so much known it . it make he feel old , and he would buy his 
 railway - ticket - feeling , no doubt , old - the next day ; but he have 
 meanwhile come up four flight , count the entresol , at midnight and 
 without a lift , for Chad 's life . the young man , hear he by this 
 time , and with Baptiste send to rest , be already at the door ; so that 
 Strether have before he in full visibility the cause in which he be 
 labour and even , with the troisieme fairly gain , pant a little . 
 Chad offer he , as always , a welcome in which the cordial and the 
 formal - so far as the formal be the respectful - handsomely meet ; and 
 after he have express a hope that he would let he put he up for the 
 night Strether be in full possession of the key , as it might have be 
 call , to what have lately happen . if he have just think of himself 
 as old Chad be at sight of he think of he as old : he want to 
 put he up for the night just because he be ancient and weary . it 
 could never be say the tenant of these quarter be not   nice to he ; a 
 tenant who , if he might indeed now keep he , be probably prepared to 
 work it all still more thoroughly . our friend have in fact the 
 impression that with the minimum of encouragement Chad would propose to 
 keep he indefinitely ; an impression in the lap of which one of his own 
 possibility seem to sit . Madame de Vionnet have wish he to 
 stay - so why do not   that happily fit ? he could enshrine himself for 
 the rest of his day in his young host 's chambre d'ami and draw out 
 these day at his young host 's expense : there could scarce be great 
 logical expression of the countenance he have be move to give . there 
 be literally a minute - it be strange enough - during which he grasp 
 the idea that as he be act , as he could only act , he be 
 inconsistent . the sign that the inward force he have obey really 
 hang together would be that - in default always of another career - he 
 should promote the good cause by mount guard on it . these thing , 
 during his first minute , come and go ; but they be after all 
 practically disposed of as soon as he have mention his errand . he have 
 come to say good - bye - yet that be only a part ; so that from the moment 
 Chad accept his farewell the question of a more ideal affirmation 
 give way to something else . he proceed with the rest of his business . 
 " you will be a brute , you know - you will be guilty of the last infamy - if 
 you ever forsake she . " 
 that , utter there at the solemn hour , utter in the place that be 
 full of her influence , be the rest of his business ; and when once he 
 have hear himself say it he feel that his message have never before be 
 speak . it place his present call immediately on solid ground , and 
 the effect of it be to enable he quite to play with what we have 
 call the key . Chad show no shade of embarrassment , but have none 
 the less be trouble for he after their meeting in the country ; have 
 have fear and doubt on the subject of his comfort . he be disturb , 
 as it be , only for he , and have positively go away to ease he off , 
 to let he down - if it be not   indeed rather to screw he up - the more 
 gently . see he now fairly jade he have come , with characteristic 
 good humour , all the way to meet he , and what Strether thereupon 
 supremely make out be that he would abound for he to the end in 
 conscientious assurance . this be what be between they while the 
 visitor remain ; so far from have to go over old ground he find his 
 entertainer keen to agree to everything . it could not   be put too 
 strongly for he that he would be a brute . " oh rather ! - if I should do 
 anything of that sort . I hope you believe I really feel it . " 
 " I want it , " say Strether , " to be my last word of all to you . I can not 
 say more , you know ; and I do not   see how I can do more , in every way , 
 than I have   do . " 
 Chad take this , almost artlessly , as a direct allusion . " you have   see 
 she ? " 
 " oh yes - to say good - bye . and if I have doubt the truth of what I 
 tell you - " 
 " she would have clear up your doubt ? " Chad understand - " rather " - again ! 
 it even keep he briefly silent . but he make that up . " she must have 
 be wonderful . " 
 " she be , " Strether candidly admit - all of which practically tell as 
 a reference to the condition create by the accident of the previous 
 week . 
 they appear for a little to be look back at it ; and that come out 
 still more in what Chad next say . " I do not   know what you have   really 
 think , all along ; I never do know - for anything , with you , seem to 
 be possible . but of course - of course - " without confusion , quite 
 with nothing but indulgence , he break down , he pull up . " after all , 
 you understand . I speak to you originally only as I had to speak . 
 there be only one way - be not   there ? - about such thing . however , " he 
 smile with a final philosophy , " I see it be all right . " 
 Strether meet his eye with a sense of multiplying thought . what be 
 it that make he at present , late at night and after journey , so 
 renewedly , so substantially young ? Strether see in a moment what it 
 be - it be that he be young again than Madame de Vionnet . he 
 himself say immediately none of the thing that he be think ; he 
 say something quite different . " you have really be to a distance ? " 
 " I have   be to England . " Chad speak cheerfully and promptly , but give no 
 further account of it than to say : " one must sometimes get off . " 
 Strether want no more fact - he only want to justify , as it be , 
 his question . " of course you do as you be free to do . but I hope , 
 this time , that you do not   go for I . " 
 " for very shame at bother you really too much ? my dear man , " Chad 
 laugh , " what wouldn't   I do for you ? " 
 Strether 's easy answer for this be that it be a disposition he have 
 exactly come to profit by . " even at the risk of be in your way I have 
 wait on , you know , for a definite reason . " 
 Chad take it in . " oh yes - for we to make if possible a still well 
 impression . " and he stand there happily exhale his full general 
 consciousness . " I be delighted to gather that you feel we have   make it . " 
 there be a pleasant irony in the word , which his guest , preoccupy 
 and keep to the point , do not   take up . " if I have my sense of 
 want the rest of the time - the time of their be still on this 
 side , " he continue to explain - " I know now why I want it . " 
 he be as grave , as distinct , as a demonstrator before a blackboard , 
 and Chad continue to face he like an intelligent pupil . " you want 
 to have be put through the whole thing . " 
 Strether again , for a moment , say nothing ; he turn his eye away , 
 and they lose themselves , through the open window , in the dusky outer 
 air . " I shall learn from the Bank here where they be now have their 
 letter , and my last word , which I shall write in the morning and which 
 they be expect as my ultimatum , will so immediately reach they . " the 
 light of his plural pronoun be sufficiently reflect in his 
 companion 's face as he again meet it ; and he complete his 
 demonstration . he pursue indeed as if for himself . " of course I have 
 first to justify what I shall do . " 
 " you be justify it beautifully ! " Chad declare . 
 " it be not a question of advise you not to go , " Strether say , " but of 
 absolutely prevent you , if possible , from so much as think of it . 
 let I accordingly appeal to you by all you hold sacred . " 
 Chad show a surprise . " what make you think I capable - ? " 
 " you would not only be , as I say , a brute ; you would be , " his companion go on 
 in the same way , " a criminal of the deep dye . " 
 Chad give a sharp look , as if to gauge a possible suspicion . " I do not 
 know what should make you think I be tired of she . " 
 Strether do not   quite know either , and such impression , for the 
 imaginative mind , be always too fine , too float , to produce on the 
 spot their warrant . there be none the less for he , in the very 
 manner of his host 's allusion to satiety as a thinkable motive , a 
 slight breath of the ominous . " I feel how much more she can do for 
 you . she have not   do it all yet . stay with she at least till she have . " 
 " and leave she then ? " 
 Chad have keep smile , but its effect in Strether be a shade of 
 dryness . " do not   leave she before . when you have   get all that can be 
 get - I do not   say , " he add a trifle grimly . " that will be the proper 
 time . but as , for you , from such a woman , there will always be 
 something to be get , my remark be not a wrong to she . " Chad let he go 
 on , show every decent deference , show perhaps also a candid 
 curiosity for this sharp accent . " I remember you , you know , as you 
 be . " 
 " an awful ass , be not   I ? " 
 the response be as prompt as if he have press a spring ; it have a 
 ready abundance at which he even wince ; so that he take a moment to 
 meet it . " you certainly then would not   have seem worth all you have   let 
 I in for . you have   define yourself well . your value have quintuple . " 
 " well then , would not   that be enough - ? " 
 Chad have risk it jocosely , but Strether remain blank . " enough ? " 
 " if one should wish to live on one 's accumulation ? " after which , 
 however , as his friend appear cold to the joke , the young man as 
 easily drop it . " of course I really never forget , night or day , 
 what I owe she . I owe she everything . I give you my word of honour , " 
 he frankly ring out , " that I be not a bit tired of she . " Strether at 
 this only give he a stare : the way youth could express itself be 
 again and again a wonder . he mean no harm , though he might after all 
 be capable of much ; yet he speak of be " tired " of she almost as he 
 might have speak of be tired of roast mutton for dinner . " she have 
 never for a moment yet bore I - never be want , as the clever 
 woman sometimes be , in tact . she have never talk about her tact - as 
 even they too sometimes talk ; but she have always have it . she have never 
 have it more " - he handsomely make the point - " than just lately . " and he 
 scrupulously go far . " she have never be anything I could call a 
 burden . " 
 Strether for a moment say nothing ; then he speak gravely , with his 
 shade of dryness deepen . " oh if you do not   do her justice - ! " 
 " I should be a beast , eh ? " 
 Strether devote no time to say what he would be ; that , visibly , 
 would take they far . if there be nothing for it but to repeat , 
 however , repetition be no mistake . " you owe she everything - very much 
 more than she can ever owe you . you have   in other word duty to she , 
 of the most positive sort ; and I do not   see what other duty - as the 
 other be present to you - can be hold to go before they . " 
 Chad look at he with a smile . " and you know of course about the 
 other , eh ? - since it be you yourself who have do the presenting . " 
 " much of it - yes - and to the good of my ability . but not all - from the 
 moment your sister take my place . " 
 " she do not , " Chad return . " Sally take a place , certainly ; but it 
 be never , I see from the first moment , to be yours . no one - with 
 we - will ever take your . it would not   be possible . " 
 " ah of course , " sigh Strether , " I know it . I believe you be right . 
 no one in the world , I imagine , be ever so portentously solemn . there 
 I be , " he add with another sigh , as if weary enough , on occasion , of 
 this truth . " I be make so . " 
 Chad appear for a little to consider the way he be make ; he might 
 for this purpose have measure he up and down . his conclusion favour 
 the fact . " you have never need any one to make you well . there 
 have never be any one good enough . they could not , " the young man 
 declare . 
 his friend hesitate . " I beg your pardon . they have . " 
 Chad show , not without amusement , his doubt . " who then ? " 
 Strether - though a little dimly - smile at he . " Women - too . " 
 " ' two ' ? " - Chad star and laugh . " oh I do not   believe , for such work , 
 in any more than one ! so you be prove too much . and what be 
 beastly , at all event , " he add , " be lose you . " 
 Strether have set himself in motion for departure , but at this he 
 pause . " be you afraid ? " 
 " Afraid - ? " 
 " of do wrong . I mean away from my eye . " before Chad could speak , 
 however , he have take himself up . " I AM , certainly , " he laugh , 
 " prodigious . " 
 " yes , you spoil we for all the stupid - ! " this might have be , on 
 Chad 's part , in its extreme emphasis , almost too freely extravagant ; 
 but it be full , plainly enough , of the intention of comfort , it 
 carry with it a protest against doubt and a promise , positively , of 
 performance . pick up a hat in the vestibule he come out with his 
 friend , come downstairs , take his arm , affectionately , as to help and 
 guide he , treat he if not exactly as aged and infirm , yet as a 
 noble eccentric who appeal to tenderness , and keep on with he , 
 while they walk , to the next corner and the next . " you need not   tell 
 I , you need not   tell I ! " - this again as they proceed , he wish to 
 make Strether feel . what he need not   tell he be now at last , in the 
 geniality of separation , anything at all it concern he to know . he 
 know , up to the hilt - that really come over Chad ; he understand , feel , 
 record his vow ; and they linger on it as they have linger in their 
 walk to Strether 's hotel the night of their first meeting . the latter 
 take , at this hour , all he could get ; he have give all he have have to 
 give ; he be as deplete as if he have spend his last sou . but there 
 be just one thing for which , before they break off , Chad seem 
 dispose slightly to bargain . his companion need not , as he say , tell 
 he , but he might himself mention that he have be get some news of 
 the art of advertisement . he come out quite suddenly with this 
 announcement while Strether wonder if his revive interest be what 
 have take he , with strange inconsequence , over to London . he appear 
 at all event to have be look into the question and have 
 encounter a revelation . advertising scientifically work present 
 itself thus as the great new force . " it really do the thing , you 
 know . " 
 they be face to face under the street - lamp as they have be the first 
 night , and Strether , no doubt , look blank . " affect , you mean , the 
 sale of the object advertise ? " 
 " yes - but affect it extraordinarily ; really beyond what one have 
 suppose . I mean of course when it be do as one make out that in our 
 roaring age , it can be do . I have   be find out a little , though it 
 doubtless do not   amount to much more than what you originally , so 
 awfully vividly - and all , very nearly , that first night - put before I . 
 it be an art like another , and infinite like all the art . " he go on 
 as if for the joke of it - almost as if his friend 's face amuse he . 
 " in the hand , naturally , of a master . the right man must take hold . 
 with the right man to work it c'est un monde . " 
 Strether have watch he quite as if , there on the pavement without a 
 pretext , he have begin to dance a fancy step . " be what you be think 
 of that you yourself , in the case you have in mind , would be the right 
 man ? " 
 Chad have throw back his light coat and thrust each of his thumb into 
 an armhole of his waistcoat ; in which position his finger play up 
 and down . " why , what be he but what you yourself , as I say , take I 
 for when you first come out ? " 
 Strether feel a little faint , but he coerce his attention . " oh yes , 
 and there be no doubt that , with your natural part , you would have much in 
 common with he . advertising be clearly at this time of day the secret 
 of trade . it be quite possible it will be open to you - give the whole 
 of your mind to it - to make the whole place hum with you . your 
 mother 's appeal be to the whole of your mind , and that be exactly the 
 strength of her case . " 
 Chad 's finger continue to twiddle , but he have something of a drop . 
 " ah we have   be through my mother 's case ! " 
 " so I think . why then do you speak of the matter ? " 
 " only because it be part of our original discussion . to wind up where 
 we begin , my interest 's purely platonic . there at any rate the fact 
 be - the fact of the possible . I mean the money in it . " 
 " oh damn the money in it ! " say Strether . and then as the young man 's 
 fix smile seem to shine out more strange : " shall you give your 
 friend up for the money in it ? " 
 Chad preserve his handsome grimace as well as the rest of his 
 attitude . " you be not altogether - in your so great ' solemnity ' - kind . 
 have not   I be drink you in - show you all I feel you be worth to 
 I ? what have I do , what be I do , but cleave to she to the death ? 
 the only thing be , " he good - humouredly explain , " that one can not   but 
 have it before one , in the cleave - the point where the death come 
 in . do not   be afraid for that . it be pleasant to a fellow 's feeling , " 
 he develop , " to ' size - up ' the bribe he apply his foot to . " 
 " oh then if all you want be a kickable surface the bribe 's enormous . " 
 " good . then there it go ! " Chad administer his kick with fantastic 
 force and send an imaginary object fly . it be accordingly as if 
 they be once more rid of the question and could come back to what 
 really concern he . " of course I shall see you tomorrow . " 
 but Strether scarce heed the plan propose for this ; he have still the 
 impression - not the slighter for the simulate kick - of an irrelevant 
 hornpipe or jig . " you be restless . " 
 " ah , " return Chad as they part , " you be exciting . " 
 V 
 he have , however , within two day , another separation to face . he have 
 send Maria Gostrey a word early , by hand , to ask if he might come to 
 breakfast ; in consequence of which , at noon , she await he in the 
 cool shade of her little Dutch - look dining - room . this retreat be at 
 the back of the house , with a view of a scrap of old garden that have 
 be save from modern ravage ; and though he have on more than one other 
 occasion have his leg under its small and peculiarly polished table of 
 hospitality , the place have never before strike he as so sacred to 
 pleasant knowledge , to intimate charm , to antique order , to a neatness 
 that be almost august . to sit there be , as he have tell his hostess 
 before , to see life reflect for the time in ideally keep pewter ; 
 which be somehow become , improve to life , so that one 's eye be 
 hold and comfort . Strether 's be comfort at all event now - and 
 the more that it be the last time - with the charming effect , on the 
 board bare of a cloth and proud of its perfect surface , of the small 
 old crockery and old silver , match by the more substantial piece 
 happily disposed about the room . the specimen of vivid Delf , in 
 particular have the dignity of family portrait ; and it be in the midst 
 of they that our friend resignedly express himself . he speak even 
 with a certain philosophic humour . " there be nothing more to wait for ; 
 I seem to have do a good day 's work . I have   let they have it all 
 round . I have   see Chad , who have be to London and come back . he tell 
 I I be ' exciting , ' and I seem indeed pretty well to have upset every 
 one . I have   at any rate excite HIM . he be distinctly restless . " 
 " you have   excite ME , " Miss Gostrey smile . " i'm distinctly restless . " 
 " oh you be that when I find you . it seem to I I have   rather get you 
 out of it . what be this , " he ask as he look about he , " but a haunt 
 of ancient peace ? " 
 " I wish with all my heart , " she presently reply , " I could make you 
 treat it as a haven of rest . " on which they front each other , across 
 the table , as if thing unuttere be in the air . 
 Strether seem , in his way , when he next speak , to take some of they 
 up . " it would not   give I - that would be the trouble - what it will , no 
 doubt , still give you . I be not , " he explain , lean back in his 
 chair , but with his eye on a small ripe round melon - " in real harmony 
 with what surround I . you be . I take it too hard . you don't. it 
 make - that be what it come to in the end - a fool of I . " then at a 
 tangent , " what have he be do in London ? " he demand . 
 " ah one may go to London , " Maria laugh . " you know I do . " 
 yes - he take the reminder . " and you bring I back . " he brood there 
 opposite to she , but without gloom . " whom have Chad bring ? he be full 
 of idea . and I write to Sarah , " he add , " the first thing this 
 morning . so I be square . I be ready for they . " 
 she neglect certain part of this speech in the interest of other . 
 " Marie say to I the other day that she feel he to have the making 
 of an immense man of business . " 
 " there it be . he be the son of his father ! " 
 " but SUCH a father ! " 
 " ah just the right one from that point of view ! but it be not   his 
 father in he , " Strether add , " that trouble I . " 
 " what be it then ? " he come back to his breakfast ; he partook presently 
 of the charming melon , which she liberally cut for he ; and it be only 
 after this that he meet her question . then moreover it be but to 
 remark that he would answer she presently . she wait , she watch , she 
 serve he and amuse he , and it be perhaps with this last idea that 
 she soon remind he of his have never even yet name to her the 
 article produce at Woollett . " do you remember our talk of it in 
 London - that night at the play ? " before he could say yes , however , she 
 have put it to he for other matter . do he remember , do he 
 remember - this and that of their first day ? he remember everything , 
 bring up with humour even thing of which she profess no 
 recollection , thing she vehemently deny ; and fall back above all 
 on the great interest of their early time , the curiosity feel by both 
 of they as to where he would " come out . " they have so assume it be to 
 be in some wonderful place - they have think of it as so very MUCH out . 
 well , that be doubtless what it have be - since he have come out just 
 there . he be out , in truth , as far as it be possible to be , and must 
 now rather bethink himself of get in again . he find on the spot 
 the image of his recent history ; he be like one of the figure of the 
 old clock at Berne . they come out , on one side , at their hour , jig 
 along their little course in the public eye , and go in on the other 
 side . he too have jig his little course - he too a modest retreat 
 await . he offer now , should she really like to know , to name the 
 great product of Woollett . it would be a great commentary on 
 everything . at this she stop he off ; she not only have no wish to 
 know , but she would not   know for the world . she have do with the 
 product of Woollett - for all the good she have get from they . she 
 desire no further news of they , and she mention that Madame de 
 Vionnet herself have , to her knowledge , live exempt from the 
 information he be ready to supply . she have never consent to receive 
 it , though she would have take it , under stress , from Mrs. Pocock . but 
 it be a matter about which Mrs. Pocock appear to have have little to 
 say - never sound the word - and it do not   signify now . there be 
 nothing clearly for Maria Gostrey that signify now - save one sharp 
 point , that be , to which she come in time . " I do not   know whether it be 
 before you as a possibility that , leave to himself , Mr. Chad may after 
 all go back . I judge that it be more or less so before you , from what 
 you just now say of he . " 
 her guest have his eye on she , kindly but attentively , as if foresee 
 what be to follow this . " I do not   think it will be for the money . " and 
 then as she seem uncertain : " I mean I do not   believe it will be for 
 that he will give she up . " 
 " then he will give she up ? " 
 Strether wait a moment , rather slow and deliberate now , draw out a 
 little this last soft stage , plead with she in various suggestive 
 and unspoken way for patience and understanding . " what be you just 
 about to ask I ? " 
 " be there anything he can do that would make you patch it up ? " 
 " with Mrs. Newsome ? " 
 her assent , as if she have have a delicacy about sound the name , be 
 only in her face ; but she add with it : " or be there anything he can 
 do that would make she try it ? " 
 " to patch it up with I ? " his answer come at last in a conclusive 
 headshake . " there be nothing any one can do . it be over . over for both 
 of we . " 
 Maria wonder , seem a little to doubt . " be you so sure for she ? " 
 " oh yes - sure now . too much have happen . I be different for she . " 
 she take it in then , draw a deep breath . " I see . so that as 
 she be different for you - " 
 " ah but , " he interrupt , ' she be not . " and as Miss Gostrey wonder 
 again : " she be the same . she be more than ever the same . but I do what 
 I do not   before - I see she . " 
 he speak gravely and as if responsibly - since he have to pronounce ; and 
 the effect of it be slightly solemn , so that she simply exclaim 
 " oh ! " satisfied and grateful , however , she show in her own next 
 word an acceptance of his statement . " what then do you go home to ? " 
 he have push his plate a little away , occupy with another side of 
 the matter ; take refuge verily in that side and feeling so moved that 
 he soon find himself on his foot . he be affect in advance by what 
 he believe might come from she , and he would have like to forestall 
 it and deal with it tenderly ; yet in the presence of it he wish 
 still more to be - though as smoothly as possible - deterrent and 
 conclusive . he put her question by for the moment ; he tell she more 
 about Chad . " it would have be impossible to meet I more than he do 
 last night on the question of the infamy of not stick to she . " 
 " be that what you call it for he - ' infamy ' ? " 
 " oh rather ! I describe to he in detail the base creature he would be , 
 and he quite agree with I about it . " 
 " so that it be really as if you have nail he ? " 
 " quite really as if - ! I tell he I should curse he . " 
 " oh , " she smile , " you have do it . " and then have think again : 
 " you can't after that propose - ! " yet she scan his face . 
 " propose again to Mrs. Newsome ? " 
 she hesitate afresh , but she bring it out . " I have   never believe , 
 you know , that you do propose . I always believe it be really 
 she - and , so far as that go , I can understand it . what I mean be , " 
 she explain , " that with such a spirit - the spirit of curse ! - your 
 breach be past mending . she have only to know what you have   do to he 
 never again to raise a finger . " 
 " I have   do , " say Strether , " what I could - one can not   do more . he 
 protest his devotion and his horror . but I be not sure I have   save he . 
 he protest too much . he ask how one can dream of his be tired . 
 but he have all life before he . " 
 Maria see what he mean . " he be form to please . " 
 " and it be our friend who have form he . " Strether feel in it the 
 strange irony . 
 " so it be scarcely his fault ! " 
 " it be at any rate his danger . I mean , " say Strether , " it be her . but 
 she know it . " 
 " yes , she know it . and be your idea , " Miss Gostrey ask , " that there 
 be some other woman in London ? " 
 " yes . no . that be I have no idea . I be afraid of they . I have   do 
 with they . " and he put out his hand to she . " good - bye . " 
 it bring she back to her unanswered question . " to what do you go 
 home ? " 
 " I do not   know . there will always be something . " 
 " to a great difference , " she say as she keep his hand . 
 " a great difference - no doubt . yet I shall see what I can make of it . " 
 " shall you make anything so good - ? " but , as if remember what Mrs. 
 Newsome have do , it be as far as she go . 
 he have sufficiently understand . " so good as this place at this moment ? 
 so good as what you make of everything you touch ? " he take a moment to 
 say , for , really and truly , what stand about he there in her 
 offer - which be as the offer of exquisite service , of lightened care , 
 for the rest of his day - might well have tempt . it build he softly 
 round , it roof he warmly over , it rest , all so firm , on selection . 
 and what rule selection be beauty and knowledge . it be awkward , it 
 be almost stupid , not to seem to prize such thing ; yet , none the 
 less , so far as they make his opportunity they make it only for a 
 moment . she would moreover understand - she always understand . 
 that indeed might be , but meanwhile she be go on . " there be nothing , 
 you know , I would not   do for you . " 
 " oh yes - I know . " 
 " there be nothing , " she repeat , " in all the world . " 
 " I know . I know . but all the same I must go . " he have get it at last . 
 " to be right . " 
 " to be right ? " 
 she have echo it in vague deprecation , but he feel it already clear 
 for she . " that , you see , be my only logic . not , out of the whole 
 affair , to have get anything for myself . " 
 she think . " but with your wonderful impression you will have get a 
 great deal . " 
 " a great deal " - he agree . " but nothing like you . it be you who would 
 make I wrong ! " 
 honest and fine , she could not   greatly pretend she do not   see it . still 
 she could pretend just a little . " but why should you be so dreadfully 
 right ? " 
 " that be the way that - if I must go - you yourself would be the first to 
 want I . and I can not   do anything else . " 
 so then she have to take it , though still with her defeat protest . " it 
 be not   so much your be ' right ' - it be your horrible sharp eye for what 
 make you so . " 
 " oh but you be just as bad yourself . you can not   resist I when I point 
 that out . " 
 she sigh it at last all comically , all tragically , away . " I can not 
 indeed resist you . " 
 " then there we be ! " say Strether . 
