RODERICK hudson 

 CHAPTER I. Rowland 

 Mallet have make his arrangement to sail for Europe on the first 
 of September , and have in the interval a fortnight to spare , he 
 determine to spend it with his cousin Cecilia , the widow of a nephew of 
 his father . he be urge by the reflection that an affectionate farewell 
 might help to exonerate he from the charge of neglect frequently 
 prefer by this lady . it be not that the young man dislike she ; on 
 the contrary , he regard she with a tender admiration , and he have not 
 forget how , when his cousin have bring her home on her marriage , he 
 have seem to feel the upward sweep of the empty bough from which the 
 golden fruit have be pluck , and have then and there accept the 
 prospect of bachelorhood . the truth be , that , as it will be part of 
 the entertainment of this narrative to exhibit , Rowland Mallet have an 
 uncomfortably sensitive conscience , and that , in spite of the seem 
 paradox , his visit to Cecilia be rare because she and her misfortune 
 be often uppermost in it . her misfortune be three in number : first , 
 she have lose her husband ; second , she have lose her money   or the 
 great part of it ; and third , she live at Northampton , Massachusetts . 
 Mallet 's compassion be really waste , because Cecilia be a very clever 
 woman , and a most skillful counter - plotter to adversity . she have make 
 herself a charming home , her economy be not obtrusive , and there 
 be always a cheerful flutter in the fold of her crape . it be the 
 consciousness of all this that puzzle Mallet whenever he feel tempt 
 to put in his oar . he have money and he have time , but he never could 
 decide just how to place these gift gracefully at Cecilia 's service . 
 he no long feel like marry she : in these eight year that fancy have 
 die a natural death . and yet her extreme cleverness seem somehow to 
 make charity difficult and patronage impossible . he would rather chop 
 off his hand than offer she a check , a piece of useful furniture , or 
 a black silk dress ; and yet there be some sadness in see such a 
 bright , proud woman live in such a small , dull way . Cecilia have , 
 moreover , a turn for sarcasm , and her smile , which be her pretty 
 feature , be never so pretty as when her sprightly phrase have a lurking 
 scratch in it . Rowland remember that , for he , she be all smile , and 
 suspect , awkwardly , that he minister not a little to her sense of 
 the irony of thing . and in truth , with his mean , his leisure , and his 
 opportunity , what have he do ? he have an unaffected suspicion of 
 his uselessness . Cecilia , meanwhile , cut out her own dress , and be 
 personally give her little girl the education of a princess . 

 this time , however , he present himself bravely enough ; for in the way 
 of activity it be something definite , at least , to be go to Europe 
 and to be mean to spend the winter in Rome . Cecilia meet he in the 
 early dusk at the gate of her little garden , amid a study combination 
 of floral perfume . a rosy widow of twenty - eight , half cousin , half 
 hostess , do the honor of an odorous cottage on a midsummer evening , 
 be a phenomenon to which the young man 's imagination be able to do 
 ample justice . Cecilia be always gracious , but this evening she be 
 almost joyous . she be in a happy mood , and Mallet imagine there be 
 a private reason for it - a reason quite distinct from her pleasure in 
 receive her honored kinsman . the next day he flatter himself he be 
 on the way to discover it . 

 for the present , after tea , as they sit on the rose - frame porch , while 
 Rowland hold his young cousin between his knee , and she , enjoy 
 her situation , listen timorously for the stroke of bedtime , Cecilia 
 insist on talk more about her visitor than about herself . 

 " what be it you mean to do in Europe ? " she ask , lightly , give a 
 turn to the frill of her sleeve - just such a turn as seem to Mallet to 
 bring out all the latent difficulty of the question . 

 " why , very much what I do here , " he answer . " no great harm . " 

 " be it true , " Cecilia ask , " that here you do no great harm ? be not a 
 man like you do harm when he be not do positive good ? " 

 " your compliment be ambiguous , " say Rowland . 

 " no , " answer the widow , " you know what I think of you . you have a 
 particular aptitude for beneficence . you have it in the first place in 
 your character . you be a benevolent person . ask Bessie if you do not 
 hold she more gently and comfortably than any of her other admirer . " 

 " he hold I more comfortably than Mr. Hudson , " Bessie declare , 
 roundly . 

 Rowland , not know Mr. Hudson , could but half appreciate the eulogy , 
 and Cecilia go on to develop her idea . " your circumstance , in 
 the second place , suggest the idea of social usefulness . you be 
 intelligent , you be well - inform , and your charity , if one may call it 
 charity , would be discriminate . you be rich and unoccupied , so that 
 it might be abundant . therefore , I say , you be a person to do something 
 on a large scale . Bestir yourself , dear Rowland , or we may be teach to 
 think that virtue herself be set a bad example . " 

 " heaven forbid , " cry Rowland , " that I should set the example of 
 virtue ! I be quite willing to follow they , however , and if I do not 
 do something on the grand scale , it be that my genius be altogether 
 imitative , and that I have not recently encounter any very striking 
 model of grandeur . pray , what shall I do ? find an orphan asylum , or 
 build a dormitory for Harvard College ? I be not rich enough to do either 
 in an ideally handsome way , and I confess that , yet awhile , I feel 
 too young to strike my grand coup . I be hold myself ready for 
 inspiration . I be wait till something take my fancy irresistibly . if 
 inspiration come at forty , it will be a hundred pity to have tie up 
 my money - bag at thirty . " 

 " well , I give you till forty , " say Cecilia . " it be only a word to 
 the wise , a notification that you be expect not to run your course 
 without have do something handsome for your fellow - man . " 

 nine o'clock sound , and Bessie , with each stroke , court a close 
 embrace . but a single wing word from her mother overleap she 
 successive intrenchment . she turn and kiss her cousin , and 
 deposit an irrepressible tear on his moustache . then she go and 
 say her prayer to her mother : it be evident she be be admirably 
 bring up . Rowland , with the permission of his hostess , light a cigar 
 and puff it awhile in silence . Cecilia 's interest in his career seem 
 very agreeable . that Mallet be without vanity I by no mean intend to 
 affirm ; but there have be time when , see he accept , hardly less 
 deferentially , advice even more peremptory than the widow 's , you 
 might have ask yourself what have become of his vanity . now , in the 
 sweet - smell starlight , he feel gently woo to egotism . there be a 
 project connect with his go abroad which it be on his tongue 's end 
 to communicate . it have no relation to hospital or dormitory , and yet 
 it would have sound very generous . but it be not because it would 
 have sound generous that poor Mallet at last puff it away in 
 the fume of his cigar . useful though it might be , it express most 
 imperfectly the young man 's own personal conception of usefulness . he 
 be extremely fond of all the art , and he have an almost passionate 
 enjoyment of picture . he have see many , and he judge they sagaciously . 
 it have occur to he some time before that it would be the work of a 
 good citizen to go abroad and with all expedition and secrecy purchase 
 certain valuable specimen of the dutch and italian school as to which 
 he have receive private proposal , and then present his treasure out of 
 hand to an american city , not unknown to aesthetic fame , in which at 
 that time there prevail a good deal of fruitless aspiration toward an 
 art - museum . he have see himself in imagination , more than once , in 
 some mouldy old saloon of a florentine palace , turn toward the deep 
 embrasure of the window some scarcely - fade Ghirlandaio or Botticelli , 
 while a host in reduce circumstance point out the lovely drawing 
 of a hand . but he impart none of these vision to Cecilia , and he 
 suddenly sweep they away with the declaration that he be of course an 
 idle , useless creature , and that he would probably be even more so in 
 Europe than at home . " the only thing be , " he say , " that there I shall 
 seem to be do something . I shall be well entertain , and shall be 
 therefore , I suppose , in a well humor with life . you may say that that 
 be just the humor a useless man should keep out of . he should cultivate 
 discontentment . I do a good many thing when I be in Europe before , 
 but I do not spend a winter in Rome . every one assure I that this be 
 a peculiar refinement of bliss ; most people talk about Rome in the same 
 way . it be evidently only a sort of idealized form of loafing : a passive 
 life in Rome , thank to the number and the quality of one 's impression , 
 take on a very respectable likeness to activity . it be still 
 lotus - eating , only you sit down at table , and the lotus be serve up 
 on rococo china . it be all very well , but I have a distinct prevision of 
 this - that if roman life do not   do something substantial to make you 
 happy , it increase tenfold your liability to moral misery . it seem 
 to I a rash thing for a sensitive soul deliberately to cultivate its 
 sensibility by ramble too often among the ruin of the Palatine , or 
 rid too often in the shadow of the aqueduct . in such recreation the 
 chord of feel grow tense , and after - life , to spare your intellectual 
 nerve , must play upon they with a touch as dainty as the tread of 
 Mignon when she dance her egg - dance . " 

 " I should have say , my dear Rowland , " say Cecilia , with a laugh , " that 
 your nerve be tough , that your egg be hard ! " 

 " that be stupid , you mean , I might be happy ? upon my word I be not . 
 I be clever enough to want more than I ' ve   get . I be tired of myself , my 
 own thought , my own affair , my own eternal company . true happiness , 
 we be tell , consist in get out of one 's self ; but the point be not 
 only to get out - you must stay out ; and to stay out you must have some 
 absorb errand . unfortunately , I ' ve   get no errand , and nobody will 
 trust I with one . I want to care for something , or for some one . and I 
 want to care with a certain ardor ; even , if you can believe it , with 
 a certain passion . I can not   just now feel ardent and passionate about a 
 hospital or a dormitory . do you know I sometimes think that I ' m a man 
 of genius , half finish ? the genius have be leave out , the faculty of 
 expression be want ; but the need for expression remain , and I spend 
 my day grope for the latch of a closed door . " 

 " what an immense number of word , " say Cecilia after a pause , " to say 
 you want to fall in love ! I ' ve   no doubt you have as good a genius for 
 that as any one , if you would only trust it . " 

 " of course I ' ve   think of that , and I assure you I hold myself ready . 
 but , evidently , I ' m not inflammable . be there in Northampton some 
 perfect epitome of the grace ? " 

 " of the grace ? " say Cecilia , raise her eyebrow and suppress too 
 distinct a consciousness of be herself a rosy embodiment of several . 
 " the household virtue be well represent . there be some excellent 
 girl , and there be two or three very pretty one . I will have they 
 here , one by one , to tea , if you like . " 

 " I should particularly like it ; especially as I should give you a chance 
 to see , by the profundity of my attention , that if I be not happy , it be 
 not for want of take pain . " 

 Cecilia be silent a moment ; and then , " on the whole , " she resume , " I 
 do not   think there be any worth ask . there be none so very pretty , 
 none so very pleasing . " 

 " be you very sure ? " ask the young man , rise and throw away his 
 cigar - end . 

 " upon my word , " cry Cecilia , " one would suppose I wish to keep 
 you for myself . of course I be sure ! but as the penalty of your 
 insinuation , I shall invite the plainest and prosiest damsel that can 
 be find , and leave you alone with she . " 

 Rowland smile . " even against she , " he say , " I should be sorry to 
 conclude until I have give she my respectful attention . " 

 this little profession of ideal chivalry   which close the conversation 
 be not quite so fanciful on Mallet 's lip as it would have be on 
 those of many another man ; as a rapid glance at his antecedent may help 
 to make the reader perceive . his life have be a singular mixture of the 
 rough and the smooth . he have spring from a rigid Puritan stock , and have 
 be bring up to think much more intently of the duty of this life 
 than of its privilege and pleasure . his progenitor have submit in 
 the matter of dogmatic theology to the relax influence of recent 
 year ; but if Rowland 's youthful consciousness be not chill by the 
 menace of long punishment for brief transgression , he have at least be 
 make to feel that there run through all thing a strain of right and of 
 wrong , as different , after all , in their complexion , as the texture , to 
 the spiritual sense , of sunday and week - day . his father be a chip of 
 the primal Puritan block , a man with an icy smile and a stony frown . he 
 have always bestow on his son , on principle , more frown than smile , 
 and if the lad have not be turn to stone himself , it be because 
 nature have bless he , inwardly , with a well of vivifying water . Mrs. 
 Mallet have be a Miss Rowland , the daughter of a retired sea - captain , 
 once famous on the ship that sail from Salem and Newburyport . he 
 have bring to port many a cargo which crown the edifice of fortune 
 already almost colossal , but he have also do a little sagacious trading 
 on his own account , and he be able to retire , prematurely for so 
 sea - worthy a maritime organism , upon a pension of his own providing . he 
 be to be see for a year on the Salem wharf , smoke the good tobacco 
 and eye the seaward horizon with an inveteracy which superficial 
 mind interpret as a sign of repentance . at last , one evening , he 
 disappear beneath it , as he have often do before ; this time , 
 however , not as a commission navigator , but simply as an amateur of an 
 observe turn likely to prove oppressive to the officer in command of 
 the vessel . five month later his place at home know he again , and make 
 the acquaintance also of a handsome , blonde young woman , of redundant 
 contour , speak a foreign tongue . the foreign tongue prove , after 
 much conflict research , to be the idiom of Amsterdam , and the young 
 woman , which be strange still , to be Captain Rowland 's wife . why 
 he have go forth so suddenly across the sea to marry she , what have 
 happen between they before , and whether - though it be of questionable 
 propriety for a good citizen to espouse a young person of mysterious 
 origin , who do her hair in fantastically elaborate plait , and in whose 
 appearance " figure " enjoy such strike predominance - he would 
 not have have a heavy weight on his conscience if he have remain an 
 irresponsible bachelor ; these question and many other , bear with 
 vary degree of immediacy on the subject , be much propound but 
 scantily answer , and this history need not be charge with resolve 
 they . Mrs. Rowland , for so handsome a woman , prove a tranquil neighbor 
 and an excellent housewife . her extremely fresh complexion , however , be 
 always suffuse with an air of apathetic homesickness , and she play 
 her part in american society chiefly by have the little square of 
 brick pavement in front of her dwelling scour and polish as nearly 
 as possible into the likeness of dutch tile . Rowland Mallet remember 
 have see she , as a child - an immensely stout , white - faced lady , 
 wear a high cap of very stiff tulle , speak English with a 
 formidable accent , and suffer from dropsy . Captain Rowland be a 
 little bronzed and wizene man , with eccentric opinion . he advocate 
 the creation of a public promenade along the sea , with arbor and little 
 green table for the consumption of beer , and a platform , surround by 
 chinese lantern , for dancing . he especially desire the town library 
 to be open on Sundays , though , as he never enter it on week - day , 
 it be easy to turn the proposition into ridicule . if , therefore , Mrs. 
 Mallet be a woman of an exquisite moral tone , it be not that she have 
 inherit her temper from an ancestry with a turn for casuistry . 
 Jonas Mallet , at the time of his marriage , be conduct with silent 
 shrewdness a small , unpromise business . both his shrewdness and his 
 silence increase with his year , and at the close of his life he be an 
 extremely well - dress , well - brush gentleman , with a frigid gray eye , 
 who say little to anybody , but of whom everybody say that he have 
 a very handsome fortune . he be not a sentimental father , and the 
 roughness I just now speak of in Rowland 's life date from his early 
 boyhood . Mr. Mallet , whenever he look at his son , feel extreme 
 compunction at have make a fortune . he remember that the fruit have 
 not drop ripe from the tree into his own mouth , and determine it 
 should be no fault of his if the boy be corrupt by luxury . Rowland , 
 therefore , except for a good deal of expensive instruction in foreign 
 tongue and abstruse science , receive the education of a poor man 's 
 son . his fare be plain , his temper familiar with the discipline of 
 patch trouser , and his habit mark by an exaggerated simplicity 
 which it really cost a good deal of money to preserve unbroken . he be 
 keep in the country for month together , in the midst of servant who 
 have strict injunction to see that he suffer no serious harm , but 
 be as strictly forbid to wait upon he . as no school could be find 
 conduct on principle sufficiently rigorous , he be attend at home 
 by a master who set a high price on the understanding that he be to 
 illustrate the beauty of abstinence not only by precept but by example . 
 Rowland pass for a child of ordinary part , and certainly , during his 
 young year , be an excellent imitation of a boy who have inherit 
 nothing whatever that be to make life easy . he be passive , 
 pliable , frank , extremely slow at his book , and inordinately fond of 
 trout - fishing . his hair , a memento of his dutch ancestry , be of 
 the fairest shade of yellow , his complexion absurdly rosy , and his 
 measurement around the waist , when he be about ten year old , quite 
 alarmingly large . this , however , be but an episode in his growth ; he 
 become afterwards a fresh - color , yellow - bearded man , but he be never 
 accuse of anything bad than a tendency to corpulence . he emerge from 
 childhood a simple , wholesome , round - eyed lad , with no suspicion that a 
 less roundabout course might have be take to make he happy , but with 
 a vague sense that his young experience be not a fair sample of human 
 freedom , and that he be to make a great many discovery . when he be 
 about fifteen , he achieve a momentous one . he ascertain that his 
 mother be a saint . she have always be a very distinct presence in his 
 life , but so ineffably gentle a one that his sense be fully open to 
 it only by the danger of lose she . she have an illness which for many 
 month be liable at any moment to terminate fatally , and during her 
 long - arrest convalescence she remove the mask which she have wear for 
 year by her husband 's order . Rowland spend his day at her side and 
 feel before long as if he have make a new friend . all his impression at 
 this period be comment and interpret at leisure in the future , and 
 it be only then that he understand that his mother have be for fifteen 
 year a perfectly unhappy woman . her marriage have be an immitigable 
 error which she have spend her life in try to look straight in the 
 face . she find nothing to oppose to her husband 's will of steel but the 
 appearance of absolute compliance ; her spirit sink , and she live for 
 a while in a sort of helpless moral torpor . but at last , as her child 
 emerge from babyhood , she begin to feel a certain charm in patience , to 
 discover the us of ingenuity , and to learn that , somehow or other , one 
 can always arrange one 's life . she cultivate from this time forward a 
 little private plot of sentiment , and it be of this seclude precinct 
 that , before her death , she give her son the key . Rowland 's allowance at 
 college be barely sufficient to maintain he decently , and as soon as 
 he graduate , he be take into his father 's counting - house , to do small 
 drudgery on a proportionate salary . for three year he earn his living 
 as regularly as the obscure functionary in fustian who sweep the office . 
 Mr. Mallet be consistent , but the perfection of his consistency be 
 know only on his death . he leave but a third of his property to his 
 son , and devote the remainder to various public institution and local 
 charity . Rowland 's third be an easy competence , and he never feel 
 a moment 's jealousy of his fellow - pensioner ; but when one of the 
 establishment which have figure most advantageously in his father 's 
 will bethought itself to affirm the existence of a later instrument , in 
 which it have be still more handsomely treat , the young man feel a 
 sudden passionate need to repel the claim by process of law . there be a 
 lively tussle , but he gain his case ; immediately after which he make , 
 in another quarter , a donation of the contest sum . he care nothing 
 for the money , but he have feel an angry desire to protest against a 
 destiny which seem determined to be exclusively salutary . it seem to 
 he that he would bear a little spoiling . and yet he treat himself 
 to a very modest quantity , and submit without reserve to the great 
 national discipline which begin in 1861 . when the Civil War break out he 
 immediately obtain a commission , and do his duty for three long year 
 as a citizen soldier . his duty be obscure , but he never lose a certain 
 private satisfaction in remember that on two or three occasion 
 it have be perform with something of an ideal precision . he have 
 disentangle himself from business , and after the war he feel a profound 
 disinclination to tie the knot again . he have no desire to make money , 
 he have money enough ; and although he know , and be frequently remind , 
 that a young man be the well for a fix occupation , he could discover 
 no moral advantage in drive a lucrative trade . yet few young man of 
 mean and leisure ever make less of a parade of idleness , and indeed 
 idleness in any degree could hardly be lay at the door of a young 
 man who take life in the serious , attentive , reason fashion of 
 our friend . it often seem to mallet that he wholly lack the prime 
 requisite of a graceful flaneur - the simple , sensuous , confident relish 
 of pleasure . he have frequent fit of extreme melancholy , in which he 
 declare that he be neither fish nor flesh nor good red herring . he be 
 neither an irresponsibly contemplative nature nor a sturdily practical 
 one , and he be forever look in vain for the us of the thing 
 that please and the charm of the thing that sustain . he be an awkward 
 mixture of strong moral impulse and restless aesthetic curiosity , 
 and yet he would have make a most ineffective reformer and a very 
 indifferent artist . it seem to he that the glow of happiness must be 
 find either in action , of some immensely solid kind , on behalf of 
 an idea , or in produce a masterpiece in one of the art . Oftenest , 
 perhaps , he wish he be a vigorous young man of genius , without a 
 penny . as it be , he could only buy picture , and not paint they ; and 
 in the way of action , he have to content himself with make a rule to 
 render scrupulous moral justice to handsome example of it in other . on 
 the whole , he have an incorruptible modesty . with his bloom complexion 
 and his serene gray eye , he feel the friction of existence more than be 
 suspect ; but he ask no allowance on ground of temper , he assume 
 that fate have treat he inordinately well and that he have no excuse 
 for take an ill - natured view of life , and he undertake constantly to 
 believe that all woman be fair , all man be brave , and the world be 
 a delightful place of sojourn , until the contrary have be distinctly 
 prove . 

 Cecilia 's bloom garden and shady porch have seem so friendly to 
 repose and a cigar , that she reproach he the next morning with 
 indifference to her little parlor , not less , in its way , a monument to 
 her ingenious taste . " and by the way , " she add as he follow she in , 
 " if I refuse last night to show you a pretty girl , I can at least show 
 you a pretty boy . " 

 she throw open a window and point to a statuette which occupy the 
 place of honor among the ornament of the room . Rowland look at it a 
 moment and then turn to she with an exclamation of surprise . she 
 give he a rapid glance , perceive that her statuette be of altogether 
 exceptional merit , and then smile , knowingly , as if this have long be 
 an agreeable certainty . 

 " who do it ? where do you get it ? " Rowland demand . 

 " oh , " say Cecilia , adjust the light , " it be a little thing of Mr. 
 Hudson 's . " 

 " and who the deuce be Mr. Hudson ? " ask Rowland . but he be absorb ; 
 he lose her immediate reply . the statuette , in bronze , something less 
 than two foot high , represent a naked youth drink from a gourd . the 
 attitude be perfectly simple . the lad be squarely plant on his foot , 
 with his leg a little apart ; his back be slightly hollow , his head 
 throw back , and both hand raise to support the rustic cup . there be 
 a loosened fillet of wild flower about his head , and his eye , under 
 their drooped lid , look straight into the cup . on the base be 
 scratch the greek word ? ? ? ? , Thirst . the figure might have 
 be some beautiful youth of ancient fable , - Hylas or Narcissus , Paris 
 or endymion . its beauty be the beauty of natural movement ; nothing have 
 be seek to be represent but the perfection of an attitude . this 
 have be most attentively study , and it be exquisitely render . 
 Rowland demand more light , drop his head on this side and that , 
 utter vague exclamation . he say to himself , as he have say more than 
 once in the Louvre and the Vatican , " we ugly mortal , what beautiful 
 creature we be ! " nothing , in a long time , have give he so much 
 pleasure . " Hudson - Hudson , " he ask again ; " who be Hudson ? " 

 " a young man of this place , " say Cecilia . 

 " a young man ? how old ? " 

 " I suppose he be three or four and twenty . " 

 " of this place , you say - of Northampton , Massachusetts ? " 

 " he live here , but he come from Virginia . " 

 " be he a sculptor by profession ? " 

 " he be a law - student . " 

 Rowland burst out laugh . " he have find something in Blackstone that I 
 never do . he make statue then simply for his pleasure ? " 

 Cecilia , with a smile , give a little toss of her head . " for mine ! " 

 " I congratulate you , " say Rowland . " I wonder whether he could be 
 induce to do anything for I ? " 

 " this be a matter of friendship . I see the figure when he have model 
 it in clay , and of course greatly admire it . he say nothing at the 
 time , but a week ago , on my birthday , he arrive in a buggy , with 
 this . he have have it cast at the foundry at Chicopee ; I believe it be a 
 beautiful piece of bronze . he beg I to accept . " 

 " upon my word , " say Mallet , " he do thing handsomely ! " and he fall to 
 admire the statue again . 

 " so then , " say Cecilia , " it be very remarkable ? " 

 " why , my dear cousin , " Rowland answer , " Mr. Hudson , of Virginia , be 
 an extraordinary - " then suddenly stop : " be he a great friend of 
 your ? " he ask . 

 " a great friend ? " and Cecilia hesitate . " I regard he as a child ! " 

 " well , " say Rowland , " he be a very clever child . tell I something 
 about he : I should like to see he . " 

 Cecilia be oblige to go to her daughter 's music - lesson , but she 
 assure Rowland that she would arrange for he a meeting with the young 
 sculptor . he be a frequent visitor , and as he have not call for some 
 day it be likely he would come that evening . Rowland , leave alone , 
 examine the statuette at his leisure , and return more than once 
 during the day to take another look at it . he discover its weak 
 point , but it wear well . it have the stamp of genius . Rowland envy the 
 happy youth who , in a New England village , without aid or encouragement , 
 without model or resource , have find it so easy to produce a lovely 
 work . 

 in the evening , as he be smoke his cigar on the veranda , a light , 
 quick step press the gravel of the garden path , and in a moment a 
 young man make his bow to Cecilia . it be rather a nod than a bow , and 
 indicate either that he be an old friend , or that he be scantily 
 verse in the usual social form . Cecilia , who be sit near the 
 step , point to a neighboring chair , but the young man seat himself 
 abruptly on the floor at her foot , begin to fan himself vigorously with 
 his hat , and break out into a lively objurgation upon the hot weather . 
 " I ' m dripping wet ! " he say , without ceremony . 

 " you walk too fast , " say Cecilia . " you do everything too fast . " 

 " I know it , I know it ! " he cry , pass his hand through his abundant 
 dark hair and make it stand out in a picturesque shock . " I can not 
 be slow if I try . there be something inside of I that drive I . a 
 restless fiend ! " 

 Cecilia give a light laugh , and Rowland lean forward in his hammock . 
 he have place himself in it at Bessie 's request , and be play that he 
 be her baby and that she be rock he to sleep . she sit beside he , 
 swing the hammock to and fro , and sing a lullaby . when he raise 
 himself she push he back and say that the baby must finish its nap . 
 " but I want to see the gentleman with the fiend inside of he , " say 
 Rowland . 

 " what be a fiend ? " Bessie demand . " it be only Mr. Hudson . " 

 " very well , I want to see he . " 

 " oh , never mind he ! " say Bessie , with the brevity of contempt . 

 " you speak as if you do not   like he . " 

 " I do not ! " Bessie affirm , and put Rowland to bed again . 

 the hammock be swing at the end of the veranda , in the thick shade 
 of the vine , and this fragment of dialogue have pass unnoticed . 
 Rowland submit a while long to be cradle , and content himself 
 with listen to Mr. Hudson 's voice . it be a soft and not altogether 
 masculine organ , and be pitch on this occasion in a somewhat 
 plaintive and pettish key . the young man 's mood seem fretful ; he 
 complain of the heat , of the dust , of a shoe that hurt he , of have 
 go on an errand a mile to the other side of the town and find the 
 person he be in search of have leave Northampton an hour before . 

 " will not   you have a cup of tea ? " Cecilia ask . " perhaps that will restore 
 your equanimity . " 

 " Aye , by keep I awake all night ! " say Hudson . " at the good , it be 
 hard enough to go down to the office . with my nerve set on edge by a 
 sleepless night , I should perforce stay at home and be brutal to my poor 
 mother . " 

 " your mother be well , I hope . " 

 " oh , she be as usual . " 

 " and Miss Garland ? " 

 " she be as usual , too . every one , everything , be as usual . nothing ever 
 happen , in this benighted town . " 

 " I beg your pardon ; thing do happen , sometimes , " say Cecilia . " here 
 be a dear cousin of mine arrive on purpose to congratulate you on your 
 statuette . " and she call to Rowland to come and be introduce to 
 Mr. Hudson . the young man spring up with alacrity , and Rowland , come 
 forward to shake hand , have a good look at he in the light project 
 from the parlor window . something seem to shine out of Hudson 's face 
 as a warning against a " compliment " of the idle , unpondered sort . 

 " your statuette seem to I very good , " Rowland say gravely . " it have 
 give I extreme pleasure . " 

 " and my cousin know what be good , " say Cecilia . " he be a connoisseur . " 

 Hudson smile and star . " a connoisseur ? " he cry , laugh . " he be 
 the first I ' ve   ever see ! let I see what they look like ; " and he draw 
 Rowland nearer to the light . " have they all such good head as that ? I 
 should like to model your . " 

 " pray do , " say Cecilia . " it will keep he a while . he be run off to 
 Europe . " 

 " ah , to Europe ! " Hudson exclaim with a melancholy cadence , as they sit 
 down . " happy man ! " 

 but the note seem to Rowland to be strike rather at random , for he 
 perceive no echo of it in the boyish garrulity of his later talk . 
 Hudson be a tall , slender young fellow , with a singularly mobile and 
 intelligent face . Rowland be strike at first only with its responsive 
 vivacity , but in a short time he perceive it be remarkably handsome . 
 the feature be admirably chisel and finish , and a frank smile 
 play over they as gracefully as a breeze among flower . the fault of 
 the young man 's whole structure be an excessive want of breadth . the 
 forehead , though it be high and rounded , be narrow ; the jaw and 
 the shoulder be narrow ; and the result be an air of insufficient 
 physical substance . but Mallet afterwards learn that this fair , slim 
 youth could draw indefinitely upon a mysterious fund of nervous 
 force , which outlast and outwearie the endurance of many a sturdy 
 temperament . and certainly there be life enough in his eye to furnish 
 an immortality ! it be a generous dark gray eye , in which there come 
 and go a sort of kindling glow , which would have make a ruder visage 
 striking , and which give at time to Hudson 's harmonious face an 
 altogether extraordinary beauty . there be to Rowland 's sympathetic 
 sense a slightly pitiful disparity between the young sculptor 's delicate 
 countenance and the shabby gentility of his costume . he be dress for 
 a visit - a visit to a pretty woman . he be clothe from head to foot in a 
 white linen suit , which have never be remarkable for the felicity of 
 its cut , and have now quite lose that crispness which garment of this 
 complexion can as ill spare as the back - scene of a theatre the radiance 
 of the footlight . he wear a vivid blue cravat , pass through a ring 
 altogether too splendid to be valuable ; he pull and twist , as he 
 sit , a pair of yellow kid glove ; he emphasize his conversation with 
 great dash and flourish of a light , silver - tip walking - stick , 
 and he keep constantly take off and put on one of those slouch 
 sombrero which be the traditional property of the virginian or 
 carolinian of romance . when this be on , he be very picturesque , in 
 spite of his mock elegance ; and when it be off , and he sit nurse it 
 and turn it about and not know what to do with it , he could hardly 
 be say to be awkward . he evidently have a natural relish for brilliant 
 accessory , and appropriate what come to his hand . this be visible in 
 his talk , which abound in the florid and sonorous . he like word with 
 color in they . 

 Rowland , who be but a moderate talker , sit by in silence , while 
 Cecilia , who have tell he that she desire his opinion upon her friend , 
 use a good deal of characteristic finesse in lead the young man to 
 expose himself . she perfectly succeed , and Hudson rattle away for 
 an hour with a volubility in which boyish unconsciousness and manly 
 shrewdness be singularly combine . he give his opinion on twenty 
 topic , he open up an endless budget of local gossip , he describe 
 his repulsive routine at the office of Messrs. Striker and Spooner , 
 counselor at law , and he give with great felicity and gusto an account 
 of the annual boat - race between Harvard and Yale , which he have lately 
 witness at Worcester . he have look at the strain oarsman and the 
 swaying crowd with the eye of the sculptor . Rowland be a good deal 
 amuse and not a little interested . whenever Hudson utter some 
 peculiarly striking piece of youthful grandiloquence , Cecilia break into 
 a long , light , familiar laugh . 

 " what be you laugh at ? " the young man then demand . " have I say 
 anything so ridiculous ? " 

 " go on , go on , " Cecilia reply . " you be too delicious ! show Mr. Mallet 
 how Mr. Striker read the Declaration of Independence . " 

 Hudson , like most man with a turn for the plastic art , be an excellent 
 mimic , and he represent with a great deal of humor the accent and 
 attitude of a pompous country lawyer sustain the burden of this 
 customary episode of our national festival . the sonorous twang , the 
 see - see gesture , the odd pronunciation , be vividly depict . but 
 Cecilia 's manner , and the young man 's quick response , ruffle a little 
 poor Rowland 's paternal conscience . he wonder whether his cousin be 
 not sacrifice the faculty of reverence in her clever protege to 
 her need for amusement . Hudson make no serious rejoinder to Rowland 's 
 compliment on his statuette until he rise to go . Rowland wonder 
 whether he have forget it , and suppose that the oversight be a sign 
 of the natural self - sufficiency of genius . but Hudson stand a moment 
 before he say good night , twirl his sombrero , and hesitate for the 
 first time . he give Rowland a clear , penetrate glance , and then , with 
 a wonderfully frank , appeal smile : " you really mean , " he 
 ask , " what you say a while ago about that thing of mine ? it be 
 good - essentially good ? " 

 " I really mean it , " say Rowland , lay a kindly hand on his shoulder . 
 " it be very good indeed . it be , as you say , essentially good . that be 
 the beauty of it . " 

 Hudson 's eye glow and expand ; he look at Rowland for some time in 
 silence . " I have a notion you really know , " he say at last . " but if you 
 do not , it do not   much matter . " 

 " my cousin ask I to - day , " say Cecilia , " whether I suppose you know 
 yourself how good it be . " 

 Hudson star , blush a little . " perhaps not ! " he cry . 

 " very likely , " say Mallet . " I read in a book the other day that 
 great talent in action - in fact the book say genius - be a kind of 
 somnambulism . the artist perform great feat , in a dream . we must not 
 wake he up , lest he should lose his balance . " 

 " oh , when he be back in bed again ! " Hudson answer with a laugh . " yes , 
 call it a dream . it be a very happy one ! " 

 " tell I this , " say Rowland . " do you mean anything by your young 
 water - drinker ? do he represent an idea ? be he a symbol ? " 

 Hudson raise his eyebrow and gently scratch his head . " why , he be 
 youth , you know ; he be innocence , he be health , he be strength , he be 
 curiosity . yes , he be a good many thing . " 

 " and be the cup also a symbol ? " 

 " the cup be knowledge , pleasure , experience . anything of that kind ! " 

 " well , he be guzzle in earnest , " say Rowland . 

 Hudson give a vigorous nod . " aye , poor fellow , he be thirsty ! " and on 
 this he cry good night , and bound down the garden path . 

 " well , what do you make of he ? " ask Cecilia , return a short 
 time afterwards from a visit of investigation as to the sufficiency of 
 Bessie 's bedclothe . 

 " I confess I like he , " say Rowland . " he be very immature , - but there 
 's stuff in he . " 

 " he be a strange being , " say Cecilia , musingly . 

 " who be his people ? what have be his education ? " Rowland ask . 

 " he have have no education , beyond what he have pick up , with little 
 trouble , for himself . his mother be a widow , of a Massachusetts country 
 family , a little timid , tremulous woman , who be always on pin and 
 needle about her son . she have some property herself , and marry a 
 virginian gentleman of good estate . he turn out , I believe , a very 
 licentious personage , and make great havoc in their fortune . everything , 
 or almost everything , melt away , include Mr. Hudson himself . this 
 be literally true , for he drink himself to death . ten year ago his wife 
 be leave a widow , with scanty mean and a couple of grow boy . 
 she pay her husband 's debt as good she could , and come to establish 
 herself here , where by the death of a charitable relative she have 
 inherit an old - fashioned ruinous house . Roderick , our friend , be her 
 pride and joy , but Stephen , the elder , be her comfort and support . 
 I remember he , later ; he be an ugly , sturdy , practical lad , very 
 different from his brother , and in his way , I imagine , a very fine 
 fellow . when the war break out he find that the New England blood run 
 thick in his vein than the Virginian , and immediately obtain 
 a commission . he fall in some western battle and leave his mother 
 inconsolable . Roderick , however , have give she plenty to think about , 
 and she have induce he , by some mysterious art , to abide , nominally at 
 least , in a profession that he abhor , and for which he be about as fit , 
 I should say , as I be to drive a locomotive . he grow up a la grace de 
 Dieu , and be horribly spoil . three or four year ago he graduate at 
 a small college in this neighborhood , where I be afraid he have give a 
 good deal more attention to novel and billiard than to mathematic and 
 Greek . since then he have be read law , at the rate of a page a day . 
 if he be ever admit to practice I ' m afraid my friendship will not   avail 
 to make I give he my business . good , bad , or indifferent , the boy be 
 essentially an artist - an artist to his finger ' end . " 

 " why , then , " ask Rowland , " do not   he deliberately take up the 
 chisel ? " 

 " for several reason . in the first place , I do not   think he more than 
 half suspect his talent . the flame be smoulder , but it be never 
 fan by the breath of criticism . he see nothing , hear nothing , to 
 help he to self - knowledge . he be hopelessly discontent , but he 
 do not   know where to look for help . then his mother , as she one 
 day confess to I , have a holy horror of a profession which consist 
 exclusively , as she suppose , in make figure of people without their 
 clothe on . Sculpture , to her mind , be an insidious form of immorality , 
 and for a young man of a passionate disposition she consider the law a 
 much safe investment . her father be a judge , she have two brother at 
 the bar , and her eld son have make a very promising beginning in the 
 same line . she wish the tradition to be perpetuate . I ' m pretty sure 
 the law will not   make Roderick 's fortune , and I ' m afraid it will , in the 
 long run , spoil his temper . " 

 " what sort of a temper be it ? " 

 " one to be trust , on the whole . it be quick , but it be generous . I 
 have know it to breathe flame and fury at ten o'clock in the evening , 
 and soft , sweet music early on the morrow . it be a very entertaining 
 temper to observe . I , fortunately , can do so dispassionately , for I ' m 
 the only person in the place he have not quarrel with . " 

 " have he then no society ? who be Miss Garland , whom you ask about ? " 

 " a young girl stay with his mother , a sort of far - away cousin ; a good 
 plain girl , but not a person to delight a sculptor 's eye . Roderick have 
 a goodly share of the old southern arrogance ; he have the aristocratic 
 temperament . he will have nothing to do with the small town - people ; he 
 say they be ' ignoble . ' he can not endure his mother 's friend - the 
 old lady and the minister and the tea - party people ; they bear he to 
 death . so he come and lounge here and rail at everything and every 
 one . " 

 this graceful young scoffer reappear a couple of evening later , and 
 confirm the friendly feeling he have provoke on Rowland 's part . he 
 be in an easy mood than before , he chatter less extravagantly , and 
 ask Rowland a number of rather naif question about the condition of 
 the fine art in New York and Boston . Cecilia , when he have go , say 
 that this be the wholesome effect of Rowland 's praise of his statuette . 
 Roderick be acutely sensitive , and Rowland 's tranquil commendation have 
 still his restless pulse . he be ruminate the full - flavor verdict 
 of culture . Rowland feel an irresistible kindness for he , a mingled 
 sense of his personal charm and his artistic capacity . he have an 
 indefinable attraction - the something divine of unspotted , exuberant , 
 confident youth . the next day be Sunday , and Rowland propose that they 
 should take a long walk and that Roderick should show he the country . 
 the young man assent gleefully , and in the morning , as Rowland at the 
 garden gate be give his hostess Godspeed on her way to church , he 
 come stride along the grassy margin of the road and out - whistle the 
 music of the church bell . it be one of those lovely day of August 
 when you feel the complete exuberance of summer just warn and check 
 by autumn . " remember the day , and take care you rob no orchard , " say 
 Cecilia , as they separate . 

 the young man walk away at a steady pace , over hill and dale , through 
 wood and field , and at last find themselves on a grassy elevation 
 stud with mossy rock and red cedar . just beneath they , in a great 
 shin curve , flow the goodly Connecticut . they fling themselves 
 on the grass and tossed stone into the river ; they talk like old 
 friend . Rowland light a cigar , and Roderick refuse one with a grimace 
 of extravagant disgust . he think they vile thing ; he do not   see how 
 decent people could tolerate they . Rowland be amuse , and wonder what 
 it be that make this ill - mannered speech seem perfectly inoffensive 
 on Roderick 's lip . he belong to the race of mortal , to be pity 
 or envy accord as we view the matter , who be not hold to a strict 
 account for their aggression . look at he as he lie stretch in the 
 shade , Rowland vaguely liken he to some beautiful , supple , restless , 
 bright - eyed animal , whose motion should have no deep warrant than the 
 tremulous delicacy of its structure , and be graceful even when they 
 be most inconvenient . Rowland watch the shadow on Mount Holyoke , 
 listen to the gurgle of the river , and sniff the balsam of the 
 pine . a gentle breeze have begin to tickle their summit , and bring 
 the smell of the mow grass across from the elm - dot river meadow . he 
 sit up beside his companion and look away at the far - spread 
 view . it seem to he beautiful , and suddenly a strange feeling of 
 prospective regret take possession of he . something seem to tell 
 he that later , in a foreign land , he would remember it lovingly and 
 penitently . 

 " it be a wretched business , " he say , " this practical quarrel of ours 
 with our own country , this everlaste impatience to get out of it . be 
 one 's only safety then in flight ? this be an american day , an american 
 landscape , an american atmosphere . it certainly have its merit , and 
 some day when I be shiver with ague in classic Italy , I shall accuse 
 myself of have slight they . " 

 Roderick kindle with a sympathetic glow , and declare that America be 
 good enough for he , and that he have always think it the duty of an 
 honest citizen to stand by his own country and help it along . he have 
 evidently think nothing whatever about it , and be launch his 
 doctrine on the inspiration of the moment . the doctrine expand with 
 the occasion , and he declare that he be above all an advocate for 
 american art . he do not   see why we should not   produce the great 
 work in the world . we be the big people , and we ought to have the 
 big conception . the big conception of course would bring forth 
 in time the big performance . we have only to be true to ourselves , 
 to pitch in and not be afraid , to fle imitation overboard and fix our 
 eye upon our National Individuality . " I declare , " he cry , " there be 
 a career for a man , and I ' ve   twenty mind to decide , on the spot , to 
 embrace it - to be the consummate , typical , original , national american 
 artist ! it be inspire ! " 

 Rowland burst out laugh and tell he that he like his practice 
 well than his theory , and that a saner impulse than this have inspire 
 his little water - drinker . Roderick take no offense , and three minute 
 afterwards be talk volubly of some humbler theme , but half heed 
 by his companion , who have return to his cogitation . at last Rowland 
 deliver himself of the upshot of these . " how would you like , " he 
 suddenly demand , " to go to Rome ? " 

 Hudson star , and , with a hungry laugh which speedily consign our 
 National Individuality to perdition , respond that he would like it 
 reasonably well . " and I should like , by the same token , " he add , 
 " to go to Athens , to Constantinople , to Damascus , to the holy city of 
 Benares , where there be a golden statue of Brahma twenty foot tall . " 

 " Nay , " say Rowland soberly , " if you be to go to Rome , you should 
 settle down and work . Athens might help you , but for the present I 
 should not   recommend benare . " 

 " it will be time to arrange detail when I pack my trunk , " say Hudson . 

 " if you mean to turn sculptor , the soon you pack your trunk the 
 well . " 

 " oh , but I ' m a practical man ! what be the small sum per annum , on 
 which one can keep alive the sacred fire in Rome ? " 

 " what be the large sum at your disposal ? " 

 Roderick stroke his light moustache , give it a twist , and then 
 announce with mock pomposity : " three hundred dollar ! " 

 " the money question could be arrange , " say Rowland . " there be way of 
 raise money . " 

 " I should like to know a few ! I never yet discover one . " 

 " one consist , " say Rowland , " in have a friend with a good deal more 
 than he want , and not be too proud to accept a part of it . " 

 Roderick star a moment and his face flush . " do you mean - do you 
 mean ? " .... he stammer . he be greatly excited . 

 Rowland get up , blush a little , and Roderick spring to his foot . " in 
 three word , if you be to be a sculptor , you ought to go to Rome and 
 study the antique . to go to Rome you need money . I ' m fond of fine 
 statue , but unfortunately I can not   make they myself . I have to order 
 they . I order a dozen from you , to be execute at your convenience . to 
 help you , I pay you in advance . " 

 Roderick push off his hat and wipe his forehead , still gaze at his 
 companion . " you believe in I ! " he cry at last . 

 " allow I to explain , " say Rowland . " I believe in you , if you be 
 prepared to work and to wait , and to struggle , and to exercise a great 
 many virtue . and then , I ' m afraid to say it , lest I should disturb 
 you more than I should help you . you must decide for yourself . I simply 
 offer you an opportunity . " 

 Hudson stand for some time , profoundly meditative . " you have not see my 
 other thing , " he say suddenly . " come and look at they . " 

 " now ? " 

 " yes , we will walk home . we will settle the question . " 

 he pass his hand through Rowland 's arm and they retrace their step . 
 they reach the town and make their way along a broad country street , 
 dusky with the shade of magnificent elm . Rowland feel his companion 's 
 arm tremble in his own . they stop at a large white house , flank 
 with melancholy hemlock , and pass through a little front garden , 
 pave with moss - coat brick and ornament with parterre border 
 with high box hedge . the mansion have an air of antiquated dignity , but 
 it have see its good day , and evidently shelter a shrunken household . 
 Mrs. Hudson , Rowland be sure , might be see in the garden of a 
 morning , in a white apron and a pair of old glove , engage in frugal 
 horticulture . Roderick 's studio be behind , in the basement ; a large , 
 empty room , with the paper peel off the wall . this represent , in 
 the fashion of fifty year ago , a series of small fantastic landscape 
 of a hideous pattern , and the young sculptor have presumably tear it away 
 in great scrap , in moment of aesthetic exasperation . on a board in 
 a corner be a heap of clay , and on the floor , against the wall , 
 stand some dozen medallion , bust , and figure , in various stage of 
 completion . to exhibit they Roderick have to place they one by one on 
 the end of a long packing - box , which serve as a pedestal . he do so 
 silently , make no explanation , and look at they himself with a 
 strange air of quickened curiosity . Most of the thing be portrait ; 
 and the three at which he look long be finish bust . one be a 
 colossal head of a negro , toss back , defiant , with distend nostril ; 
 one be the portrait of a young man whom Rowland immediately perceive , 
 by the resemblance , to be his deceased brother ; the last represent a 
 gentleman with a pointed nose , a long , shave upper lip , and a tuft on 
 the end of his chin . this be a face peculiarly unadapte to sculpture ; 
 but as a piece of modeling it be the good , and it be admirable . it 
 remind Rowland in its homely veracity , its artless artfulness , of 
 the work of the early italian Renaissance . on the pedestal be cut 
 the name - Barnaby Striker , Esq . Rowland remember that this be the 
 appellation of the legal luminary from whom his companion have undertake 
 to borrow a reflect ray , and although in the bust there be naught 
 flagrantly set down in malice , it betray , comically to one who could 
 relish the secret , that the feature of the original have often be 
 scan with an irritated eye . besides these there be several rough 
 study of the nude , and two or three figure of a fanciful kind . the 
 most noticeable   and it have singular beauty   be a small model design 
 for a sepulchral monument ; that , evidently , of Stephen Hudson . the young 
 soldier lie sleep eternally , with his hand on his sword , like an old 
 crusader in a Gothic cathedral . 

 Rowland make no haste to pronounce ; too much depend on his judgment . 
 " upon my word , " cry Hudson at last , " they seem to I very good . " 

 and in truth , as Rowland look , he see they be good . they be 
 youthful , awkward , and ignorant ; the effort , often , be more apparent 
 than the success . but the effort be signally powerful and intelligent ; 
 it seem to Rowland that it need only to let itself go to compass 
 great thing . here and there , too , success , when grasp , have something 
 masterly . Rowland turn to his companion , who stand with his hand in 
 his pocket and his hair very much crumple , look at he askance . 
 the light of admiration be in Rowland 's eye , and it speedily kindle a 
 wonderful illumination on Hudson 's handsome brow . Rowland say at last , 
 gravely , " you have only to work ! " 

 " I think I know what that mean , " Roderick answer . he turn away , 
 throw himself on a rickety chair , and sit for some moment with his 
 elbow on his knee and his head in his hand . " work - work ? " he say at 
 last , look up , " ah , if I could only begin ! " he glance round the 
 room a moment and his eye encounter on the mantel - shelf the vivid 
 physiognomy of Mr. Barnaby Striker . his smile vanish , and he star at 
 it with an air of concentrated enmity . " I want to begin , " he cry , " and 
 I can not   make a well beginning than this ! good - by , Mr. Striker ! " he 
 stride across the room , seize a mallet that lie at hand , and before 
 Rowland could interfere , in the interest of art if not of moral , deal 
 a merciless blow upon Mr. Striker 's skull . the bust crack into a 
 dozen piece , which topple with a great crash upon the floor . Rowland 
 relish neither the destruction of the image nor his companion 's look 
 in work it , but as he be about to express his displeasure the door 
 open and give passage to a young girl . she come in with a rapid step 
 and startled face , as if she have be summon by the noise . see the 
 heap of shattered clay and the mallet in Roderick 's hand , she give a 
 cry of horror . her voice die away when she perceive that Rowland be a 
 stranger , but she murmur reproachfully , " why , Roderick , what have you 
 do ? " 

 Roderick give a joyous kick to the shapeless fragment . " I ' ve   drive 
 the money - changer out of the temple ! " he cry . 

 the trace retain shape enough to be recognize , and she give a little 
 moan of pity . she seem not to understand the young man 's allegory , but 
 yet to feel that it point to some great purpose , which must be an evil 
 one , from be express in such a lawless fashion , and to perceive 
 that Rowland be in some way accountable for it . she look at he with 
 a sharp , frank mistrust , and turn away through the open door . Rowland 
 look after she with extraordinary interest . 





 CHAPTER II . roderick 

 early on the morrow Rowland receive a visit from his new friend . 
 Roderick be in a state of extreme exhilaration , temper , however , by 
 a certain amount of righteous wrath . he have have a domestic struggle , but 
 he have remain master of the situation . he have shake the dust of Mr. 
 Striker 's office from his foot . 

 " I have it out last night with my mother , " he say . " I dread the scene , 
 for she take thing terribly hard . she do not   scold nor storm , and 
 she do not   argue nor insist . she sit with her eye full of tear 
 that never fall , and look at I , when I displease she , as if I be 
 a perfect monster of depravity . and the trouble be that I be bear to 
 displease she . she do not   trust I ; she never have and she never will . 
 I do not   know what I have do to set she against I , but ever since I 
 can remember I have be look at with tear . the trouble be , " he go 
 on , give a twist to his moustache , " I ' ve   be too absurdly docile . 
 I ' ve   be sprawl all my day by the maternal fireside , and my dear 
 mother have grow use to bully I . I ' ve   make myself cheap ! if I ' m 
 not in my bed by eleven o'clock , the girl be send out to explore with 
 a lantern . when I think of it , I fairly despise my amiability . it be 
 rather a hard fate , to live like a saint and to pass for a sinner ! I 
 should like for six month to lead Mrs. Hudson the life some fellow 
 lead their mother ! " 

 " allow I to believe , " say Rowland , " that you would like nothing of 
 the sort . if you have be a good boy , do not   spoil it by pretend you 
 do not   like it . you have be very happy , I suspect , in spite of your 
 virtue , and there be bad fate in the world than be love too 
 well . I have not have the pleasure of see your mother , but I would lay 
 you a wager that that be the trouble . she be passionately fond of you , 
 and her hope , like all intense hope , keep tremble into fear . " 
 Rowland , as he speak , have an instinctive vision of how such a beautiful 
 young fellow must be love by his female relative . 

 Roderick frown , and with an impatient gesture , " I do her justice , " he 
 cry . " may she never do I less ! " then after a moment 's hesitation , " I 
 will tell you the perfect truth , " he go on . " I have to fill a double 
 place . I have to be my brother as well as myself . it be a good deal to 
 ask of a man , especially when he have so little talent as I for be 
 what he be not . when we be both young together I be the curl 
 darling . I have the silver mug and the big piece of pudding , and I 
 stay in - door to be kiss by the lady while he make mud - pie in the 
 garden and be never miss , of course . really , he be worth fifty of 
 I ! when he be bring home from Vicksburg with a piece of shell in 
 his skull , my poor mother begin to think she have not   love he enough . I 
 remember , as she hang round my neck sobbing , before his coffin , she tell 
 I that I must be to she everything that he would have be . I swear in 
 tear and in perfect good faith that I would , but naturally I have 
 not keep my promise . I have be utterly different . I have be idle , 
 restless , egotistical , discontent . I have do no harm , I believe , but 
 I have do no good . my brother , if he have live , would have make 
 fifty thousand dollar and put gas and water into the house . my mother , 
 brood night and day on her bereavement , have come to fix her ideal in 
 office of that sort . judge by that standard I ' m nowhere ! " 

 Rowland be at loss how to receive this account of his friend 's domestic 
 circumstance ; it be plaintive , and yet the manner seem to he 
 over - trenchant . " you must lose no time in make a masterpiece , " he 
 answer ; " then with the proceed you can give her gas from golden 
 burner . " 

 " so I have tell she ; but she only half believe either in masterpiece or 
 in proceed . she can see no good in my making statue ; they seem to she 
 a snare of the enemy . she would fain see I all my life tethered to the 
 law , like a browse goat to a stake . in that way I ' m in sight . ' it 
 be a more regular occupation ! ' that be all I can get out of she . a 
 more regular damnation ! be it a fact that artist , in general , be such 
 wicked man ? I never have the pleasure of know one , so I could not 
 confute she with an example . she have the advantage of I , because she 
 formerly know a portrait - painter at Richmond , who do she miniature in 
 black lace mitten   you may see it on the parlor table , who use to 
 drink raw brandy and beat his wife . I promise she that , whatever I 
 might do to my wife , I would never beat my mother , and that as for 
 brandy , raw or diluted , I detest it . she sit silently cry for an 
 hour , during which I expend treasure of eloquence . it be a good thing 
 to have to reckon up one 's intention , and I assure you , as I plead my 
 cause , I be most agreeably impressed with the elevated character of 
 my own . I kiss she solemnly at last , and tell she that I have say 
 everything and that she must make the good of it . this morning she have 
 dry her eye , but I warrant you it be not   a cheerful house . I long to 
 be out of it ! " 

 " I ' m extremely sorry , " say Rowland , " to have be the prime cause of 
 so much suffering . I owe your mother some amend ; will it be possible 
 for I to see she ? " 

 " if you will see she , it will smooth matter vastly ; though to tell the 
 truth she will need all her courage to face you , for she consider you an 
 agent of the foul fiend . she do not   see why you should have come 
 here and set I by the ear : you be make to ruin ingenuous youth and 
 desolate doting mother . I leave it to you , personally , to answer these 
 charge . you see , what she can not   forgive - what she will not really ever 
 forgive - be your take I off to Rome . Rome be an evil word , in my 
 mother 's vocabulary , to be say in a whisper , as you would say ' damnation . ' 
 Northampton be in the centre of the earth and Rome far away in outlying 
 dusk , into which it can do no Christian any good to penetrate . and there 
 be I but yesterday a doomed habitue of that repository of every virtue , 
 Mr. Striker 's office ! " 

 " and do Mr. Striker know of your decision ? " ask Rowland . 

 " to a certainty ! Mr. Striker , you must know , be not simply a 
 good - natured attorney , who let I dog's - ear his law - book . he be a 
 particular friend and general adviser . he look after my mother 's 
 property and kindly consent to regard I as part of it . our opinion 
 have always be painfully divergent , but I freely forgive he his 
 zealous attempt to unscrew my head - piece and set it on hind part 
 before . he never understand I , and it be useless to try to make he . 
 we speak a different language - we be make of a different clay . I have a 
 fit of rage yesterday when I smash his bust , at the thought of all the 
 bad blood he have stir up in I ; it do I good , and it be all over 
 now . I do not   hate he any more ; I ' m rather sorry for he . see how you 
 ' ve   improve I ! I must have seem to he wilfully , wickedly stupid , 
 and I ' m sure he only tolerate I on account of his great regard for my 
 mother . this morning I grasp the bull by the horn . I take an armful 
 of law - book that have be gather the dust in my room for the last 
 year and a half , and present myself at the office . ' allow I to put 
 these back in their place , ' I say . ' I shall never have need for 
 they more - never more , never more , never more ! ' ' so you ' ve   learn 
 everything they contain ? ' ask Striker , leer over his spectacle . 
 ' well late than never . ' ' I ' ve   learn nothing that you can teach I , ' 
 I cry . ' but I shall tax your patience no long . I ' m go to be a 
 sculptor . I ' m go to Rome . I will not   bid you good - by just yet ; I shall 
 see you again . but I bid good - by here , with rapture , to these four 
 detest wall - to this live tomb ! I do not   know till now how I hat 
 it ! my compliment to Mr. Spooner , and my thank for all you have not 
 make of I ! ' " 

 " I ' m glad to know you be to see Mr. Striker again , " Rowland answer , 
 correct a primary inclination to smile . " you certainly owe he a 
 respectful farewell , even if he have not understand you . I confess you 
 rather puzzle I . there be another person , " he presently add , " whose 
 opinion as to your new career I should like to know . what do Miss 
 Garland think ? " 

 Hudson look at he keenly , with a slight blush . then , with a conscious 
 smile , " what make you suppose she think anything ? " he ask . 

 " because , though I see she but for a moment yesterday , she strike I as 
 a very intelligent person , and I be sure she have opinion . " 

 the smile on Roderick 's mobile face pass rapidly into a frown . " oh , 
 she think what I think ! " he answer . 

 before the two young man separate Rowland attempt to give as 
 harmonious a shape as possible to his companion 's scheme . " I have 
 launch you , as I may say , " he say , " and I feel as if I ought to see 
 you into port . I be old than you and know the world well , and 
 it seem well that we should voyage a while together . it be on my 
 conscience that I ought to take you to Rome , walk you through the 
 Vatican , and then lock you up with a heap of clay . I sail on the fifth 
 of September ; can you make your preparation to start with I ? " 

 Roderick assent to all this with an air of candid confidence in 
 his friend 's wisdom that outshone the virtue of pledge . " I have no 
 preparation to make , " he say with a smile , raise his arm and 
 let they fall , as if to indicate his unencumbered condition . " what I 
 be to take with I I carry here ! " and he tap his forehead . 

 " happy man ! " murmur Rowland with a sigh , think of the light 
 stowage , in his own organism , in the region indicate by Roderick , and 
 of the heavy one in deposit at his banker 's , of bag and box . 

 when his companion have leave he he go in search of Cecilia . she 
 be sit at work at a shady window , and welcome he to a low 
 chintz - cover chair . he sit some time , thoughtfully snip tape with 
 her scissor ; he expect criticism and he be prepare a rejoinder . at 
 last he tell she of Roderick 's decision and of his own influence in 
 it . Cecilia , besides an extreme surprise , exhibit a certain fine 
 displeasure at his not have ask her advice . 

 " what would you have say , if I have ? " he demand . 

 " I would have say in the first place , ' oh for pity 's sake do not   carry 
 off the person in all Northampton who amuse I most ! ' I would have say 
 in the second place , ' Nonsense ! the boy be do very well . let well 
 alone ! ' " 

 " that in the first five minute . what would you have say later ? " 

 " that for a man who be generally averse to meddling , you be suddenly 
 rather officious . " 

 Rowland 's countenance fall . he frown in silence . Cecilia look at he 
 askance ; gradually the spark of irritation fade from her eye . 

 " excuse my sharpness , " she resume at last . " but I be literally in 
 despair at lose Roderick Hudson . his visit in the evening , for the 
 past year , have keep I alive . they have give a silver tip to leaden 
 day . I do not   say he be of a more useful metal than other people , but he 
 be of a different one . of course , however , that I shall miss he sadly 
 be not a reason for his not go to seek his fortune . man must work and 
 woman must weep ! " 

 " decidedly not ! " say Rowland , with a good deal of emphasis . he have 
 suspect from the first hour of his stay that Cecilia have treat 
 herself to a private social luxury ; he have then discover that she 
 find it in Hudson 's lounging visit and boyish chatter , and he have feel 
 himself wonder at last whether , judiciously view , her gain in the 
 matter be not the young man 's loss . it be evident that Cecilia be not 
 judicious , and that her good sense , habitually rigid under the demand 
 of domestic economy , indulge itself with a certain agreeable laxity on 
 this particular point . she like her young friend just as he be ; she 
 humor he , flatter he , laugh at he , caress he - do 
 everything but advise he . it be a flirtation without the benefit of 
 a flirtation . she be too old to let he fall in love with she , which 
 might have do he good ; and her inclination be to keep he young , so 
 that the nonsense he talk might never transgress a certain line . it 
 be quite conceivable that poor Cecilia should relish a pastime ; but if 
 one have philanthropically embrace the idea that something considerable 
 might be make of Roderick , it be impossible not to see that her 
 friendship be not what might be call tonic . so Rowland reflect , in 
 the glow of his new - bear sympathy . there be a later time when he would 
 have be grateful if Hudson 's susceptibility to the relax influence 
 of lovely woman might have be limit to such inexpensive tribute as 
 he render the excellent Cecilia . 

 " I only desire to remind you , " she pursue , " that you be likely to have 
 your hand full . " 

 " I ' ve   think of that , and I rather like the idea ; like , as I do , the 
 man . I tell you the other day , you know , that I long to have something 
 on my hand . when it first occur to I that I might start our 
 young friend on the path of glory , I feel as if I have an unimpeachable 
 inspiration . then I remember there be danger and difficulty , 
 and ask myself whether I have a right to step in between he and his 
 obscurity . my sense of his really have the divine flame answer the 
 question . he be make to do the thing that humanity be the happy for ! 
 I can not   do such thing myself , but when I see a young man of genius 
 standing helpless and hopeless for want of capital , I feel - and it be 
 no affectation of humility , I assure you - as if it would give at least a 
 reflect usefulness to my own life to offer he his opportunity . " 

 " in the name of humanity , I suppose , I ought to thank you . but I want , 
 first of all , to be happy myself . you guarantee we at any rate , I hope , 
 the masterpiece . " 

 " a masterpiece a year , " say Rowland smile , " for the next quarter of a 
 century . " 

 " it seem to I that we have a right to ask more : to demand that you 
 guarantee we not only the development of the artist , but the security of 
 the man . " 

 Rowland become grave again . " his security ? " 

 " his moral , his sentimental security . here , you see , it be perfect . we 
 be all under a tacit compact to preserve it . perhaps you believe in 
 the necessary turbulence of genius , and you intend to enjoin upon your 
 protege the importance of cultivate his passion . " 

 " on the contrary , I believe that a man of genius owe as much deference 
 to his passion as any other man , but not a particle more , and I confess 
 I have a strong conviction that the artist be well for lead a quiet 
 life . that be what I shall preach to my protege , as you call he , by 
 example as well as by precept . you evidently believe , " he add in a 
 moment , " that he will lead I a dance . " 

 " Nay , I prophesy nothing . I only think that circumstance , with our 
 young man , have a great influence ; as be prove by the fact that 
 although he have be fume and fret here for the last five year , 
 he have nevertheless manage to make the good of it , and find it easy , 
 on the whole , to vegetate . transplant to Rome , I fancy he will put 
 forth a denser leafage . I should like vastly to see the change . you must 
 write I about it , from stage to stage . I hope with all my heart that 
 the fruit will be proportionate to the foliage . do not   think I a bird of 
 ill oman ; only remember that you will be hold to a strict account . " 

 " a man should make the most of himself , and be help if he need help , " 
 Rowland answer , after a long pause . " of course when a body begin to 
 expand , there come in the possibility of burst ; but I nevertheless 
 approve of a certain tension of one 's being . it be what a man be mean 
 for . and then I believe in the essential salubrity of genius - true 
 genius . " 

 " very good , " say Cecilia , with an air of resignation which make 
 Rowland , for the moment , seem to himself culpably eager . " we will drink 
 then to - day at dinner to the health of our friend . " 

     

 have it much at heart to convince Mrs. Hudson of the purity of his 
 intention , Rowland wait upon she that evening . he be usher into a 
 large parlor , which , by the light of a couple of candle , he perceive 
 to be very meagrely furnished and very tenderly and sparingly use . the 
 window be open to the air of the summer night , and a circle of three 
 person be temporarily awe into silence by his appearance . one 
 of these be Mrs. Hudson , who be sit at one of the window , 
 empty - handed save for the pocket - handkerchief in her lap , which be hold 
 with an air of familiarity with its sadder us . near she , on the sofa , 
 half sit , half lounge , in the attitude of a visitor outstaying 
 ceremony , with one long leg fling over the other and a large foot in a 
 clumsy boot swing to and fro continually , be a lean , sandy - haire 
 gentleman whom Rowland recognize as the original of the portrait of Mr. 
 Barnaby Striker . at the table , near the candle , busy with a substantial 
 piece of needle - work , sit the young girl of whom he have have a moment 's 
 quicken glimpse in Roderick 's studio , and whom he have learn to 
 be Miss Garland , his companion 's kinswoman . this young lady 's limpid , 
 penetrate gaze be the most effective greeting he receive . Mrs. 
 Hudson rise with a soft , vague sound of distress , and stand look at 
 he shrinkingly and waveringly , as if she be sorely tempt to 
 retreat through the open window . Mr. Striker swing his long leg a trifle 
 defiantly . no one , evidently , be use to offer hollow welcome or 
 tell polite fib . Rowland introduce himself ; he have come , he might 
 say , upon business . 

 " yes , " say Mrs. Hudson tremulously ; " I know - my son have tell I . I 
 suppose it be well I should see you . perhaps you will take a seat . " 

 with this invitation Rowland prepare to comply , and , turning , grasp 
 the first chair that offer itself . 

 " not that one , " say a full , grave voice ; whereupon he perceive that a 
 quantity of sewing - silk have be suspend and entangle over the back , 
 preparatory to be wound on reel . he feel the least bit irritated at 
 the curtness of the warning , come as it do from a young woman whose 
 countenance he have mentally pronounce interesting , and with regard to 
 whom he be conscious of the germ of the inevitable desire to produce a 
 responsive interest . and then he think it would break the ice to say 
 something playfully urbane . 

 " oh , you should let I take the chair , " he answer , " and have the 
 pleasure of hold the skein myself ! " 

 for all reply to this sally he receive a stare of undisguise amazement 
 from Miss Garland , who then look across at Mrs. Hudson with a glance 
 which plainly say : " you see he be quite the insidious personage we 
 fear . " the eld lady , however , sit with her eye fix on the ground 
 and her two hand tightly clasp . but touch her Rowland feel much 
 more compassion than resentment ; her attitude be not coldness , it be 
 a kind of dread , almost a terror . she be a small , eager woman , with a 
 pale , troubled face , which add to her apparent age . after look at 
 she for some minute Rowland see that she be still young , and that she 
 must have be a very girlish bride . she have be a pretty one , too , 
 though she probably have look terribly frightened at the altar . she 
 be very delicately make , and Roderick have come honestly by his physical 
 slimness and elegance . she wear no cap , and her flaxen hair , which be 
 of extraordinary fineness , be smooth and confine with puritanic 
 precision . she be excessively shy , and evidently very humble - minded ; it 
 be singular to see a woman to whom the experience of life have convey 
 so little reassurance as to her own resource or the chance of thing 
 turn out well . Rowland begin immediately to like she , and to feel 
 impatient to persuade she that there be no harm in he , and that , 
 twenty to one , her son would make she a well - please woman yet . he 
 foresaw that she would be easy to persuade , and that a benevolent 
 conversational tone would probably make she pass , flutter , from 
 distrust into an oppressive extreme of confidence . but he have an 
 indefinable sense that the person who be test that strong young 
 eyesight of hers in the dim candle - light be less readily beguile 
 from her mysterious feminine preconception . Miss Garland , accord 
 to Cecilia 's judgment , as Rowland remember , have not a countenance to 
 inspire a sculptor ; but it seem to Rowland that her countenance might 
 fairly inspire a man who be far from be a sculptor . she be not 
 pretty , as the eye of habit judge prettiness , but when you make the 
 observation you somehow fail to set it down against she , for you have 
 already pass from measure contour to trace meaning . in Mary 
 Garland 's face there be many possible one , and they give you the more 
 to think about that it be not - like Roderick Hudson 's , for instance - a 
 quick and mobile face , over which expression flicker like a candle in 
 a wind . they follow each other slowly , distinctly , gravely , sincerely , 
 and you might almost have fancy that , as they come and go , they give 
 she a sort of pain . she be tall and slender , and have an air of maidenly 
 strength and decision . she have a broad forehead and dark eyebrow , a 
 trifle thick than those of classic beauty ; her gray eye be clear 
 but not brilliant , and her feature be perfectly irregular . her mouth 
 be large , fortunately for the principal grace of her physiognomy be 
 her smile , which display itself with magnificent amplitude . Rowland , 
 indeed , have not yet see her smile , but something assure he that her 
 rigid gravity have a radiant counterpart . she wear a scanty white dress , 
 and have a nameless rustic air which would have lead one to speak of she 
 less as a young lady than as a young woman . she be evidently a girl 
 of a great personal force , but she lack pliancy . she be hem 
 a kitchen towel with the aid of a large steel thimble . she bent she 
 serious eye at last on her work again , and let Rowland explain himself . 

 " I have become suddenly so very intimate with your son , " he say at 
 last , address himself to Mrs. Hudson , " that it seem just I should 
 make your acquaintance . " 

 " very just , " murmur the poor lady , and after a moment 's hesitation be 
 on the point of add something more ; but Mr. Striker here interpose , 
 after a prefatory clearance of the throat . 

 " I should like to take the liberty , " he say , " of address you a 
 simple question . for how long a period of time have you be acquaint 
 with our young friend ? " he continue to kick the air , but his head be 
 throw back and his eye fix on the opposite wall , as if in aversion 
 to the spectacle of Rowland 's inevitable confusion . 

 " a very short time , I confess . hardly three day . " 

 " and yet you call yourself intimate , eh ? I have be see Mr. Roderick 
 daily these three year , and yet it be only this morning that I feel as 
 if I have at last the right to say that I know he . we have a few moment ' 
 conversation in my office which supply the miss link in the 
 evidence . so that now I do venture to say I ' m acquaint with Mr. 
 Roderick ! but wait three year , sir , like I ! " and Mr. Striker laugh , 
 with a closed mouth and a noiseless shake of all his long person . 

 Mrs. Hudson smile confusedly , at hazard ; Miss Garland keep her eye on 
 her stitch . but it seem to Rowland that the latter color a little . 
 " oh , in three year , of course , " he say , " we shall know each other 
 well . before many year be over , madam , " he pursue , " I expect the 
 world to know he . I expect he to be a great man ! " 

 Mrs. Hudson look at first as if this could be but an insidious device 
 for increase her distress by the assistance of irony . then reassure , 
 little by little , by Rowland 's benevolent visage , she give he an 
 appeal glance and a timorous " really ? " 

 but before Rowland could respond , Mr. Striker again intervene . " do 
 I fully apprehend your expression ? " he ask . " our young friend be to 
 become a great man ? " 

 " a great artist , I hope , " say Rowland . 

 " this be a new and interesting view , " say Mr. Striker , with an 
 assumption of judicial calmness . " we have have hope for Mr. Roderick , 
 but I confess , if I have rightly understand they , they stop short of 
 greatness . we should not   have take the responsibility of claim 
 it for he . what do you say , lady ? we all feel about he here - his 
 mother , Miss Garland , and myself - as if his merit be rather in the 
 line of the " - and Mr. Striker wave his hand with a series of fantastic 
 flourish in the air - " of the light ornamental ! " Mr. Striker bear his 
 recalcitrant pupil a grudge , but he be evidently try both to be 
 fair and to respect the susceptibility of his companion . but he be 
 unversed in the mysterious process of feminine emotion . ten minute 
 before , there have be a general harmony of sombre view ; but on hear 
 Roderick 's limitation thus distinctly formulate to a stranger , the two 
 lady mutely protest . Mrs. Hudson utter a short , faint sigh , and 
 Miss Garland raise her eye toward their advocate and visit he with 
 a short , cold glance . 

 " I ' m afraid , Mrs. Hudson , " Rowland pursue , evade the discussion 
 of Roderick 's possible greatness , " that you do not   at all thank I for 
 stir up your son 's ambition on a line which lead he so far from 
 home . I suspect I have make you my enemy . " 

 Mrs. Hudson cover her mouth with her finger - tip and look painfully 
 perplex between the desire to confess the truth and the fear of be 
 impolite . " my cousin be no one 's enemy , " Miss Garland hereupon declare , 
 gently , but with that same fine deliberateness with which she have make 
 Rowland relax his grasp of the chair . 

 " do she leave that to you ? " Rowland venture to ask , with a smile . 

 " we be inspire with none but christian sentiment , " say Mr. Striker ; 
 " Miss Garland perhaps most of all . Miss Garland , " and Mr. Striker 
 wave his hand again as if to perform an introduction which have be 
 regrettably omit , " be the daughter of a minister , the granddaughter 
 of a minister , the sister of a minister . " Rowland bow deferentially , 
 and the young girl go on with her sewing , with nothing , apparently , 
 either of embarrassment or elation at the promulgation of these fact . 
 Mr. Striker continue : " Mrs. Hudson , I see , be too deeply agitated 
 to converse with you freely . she will allow I to address you a few 
 question . would you kindly inform she , as exactly as possible , just 
 what you propose to do with her son ? " 

 the poor lady fix her eye appealingly on Rowland 's face and seem 
 to say that Mr. Striker have speak her desire , though she herself would 
 have express it less defiantly . but Rowland see in Mr. Striker 's 
 many - wrinkle light blue eye , shrewd at once and good - natured , that 
 he have no intention of defiance , and that he be simply pompous and 
 conceited and sarcastically compassionate of any view of thing in which 
 Roderick Hudson be regard in a serious light . 

 " do , my dear madam ? " demand Rowland . " I do not   propose to do anything . 
 he must do for himself . I simply offer he the chance . he be to study , 
 to work - hard , I hope . " 

 " not too hard , please , " murmur Mrs. Hudson , pleadingly , wheel about 
 from recent vision of dangerous leisure . " he be not very strong , and I 
 ' m afraid the climate of Europe be very relaxing . " 

 " ah , study ? " repeat Mr. Striker . " to what line of study be he to 
 direct his attention ? " then suddenly , with an impulse of disinterested 
 curiosity on his own account , " how do you study sculpture , anyhow ? " 

 " by look at model and imitate they . " 

 " at model , eh ? to what kind of model do you refer ? " 

 " to the antique , in the first place . " 

 " ah , the antique , " repeat Mr. Striker , with a jocose intonation . " do 
 you hear , madam ? Roderick be go off to Europe to learn to imitate the 
 antique . " 

 " I suppose it be all right , " say Mrs. Hudson , twist herself in a 
 sort of delicate anguish . 

 " an antique , as I understand it , " the lawyer continue , " be an image of 
 a pagan deity , with considerable dirt stick to it , and no arm , no 
 nose , and no clothing . a precious model , certainly ! " 

 " that be a very good description of many , " say Rowland , with a laugh . 

 " Mercy ! truly ? " ask Mrs. Hudson , borrow courage from his urbanity . 

 " but a sculptor 's study , you intimate , be not confine to the 
 antique , " Mr. Striker resume . " after he have be look three or four 
 year at the object I describe " - 

 " he study the living model , " say Rowland . 

 " do it take three or four year ? " ask Mrs. Hudson , imploringly . 

 " that depend upon the artist 's aptitude . after twenty year a real 
 artist be still study . " 

 " oh , my poor boy ! " moan Mrs. Hudson , find the prospect , under every 
 light , still terrible . 

 " now this study of the living model , " Mr. Striker pursue . " Inform Mrs. 
 Hudson about that . " 

 " oh dear , no ! " cry Mrs. Hudson , shrinkingly . 

 " that too , " say Rowland , " be one of the reason for study in Rome . 
 it be a handsome race , you know , and you find very well - make people . " 

 " I suppose they be no well make than a good tough Yankee , " object 
 Mr. Striker , transpose his interminable leg . " the same God make we . " 

 " surely , " sigh Mrs. Hudson , but with a questioning glance at her 
 visitor which show that she have already begin to concede much weight 
 to his opinion . Rowland hasten to express his assent to Mr. Striker 's 
 proposition . 

 Miss Garland look up , and , after a moment 's hesitation : " be the roman 
 woman very beautiful ? " she ask . 

 Rowland too , in answering , hesitate ; he be look straight at the 
 young girl . " on the whole , I prefer ours , " he say . 

 she have drop her work in her lap ; her hand be cross upon it , she 
 head throw a little back . she have evidently expect a more impersonal 
 answer , and she be dissatisfied . for an instant she seem inclined to 
 make a rejoinder , but she slowly pick up her work in silence and draw 
 her stitch again . 

 Rowland have for the second time the feeling that she judge he to be 
 a person of a disagreeably sophisticated tone . he notice too that the 
 kitchen towel she be hem be terribly coarse . and yet his answer 
 have a resonant inward echo , and he repeat to himself , " yes , on the 
 whole , I prefer our . " 

 " well , these model , " begin Mr. Striker . " you put they into an attitude , 
 I suppose . " 

 " an attitude , exactly . " 

 " and then you sit down and look at they . " 

 " you must not sit too long . you must go at your clay and try to build up 
 something that look like they . " 

 " well , there you be with your model in an attitude on one side , 
 yourself , in an attitude too , I suppose , on the other , and your pile of 
 clay in the middle , build up , as you say . so you pass the morning . 
 after that I hope you go out and take a walk , and rest from your 
 exertion . " 

 " unquestionably . but to a sculptor who love his work there be no time 
 lose . everything he look at teach or suggest something . " 

 " that be a tempting doctrine to young man with a taste for sit by 
 the hour with the page unturned , watch the fly buzz , or the frost 
 melt on the window - pane . our young friend , in this way , must have lay 
 up store of information which I never suspect ! " 

 " very likely , " say Rowland , with an unresentful smile , " he will prove 
 some day the completer artist for some of those lazy revery . " 

 this theory be apparently very grateful to Mrs. Hudson , who have never 
 have the case put for her son with such ingenious hopefulness , and find 
 herself disrelishe the singular situation of seem to side against 
 her own flesh and blood with a lawyer whose conversational tone betray 
 the habit of cross - questioning . 

 " my son , then , " she venture to ask , " my son have great - what you would 
 call great power ? " 

 " to my sense , very great power . " 

 Poor Mrs. Hudson actually smile , broadly , gleefully , and glance at 
 Miss Garland , as if to invite she to do likewise . but the young girl 's 
 face remain serious , like the eastern sky when the opposite sunset be 
 too feeble to make it glow . " do you really know ? " she ask , look at 
 Rowland . 

 " one can not know in such a matter save after proof , and proof take 
 time . but one can believe . " 

 " and you believe ? " 

 " I believe . " 

 but even then Miss Garland vouchsafe no smile . her face become graver 
 than ever . 

 " well , well , " say Mrs. Hudson , " we must hope that it be all for the 
 good . " 

 Mr. Striker eye his old friend for a moment with a look of some 
 displeasure ; he see that this be but a cunning feminine imitation of 
 resignation , and that , through some untraceable process of transition , 
 she be now take more comfort in the opinion of this insinuate 
 strange than in his own tough dogma . he rise to his foot , 
 without pull down his waistcoat , but with a wrinkle grin at the 
 inconsistency of woman . " well , sir , Mr. Roderick 's power be nothing to 
 I , " he say , " nor no use he make of they . good or bad , he be no son 
 of mine . but , in a friendly way , I ' m glad to hear so fine an account 
 of he . I ' m glad , madam , you be so satisfied with the prospect . 
 Affection , sir , you see , must have its guarantee ! " he pause a moment , 
 stroke his beard , with his head inclined and one eye half - closed , 
 look at Rowland . the look be grotesque , but it be significant , and 
 it puzzle Rowland more than it amuse he . " I suppose you be a very 
 brilliant young man , " he go on , " very enlighten , very cultivate , 
 quite up to the mark in the fine art and all that sort of thing . I ' m a 
 plain , practical old boy , content to follow an honorable profession in a 
 free country . I do not   go off to the Old World to learn my business ; no 
 one take I by the hand ; I have to grease my wheel myself , and , such as 
 I be , I ' m a self - make man , every inch of I ! well , if our young friend 
 be book for fame and fortune , I do not   suppose his go to Rome will 
 stop he . but , mind you , it will not   help he such a long way , either . if 
 you have undertake to put he through , there be a thing or two you would 
 well remember . the crop we gather depend upon the seed we sow . he may 
 be the big genius of the age : his potato will not   come up without his 
 hoe they . if he take thing so almighty easy as - well , as one or two 
 young fellow of genius I ' ve   have under my eye - his produce will never 
 gain the prize . take the word for it of a man who have make his way inch 
 by inch , and do not   believe that we will wake up to find our work do 
 because we ' ve   lain all night a - dreaming of it ; anything worth do be 
 devilish hard to do ! if your young protajay find thing easy and have 
 a good time and say he like the life , it be a sign that - as I may 
 say - you have well step round to the office and look at the book . that 
 be all I desire to remark . no offense intend . I hope you will have a 
 first - rate time . " 

 Rowland could honestly reply that this seem pregnant sense , and he 
 offer Mr. Striker a friendly hand - shake as the latter withdraw . but 
 Mr. Striker 's rather grim view of matter cast a momentary shadow on his 
 companion , and Mrs. Hudson seem to feel that it necessitate between 
 they some little friendly agreement not to be overawe . 

 Rowland sit for some time long , partly because he wish to please the 
 two woman and partly because he be strangely pleased himself . there 
 be something touch in their unworldly fear and diffident hope , 
 something almost terrible in the way poor little Mrs. Hudson seem 
 to flutter and quiver with intense maternal passion . she put forth one 
 timid conversational venture after another , and ask Rowland a number 
 of question about himself , his age , his family , his occupation , his 
 taste , his religious opinion . Rowland have an odd feeling at last that 
 she have begin to consider he very exemplary , and that she might 
 make , later , some perturb discovery . he try , therefore , to invent 
 something that would prepare she to find he fallible . but he could 
 think of nothing . it only seem to he that Miss Garland secretly 
 mistrust he , and that he must leave she to render he the service , 
 after he have go , of make he the object of a little firm derogation . 
 Mrs. Hudson talk with low - voice eagerness about her son . 

 " he be very lovable , sir , I assure you . when you come to know he you 
 will find he very lovable . he be a little spoil , of course ; he have 
 always do with I as he please ; but he be a good boy , I ' m sure he be 
 a good boy . and every one think he very attractive : I ' m sure he would be 
 notice , anywhere . do not   you think he be very handsome , sir ? he feature 
 his poor father . I have another - perhaps you ' ve   be tell . he be 
 kill . " and the poor little lady bravely smile , for fear of do 
 bad . " he be a very fine boy , but very different from Roderick . 
 Roderick be a little strange ; he have never be an easy boy . sometimes 
 I feel like the goose - be not   it a goose , dear ? " and startle by the 
 audacity of her comparison she appeal to Miss Garland - " the goose , or 
 the hen , who hatch a swan 's egg . I have never be able to give he 
 what he need . I have always think that in more - in more brilliant 
 circumstance he might find his place and be happy . but at the same time 
 I be afraid of the world for he ; it be so large and dangerous and 
 dreadful . no doubt I know very little about it . I never suspect , I 
 confess , that it contain person of such liberality as your . " 

 Rowland reply that , evidently , she have do the world but scanty 
 justice . " no , " object Miss Garland , after a pause , " it be like 
 something in a fairy tale . " 

 " what , pray ? " 

 " your come here all unknown , so rich and so polite , and carry off 
 my cousin in a golden cloud . " 

 if this be badinage Miss Garland have the good of it , for Rowland almost 
 fall a - musing silently over the question whether there be a possibility 
 of irony in that transparent gaze . before he withdraw , Mrs. Hudson make 
 he tell she again that Roderick 's power be extraordinary . he have 
 inspire she with a clinging , caress faith in his wisdom . " he will 
 really do great thing , " she ask , " the very great ? " 

 " I see no reason in his talent itself why he should not . " 

 " well , we will think of that as we sit here alone , " she rejoin . " Mary 
 and I will sit here and talk about it . so I give he up , " she go on , 
 as he be go . " I ' m sure you will be the good of friend to he , 
 but if you should ever forget he , or grow tired of he , or lose your 
 interest in he , and he should come to any harm or any trouble , please , 
 sir , remember " - and she pause , with a tremulous voice . 

 " remember , my dear madam ? " 

 " that he be all I have - that he be everything - and that it would be very 
 terrible . " 

 " in so far as I can help he , he shall succeed , " be all Rowland could 
 say . he turn to Miss Garland , to bid she good night , and she rise and 
 put out her hand . she be very straightforward , but he could see that if 
 she be too modest to be bold , she be much too simple to be shy . " have 
 you no charge to lay upon I ? " he ask - to ask she something . 

 she look at he a moment and then , although she be not shy , she 
 blush . " make he do his good , " she say . 

 Rowland note the soft intensity with which the word be utter . " do 
 you take a great interest in he ? " he demand . 

 " certainly . " 

 " then , if he will not do his good for you , he will not do it for I . " 
 she turn away with another blush , and Rowland take his leave . 

 he walk homeward , think of many thing . the great Northampton 
 elm interarche far above in the darkness , but the moon have rise and 
 through scatter aperture be hang the dusky vault with silver 
 lamp . there seem to rowland something intensely serious in the scene 
 in which he have just take part . he have laugh and talk and brave it 
 out in self - defense ; but when he reflect that he be really meddle 
 with the simple stillness of this little New England home , and that he 
 have venture to disturb so much live security in the interest of a 
 far - away , fantastic hypothesis , he pause , amazed at his temerity . it 
 be true , as Cecilia have say , that for an unofficious man it be a 
 singular position . there stir in his mind an odd feeling of annoyance 
 with Roderick for have thus peremptorily enlist his sympathy . as 
 he look up and down the long vista , and see the clear white house 
 glance here and there in the broken moonshine , he could almost have 
 believe that the happy lot for any man be to make the most of life 
 in some such tranquil spot as that . here be kindness , comfort , safety , 
 the warn voice of duty , the perfect hush of temptation . and as 
 Rowland look along the arch of silver shadow and out into the lucid 
 air of the american night , which seem so doubly vast , somehow , and 
 strange and nocturnal , he feel like declare that here be beauty 
 too - beauty sufficient for an artist not to starve upon it . as he stand , 
 lose in the darkness , he presently hear a rapid tread on the other side 
 of the road , accompany by a loud , jubilant whistle , and in a moment 
 a figure emerge into an open gap of moonshine . he have no difficulty 
 in recognize Hudson , who be presumably return from a visit to 
 Cecilia . Roderick stop suddenly and star up at the moon , with his 
 face vividly illumine . he break out into a snatch of song : - 

 " the splendor fall on castle wall 
 and snowy summit old in story ! " 

 and with a great , musical roll of his voice he go swing off into 
 the darkness again , as if his thought have lend he wing . he be 
 dream of the inspiration of foreign land , - of castle crag and 
 historic landscape . what a pity , after all , think Rowland , as he go 
 his own way , that he should not   have a taste of it ! 

 it have be a very just remark of Cecilia 's that Roderick would change 
 with a change in his circumstance . Rowland have telegraph to New York 
 for another berth on his steamer , and from the hour the answer come 
 Hudson 's spirit rise to incalculable height . he be radiant with 
 good - humor , and his kindly jollity seem the pledge of a brilliant 
 future . he have forgive his old enemy and forget his old 
 grievance , and seem every way reconcile to a world in which he be 
 go to count as an active force . he be inexhaustibly loquacious and 
 fantastic , and as Cecilia say , he have suddenly become so good that 
 it be only to be fear he be go to start not for Europe but for 
 heaven . he take long walk with Rowland , who feel more and more the 
 fascination of what he would have call his giftedness . Rowland 
 return several time to Mrs. Hudson 's , and find the two lady do 
 their good to be happy in their companion 's happiness . Miss Garland , he 
 think , be succeed well than her demeanor on his first visit have 
 promise . he try to have some especial talk with she , but her extreme 
 reserve force he to content himself with such response to his rather 
 urgent overture as might be extract from a keenly attentive smile . 
 it must be confess , however , that if the response be vague , the 
 satisfaction be great , and that Rowland , after his second visit , keep 
 see a lurking reflection of this smile in the most unexpected place . 
 it seem strange that she should please he so well at so slender 
 a cost , but please he she do , prodigiously , and his pleasure have 
 a quality altogether new to he . it make he restless , and a trifle 
 melancholy ; he walk about absently , wonder and wish . he 
 wonder , among other thing , why fate should have condemn he to 
 make the acquaintance of a girl whom he would make a sacrifice to know 
 well , just as he be leave the country for year . it seem to he 
 that he be turn his back on a chance of happiness - happiness of a 
 sort of which the slender germ should be cultivate . he ask himself 
 whether , feel as he do , if he have only himself to please , he would 
 give up his journey and - wait . he have Roderick to please now , for whom 
 disappointment would be cruel ; but he say to himself that certainly , if 
 there be no Roderick in the case , the ship should sail without he . 
 he ask Hudson several question about his cousin , but Roderick , 
 confidential on most point , seem to have reason of his own for 
 be reticent on this one . his measure answer quicken Rowland 's 
 curiosity , for Miss Garland , with her own irritate half - suggestion , 
 have only to be a subject of guard allusion in other to become 
 intolerably interesting . he learn from Roderick that she be the 
 daughter of a country minister , a far - away cousin of his mother , 
 settle in another part of the state ; that she be one of a half - a - dozen 
 daughter , that the family be very poor , and that she have come a couple 
 of month before to pay his mother a long visit . " it be to be a very 
 long one now , " he say , " for it be settle that she be to remain while I 
 be away . " 

 the fermentation of contentment in Roderick 's soul reach its climax a 
 few day before the young man be to make their farewell . he have be 
 sit with his friend on Cecilia 's veranda , but for half an hour past 
 he have say nothing . lounge back against a vine - wreathed column and 
 gaze idly at the star , he keep carol softly to himself with that 
 indifference to ceremony for which he always find allowance , and which 
 in he have a sort of plead grace . at last , spring up : " I want to 
 strike out , hard ! " he exclaim . " I want to do something violent , to let 
 off steam ! " 

 " I will tell you what to do , this lovely weather , " say Cecilia . " give a 
 picnic . it can be as violent as you please , and it will have the merit 
 of lead off our emotion into a safe channel , as well as your . " 

 Roderick laugh uproariously at Cecilia 's very practical remedy for his 
 sentimental need , but a couple of day later , nevertheless , the picnic 
 be give . it be to be a family party , but Roderick , in his magnanimous 
 geniality , insist on invite Mr. Striker , a decision which Rowland 
 mentally applaud . " and we will have Mrs. Striker , too , " he say , " if 
 she will come , to keep my mother in countenance ; and at any rate we 
 will have Miss Striker - the divine Petronilla ! " the young lady thus 
 denominate form , with Mrs. Hudson , Miss Garland , and Cecilia , the 
 feminine half of the company . Mr. Striker present himself , sacrifice 
 a morning 's work , with a magnanimity great even than Roderick 's , and 
 foreign support be far secure in the person of Mr. Whitefoot , the 
 young Orthodox minister . Roderick have choose the feasting - place ; he 
 know it well and have pass many a summer afternoon there , lie at his 
 length on the grass and gaze at the blue undulation of the horizon . 
 it be a meadow on the edge of a wood , with mossy rock protrude 
 through the grass and a little lake on the other side . it be a 
 cloudless August day ; Rowland always remember it , and the scene , and 
 everything that be say and do , with extraordinary distinctness . 
 Roderick surpass himself in friendly jollity , and at one moment , when 
 exhilaration be at the high , be see in Mr. Striker 's high white 
 hat , drink champagne from a break tea - cup to Mr. Striker 's health . 
 Miss Striker have her father 's pale blue eye ; she be dress as if she 
 be go to sit for her photograph , and remain for a long time with 
 Roderick on a little promontory overhang the lake . Mrs. Hudson sit 
 all day with a little meek , apprehensive smile . she be afraid of an 
 " accident , " though unless Miss Striker   who indeed be a little of 
 a romp   should push Roderick into the lake , it be hard to see what 
 accident could occur . Mrs. Hudson be as neat and crisp and uncrumple 
 at the end of the festival as at the beginning . Mr. Whitefoot , who but 
 a twelvemonth later become a convert to episcopacy and be already 
 cultivate a certain conversational sonority , devote himself to 
 Cecilia . he have a little book in his pocket , out of which he read to 
 she at interval , lie stretch at her foot , and it be a last joke 
 with Cecilia , afterwards , that she would never tell what Mr. Whitefoot 's 
 little book have be . Rowland have place himself near Miss Garland , 
 while the feasting go forward on the grass . she wear a so - call gypsy 
 hat - a little straw hat , tie down over her ear , so as to cast she 
 eye into shadow , by a ribbon pass outside of it . when the company 
 disperse , after lunch , he propose to she to take a stroll in the 
 wood . she hesitate a moment and look toward Mrs. Hudson , as if for 
 permission to leave she . but Mrs. Hudson be listen to Mr. Striker , 
 who sit gossip to she with relaxed magniloquence , his waistcoat 
 unbuttoned and his hat on his nose . 

 " you can give your cousin your society at any time , " say Rowland . " but 
 I , perhaps , you will never see again . " 

 " why then should we wish to be friend , if nothing be to come of it ? " 
 she ask , with homely logic . but by this time she have consent , and 
 they be tread the fall pine - needle . 

 " oh , one must take all one can get , " say Rowland . " if we can be friend 
 for half an hour , it be so much gain . " 

 " do you expect never to come back to Northampton again ? " 

 " ' never ' be a good deal to say . but I go to Europe for a long stay . " 

 " do you prefer it so much to your own country ? " 

 " I will not say that . but I have the misfortune to be a rather idle man , 
 and in Europe the burden of idleness be less heavy than here . " 

 she be silent for a few minute ; then at last , " in that , then , we be 
 well than Europe , " she say . to a certain point Rowland agree with 
 she , but he demur , to make she say more . 

 " would not   it be well , " she ask , " to work to get reconcile to 
 America , than to go to Europe to get reconcile to idleness ? " 

 " Doubtless ; but you know work be hard to find . " 

 " I come from a little place where every one have plenty , " say Miss 
 Garland . " we all work ; every one I know work . and really , " she add 
 presently , " I look at you with curiosity ; you be the first unoccupied 
 man I ever see . " 

 " do not   look at I too hard , " say Rowland , smile . " I shall sink into 
 the earth . what be the name of your little place ? " 

 " West Nazareth , " say Miss Garland , with her usual sobriety . " it be not 
 so very little , though it be small than Northampton . " 

 " I wonder whether I could find any work at West Nazareth , " Rowland say . 

 " you would not like it , " Miss Garland declare reflectively . " though 
 there be far fine wood there than this . we have mile and mile of 
 wood . " 

 " I might chop down tree , " say Rowland . " that be , if you allow it . " 

 " allow it ? why , where should we get our firewood ? " then , notice that 
 he have speak jestingly , she glance at he askance , though with no 
 visible diminution of her gravity . " do not   you know how to do anything ? 
 have you no profession ? " 

 Rowland shake his head . " absolutely none . " 

 " what do you do all day ? " 

 " nothing worth relate . that be why I be go to Europe . there , at 
 least , if I do nothing , I shall see a great deal ; and if I ' m not a 
 producer , I shall at any rate be an observer . " 

 " can not   we observe everywhere ? " 

 " certainly ; and I really think that in that way I make the most of my 
 opportunity . though I confess , " he continue , " that I often remember 
 there be thing to be see here to which I probably have not   do 
 justice . I should like , for instance , to see West Nazareth . " 

 she look round at he , open - eyed ; not , apparently , that she exactly 
 suppose he be jest , for the expression of such a desire be not 
 necessarily facetious ; but as if he must have speak with an ulterior 
 motive . in fact , he have speak from the simple of motif . the girl 
 beside he please he unspeakably , and , suspect that her charm 
 be essentially her own and not reflect from social circumstance , 
 he wish to give himself the satisfaction of contrast she with the 
 meagre influence of her education . Miss Garland 's second movement be 
 to take he at his word . " since you be free to do as you please , why 
 do not   you go there ? " 

 " I be not free to do as I please now . I have offer your cousin to bear 
 he company to Europe , he have accept with enthusiasm , and I can not 
 retract . " 

 " be you go to Europe simply for his sake ? " 

 Rowland hesitate a moment . " I think I may almost say so . " 

 Miss Garland walk along in silence . " do you mean to do a great deal 
 for he ? " she ask at last . 

 " what I can . but my power of help he be very small beside his power 
 of help himself . " 

 for a moment she be silent again . " you be very generous , " she say , 
 almost solemnly . 

 " no , I be simply very shrewd . roderick will repay I . it be an 
 investment . at first , I think , " he add shortly afterwards , " you would 
 not have pay I that compliment . you distrust I . " 

 she make no attempt to deny it . " I do not   see why you should wish to 
 make Roderick discontent . I think you be rather frivolous . " 

 " you do I injustice . I do not   think I ' m that . " 

 " it be because you be unlike other man - those , at least , whom I have 
 see . " 

 " in what way ? " 

 " why , as you describe yourself . you have no duty , no profession , no 
 home . you live for your pleasure . " 

 " that be all very true . and yet I maintain I ' m not frivolous . " 

 " I hope not , " say Miss Garland , simply . they have reach a point where 
 the wood - path fork and put forth two divergent track which lose 
 themselves in a verdurous tangle . Miss Garland seem to think that the 
 difficulty of choice between they be a reason for give they up and 
 turn back . Rowland think otherwise , and detect agreeable ground 
 for preference in the left - hand path . as a compromise , they sit down on 
 a fallen log . look about he , Rowland espy a curious wild shrub , 
 with a spot crimson leaf ; he go and pluck a spray of it and 
 bring it to Miss Garland . he have never observe it before , but she 
 immediately call it by its name . she express surprise at his not 
 know it ; it be extremely common . he presently bring she a speciman 
 of another delicate plant , with a little blue - streak flower . " I 
 suppose that be common , too , " he say , " but I have never see it - or 
 notice it , at least . " she answer that this one be rare , and 
 meditate a moment before she could remember its name . at last she 
 recall it , and express surprise at his have find the plant in the 
 wood ; she suppose it grow only in open marsh . Rowland compliment 
 she on her fund of useful information . 

 " it be not especially useful , " she answer ; " but I like to know the 
 name of plant as I do those of my acquaintance . when we walk in the 
 wood at home - which we do so much - it seem as unnatural not to know 
 what to call the flower as it would be to see some one in the town with 
 whom we be not on speak term . " 

 " Apropos of frivolity , " Rowland say , " I ' m sure you have very little 
 of it , unless at West Nazareth it be consider frivolous to walk in the 
 wood and nod to the nodding flower . do kindly tell I a little about 
 yourself . " and to compel she to begin , " I know you come of a race of 
 theologian , " he go on . 

 " no , " she reply , deliberate ; " they be not theologian , though they 
 be minister . we do not   take a very firm stand upon doctrine ; we be 
 practical , rather . we write sermon and preach they , but we do a great 
 deal of hard work beside . " 

 " and of this hard work what have your share be ? " 

 " the hard part : do nothing . " 

 " what do you call nothing ? " 

 " I teach school a while : I must make the most of that . but I confess I 
 do not   like it . otherwise , I have only do little thing at home , as 
 they turn up . " 

 " what kind of thing ? " 

 " oh , every kind . if you have see my home , you would understand . " 

 Rowland would have like to make she specify ; but he feel a more urgent 
 need to respect her simplicity than he have ever feel to defer to the 
 complex circumstance of certain other woman . " to be happy , I imagine , " 
 he content himself with say , " you need to be occupy . you need to 
 have something to expend yourself upon . " 

 " that be not so true as it once be ; now that I be old , I be sure I be 
 less impatient of leisure . certainly , these two month that I have be 
 with Mrs. Hudson , I have have a terrible amount of it . and yet I have 
 like it ! and now that I be probably to be with she all the while that 
 her son be away , I look forward to more with a resignation that I do not 
 quite know what to make of . " 

 " it be settle , then , that you be to remain with your cousin ? " 

 " it depend upon their writing from home that I may stay . but that be 
 probable . only I must not forget , " she say , rise , " that the ground 
 for my do so be that she be not leave alone . " 

 " I be glad to know , " say Rowland , " that I shall probably often hear 
 about you . I assure you I shall often think about you ! " these word be 
 half impulsive , half deliberate . they be the simple truth , and he have 
 ask himself why he should not tell she the truth . and yet they be 
 not all of it ; her hear the rest would depend upon the way she 
 receive this . she receive it not only , as Rowland foresee , without 
 a shadow of coquetry , of any apparent thought of listen to it 
 gracefully , but with a slight movement of nervous deprecation , which 
 seem to betray itself in the quickening of her step . evidently , if 
 Rowland be to take pleasure in hear about she , it would have to be a 
 highly disinterested pleasure . she answer nothing , and Rowland too , 
 as he walk beside she , be silent ; but as he look along the 
 shadow - weave wood - path , what he be really face be a level three 
 year of disinterestedness . he usher they in by talk compose 
 civility until he have bring Miss Garland back to her companion . 

 he see she but once again . he be oblige to be in New York a couple of 
 day before sailing , and it be arrange that Roderick should overtake 
 he at the last moment . the evening before he leave Northampton he go 
 to say farewell to Mrs. Hudson . the ceremony be brief . Rowland soon 
 perceive that the poor little lady be in the melt mood , and , as he 
 dread her tear , he compress a multitude of solemn promise into a 
 silent hand - shake and take his leave . Miss Garland , she have tell he , 
 be in the back - garden with Roderick : he might go out to they . he do 
 so , and as he draw near he hear Roderick 's high - pitch voice ringing 
 behind the shrubbery . in a moment , emerge , he find Miss Garland 
 lean against a tree , with her cousin before she talk with great 
 emphasis . he ask pardon for interrupt they , and say he wish only 
 to bid her good - by . she give he her hand and he make she his bow in 
 silence . " do not   forget , " he say to Roderick , as he turn away . " and 
 do not , in this company , repent of your bargain . " 

 " I shall not let he , " say Miss Garland , with something very like 
 gayety . " I shall see that he be punctual . he must go ! I owe you an 
 apology for have doubt that he ought to . " and in spite of the dusk 
 Rowland could see that she have an even fine smile than he have suppose . 

 Roderick be punctual , eagerly punctual , and they go . Rowland for 
 several day be occupy with material care , and lose sight of his 
 sentimental perplexity . but they only slumber , and they be 
 sharply awaken . the weather be fine , and the two young man always sit 
 together upon deck late into the evening . one night , toward the last , 
 they be at the stern of the great ship , watch she grind the solid 
 blackness of the ocean into phosphorescent foam . they talk on these 
 occasion of everything conceivable , and have the air of have no 
 secret from each other . but it be on Roderick 's conscience that this 
 air belie he , and he be too frank by nature , moreover , for permanent 
 reticence on any point . 

 " I must tell you something , " he say at last . " I should like you to know 
 it , and you will be so glad to know it . besides , it be only a question 
 of time ; three month hence , probably , you would have guess it . I be 
 engage to Mary Garland . " 

 Rowland sit star ; though the sea be calm , it seem to he that the 
 ship give a great dizzying lurch . but in a moment he contrive to 
 answer coherently : " engage to Miss Garland ! I never suppose - I never 
 imagine " - 

 " that I be in love with she ? " roderick interrupt . " neither do I , 
 until this last fortnight . but you come and put I into such ridiculous 
 good - humor that I feel an extraordinary desire to tell some woman that I 
 adore she . Miss Garland be a magnificent girl ; you know she too little 
 to do her justice . I have be quietly learn to know she , these 
 past three month , and have be fall in love with she without 
 be conscious of it . it appear , when I speak to she , that she have 
 a kindness for I . so the thing be settle . I must of course make some 
 money before we can marry . it be rather droll , certainly , to engage 
 one 's self to a girl whom one be go to leave the next day , for year . 
 we shall be condemn , for some time to come , to do a terrible deal 
 of abstract think about each other . but I want her blessing on my 
 career and I could not help ask for it . unless a man be unnaturally 
 selfish he need to work for some one else than himself , and I be sure 
 I shall run a smoother and swifter course for know that that fine 
 creature be wait , at Northampton , for news of my greatness . if ever I 
 be a dull companion and over - addict to moping , remember in justice 
 to I that I be in love and that my sweetheart be five thousand mile 
 away . " 

 Rowland listen to all this with a sort of feeling that fortune have 
 play he an elaborately - devise trick . it have lure he out into 
 mid - ocean and smooth the sea and still the wind and give he a 
 singularly sympathetic comrade , and then it have turn and deliver he 
 a thumping blow in mid - chest . " yes , " he say , after an attempt at the 
 usual formal congratulation , " you certainly ought to do well - with 
 Miss Garland wait for you at Northampton . " 

 Roderick , now that he have break ground , be eloquent and rung a hundred 
 change on the assurance that he be a very happy man . then at last , 
 suddenly , his climax be a yawn , and he declare that he must go to bed . 
 Rowland let he go alone , and sit there late , between sea and sky . 





 CHAPTER III . Rome 

 one warm , still day , late in the roman autumn , our two young man be 
 sit beneath one of the high - stem pine of the Villa Ludovisi . 
 they have be spend an hour in the mouldy little garden - house , where 
 the colossal mask of the famous Juno look out with blank eye from that 
 dusky corner which must seem to she the last possible stage of a lapse 
 from Olympus . then they have wander out into the garden , and 
 be lounge away the morning under the spell of their magical 
 picturesqueness . Roderick declare that he would go nowhere else ; that , 
 after the Juno , it be a profanation to look at anything but sky and 
 tree . there be a fresco of Guercino , to which Rowland , though he have 
 see it on his former visit to Rome , go dutifully to pay his respect . 
 but Roderick , though he have never see it , declare that it could not 
 be worth a fig , and that he do not   care to look at ugly thing . he 
 remain stretch on his overcoat , which he have spread on the grass , 
 while Rowland go off envy the intellectual comfort of genius , which 
 can arrive at serene conclusion without disagreeable process . when 
 the latter come back , his friend be sit with his elbow on his 
 knee and his head in his hand . Rowland , in the geniality of a mood 
 attuned to the mellow charm of a roman villa , find a good word to say 
 for the Guercino ; but he chiefly talk of the view from the little 
 belvedere on the roof of the casino , and how it look like the prospect 
 from a castle turret in a fairy tale . 

 " very likely , " say Roderick , throw himself back with a yawn . " but I 
 must let it pass . I have see enough for the present ; I have reach the 
 top of the hill . I have an indigestion of impression ; I must work they 
 off before I go in for any more . I do not   want to look at any more of 
 other people 's work , for a month - not even at Nature 's own . I want to 
 look at Roderick Hudson 's . the result of it all be that I ' m not afraid . 
 I can but try , as well as the rest of they ! the fellow who do that 
 gaze goddess yonder only make an experiment . the other day , when I 
 be look at Michael Angelo 's Moses , I be seize with a kind 
 of defiance - a reaction against all this mere passive enjoyment of 
 grandeur . it be a rouse great success , certainly , that rise there 
 before I , but somehow it be not an inscrutable mystery , and it seem 
 to I , not perhaps that I should some day do as well , but that at least 
 I might ! " 

 " as you say , you can but try , " say Rowland . " success be only passionate 
 effort . " 

 " well , the passion be blaze ; we have be pile on fuel handsomely . 
 it come over I just now that it be exactly three month to a day since 
 I leave Northampton . I can not   believe it ! " 

 " it certainly seem more . " 

 " it seem like ten year . what an exquisite ass I be ! " 

 " do you feel so wise now ? " 

 " verily ! do not   I look so ? surely I have not   the same face . have not   I a 
 different eye , a different expression , a different voice ? " 

 " I can hardly say , because I have see the transition . but it be very 
 likely . you be , in the literal sense of the word , more civilized . I 
 dare say , " add Rowland , " that Miss Garland would think so . " 

 " that be not what she would call it ; she would say I be corrupt . " 

 Rowland ask few question about Miss Garland , but he always listen 
 narrowly to his companion 's voluntary observation . 

 " be you very sure ? " he reply . 

 " why , she be a stern moralist , and she would infer from my appearance 
 that I have become a cynical sybarite . " Roderick have , in fact , a Venetian 
 watch - chain round his neck and a magnificent roman intaglio on the third 
 finger of his left hand . 

 " will you think I take a liberty , " ask Rowland , " if I say you judge 
 she superficially ? " 

 " for heaven 's sake , " cry Roderick , laughing , " do not   tell I she be 
 not a moralist ! it be for that I fall in love with she , and with rigid 
 virtue in her person . " 

 " she be a moralist , but not , as you imply , a narrow one . that be more 
 than a difference in degree ; it be a difference in kind . I do not   know 
 whether I ever mention it , but I admire she extremely . there be 
 nothing narrow about she but her experience ; everything else be large . 
 my impression of she be of a person of great capacity , as yet wholly 
 unmeasured and untested . some day or other , I ' m sure , she will judge 
 fairly and wisely of everything . " 

 " stay a bit ! " cry Roderick ; " you be a well catholic than the Pope . 
 I shall be content if she judge fairly of I - of my merit , that be . 
 the rest she must not judge at all . she be a grimly devoted little 
 creature ; may she always remain so ! change as I be , I adore she none 
 the less . what become of all our emotion , our impression , " he go 
 on , after a long pause , " all the material of thought that life pour 
 into we at such a rate during such a memorable three month as these ? 
 there be twenty moment a week - a day , for that matter , some day - that 
 seem supreme , twenty impression that seem ultimate , that appear to 
 form an intellectual era . but other come treading on their heel and 
 sweep they along , and they all melt like water into water and settle 
 the question of precedence among themselves . the curious thing be that 
 the more the mind take in , the more it have space for , and that all 
 one 's idea be like the irish people at home who live in the different 
 corner of a room , and take boarder . " 

 " I fancy it be our peculiar good luck that we do not   see the limit of 
 our mind , " say Rowland . " we be young , compare with what we may one 
 day be . that belong to youth ; it be perhaps the good part of it . they 
 say that old people do find themselves at last face to face with a solid 
 blank wall , and stand thump against it in vain . it resound , it seem 
 to have something beyond it , but it will not   move ! that be only a reason 
 for live with open door as long as we can ! " 

 " open door ? " murmur Roderick . " yes , let we close no door that open 
 upon Rome . for this , for the mind , be eternal summer ! but though my 
 door may stand open to - day , " he presently add , " I shall see no 
 visitor . I want to pause and breathe ; I want to dream of a statue . 
 I have be work hard for three month ; I have earn a right to a 
 reverie . " 

 Rowland , on his side , be not without provision for reflection , and 
 they linger on in break , desultory talk . Rowland feel the need for 
 intellectual rest , for a truce to present care for church , statue , 
 and picture , on even well ground than his companion , inasmuch as 
 he have really be live Roderick 's intellectual life the past three 
 month , as well as his own . as he look back on these full - flavor 
 week , he draw a long breath of satisfaction , almost of relief . 
 Roderick , thus far , have justify his confidence and flatter his 
 perspicacity ; he be rapidly unfold into an ideal brilliancy . he be 
 change even more than he himself suspect ; he have step , without 
 faltering , into his birthright , and be spend money , intellectually , 
 as lavishly as a young heir who have just win an obstructive lawsuit . 
 Roderick 's glance and voice be the same , doubtless , as when they 
 enliven the summer dusk on Cecilia 's veranda , but in his person , 
 generally , there be an indefinable expression of experience rapidly 
 and easily assimilate . Rowland have be strike at the outset with the 
 instinctive quickness of his observation and his free appropriation of 
 whatever might serve his purpose . he have not be , for instance , half 
 an hour on english soil before he perceive that he be dress like 
 a rustic , and he have immediately reform his toilet with the most 
 unerring tact . his appetite for novelty be insatiable , and for 
 everything characteristically foreign , as it present itself , he have an 
 extravagant greeting ; but in half an hour the novelty have fade , he have 
 guess the secret , he have pluck out the heart of the mystery and be 
 clamor for a keener sensation . at the end of a month , he present , 
 mentally , a puzzle spectacle to his companion . he have catch , 
 instinctively , the key - note of the old world . he observe and enjoy , 
 he criticise and rhapsodize , but though all thing interest he and 
 many delight he , none surprise he ; he have divine their logic 
 and measure their proportion , and refer they infallibly to their 
 category . witness the rate at which he do intellectual execution 
 on the general spectacle of european life , Rowland at moment feel 
 vaguely uneasy for the future ; the boy be live too fast , he would 
 have say , and give alarming pledge to ennui in his later year . but 
 we must live as our pulse be time , and Roderick 's strike the hour 
 very often . he be , by imagination , though he never become in manner , a 
 natural man of the world ; he have intuitively , as an artist , what one may 
 call the historic consciousness . he have a relish for social subtlety 
 and mystery , and , in perception , when occasion offer he an inch he 
 never fail to take an ell . a single glimpse of a social situation of 
 the eld type enable he to construct the whole , with all its complex 
 chiaroscuro , and Rowland more than once assure he that he make he 
 believe in the metempsychosis , and that he must have live in european 
 society , in the last century , as a gentleman in a cocked hat and 
 brocade waistcoat . Hudson ask Rowland question which poor Rowland 
 be quite unable to answer , and of which he be equally unable to 
 conceive where he have pick up the datum . roderick end by answer 
 they himself , tolerably to his satisfaction , and in a short time he 
 have almost turn the table and become in their walk and talk the 
 accredited source of information . Rowland tell he that when he turn 
 sculptor a capital novelist be spoil , and that to match his eye for 
 social detail one would have to go to Honore de Balzac . in all this 
 Rowland take a generous pleasure ; he feel an especial kindness for his 
 comrade 's radiant youthfulness of temperament . he be so much young 
 than he himself have ever be ! and surely youth and genius , hand in 
 hand , be the most beautiful sight in the world . Roderick add to this 
 the charm of his more immediately personal quality . the vivacity of 
 his perception , the audacity of his imagination , the picturesqueness 
 of his phrase when he be pleased , - and even more when he be 
 displeased , - his abound good - humor , his candor , his unclouded 
 frankness , his unfailing impulse to share every emotion and impression 
 with his friend ; all this make comradeship a pure felicity , and 
 interfuse with a deep amenity their long evening talk at cafe door 
 in italian town . 

 they have go almost immediately to Paris , and have spend their day at 
 the Louvre and their evening at the theatre . Roderick be divide in 
 mind as to whether Titian or Mademoiselle Delaporte be the great 
 artist . they have come down through France to Genoa and Milan , have spend 
 a fortnight in Venice and another in Florence , and have now be a month 
 in Rome . Roderick have say that he mean to spend three month in simply 
 look , absorbing , and reflect , without put pencil to paper . he 
 look indefatigably , and certainly see great thing - thing great , 
 doubtless , at time , than the intention of the artist . and yet he make 
 few false step and waste little time in theory of what he ought to 
 like and to dislike . he judge instinctively and passionately , but 
 never vulgarly . at Venice , for a couple of day , he have half a fit of 
 melancholy over the pretended discovery that he have miss his way , and 
 that the only proper vestment of plastic conception be the coloring 
 of Titian and Paul Veronese . then one morning the two young man have 
 themselves row out to Torcello , and Roderick lie back for a couple 
 of hour watch a brown - breast gondoli make superb muscular 
 movement , in high relief , against the sky of the Adriatic , and at the 
 end jerk himself up with a violence that nearly swamp the gondola , 
 and declare that the only thing worth live for be to make a colossal 
 bronze and set it aloft in the light of a public square . in Rome his 
 first care be for the Vatican ; he go there again and again . but the 
 old imperial and papal city altogether delight he ; only there he 
 really find what he have be look for from the first - the complete 
 antipode of Northampton . and indeed Rome be the natural home of those 
 spirit with which we just now claim fellowship for Roderick - the 
 spirit with a deep relish for the artificial element in life and 
 the infinite superposition of history . it be the immemorial city of 
 convention . the stagnant roman air be charge with convention ; it color 
 the yellow light and deepen the chilly shadow . and in that still 
 recent day the most impressive convention in all history be visible to 
 man 's eye , in the roman street , erect in a gilded coach draw by four 
 black horse . Roderick 's first fortnight be a high aesthetic revel . 
 he declare that Rome make he feel and understand more thing than 
 he could express : he be sure that life must have there , for all one 's 
 sens , an incomparable fineness ; that more interesting thing must 
 happen to one than anywhere else . and he give Rowland to understand that 
 he mean to live freely and largely , and be as interested as occasion 
 demand . Rowland see no reason to regard this as a menace of 
 dissipation , because , in the first place , there be in all dissipation , 
 refine it as one might , a grossness which would disqualify it for 
 Roderick 's favor , and because , in the second , the young sculptor be 
 a man to regard all thing in the light of his art , to hand over his 
 passion to his genius to be deal with , and to find that he could live 
 largely enough without exceed the circle of wholesome curiosity . 
 Rowland take immense satisfaction in his companion 's deep impatience to 
 make something of all his impression . some of these indeed find their 
 way into a channel which do not lead to statue , but it be none the 
 less a safe one . he write frequent long letter to Miss Garland ; when 
 Rowland go with he to post they he think wistfully of the 
 fortune of the great loosely - write missive , which cost roderick 
 unconscionable sum in postage . he receive punctual answer of a more 
 frugal form , write in a clear , minute hand , on paper vexatiously thin . 
 if Rowland be present when they come , he turn away and think of 
 other thing - or try to . these be the only moment when his 
 sympathy halt , and they be brief . for the rest he let the day go by 
 unprotestingly , and enjoy Roderick 's serene efflorescence as he would 
 have do a beautiful summer sunrise . Rome , for the past month , have be 
 delicious . the annual descent of the goth have not yet begin , and sunny 
 leisure seem to brood over the city . 

 Roderick have take out a note - book and be roughly sketch a memento 
 of the great Juno . suddenly there be a noise on the gravel , and the 
 young man , look up , see three person advance . one be a woman 
 of middle age , with a rather grand air and a great many furbelow . she 
 look very hard at our friend as she pass , and glance back over her 
 shoulder , as if to hasten the step of a young girl who slowly follow 
 she . she have such an expansive majesty of mien that Rowland suppose she 
 must have some proprietary right in the villa and be not just then in 
 a hospitable mood . beside she walk a little elderly man , tightly 
 button in a shabby black coat , but with a flower in his lappet , and a 
 pair of soil light glove . he be a grotesque - look personage , 
 and might have pass for a gentleman of the old school , reduce by 
 adversity to play cicerone to foreigner of distinction . he have a 
 little black eye which glitter like a diamond and roll about like a 
 ball of quicksilver , and a white moustache , cut short and stiff , like a 
 wear - out brush . he be smile with extreme urbanity , and talk in a 
 low , mellifluous voice to the lady , who evidently be not listen 
 to he . at a considerable distance behind this couple stroll a young 
 girl , apparently of about twenty . she be tall and slender , and dress 
 with extreme elegance ; she lead by a cord a large poodle of the most 
 fantastic aspect . he be comb and deck like a ram for sacrifice ; his 
 trunk and haunch be of the most transparent pink , his fleecy head 
 and shoulder as white as jeweler 's cotton , and his tail and ear 
 ornament with long blue ribbon . he step along stiffly and solemnly 
 beside his mistress , with an air of conscious elegance . there be 
 something at first slightly ridiculous in the sight of a young lady 
 gravely append to an animal of these incongruous attribute , and 
 Roderick , with his customary frankness , greet the spectacle with a 
 confident smile . the young girl perceive it and turn her face full 
 upon he , with a gaze intend apparently to enforce great deference . 
 it be not deference , however , her face provoke , but startle , 
 submissive admiration ; Roderick 's smile fall dead , and he sit eagerly 
 star . a pair of extraordinary dark blue eye , a mass of dusky hair 
 over a low forehead , a bloom oval of perfect purity , a flexible 
 lip , just touch with disdain , the step and carriage of a tired 
 princess - these be the general feature of his vision . the young lady 
 be walk slowly and let she long dress rustle over the gravel ; 
 the young man have time to see she distinctly before she avert she 
 face and go her way . she leave a vague , sweet perfume behind she as she 
 pass . 

 " immortal power ! " cry Roderick , " what a vision ! in the name of 
 transcendent perfection , who be she ? " he spring up and stand look 
 after she until she round a turn in the avenue . " what a movement , what 
 a manner , what a poise of the head ! I wonder if she would sit to I . " 

 " you have well go and ask she , " say Rowland , laugh . " she be 
 certainly most beautiful . " 

 " beautiful ? she be beauty itself - she be a revelation . I do not   believe 
 she be live - she be a phantasm , a vapor , an illusion ! " 

 " the poodle , " say Rowland , " be certainly alive . " 

 " Nay , he too may be a grotesque phantom , like the black dog in Faust . " 

 " I hope at least that the young lady have nothing in common with 
 Mephistopheles . she look dangerous . " 

 " if beauty be immoral , as people think at Northampton , " say Roderick , 
 ' she be the incarnation of evil . the mamma and the queer old gentleman , 
 moreover , be a pledge of her reality . who be they all ? " 

 " the Prince and Princess Ludovisi and the principessina , " suggest 
 Rowland . 

 " there be no such people , " say Roderick . " besides , the little old man 
 be not the papa . " Rowland smile , wonder how he have ascertain 
 these fact , and the young sculptor go on . " the old man be a Roman , a 
 hanger - on of the mamma , a useful personage who now and then get ask 
 to dinner . the lady be foreigner , from some northern country ; I 
 will not   say which . " 

 " perhaps from the State of Maine , " say Rowland . 

 " no , she be not an American , I will lay a wager on that . she be a 
 daughter of this eld world . we shall see she again , I pray my star ; 
 but if we do not , I shall have do something I never expect to - I 
 shall have have a glimpse of ideal beauty . " he sit down again and go 
 on with his sketch of the Juno , scrawl away for ten minute , and then 
 hand the result in silence to Rowland . Rowland utter an exclamation 
 of surprise and applause . the drawing represent the Juno as to the 
 position of the head , the brow , and the broad fillet across the hair ; 
 but the eye , the mouth , the physiognomy be a vivid portrait of 
 the young girl with the poodle . " I have be want a subject , " say 
 Roderick : " there be one make to my hand ! and now for work ! " 

 they see no more of the young girl , though Roderick look hopefully , 
 for some day , into the carriage on the Pincian . she have evidently be 
 but pass through Rome ; Naples or Florence now happily possess she , 
 and she be guide her fleecy companion through the Villa Reale or the 
 Boboli Gardens with the same superb defiance of irony . roderick go to 
 work and spend a month shut up in his studio ; he have an idea , and he be 
 not to rest till he have embody it . he have establish himself in 
 the basement of a huge , dusky , dilapidated old house , in that long , 
 tortuous , and preeminently roman street which lead from the Corso to 
 the Bridge of St. Angelo . the black archway which admit you might 
 have serve as the portal of the augean stable , but you emerge 
 presently upon a mouldy little court , of which the fourth side be 
 form by a narrow terrace , overhang the Tiber . here , along the 
 parapet , be station half a dozen shapeless fragment of sculpture , 
 with a couple of meagre orange - tree in terra - cotta tub , and an 
 oleander that never flower . the unclean , historic river sweep beneath ; 
 behind be dusky , reek wall , spot here and there with hang 
 rag and flower - pot in window ; opposite , at a distance , be the bare 
 brown bank of the stream , the huge rotunda of St. Angelo , tip with 
 its seraphic statue , the dome of St. Peter 's , and the broad - top pine 
 of the Villa Doria . the place be crumble and shabby and melancholy , 
 but the river be delightful , the rent be a trifle , and everything be 
 picturesque . roderick be in the good humor with his quarter from the 
 first , and be certain that the work mood there would be intenser 
 in an hour than in twenty year of Northampton . his studio be a huge , 
 empty room with a vaulted ceiling , cover with vague , dark trace of an 
 old fresco , which Rowland , when he spend an hour with his friend , use 
 to stare at vainly for some survive coherence of float drapery 
 and clasp arm . Roderick have lodge himself economically in the same 
 quarter . he occupy a fifth floor on the Ripetta , but he be only at 
 home to sleep , for when he be not at work he be either lounge in 
 Rowland 's more luxurious room or stroll through street and church 
 and garden . 

 Rowland have find a convenient corner in a stately old palace not far 
 from the Fountain of Trevi , and make himself a home to which book and 
 picture and print and odd and end of curious furniture give an air 
 of leisurely permanence . he have the taste of a collector ; he spend half 
 his afternoon ransack the dusty magazine of the curiosity - monger , 
 and often make his way , in quest of a prize , into the heart of 
 impecunious roman household , which have be prevail upon to 
 listen - with closed door and an impenetrably wary smile - to proposal 
 for an hereditary " antique . " in the evening , often , under the lamp , 
 amid drop curtain and the scatter gleam of firelight upon polished 
 carving and mellow painting , the two friend sit with their head 
 together , criticise intaglio and etching , water - color drawing and 
 illuminated missal . Roderick 's quick appreciation of every form of 
 artistic beauty remind his companion of the flexible temperament of 
 those italian artist of the sixteenth century who be indifferently 
 painter and sculptor , sonneteer and engraver . at time when he see 
 how the young sculptor 's day pass in a single sustained pulsation , 
 while his own be break into a dozen conscious device for dispose of 
 the hour , and intermingle with sigh , half suppress , some of they , 
 for conscience ' sake , over what he fail of in action and miss in 
 possession - he feel a pang of something akin to envy . but Rowland have 
 two substantial aid for give patience the air of contentment : he 
 be an inquisitive reader and a passionate rider . he plunge into bulky 
 german octavos on italian history , and he spend long afternoon in 
 the saddle , range over the grassy desolation of the Campagna . as the 
 season go on and the social group begin to constitute themselves , he 
 find that he know a great many people and that he have easy opportunity 
 for know other . he enjoy a quiet corner of a drawing - room beside 
 an agreeable woman , and although the machinery of what call itself 
 society seem to he to have many superfluous wheel , he accept 
 invitation and make visit punctiliously , from the conviction that 
 the only way not to be overcome by the ridiculous side of most of such 
 observance be to take they with exaggerated gravity . he introduce 
 Roderick right and leave , and suffer he to make his way himself - an 
 enterprise for which Roderick very soon display an all - sufficient 
 capacity . wherever he go he make , not exactly what be call a 
 favorable impression , but what , from a practical point of view , be 
 well - a puzzle one . he take to evening party as a duck to water , 
 and before the winter be half over be the most freely and frequently 
 discuss young man in the heterogeneous foreign colony . Rowland 's 
 theory of his own duty be to let he run his course and play his 
 card , only hold himself ready to point out shoal and pitfall , 
 and administer a friendly propulsion through tight place . Roderick 's 
 manner on the precinct of the Pincian be quite the same as his 
 manner on Cecilia 's veranda : that is , they be no manner at all . but 
 it remain as true as before that it would have be impossible , on the 
 whole , to violate ceremony with less of last offense . he interrupt , 
 he contradict , he speak to people he have never see , and leave his 
 social creditor without the small conversational interest on their 
 loan ; he lounge and yawn , he talk loud when he should have 
 talk low , and low when he should have talk loud . many people , in 
 consequence , think he insufferably conceite , and declare that he 
 ought to wait till he have something to show for his power , before he 
 assume the air of a spoiled celebrity . but to Rowland and to most 
 friendly observer this judgment be quite beside the mark , and the 
 young man 's undiluted naturalness be its own justification . he 
 be impulsive , spontaneous , sincere ; there be so many people at 
 dinner - table and in studio who be not , that it seem worth while 
 to allow this rare speciman all possible freedom of action . if Roderick 
 take the word out of your mouth when you be just prepared to deliver 
 they with the most effective accent , he do it with a perfect good 
 conscience and with no pretension of a well right to be hear , but 
 simply because he be full to overflow of his own momentary thought 
 and it spring from his lip without ask leave . there be person who 
 wait on your period much more deferentially , who be a hundred 
 time more capable than roderick of a reflective impertinence . roderick 
 receive from various source , chiefly feminine , enough finely - adjust 
 advice to have establish he in life as an embodiment of the 
 propriety , and he receive it , as he afterwards listen to criticism 
 on his statue , with unfaltere candor and good - humor . here and there , 
 doubtless , as he go , he take in a reef in his sail ; but he be too 
 adventurous a spirit to be successfully tame , and he remain at 
 most point the florid , rather strident young Virginian whose serene 
 inflexibility have be the despair of Mr. Striker . all this be what 
 friendly commentator   still chiefly feminine   allude to when they 
 speak of his delightful freshness , and critic of harsh sensibility 
  of the other sex   when they denounce his damned impertinence . his 
 appearance enforce these impression - his handsome face , his radiant , 
 unaverted eye , his childish , unmodulated voice . afterwards , when those 
 who love he be in tear , there be something in all this unspotted 
 comeliness that seem to lend a mockery to the cause of their sorrow . 

 certainly , among the young man of genius who , for so many age , have 
 go up to Rome to test their power , none ever make a fairer beginning 
 than Roderick . he ride his two horse at once with extraordinary good 
 fortune ; he establish the happy modus vivendi betwixt work and 
 play . he wrestle all day with a mountain of clay in his studio , and 
 chatter half the night away in roman drawing - room . it all seem part 
 of a kind of divine facility . he be passionately interested , he be 
 feel his power ; now that they have thoroughly kindle in the glowing 
 aesthetic atmosphere of Rome , the ardent young fellow should be pardon 
 for believe that he never be to see the end of they . he enjoy 
 immeasurably , after the chronic obstruction of home , the downright 
 act of production . he keep model in his studio till they drop with 
 fatigue ; he draw , on other day , at the Capitol and the Vatican , till 
 his own head swam with his eagerness , and his limb stiffen with the 
 cold . he have promptly set up a life - sized figure which he call 
 an " Adam , " and be push it rapidly toward completion . there be 
 naturally a great many wisehead who smile at his precipitancy , and 
 cite he as one more example of Yankee crudity , a capital recruit to 
 the great army of those who wish to dance before they can walk . they 
 be right , but Roderick be right too , for the success of his statue 
 be not to have be foresee ; it partook , really , of the miraculous . he 
 never surpass it afterwards , and a good judge here and there have be 
 know to pronounce it the fine piece of sculpture of our modern 
 era . to Rowland it seem to justify superbly his high hope of his 
 friend , and he say to himself that if he have invest his happiness 
 in foster a genius , he ought now to be in possession of a boundless 
 complacency . there be something especially confident and masterly in 
 the artist 's negligence of all such small picturesque accessory 
 as might serve to label his figure to a vulgar apprehension . if it 
 represent the father of the human race and the primal embodiment of 
 human sensation , it do so in virtue of its look of balanced physical 
 perfection , and deeply , eagerly sentient vitality . Rowland , in fraternal 
 zeal , travel up to Carrara and select at the quarry the most 
 magnificent block of marble he could find , and when it come down to 
 Rome , the two young man have a " celebration . " they drive out to Albano , 
 breakfast boisterously   in their respective measure   at the inn , and 
 lounge away the day in the sun on the top of Monte Cavo . Roderick 's 
 head be full of idea for other work , which he describe with infinite 
 spirit and eloquence , as vividly as if they be range on their 
 pedestal before he . he have an indefatigable fancy ; thing he see in 
 the street , in the country , thing he hear and read , effect he see 
 just miss or half - express in the work of other , act upon his 
 mind as a kind of challenge , and he be terribly restless until , in some 
 form or other , he have take up the glove and set his lance in rest . 

 the Adam be put into marble , and all the world come to see it . of the 
 criticism pass upon it this history undertake to offer no record ; 
 over many of they the two young man have a daily laugh for a month , and 
 certain of the formula of the connoisseur , restrictive or indulgent , 
 furnish Roderick with a permanent supply of humorous catch - word . but 
 people enough speak flattering good - sense to make Roderick feel as if 
 he be already half famous . the statue pass formally into Rowland 's 
 possession , and be pay for as if an illustrious name have be chisel 
 on the pedestal . Poor Roderick owe every franc of the money . it be not 
 for this , however , but because he be so gloriously in the mood , that , 
 deny himself all breathing - time , on the same day he have give the 
 last touch to the Adam , he begin to shape the rough contour of an Eve . 
 this go forward with equal rapidity and success . Roderick lose his 
 temper , time and again , with his model , who offer but a gross , 
 degenerate image of his splendid ideal ; but his ideal , as he assure 
 Rowland , become gradually such a fix , vivid presence , that he have only 
 to shut his eye to behold a creature far more to his purpose than 
 the poor girl who stand posture at forty sous an hour . the Eve be 
 finish in a month , and the feat be extraordinary , as well as the 
 statue , which represent an admirably beautiful woman . when the spring 
 begin to muffle the rugged old city with its clamber festoon , it 
 seem to he that he have do a handsome winter 's work and have fairly 
 earn a holiday . he take a liberal one , and lounge away the lovely 
 Roman May , do nothing . he look very contented ; with himself , 
 perhaps , at time , a trifle too obviously . but who could have say 
 without good reason ? he be " flush with triumph ; " this classic 
 phrase portray he , to Rowland 's sense . he would lose himself in long 
 revery , and emerge from they with a quickened smile and a heightened 
 color . Rowland grudge he none of his smile , and take an extreme 
 satisfaction in his two statue . he have the Adam and the Eve transport 
 to his own apartment , and one warm evening in May he give a little 
 dinner in honor of the artist . it be small , but Rowland have mean it 
 should be very agreeably compose . he think over his friend and choose 
 four . they be all person with whom he live in a certain intimacy . 

 one of they be an american sculptor of french extraction , or remotely , 
 perhaps , of Italian , for he rejoice in the somewhat fervid name of 
 Gloriani . he be a man of forty , he have be live for year in Paris 
 and in Rome , and he now drive a very pretty trade in sculpture of the 
 ornamental and fantastic sort . in his youth he have have money ; but he 
 have spend it recklessly , much of it scandalously , and at twenty - six 
 have find himself oblige to make capital of his talent . this be quite 
 inimitable , and fifteen year of indefatigable exercise have bring 
 it to perfection . Rowland admit its power , though it give he very 
 little pleasure ; what he relish in the man be the extraordinary 
 vivacity and frankness , not to call it the impudence , of his idea . he 
 have a definite , practical scheme of art , and he know at least what he 
 mean . in this sense he be solid and complete . there be so many of 
 the aesthetic fraternity who be flounder in unknown sea , without 
 a notion of which way their nose be turn , that gloriani , conscious 
 and compact , unlimitedly intelligent and consummately clever , dogmatic 
 only as to his own duty , and at once gracefully deferential and 
 profoundly indifferent to those of other , have for Rowland a certain 
 intellectual refreshment quite independent of the character of his 
 work . these be consider by most people to belong to a very corrupt , 
 and by many to a positively indecent school . other think they 
 tremendously know , and pay enormous price for they ; and indeed , to 
 be able to point to one of Gloriani 's figure in a shady corner of your 
 library be tolerable proof that you be not a fool . corrupt thing 
 they certainly be ; in the line of sculpture they be quite the late 
 fruit of time . it be the artist 's opinion that there be no essential 
 difference between beauty and ugliness ; that they overlap and 
 intermingle in a quite inextricable manner ; that there be no saying 
 where one begin and the other end ; that hideousness grimace at you 
 suddenly from out of the very bosom of loveliness , and beauty bloom 
 before your eye in the lap of vileness ; that it be a waste of wit to 
 nurse metaphysical distinction , and a sadly meagre entertainment to 
 caress imaginary line ; that the thing to aim at be the expressive , and 
 the way to reach it be by ingenuity ; that for this purpose everything 
 may serve , and that a consummate work be a sort of hotch - potch of the 
 pure and the impure , the graceful and the grotesque . its prime duty be 
 to amuse , to puzzle , to fascinate , to savor of a complex imagination . 
 Gloriani 's statue be florid and meretricious ; they look like 
 magnify goldsmith 's work . they be extremely elegant , but they have no 
 charm for Rowland . he never buy one , but Gloriani be such an 
 honest fellow , and withal be so deluged with order , that this make 
 no difference in their friendship . the artist might have pass for a 
 Frenchman . he be a great talker , and a very picturesque one ; he be 
 almost bald ; he have a small , bright eye , a broken nose , and a moustache 
 with wax end . when sometimes he receive you at his lodging , he 
 introduce you to a lady with a plain face whom he call Madame 
 Gloriani - which she be not . 

 Rowland 's second guest be also an artist , but of a very different type . 
 his friend call he Sam Singleton ; he be an American , and he have 
 be in Rome a couple of year . he paint small landscape , chiefly in 
 water - color : Rowland have see one of they in a shop window , have like 
 it extremely , and , ascertain his address , have go to see he and 
 find he establish in a very humble studio near the Piazza Barberini , 
 where , apparently , fame and fortune have not yet find he out . Rowland 
 take a fancy to he and buy several of his picture ; Singleton make 
 few speech , but be grateful . Rowland hear afterwards that when he 
 first come to Rome he paint worthless daub and give no promise 
 of talent . improvement have come , however , hand in hand with patient 
 industry , and his talent , though of a slender and delicate order , be 
 now incontestable . it be as yet but scantily recognize , and he have 
 hard work to live . Rowland hang his little water - color on the parlor 
 wall , and find that , as he live with they , he grow very fond of 
 they . Singleton be a diminutive , dwarfish personage ; he look like 
 a precocious child . he have a high , protuberant forehead , a transparent 
 brown eye , a perpetual smile , an extraordinary expression of modesty and 
 patience . he listen much more willingly than he talk , with a little 
 fix , grateful grin ; he blush when he speak , and always offer his 
 idea in a sidelong fashion , as if the presumption be against they . 
 his modesty set they off , and they be eminently to the point . he be 
 so perfect an example of the little noiseless , laborious artist whom 
 chance , in the person of a moneyed patron , have never take by the hand , 
 that Rowland would have like to befriend he by stealth . Singleton have 
 express a fervent admiration for Roderick 's production , but have 
 not yet meet the young master . Roderick be lounge against the 
 chimney - piece when he come in , and Rowland presently introduce he . the 
 little water - colorist stand with folded hand , blushing , smile , and 
 look up at he as if Roderick be himself a statue on a pedestal . 
 Singleton begin to murmur something about his pleasure , his admiration ; 
 the desire to make his compliment smoothly give he a kind of grotesque 
 formalism . Roderick look down at he surprised , and suddenly burst 
 into a laugh . Singleton pause a moment and then , with an intenser 
 smile , go on : " well , sir , your statue be beautiful , all the same ! " 

 Rowland 's two other guest be lady , and one of they , Miss Blanchard , 
 belong also to the artistic fraternity . she be an American , she 
 be young , she be pretty , and she have make her way to Rome alone and 
 unaided . she live alone , or with no other duenna than a bushy - browed 
 old serving - woman , though indeed she have a friendly neighbor in the 
 person of a certain Madame Grandoni , who in various social emergency 
 lend she a protect wing , and have come with she to Rowland 's dinner . 
 Miss Blanchard have a little money , but she be not above sell she 
 picture . these represent generally a bunch of dew - sprinkle rose , 
 with the dew - drop very highly finish , or else a wayside shrine , and 
 a peasant woman , with her back turn , kneel before it . she do back 
 very well , but she be a little weak in face . flower , however , be 
 her speciality , and though her touch be a little old - fashioned and 
 finical , she paint they with remarkable skill . her picture be 
 chiefly buy by the English . Rowland have make her acquaintance early 
 in the winter , and as she keep a saddle horse and ride a great deal , 
 he have ask permission to be her cavalier . in this way they have become 
 almost intimate . Miss Blanchard 's name be augusta ; she be slender , 
 pale , and elegant looking ; she have a very pretty head and brilliant 
 auburn hair , which she braid with classical simplicity . she talk in 
 a sweet , soft voice , use language at time a trifle superfine , and make 
 literary allusion . these have often a patriotic strain , and Rowland have 
 more than once be irritated by her quotation from Mrs. Sigourney in 
 the cork - wood of Monte Mario , and from Mr. Willis among the ruin of 
 Veii . Rowland be of a dozen different mind about she , and be half 
 surprised , at time , to find himself treat it as a matter of serious 
 moment whether he like she or not . he admire she , and indeed there 
 be something admirable in her combination of beauty and talent , of 
 isolation and tranquil self - support . he use sometimes to go into the 
 little , high - niche , ordinary room which serve she as a studio , and 
 find she work at a panel six inch square , at an open casement , 
 profile against the deep blue roman sky . she receive he with a 
 meek - eyed dignity that make she seem like a paint saint on a church 
 window , receive the daylight in all her be . the breath of reproach 
 pass she by with fold wing . and yet Rowland wonder why he do not 
 like she well . if he fail , the reason be not far to seek . there be 
 another woman whom he like well , an image in his heart which refuse 
 to yield precedence . 

 on that evening to which allusion have be make , when Rowland be leave 
 alone between the starlight and the wave with the sudden knowledge 
 that Mary Garland be to become another man 's wife , he have make , after a 
 while , the simple resolution to forget she . and every day since , like a 
 famous philosopher who wish to abbreviate his mourning for a faithful 
 servant , he have say to himself in substance - " remember to forget Mary 
 Garland . " sometimes it seem as if he be succeed ; then , suddenly , 
 when he be least expect it , he would find her name , inaudibly , on 
 his lip , and seem to see her eye meet his eye . all this make he 
 uncomfortable , and seem to portend a possible discord . Discord be not 
 to his taste ; he shrink from imperious passion , and the idea of find 
 himself jealous of an unsuspecting friend be absolutely repulsive . More 
 than ever , then , the path of duty be to forget Mary Garland , and he 
 cultivate oblivion , as we may say , in the person of Miss Blanchard . her 
 fine temper , he say to himself , be a trifle cold and conscious , her 
 purity prudish , perhaps , her culture pedantic . but since he be oblige 
 to give up hope of Mary Garland , Providence owe he a compensation , 
 and he have fit of angry sadness in which it seem to he that to 
 attest his right to sentimental satisfaction he would be capable of 
 fall in love with a woman he absolutely detest , if she be the 
 good that come in his way . and what be the use , after all , of bother 
 about a possible which be only , perhaps , a dream ? even if Mary Garland 
 have be free , what right have he to assume that he would have please 
 she ? the actual be good enough . Miss Blanchard have beautiful hair , and 
 if she be a trifle old - maidish , there be nothing like matrimony for 
 cure old - maidishness . 

 Madame Grandoni , who have form with the companion of Rowland 's ride 
 an alliance which might have be call defensive on the part of the 
 former and attractive on that of Miss Blanchard , be an excessively ugly 
 old lady , highly esteemed in roman society for her homely benevolence 
 and her shrewd and humorous good sense . she have be the widow of a 
 german archaeologist , who have come to Rome in the early age as an 
 attache of the prussian legation on the Capitoline . her good sense have 
 be want on but a single occasion , that of her second marriage . this 
 occasion be certainly a momentous one , but these , by common consent , 
 be not test case . a couple of year after her first husband 's death , 
 she have accept the hand and the name of a Neapolitan music - master , ten 
 year young than herself , and with no fortune but his fiddle - bow . the 
 marriage be most unhappy , and the Maestro Grandoni be suspect of 
 use the fiddle - bow as an instrument of conjugal correction . he have 
 finally run off with a prima donna assoluta , who , it be to be hop , 
 have give he a taste of the quality imply in her title . he be 
 believe to be live still , but he have shrink to a small black spot 
 in Madame Grandoni 's life , and for ten year she have not mention 
 his name . she wear a light flaxen wig , which be never very artfully 
 adjust , but this matter little , as she make no secret of it . she 
 use to say , " I be not always so ugly as this ; as a young girl I have 
 beautiful golden hair , very much the color of my wig . " she have wear 
 from time immemorial an old blue satin dress , and a white crape shawl 
 embroider in color ; her appearance be ridiculous , but she have an 
 interminable teutonic pedigree , and her manner , in every presence , be 
 easy and jovial , as become a lady whose ancestor have be cup - bearer 
 to Frederick Barbarossa . thirty year ' observation of roman society have 
 sharpen her wit and give she an inexhaustible store of anecdote , 
 but she have beneath her crumpled bodice a deep - well fund of teutonic 
 sentiment , which she communicate only to the object of her particular 
 favor . Rowland have a great regard for she , and she repay it by wish 
 he to get marry . she never see he without whisper to he that 
 Augusta Blanchard be just the girl . 

 it seem to Rowland a sort of foreshadowing of matrimony to see Miss 
 Blanchard stand gracefully on his hearth - rug and bloom behind 
 the central bouquet at his circular dinner - table . the dinner be very 
 prosperous and Roderick amply fill his position as hero of the feast . 
 he have always an air of buoyant enjoyment in his work , but on this 
 occasion he manifest a good deal of harmless pleasure in his glory . 
 he drink freely and talk bravely ; he lean back in his chair with 
 his hand in his pocket , and fling open the gate of his eloquence . 
 Singleton sit gaze and listen open - mouthed , as if Apollo in person 
 be talk . Gloriani show a twinkle in his eye and an evident 
 disposition to draw Roderick out . Rowland be rather regretful , for 
 he know that theory be not his friend 's strong point , and that it be 
 never fair to take his measure from his talk . 

 " as you have begin with Adam and Eve , " say Gloriani , " I suppose you be 
 go straight through the Bible . " he be one of the person who think 
 roderick delightfully fresh . 

 " I may make a David , " say Roderick , " but I shall not try any more of 
 the Old Testament people . I do not   like the Jews ; I do not   like pendulous 
 nose . David , the boy David , be rather an exception ; you can think of 
 he and treat he as a young greek . stand forth there on the plain 
 of battle between the contend army , rush forward to let fly his 
 stone , he look like a beautiful runner at the Olympic game . after that 
 I shall skip to the New Testament . I mean to make a Christ . " 

 " you will put nothing of the olympic game into he , I hope , " say 
 Gloriani . 

 " oh , I shall make he very different from the Christ of tradition ; 
 more - more " - and Roderick pause a moment to think . this be the first 
 that Rowland have hear of his Christ . 

 " more rationalistic , I suppose , " suggest Miss Blanchard . 

 " more idealistic ! " cry Roderick . " the perfection of form , you know , to 
 symbolize the perfection of spirit . " 

 " for a companion piece , " say Miss Blanchard , " you ought to make a 
 Judas . " 

 " never ! I mean never to make anything ugly . the Greeks never make 
 anything ugly , and I ' m a hellenist ; I ' m not a Hebraist ! I have be 
 think lately of make a Cain , but I should never dream of make 
 he ugly . he should be a very handsome fellow , and he should lift up the 
 murderous club with the beautiful movement of the fighter in the greek 
 frieze who be chop at their enemy . " 

 " there be no use try to be a Greek , " say Gloriani . " if Phidias be 
 to come back , he would recommend you to give it up . I be half italian 
 and half french , and , as a whole , a Yankee . what sort of a Greek should 
 I make ? I think the Judas be a capital idea for a statue . much oblige 
 to you , madame , for the suggestion . what an insidious little scoundrel 
 one might make of he , sit there nurse his money - bag and his 
 treachery ! there can be a great deal of expression in a pendulous nose , 
 my dear sir , especially when it be cast in green bronze . " 

 " very likely , " say Roderick . " but it be not the sort of expression I 
 care for . I care only for perfect beauty . there it be , if you want to 
 know it ! that be as good a profession of faith as another . in future , so 
 far as my thing be not positively beautiful , you may set they down as 
 failure . for I , it be either that or nothing . it be against the taste 
 of the day , I know ; we have really lose the faculty to understand beauty 
 in the large , ideal way . we stand like a race with shrunken muscle , 
 star helplessly at the weight our forefather easily lift . but I 
 do not   hesitate to proclaim it - I mean to lift they again ! I mean to go 
 in for big thing ; that be my notion of my art . I mean to do thing 
 that will be simple and vast and infinite . you will see if they will not   be 
 infinite ! excuse I if I brag a little ; all those italian fellow in the 
 Renaissance use to brag . there be a sensation once common , I be sure , 
 in the human breast - a kind of religious awe in the presence of a marble 
 image newly create and express the human type in superhuman purity . 
 when Phidias and Praxiteles have their statue of goddess unveil in 
 the temple of the AEgean , do not   you suppose there be a passionate 
 beating of heart , a thrill of mysterious terror ? I mean to bring it 
 back ; I mean to thrill the world again ! I mean to produce a Juno that 
 will make you tremble , a Venus that will make you swoon ! " 

 " so that when we come and see you , " say Madame Grandoni , " we must be 
 sure and bring our smelling - bottle . and pray have a few soft sofa 
 conveniently place . " 

 " Phidias and Praxiteles , " Miss Blanchard remark , " have the advantage 
 of believe in their goddess . I insist on believe , for myself , that 
 the pagan mythology be not a fiction , and that Venus and Juno and Apollo 
 and Mercury use to come down in a cloud into this very city of Rome 
 where we sit talk nineteenth century English . " 

 " nineteenth century nonsense , my dear ! " cry Madame Grandoni . " Mr. 
 Hudson may be a new Phidias , but Venus and Juno - that be you and 
 I - arrive to - day in a very dirty cab ; and be cheat by the driver , 
 too . " 

 " but , my dear fellow , " object Gloriani , " you do not   mean to say you 
 be go to make over in cold blood those poor old explode Apollos and 
 Hebes . " 

 " it will not   matter what you call they , " say Roderick . " they shall be 
 simply divine form . they shall be beauty ; they shall be wisdom ; they 
 shall be power ; they shall be Genius ; they shall be dare . that be all 
 the greek divinity be . " 

 " that be rather abstract , you know , " say Miss Blanchard . 

 " my dear fellow , " cry Gloriani , " you be delightfully young . " 

 " I hope you will not grow any old , " say Singleton , with a flush of 
 sympathy across his large white forehead . " you can do it if you try . " 

 " then there be all the Forces and Mysteries and Elements of Nature , " 
 Roderick go on . " I mean to do the morning ; I mean to do the Night ! I 
 mean to do the Ocean and the Mountains ; the Moon and the West Wind . I 
 mean to make a magnificent statue of America ! " 

 " America - the Mountains - the Moon ! " say Gloriani . " you will find it 
 rather hard , I ' m afraid , to compress such subject into classic form . " 

 " oh , there be a way , " cry Roderick , " and I shall think it out . my 
 figure shall make no contortion , but they shall mean a tremendous 
 deal . " 

 " I ' m sure there be contortion enough in Michael Angelo , " say Madame 
 Grandoni . " perhaps you do not   approve of he . " 

 " oh , Michael Angelo be not I ! " say Roderick , with sublimity . there 
 be a great laugh ; but after all , Roderick have do some fine thing . 

 Rowland have bid one of the servant bring he a small portfolio of 
 print , and have take out a photograph of Roderick 's little statue of 
 the youth drinking . it please he to see his friend sit there 
 in radiant ardor , defend idealism against so know an apostle of 
 corruption as Gloriani , and he wish to help the eld artist to be 
 confute . he silently hand he the photograph . 

 " bless I ! " cry Gloriani , " do he do this ? " 

 " age ago , " say Roderick . 

 Gloriani look at the photograph a long time , with evident admiration . 

 " it be deucedly pretty , " he say at last . " but , my dear young friend , 
 you can not   keep this up . " 

 " I shall do well , " say Roderick . 

 " you will do bad ! you will become weak . you will have to take to 
 violence , to contortion , to romanticism , in self - defense . this sort 
 of thing be like a man try to lift himself up by the seat of his 
 trouser . he may stand on tiptoe , but he can not   do more . here you stand 
 on tiptoe , very gracefully , I admit ; but you can not   fly ; there be no use 
 try . " 

 " my ' America ' shall answer you ! " say Roderick , shake toward he a 
 tall glass of champagne and drink it down . 

 Singleton have take the photograph and be pore over it with a little 
 murmur of delight . 

 " be this do in America ? " he ask . 

 " in a square white wooden house at Northampton , Massachusetts , " Roderick 
 answer . 

 " dear old white wooden house ! " say Miss Blanchard . 

 " if you could do as well as this there , " say Singleton , blushing and 
 smile , " one might say that really you have only to lose by come to 
 Rome . " 

 " Mallet be to blame for that , " say Roderick . " but I be willing to risk 
 the loss . " 

 the photograph have be pass to Madame Grandoni . " it remind I , " she 
 say , " of the thing a young man use to do whom I know year ago , when 
 I first come to Rome . he be a German , a pupil of Overbeck and a votary 
 of spiritual art . he use to wear a black velvet tunic and a very low 
 shirt collar ; he have a neck like a sickly crane , and let his hair grow 
 down to his shoulder . his name be Herr Schafgans . he never paint 
 anything so profane as a man take a drink , but his figure be all 
 of the simple and slender and angular pattern , and nothing if not 
 innocent - like this one of your . he would not have agree with Gloriani 
 any more than you . he use to come and see I very often , and in those 
 day I think his tunic and his long neck infallible symptom of 
 genius . his talk be all of gild aureole and beatific vision ; he 
 live on weak wine and biscuit , and wear a lock of Saint Somebody 's 
 hair in a little bag round his neck . if he be not a Beato Angelico , it 
 be not his own fault . I hope with all my heart that Mr. Hudson will do 
 the fine thing he talk about , but he must bear in mind the history of 
 dear Mr. Schafgans as a warning against high - fly pretension . one fine 
 day this poor young man fall in love with a roman model , though she 
 have never sit to he , I believe , for she be a buxom , bold - face , 
 high - colored creature , and he paint none but pale , sickly woman . he 
 offer to marry she , and she look at he from head to foot , give a 
 shrug , and consent . but he be ashamed to set up his menage in Rome . 
 they go to Naples , and there , a couple of year afterwards , I see he . 
 the poor fellow be ruin . his wife use to beat he , and he have take 
 to drink . he wear a ragged black coat , and he have a blotchy , red 
 face . Madame have turn washerwoman and use to make he go and fetch 
 the dirty linen . his talent have go heaven know where ! he be get 
 his living by paint view of Vesuvius in eruption on the little box 
 they sell at Sorrento . " 

 " Moral : do not   fall in love with a buxom roman model , " say Roderick . " I 
 ' m much oblige to you for your story , but I do not   mean to fall in love 
 with any one . " 

 Gloriani have possess himself of the photograph again , and be look 
 at it curiously . " it be a happy bit of youth , " he say . " but you can not 
 keep it up - you can not   keep it up ! " 

 the two sculptor pursue their discussion after dinner , in the 
 drawing - room . Rowland leave they to have it out in a corner , where 
 Roderick 's Eve stand over they in the shaded lamplight , in vague white 
 beauty , like the guardian angel of the young idealist . Singleton be 
 listen to Madame Grandoni , and Rowland take his place on the sofa , 
 near Miss Blanchard . they have a good deal of familiar , desultory talk . 
 every now and then Madame Grandoni look round at they . Miss Blanchard 
 at last ask Rowland certain question about Roderick : who he be , 
 where he come from , whether it be true , as she have hear , that Rowland 
 have discover he and bring he out at his own expense . Rowland 
 answer her question ; to the last he give a vague affirmative . 
 finally , after a pause , look at he , " you be very generous , " Miss 
 Blanchard say . the declaration be make with a certain richness of 
 tone , but it bring to Rowland 's sense neither delight nor confusion . 
 he have hear the word before ; he suddenly remember the grave 
 sincerity with which Miss Garland have utter they as he stroll with 
 she in the wood the day of Roderick 's picnic . they have please he 
 then ; now he ask Miss Blanchard whether she would have some tea . 

 when the two lady withdraw , he attend they to their carriage . come 
 back to the drawing - room , he pause outside the open door ; he be 
 strike by the group form by the three man . they be stand before 
 Roderick 's statue of Eve , and the young sculptor have lift up the lamp 
 and be show different part of it to his companion . he be talk 
 ardently , and the lamplight cover his head and face . Rowland stand 
 look on , for the group strike he with its picturesque symbolism . 
 Roderick , bear the lamp and glow in its radiant circle , seem 
 the beautiful image of a genius which combine sincerity with power . 
 Gloriani , with his head on one side , pull his long moustache and 
 look keenly from half - close eye at the lighted marble , represent 
 art with a worldly motive , skill unleavene by faith , the mere base 
 maximum of cleverness . poor little Singleton , on the other side , with 
 his hand behind he , his head throw back , and his eye follow 
 devoutly the course of Roderick 's elucidation , might pass for an 
 embodiment of aspire candor , with feeble wing to rise on . in all 
 this , Roderick 's be certainly the beau role . 

 Gloriani turn to Rowland as he come up , and point back with his 
 thumb to the statue , with a smile half sardonic , half good - natured . " a 
 pretty thing - a devilish pretty thing , " he say . " it be as fresh as the 
 foam in the milk - pail . he can do it once , he can do it twice , he can do 
 it at a stretch half a dozen time . but - but - " 

 he be return to his former refrain , but Rowland intercept he . 
 " oh , he will keep it up , " he say , smile , " I will answer for he . " 

 Gloriani be not encouraging , but Roderick have listen smile . he 
 be float unperturbed on the tide of his deep self - confidence . now , 
 suddenly , however , he turn with a flash of irritation in his eye , and 
 demand in a ringing voice , " in a word , then , you prophesy that I be to 
 fail ? " 

 Gloriani answer imperturbably , pat he kindly on the shoulder . " my 
 dear fellow , passion burn out , inspiration run to seed . some fine day 
 every artist find himself sit face to face with his lump of clay , 
 with his empty canvas , with his sheet of blank paper , wait in vain 
 for the revelation to be make , for the Muse to descend . he must learn 
 to do without the Muse ! when the fickle jade forget the way to your 
 studio , do not   waste any time in tear your hair and meditate on 
 suicide . come round and see I , and I will show you how to console 
 yourself . " 

 " if I break down , " say Roderick , passionately , " I shall stay down . 
 if the Muse desert I , she shall at least have her infidelity on her 
 conscience . " 

 " you have no business , " Rowland say to Gloriani , " to talk lightly of 
 the Muse in this company . Mr. Singleton , too , have receive pledge from 
 she which place her constancy beyond suspicion . " and he point out on 
 the wall , near by , two small landscape by the modest water - colorist . 

 the sculptor examine they with deference , and Singleton himself begin 
 to laugh nervously ; he be tremble with hope that the great 
 Gloriani would be please . " yes , these be fresh too , " Gloriani say ; 
 " extraordinarily fresh ! how old be you ? " 

 " twenty - six , sir , " say Singleton . 

 " for twenty - six they be famously fresh . they must have take you a long 
 time ; you work slowly . " 

 " yes , unfortunately , I work very slowly . one of they take I six week , 
 the other two month . " 

 " upon my word ! the Muse pay you long visit . " and Gloriani turn 
 and look , from head to foot , at so unlikely an object of her favor . 
 Singleton smile and begin to wipe his forehead very hard . " oh , you ! " 
 say the sculptor ; " you will keep it up ! " 

 a week after his dinner - party , Rowland go into Roderick 's studio and 
 find he sit before an unfinished piece of work , with a hang 
 head and a heavy eye . he could have fancy that the fatal hour foretold 
 by Gloriani have strike . roderick rise with a sombre yawn and fling down 
 his tool . " it be no use , " he say , " I give it up ! " 

 " what be it ? " 

 " I have strike a shallow ! I have be sail bravely , but for the last 
 day or two my keel have be crunch the bottom . " 

 " a difficult place ? " Rowland ask , with a sympathetic inflection , 
 look vaguely at the roughly model figure . 

 " oh , it be not the poor clay ! " Roderick answer . " the difficult place 
 be here ! " and he strike a blow on his heart . " I do not   know what be the 
 matter with I . nothing come ; all of a sudden I hate thing . my old 
 thing look ugly ; everything look stupid . " 

 Rowland be perplexed . he be in the situation of a man who have be 
 rid a blood horse at an even , elastic gallop , and of a sudden feel 
 he stumble and balk . as yet , he reflect , he have see nothing but the 
 sunshine of genius ; he have forget that it have its storm . of course 
 it have ! and he feel a flood of comradeship rise in his heart which would 
 float they both safely through the bad weather . " why , you be tired ! " 
 he say . " of course you be tired . you have a right to be ! " 

 " do you think I have a right to be ? " Roderick ask , look at he . 

 " unquestionably , after all you have do . " 

 " well , then , right or wrong , I be tired . I certainly have do a fair 
 winter 's work . I want a change . " 

 Rowland declare that it be certainly high time they should be leave 
 Rome . they would go north and travel . they would go to Switzerland , to 
 Germany , to Holland , to England . Roderick assent , his eye brighten , 
 and Rowland talk of a dozen thing they might do . Roderick walk up 
 and down ; he seem to have something to say which he hesitate to bring 
 out . he hesitate so rarely that Rowland wonder , and at last ask he 
 what be on his mind . Roderick stop before he , frown a little . 

 " I have such unbounded faith in your good - will , " he say , " that I 
 believe nothing I can say would offend you . " 

 " try it , " say Rowland . 

 " well , then , I think my journey will do I more good if I take it alone . 
 I need not   say I prefer your society to that of any man live . for the 
 last six month it have be everything to I . but I have a perpetual 
 feeling that you be expect something of I , that you be measure 
 my doing by a terrifically high standard . you be watch I ; I do not 
 want to be watch . I want to go my own way ; to work when I choose and 
 to loaf when I choose . it be not that I do not   know what I owe you ; it 
 be not that we be not friend . it be simply that I want a taste of 
 absolutely unrestricted freedom . therefore , I say , let we separate . " 

 Rowland shake he by the hand . " willingly . do as you desire , I shall 
 miss you , and I venture to believe you will pass some lonely hour . but I 
 have only one request to make : that if you get into trouble of any kind 
 whatever , you will immediately let I know . " 

 they begin their journey , however , together , and cross the Alps 
 side by side , muffle in one rug , on the top of the St. Gothard coach . 
 Rowland be go to England to pay some promise visit ; his companion 
 have no plan save to ramble through Switzerland and Germany as fancy 
 guide he . he have money , now , that would outlast the summer ; when 
 it be spend he would come back to Rome and make another statue . at 
 a little mountain village by the way , Roderick declare that he would 
 stop ; he would scramble about a little in the high place and doze in 
 the shade of the pine forest . the coach be change horse ; the two 
 young man walk along the village street , pick their way between 
 dunghill , breathe the light , cool air , and listen to the plash of 
 the fountain and the tinkle of cattle - bell . the coach overtake they , 
 and then Rowland , as he prepare to mount , feel an almost overmaster 
 reluctance . 

 " say the word , " he exclaim , " and I will stop too . " 

 Roderick frown . " ah , you do not   trust I ; you do not   think I ' m able 
 to take care of myself . that prove that I be right in feeling as if I 
 be watch ! " 

 " watch , my dear fellow ! " say Rowland . " I hope you may never have 
 anything bad to complain of than be watch in the spirit in which 
 I watch you . but I will spare you even that . good - by ! " stand in his 
 place , as the coach roll away , he look back at his friend linger 
 by the roadside . a great snow - mountain , behind Roderick , be begin 
 to turn pink in the sunset . the young man wave his hat , still look 
 grave . Rowland settle himself in his place , reflect after all that 
 this be a salubrious beginning of independence . he be among forest 
 and glacier , lean on the pure bosom of nature . and then - and 
 then - be it not in itself a guarantee against folly to be engage to 
 Mary Garland ? 






 CHAPTER IV . experience 

 Rowland pass the summer in England , stay with several old friend 
 and two or three new one . on his arrival , he feel it on his conscience 
 to write to Mrs. Hudson and inform she that her son have relieve he of 
 his tutelage . he feel that she consider he an incorruptible mentor , 
 follow Roderick like a shadow , and he wish to let she know the 
 truth . but he make the truth very comfortable , and give a succinct 
 statement of the young man 's brilliant beginning . he owe it to 
 himself , he say , to remind she that he have not judge lightly , and that 
 Roderick 's present achievement be more profitable than his inglorious 
 drudgery at Messrs. Striker    Spooner 's . he be now take a well - earn 
 holiday and propose to see a little of the world . he would work none 
 the bad for this ; every artist need to knock about and look at 
 thing for himself . they have part company for a couple of month , for 
 Roderick be now a great man and beyond the need of go about with a 
 keeper . but they be to meet again in Rome in the autumn , and then he 
 should be able to send she more good news . meanwhile , he be very happy 
 in what Roderick have already do - especially happy in the happiness it 
 must have bring to she . he venture to ask to be kindly commend to 
 Miss Garland . 

 his letter be promptly answer - to his surprise in Miss Garland 's own 
 hand . the same mail bring also an epistle from Cecilia . the latter be 
 voluminous , and we must content ourselves with give an extract . 

 " your letter be fill with an echo of that brilliant roman world , 
 which make I almost ill with envy . for a week after I get it I think 
 Northampton really unpardonably tame . but I be drift back again to my 
 old deep of resignation , and I rush to the window , when any one pass , 
 with all my old gratitude for small favor . so Roderick Hudson be 
 already a great man , and you turn out to be a great prophet ? my 
 compliment to both of you ; I never hear of anything work so 
 smoothly . and he take it all very quietly , and do not   lose his 
 balance nor let it turn his head ? you judge he , then , in a day well 
 than I have do in six month , for I really do not expect that he would 
 settle down into such a jog - trot of prosperity . I believe he would do 
 fine thing , but I be sure he would intersperse they with a good many 
 folly , and that his beautiful statue would spring up out of the midst 
 of a straggling plantation of wild oat . but from what you tell I , Mr. 
 Striker may now go hang himself ..... there be one thing , however , to say 
 as a friend , in the way of warning . that candid soul can keep a secret , 
 and he may have private design on your equanimity which you do not   begin 
 to suspect . what do you think of his be engaged to Miss Garland ? the 
 two lady have give no hint of it all winter , but a fortnight ago , when 
 those big photograph of his statue arrive , they first pin they up 
 on the wall , and then trot out into the town , make a dozen call , and 
 announce the news . Mrs. Hudson do , at least ; Miss Garland , I suppose , 
 sit at home writing letter . to I , I confess , the thing be a perfect 
 surprise . I have not a suspicion that all the while he be come so 
 regularly to make himself agreeable on my veranda , he be quietly 
 prefer his cousin to any one else . not , indeed , that he be ever at 
 particular pain to make himself agreeable ! I suppose he have pick up 
 a few grace in Rome . but he must not acquire too many : if he be too 
 polite when he come back , Miss Garland will count he as one of the 
 lose . she will be a very good wife for a man of genius , and such a one 
 as they be often shrewd enough to take . she will darn his stocking and 
 keep his account , and sit at home and trim the lamp and keep up 
 the fire while he study the Beautiful in pretty neighbor at 
 dinner - party . the two lady be evidently very happy , and , to do they 
 justice , very humbly grateful to you . Mrs. Hudson never speak of you 
 without tear in her eye , and I be sure she consider you a specially 
 patent agent of Providence . verily , it be a good thing for a woman to 
 be in love : Miss Garland have grow almost pretty . I meet she the other 
 night at a tea - party ; she have a white rise in her hair , and sing a 
 sentimental ballad in a fine contralto voice . " 

 Miss Garland 's letter be so much short that we may give it entire : - 

 my dear Sir , - Mrs. Hudson , as I suppose you know , have be for some time 
 unable to use her eye . she request I , therefore , to answer your favor 
 of the 22d of June . she thank you extremely for writing , and wish I 
 to say that she consider herself in every way under great obligation 
 to you . your account of her son 's progress and the high estimation in 
 which he be hold have make she very happy , and she earnestly pray that 
 all may continue well with he . he send we , a short time ago , several 
 large photograph of his two statue , take from different point of 
 view . we know little about such thing , but they seem to we wonderfully 
 beautiful . we send they to Boston to be handsomely frame , and the man , 
 on return they , write we that he have exhibit they for a week in 
 his store , and that they have attract great attention . the frame be 
 magnificent , and the picture now hang in a row on the parlor wall . 
 our only quarrel with they be that they make the old papering and the 
 engraving look dreadfully shabby . Mr. Striker stand and look at they 
 the other day full five minute , and say , at last , that if Roderick 's 
 head be run on such thing it be no wonder he could not learn to 
 draw up a deed . we lead here so quiet and monotonous a life that I 
 be afraid I can tell you nothing that will interest you . Mrs. Hudson 
 request I to say that the little more or less that may happen to we be 
 of small account , as we live in our thought and our thought be fix 
 on her dear son . she thank Heaven he have so good a friend . Mrs. Hudson 
 say that this be too short a letter , but I can say nothing more . 

 your most respectfully , 

 Mary Garland . 

 it be a question whether the reader will know why , but this letter 
 give Rowland extraordinary pleasure . he like its very brevity and 
 meagreness , and there seem to he an exquisite modesty in its saying 
 nothing from the young girl herself . he delight in the formal address 
 and conclusion ; they please he as he have be please by an angular 
 gesture in some expressive girlish figure in an early painting . the 
 letter renew that impression of strong feeling combine with an almost 
 rigid simplicity , which Roderick 's betrothed have personally give 
 he . and its homely stiffness seem a vivid reflection of a life 
 concentrate , as the young girl have borrow warrant from her companion 
 to say , in a single devoted idea . the monotonous day of the two woman 
 seem to Rowland 's fancy to follow each other like the tick - tick of a 
 great time - piece , mark off the hour which separate they from the 
 supreme felicity of clasp the far - away son and lover to lip seal 
 with the excess of joy . he hop that Roderick , now that he have shake 
 off the oppression of his own importunate faith , be not lose a 
 tolerant temper for the silent prayer of the two woman at Northampton . 

 he be leave to vain conjecture , however , as to Roderick 's actual mood 
 and occupation . he know he be no letter - writer , and that , in the young 
 sculptor 's own phrase , he have at any time rather build a monument than 
 write a note . but when a month have pass without news of he , he begin 
 to be half anxious and half angry , and write he three line , in the 
 care of a continental banker , beg he at least to give some sign of 
 whether he be alive or dead . a week afterwards come an answer - brief , 
 and date Baden - Baden . " I know I have be a great brute , " Roderick 
 write , " not to have send you a word before ; but really I do not   know what 
 have get into I . I have lately learn terribly well how to be idle . I 
 be afraid to think how long it be since I write to my mother or to Mary . 
 Heaven help they - poor , patient , trustful creature ! I do not   know how to 
 tell you what I be do . it seem all amusing enough while I do it , but 
 it would make a poor show in a narrative intend for your formidable 
 eye . I find Baxter in Switzerland , or rather he find I , and he 
 grab I by the arm and bring I here . I be walk twenty mile a 
 day in the Alps , drink milk in lonely chalet , sleep as you sleep , 
 and think it be all very good fun ; but Baxter tell I it would never 
 do , that the Alps be 'd - - d rot , ' that Baden - Baden be the place , and 
 that if I know what be good for I I would come along with he . it be a 
 wonderful place , certainly , though , thank the Lord , Baxter depart last 
 week , blaspheme horribly at trente et quarante . but you know all about 
 it and what one do - what one be liable to do . I have succumb , in a 
 measure , to the liability , and I wish I have some one here to give I a 
 thunder good blow up . not you , dear friend ; you would draw it too 
 mild ; you have too much of the milk of human kindness . I have fit of 
 horrible homesickness for my studio , and I shall be devoutly grateful 
 when the summer be over and I can go back and swing a chisel . I feel as 
 if nothing but the chisel would satisfy I ; as if I could rush in a rage 
 at a block of unshaped marble . there be a lot of the roman people here , 
 English and American ; I live in the midst of they and talk nonsense from 
 morning till night . there be also some one else ; and to she I do not   talk 
 sense , nor , thank heaven , mean what I say . I confess , I need a month 's 
 work to recover my self - respect . " 

 these line bring Rowland no small perturbation ; the more , that what 
 they seem to point to surprised he . during the nine month of their 
 companionship Roderick have show so little taste for dissipation that 
 Rowland have come to think of it as a cancel danger , and it greatly 
 perplex he to learn that his friend have apparently prove so pliant 
 to opportunity . but Roderick 's allusion be ambiguous , and it be 
 possible they might simply mean that he be out of patience with a 
 frivolous way of life and fret wholesomely over his absent work . 
 it be a very good thing , certainly , that idleness should prove , on 
 experiment , to sit heavily on his conscience . nevertheless , the letter 
 need , to Rowland 's mind , a key : the key arrive a week later . " in 
 common charity , " Roderick write , " lend I a hundred pound ! I have 
 gamble away my last franc - I have make a mountain of debt . send I the 
 money first ; lecture I afterwards ! " Rowland send the money by return of 
 mail ; then he proceed , not to lecture , but to think . he hang his head ; 
 he be acutely disappointed . he have no right to be , he assure himself ; 
 but so it be . Roderick be young , impulsive , unpracticed in stoicism ; 
 it be a hundred to one that he be to pay the usual vulgar tribute 
 to folly . but his friend have regard it as securely gain to his own 
 belief in virtue that he be not as other foolish youth be , and that 
 he would have be capable of look at folly in the face and pass 
 on his way . Rowland for a while feel a sore sense of wrath . what right 
 have a man who be engage to that fine girl in Northampton to behave 
 as if his consciousness be a common blank , to be overlay with coarse 
 sensation ? yes , distinctly , he be disappoint . he have accompany his 
 missive with an urgent recommendation to leave Baden - Baden immediately , 
 and an offer to meet Roderick at any point he would name . the answer 
 come promptly ; it run as follow : " send I another fifty pound ! I have 
 be back to the table . I will leave as soon as the money come , and 
 meet you at Geneva . there I will tell you everything . " 

 there be an ancient terrace at Geneva , plant with tree and stud 
 with bench , overlook by gravely aristocratic old dwelling and 
 overlook the distant Alps . a great many generation have make it a 
 lounging - place , a great many friend and lover stroll there , a great 
 many confidential talk and momentous interview go forward . here , one 
 morning , sit on one of the batter green bench , Roderick , as he 
 have promise , tell his friend everything . he have arrive late the 
 night before ; he look tired , and yet flush and excited . he make no 
 profession of penitence , but he practice an unmitigated frankness , 
 and his self - reprobation might be take for grant . he imply in every 
 phrase that he have do with it all , and that he be count the hour 
 till he could get back to work . we shall not rehearse his confession in 
 detail ; its main outline will be sufficient . he have fall in with some 
 very idle people , and have discover that a little example and a little 
 practice be capable of produce on his own part a considerable relish 
 for their diversion . what could he do ? he never read , and he have no 
 studio ; in one way or another he have to pass the time . he pass it in 
 dangle about several very pretty woman in wonderful Paris toilet , 
 and reflect that it be always something gain for a sculptor to sit 
 under a tree , look at his leisure into a charming face and say 
 thing that make it smile and play its muscle and part its lip and 
 show its tooth . attach to these lady be certain gentleman who 
 walk about in cloud of perfume , rise at midday , and sup at 
 midnight . Roderick have find himself in the mood for think they very 
 amusing fellow . he be surprised at his own taste , but he let it take 
 its course . it lead he to the discovery that to live with lady who 
 expect you to present they with expensive bouquet , to ride with they in 
 the Black Forest on well - look horse , to come into their opera - box 
 on night when Patti sing and price be consequent , to propose little 
 light supper at the Conversation House after the opera or drive by 
 moonlight to the Castle , to be always array and anoint , trinkete 
 and glove , - that to move in such society , we say , though it might be a 
 privilege , be a privilege with a penalty attach . but the table make 
 such thing easy ; half the Baden world live by the table . roderick 
 try they and find that at first they smooth his path delightfully . 
 this simplification of matter , however , be only momentary , for he soon 
 perceive that to seem to have money , and to have it in fact , expose 
 a good - look young man to peculiar liability . at this point of his 
 friend 's narrative , Rowland be remind of Madame de Cruchecassee in 
 the Newcomes , and though he have listen in tranquil silence to the rest 
 of it , he find it hard not to say that all this have be , under 
 the circumstance , a very bad business . Roderick admit it with 
 bitterness , and then tell how much - measure simply financially - it have 
 cost he . his luck have change ; the table have cease to back he , and 
 he have find himself up to his knee in debt . every penny have go 
 of the solid sum which have seem a large equivalent of those shin 
 statue in Rome . he have be an ass , but it be not irreparable ; he 
 could make another statue in a couple of month . 

 Rowland frown . " for heaven 's sake , " he say , " do not   play such 
 dangerous game with your facility . if you have get facility , revere 
 it , respect it , adore it , treasure it - do not   speculate on it . " and he 
 wonder what his companion , up to his knee in debt , would have do 
 if there have be no good - natured Rowland Mallet to lend a help hand . 
 but he do not formulate his curiosity audibly , and the contingency 
 seem not to have present itself to Roderick 's imagination . the young 
 sculptor revert to his late adventure again in the evening , and this 
 time talk of they more objectively , as the phrase be ; more as if they 
 have be the adventure of another person . he relate half a dozen droll 
 thing that have happen to he , and , as if his responsibility have be 
 disengage by all this free discussion , he laugh extravagantly at the 
 memory of they . Rowland sit perfectly grave , on principle . then Roderick 
 begin to talk of half a dozen statue that he have in his head , and 
 set forth his design , with his usual vividness . suddenly , as it be 
 relevant , he declare that his Baden doing have not be altogether 
 fruitless , for that the lady who have remind Rowland of Madame de 
 Cruchecassee be tremendously statuesque . Rowland at last say that it 
 all might pass if he feel that he be really the wiser for it . " by the 
 wiser , " he add , " I mean the strong in purpose , in will . " 

 " oh , do not   talk about will ! " Roderick answer , throw back his head 
 and look at the star . this conversation also take place in the open 
 air , on the little island in the shooting Rhone where Jean - Jacques have 
 a monument . " the will , I believe , be the mystery of mystery . who can 
 answer for his will ? who can say beforehand that it be strong ? there be 
 all kind of indefinable current move to and fro between one 's 
 will and one 's inclination . People talk as if the two thing be 
 essentially distinct ; on different side of one 's organism , like the 
 heart and the liver . mine , I know , be much near together . it all 
 depend upon circumstance . I believe there be a certain group of 
 circumstance possible for every man , in which his will be destine to 
 snap like a dry twig . " 

 " my dear boy , " say Rowland , " do not   talk about the will be 
 ' destine . ' the will be destiny itself . that be the way to look at it . " 

 " look at it , my dear Rowland , " Roderick answer , " as you find 
 most comfortable . one conviction I have gather from my summer 's 
 experience , " he go on - " it be as well to look it frankly in the 
 face - be that I possess an almost unlimited susceptibility to the 
 influence of a beautiful woman . " 

 Rowland star , then stroll away , softly whistle to himself . he 
 be unwilling to admit even to himself that this speech have really the 
 sinister mean it seem to have . in a few day the two young man make 
 their way back to Italy , and linger a while in Florence before 
 go on to Rome . in Florence Roderick seem to have win back his old 
 innocence and his preference for the pleasure of study over any other . 
 Rowland begin to think of the Baden episode as a bad dream , or at 
 the bad as a mere sporadic piece of disorder , without root in his 
 companion 's character . they pass a fortnight look at picture 
 and explore for out the way bit of fresco and carving , and roderick 
 recover all his early fervor of appreciation and comment . in Rome he 
 go eagerly to work again , and finish in a month two or three small 
 thing he have leave stand on his departure . he talk the most joyous 
 nonsense about find himself back in his old quarter . on the first 
 Sunday afternoon follow their return , on their go together to 
 Saint Peter 's , he deliver himself of a lyrical greeting to the great 
 church and to the city in general , in a tone of voice so irrepressibly 
 elevate that it ring through the nave in rather a scandalous fashion , 
 and almost arrest a procession of canon who be march across to 
 the choir . he begin to model a new statue - a female figure , of which he 
 have say nothing to Rowland . it represent a woman , lean lazily back 
 in her chair , with her head droop as if she be listen , a vague 
 smile on her lip , and a pair of remarkably beautiful arm fold in her 
 lap . with rather less softness of contour , it would have resemble the 
 noble statue of Agrippina in the Capitol . Rowland look at it and be 
 not sure he like it . " who be it ? what do it mean ? " he ask . 

 " anything you please ! " say Roderick , with a certain petulance . " I call 
 it a Reminiscence . " 

 Rowland then remember that one of the Baden lady have be 
 ' statuesque , " and ask no more question . this , after all , be a way of 
 profit by experience . a few day later he take his first ride of 
 the season on the Campagna , and as , on his homeward way , he be pass 
 across the long shadow of a ruin tower , he perceive a small figure 
 at a short distance , bend over a sketch - book . as he draw near , he 
 recognize his friend Singleton . the honest little painter 's face be 
 scorch to flame - color by the light of southern sun , and borrow an 
 even deep crimson from his gleeful greeting of his most appreciative 
 patron . he be make a careful and charming little sketch . on Rowland 's 
 ask he how he have spend his summer , he give an account of his 
 wandering which make poor Mallet sigh with a sense of more contrast 
 than one . he have not be out of Italy , but he have be delve deep 
 into the picturesque heart of the lovely land , and gather a wonderful 
 store of subject . he have ramble about among the unvisited village of 
 the Apennines , pencil in hand and knapsack on back , sleep on straw 
 and eat black bread and bean , but feast on local color , rioting , 
 as it be , on chiaroscuro , and lay up a treasure of pictorial 
 observation . he take a devout satisfaction in his hard - earn wisdom 
 and his happy frugality . Rowland go the next day , by appointment , 
 to look at his sketch , and spend a whole morning turn they over . 
 Singleton talk more than he have ever do before , explain they all , 
 and tell some quaintly humorous anecdote about the production of each . 

 " dear I , how I have chatter ! " he say at last . " I be afraid you have 
 rather have look at the thing in peace and quiet . I do not   know I 
 could talk so much . but somehow , I feel very happy ; I feel as if I have 
 improve . " 

 " that you have , " say Rowland . " I doubt whether an artist ever pass a 
 more profitable three month . you must feel much more sure of yourself . " 

 Singleton look for a long time with great intentness at a knot in the 
 floor . " yes , " he say at last , in a fluttered tone , " I feel much more 
 sure of myself . I have get more facility ! " and he lower his voice as 
 if he be communicate a secret which it take some courage to impart . 
 " I hardly like to say it , for fear I should after all be mistake . but 
 since it strike you , perhaps it be true . it be a great happiness ; I 
 would not exchange it for a great deal of money . " 

 " yes , I suppose it be a great happiness , " say Rowland . " I shall really 
 think of you as live here in a state of scandalous bliss . I do not 
 believe it be good for an artist to be in such brutally high spirit . " 

 Singleton star for a moment , as if he think Rowland be in earnest ; 
 then suddenly fathom the kindly jest , he walk about the room , 
 scratch his head and laugh intensely to himself . " and Mr. Hudson ? " 
 he say , as Rowland be go ; " I hope he be well and happy . " 

 " he be very well , " say Rowland . " he be back at work again . " 

 " ah , there be a man , " cry Singleton , " who have take his start once 
 for all , and do not   need to stop and ask himself in fear and tremble 
 every month or two whether he be advance or not . when he stop , it be 
 to rest ! and where do he spend his summer ? " 

 " the great part of it at Baden - Baden . " 

 " ah , that be in the Black Forest , " cry Singleton , with profound 
 simplicity . " they say you can make capital study of tree there . " 

 " no doubt , " say Rowland , with a smile , lay an almost paternal 
 hand on the little painter 's yellow head . " unfortunately tree be not 
 Roderick 's line . nevertheless , he tell I that at Baden he make some 
 study . come when you can , by the way , " he add after a moment , 
 " to his studio , and tell I what you think of something he have lately 
 begin . " Singleton declare that he would come delightedly , and Rowland 
 leave he to his work . 

 he meet a number of his last winter 's friend again , and call upon 
 Madame Grandoni , upon Miss Blanchard , and upon Gloriani , shortly after 
 their return . the lady give an excellent account of themselves . 
 Madame Grandoni have be take sea - bath at Rimini , and Miss Blanchard 
 paint wild flower in the Tyrol . her complexion be somewhat brown , 
 which be very become , and her flower be uncommonly pretty . 
 Gloriani have be in Paris and have come away in high good - humor , find 
 no one there , in the artist - world , cleverer than himself . he come in a 
 few day to Roderick 's studio , one afternoon when Rowland be present . 
 he examine the new statue with great deference , say it be very 
 promising , and abstain , considerately , from irritate prophecy . but 
 Rowland fancy he observe certain sign of inward jubilation on the 
 clever sculptor 's part , and walk away with he to learn his private 
 opinion . 

 " certainly ; I like it as well as I say , " Gloriani declare in answer 
 to Rowland 's anxious query ; " or rather I like it a great deal well . I 
 do not   say how much , for fear of make your friend angry . but one can 
 leave he alone now , for he be come round . I tell you he could not 
 keep up the transcendental style , and he have already break down . do not 
 you see it yourself , man ? " 

 " I do not   particularly like this new statue , " say Rowland . 

 " that be because you be a purist . it be deuce clever , it be deuce 
 knowing , it be deuce pretty , but it be not   the top high art of 
 three month ago . he have take his turn soon than I suppose . what have 
 happen to he ? have he be disappoint in love ? but that be none of 
 my business . I congratulate he on have become a practical man . " 

 Roderick , however , be less to be congratulate than Gloriani have take 
 it into his head to believe . he be discontent with his work , he 
 apply himself to it by fit and start , he declare that he do not 
 know what be come over he ; he be turn into a man of mood . " be 
 this of necessity what a fellow must come to " - he ask of Rowland , with 
 a sort of peremptory flash in his eye , which seem to imply that his 
 companion have undertake to insure he against perplexity and be not 
 fulfil his contract - " this damnable uncertainty when he go to bed 
 at night as to whether he be go to wake up in a work humor or in a 
 swearing humor ? have we only a season , over before we know it , in which 
 we can call our faculty our own ? six month ago I could stand up to my 
 work like a man , day after day , and never dream of ask myself whether 
 I feel like it . but now , some morning , it be the very devil to get 
 go . my statue look so bad when I come into the studio that I have 
 twenty mind to smash it on the spot , and I lose three or four hour in 
 sit there , mop and get use to it . " 

 Rowland say that he suppose that this sort of thing be the lot of 
 every artist and that the only remedy be plenty of courage and faith . 
 and he remind he of Gloriani 's have forewarn he against these 
 sterile mood the year before . 

 " Gloriani be an ass ! " say Roderick , almost fiercely . he hire a horse 
 and begin to ride with Rowland on the Campagna . this delicious amusement 
 restore he in a measure to cheerfulness , but seem to Rowland on the 
 whole not to stimulate his industry . their ride be always very 
 long , and Roderick insist on make they long by dismount in 
 picturesque spot and stretch himself in the sun among a heap of 
 overtangle stone . he let the scorch Roman luminary beat down upon 
 he with an equanimity which Rowland find it hard to emulate . but in 
 this situation Roderick talk so much amusing nonsense that , for the 
 sake of his company , Rowland consent to be uncomfortable , and often 
 forget that , though in these diversion the day pass quickly , they 
 bring forth neither high art nor low . and yet it be perhaps by their 
 help , after all , that Roderick secure several morning of ardent work 
 on his new figure , and bring it to rapid completion . one afternoon , 
 when it be finish , Rowland go to look at it , and Roderick ask he 
 for his opinion . 

 " what do you think yourself ? " Rowland demand , not from pusillanimity , 
 but from real uncertainty . 

 " I think it be curiously bad , " Roderick answer . " it be bad from the 
 first ; it have fundamental vice . I have shuffle they in a measure out 
 of sight , but I have not correct they . I can not   - I can not   - I can not ! " he 
 cry passionately . " they stare I in the face - they be all I see ! " 

 Rowland offer several criticism of detail , and suggest certain 
 practicable change . but Roderick differ with he on each of these 
 point ; the thing have fault enough , but they be not those fault . 
 Rowland , unruffled , conclude by say that whatever its fault might 
 be , he have an idea people in general would like it . 

 " I wish to heaven some person in particular would buy it , and take it 
 off my hand and out of my sight ! " Roderick cry . " what be I to do 
 now ? " he go on . " I have not   an idea . I think of subject , but they 
 remain mere lifeless name . they be mere word - they be not image . 
 what be I to do ? " 

 Rowland be a trifle annoyed . " be a man , " he be on the point of say , 
 " and do not , for heaven 's sake , talk in that confoundedly querulous 
 voice . " but before he have utter the word , there ring through the 
 studio a loud , peremptory ring at the outer door . 

 Roderick break into a laugh . " talk of the devil , " he say , " and you see 
 his horn ! if that be not a customer , it ought to be . " 

 the door of the studio be promptly fling open , and a lady advance to 
 the threshold - an impose , voluminous person , who quite fill up the 
 doorway . Rowland immediately feel that he have see she before , but he 
 recognize she only when she move forward and disclose an attendant in 
 the person of a little bright - eye , elderly gentleman , with a bristling 
 white moustache . then he remember that just a year before he and his 
 companion have see in the Ludovisi garden a wonderfully beautiful girl , 
 stroll in the train of this conspicuous couple . he look for she 
 now , and in a moment she appear , follow her companion with the 
 same nonchalant step as before , and lead her great snow - white poodle , 
 decorate with motley ribbon . the eld lady offer the two young 
 man a sufficiently gracious salute ; the little old gentleman bow and 
 smile with extreme alertness . the young girl , without cast a glance 
 either at Roderick or at Rowland , look about for a chair , and , on 
 perceive one , sink into it listlessly , pull her poodle towards she , 
 and begin to rearrange his top - knot . Rowland see that , even with her 
 eye drop , her beauty be still dazzle . 

 " I trust we be at liberty to enter , " say the eld lady , with majesty . 
 " we be tell that Mr. Hudson have no fixed day , and that we might come 
 at any time . let we not disturb you . " 

 Roderick , as one of the less light of the roman art - world , have not 
 hitherto be subject to incursion from inquisitive tourist , and , 
 have no regular reception day , be not verse in the usual formula of 
 welcome . he say nothing , and Rowland , look at he , see that he be 
 look amazedly at the young girl and be apparently unconscious of 
 everything else . " by Jove ! " he cry precipitately , " it be that goddess 
 of the Villa Ludovisi ! " Rowland in some confusion , do the honor as he 
 could , but the little old gentleman beg he with the most obsequious 
 of smile to give himself no trouble . " I have be in many a studio ! " he 
 say , with his finger on his nose and a strong italian accent . 

 " we be go about everywhere , " say his companion . " I be passionately 
 fond of art ! " 

 Rowland smile sympathetically , and let they turn to Roderick 's statue . 
 he glance again at the young sculptor , to invite he to bestir himself , 
 but Roderick be still gaze wide - eyed at the beautiful young mistress 
 of the poodle , who by this time have look up and be gaze straight at 
 he . there be nothing bold in her look ; it express a kind of languid , 
 imperturbable indifference . her beauty be extraordinary ; it grow and 
 grow as the young man observe she . in such a face the maidenly custom 
 of avert eye and ready blush would have seem an anomaly ; nature 
 have produce it for man 's delight and mean that it should surrender 
 itself freely and coldly to admiration . it be not immediately apparent , 
 however , that the young lady find an answer entertainment in the 
 physiognomy of her host ; she turn her head after a moment and look 
 idly round the room , and at last let her eye rest on the statue of the 
 woman seat . it be leave to Rowland to stimulate conversation , he 
 begin by compliment she on the beauty of her dog . 

 " yes , he be very handsome , " she murmur . " he be a florentine . the dog 
 in Florence be handsomer than the people . " and on Rowland 's caressing 
 he : " his name be Stenterello , " she add . " stenterello , give your hand 
 to the gentleman . " this order be give in Italian . " say buon giorno a 
 lei . " 

 Stenterello thrust out his paw and give four short , shrill bark ; upon 
 which the eld lady turn round and raise her forefinger . 

 " my dear , my dear , remember where you be ! excuse my foolish child , " she 
 add , turn to Roderick with an agreeable smile . " she can think of 
 nothing but her poodle . " 

 " I be teach he to talk for I , " the young girl go on , without 
 heed her mother ; " to say little thing in society . it will save I 
 a great deal of trouble . Stenterello , love , give a pretty smile and say 
 tanti complimenti ! " the poodle wag his white pate - it look like 
 one of those little pad in swan's - down , for apply powder to the 
 face - and repeat the barking process . 

 " he be a wonderful beast , " say Rowland . 

 " he be not a beast , " say the young girl . " a beast be something black 
 and dirty - something you can not   touch . " 

 " he be a very valuable dog , " the eld lady explain . " he be present 
 to my daughter by a Florentine nobleman . " 

 " it be not for that I care about he . it be for himself . he be well 
 than the prince . " 

 " my dear , my dear ! " repeat the mother in deprecate accent , but with 
 a significant glance at Rowland which seem to bespeak his attention to 
 the glory of possess a daughter who could deal in that fashion with 
 the aristocracy . 

 Rowland remember that when their unknown visitor have pass before 
 they , a year previous , in the Villa Ludovisi , Roderick and he have 
 exchange conjecture as to their nationality and social quality . 
 Roderick have declare that they be old - world people ; but Rowland 
 now need no telling to feel that he might claim the eld lady as a 
 fellow - countrywoman . she be a person of what be call a great deal 
 of presence , with the fade trace , artfully revive here and there , of 
 once brilliant beauty . her daughter have come lawfully by her loveliness , 
 but Rowland mentally make the distinction that the mother be silly and 
 that the daughter be not . the mother have a very silly mouth - a mouth , 
 Rowland suspect , capable of express an inordinate degree of 
 unreason . the young girl , in spite of her childish satisfaction in her 
 poodle , be not a person of feeble understanding . Rowland receive an 
 impression that , for reason of her own , she be play a part . what 
 be the part and what be her reason ? she be interesting ; Rowland 
 wonder what be her domestic secret . if her mother be a daughter 
 of the great Republic , it be to be suppose that the young girl be a 
 flower of the american soil ; but her beauty have a robustness and tone 
 uncommon in the somewhat facile loveliness of our western maidenhood . 
 she speak with a vague foreign accent , as if she have spend her life in 
 strange country . the little Italian apparently divine Rowland 's mute 
 imagining , for he presently step forward , with a bow like a master 
 of ceremony . " I have not do my duty , " he say , " in not announce 
 these lady . Mrs. Light , Miss Light ! " 

 Rowland be not materially the wiser for this information , but Roderick 
 be arouse by it to the exercise of some slight hospitality . he alter 
 the light , pull forward two or three figure , and make an apology 
 for not have more to show . " I do not   pretend to have anything of an 
 exhibition - I be only a novice . " 

 " indeed ? - a novice ! for a novice this be very well , " Mrs. Light 
 declare . " Cavaliere , we have see nothing well than this . " 

 the Cavaliere smile rapturously . " it be stupendous ! " he murmur . " and 
 we have be to all the studio . " 

 " not to all - heaven forbid ! " cry Mrs. Light . " but to a number that I 
 have have point out by artistic friend . I delight in studio : they be 
 the temple of the beautiful here below . and if you be a novice , Mr. 
 Hudson , " she go on , " you have already great admirer . half a dozen 
 people have tell we that yours be among the thing to see . " this 
 gracious speech go unanswered ; Roderick have already wander across to 
 the other side of the studio and be revolve about Miss Light . " ah , he 
 be go to look at my beautiful daughter ; he be not the first that 
 have have his head turn , " Mrs. Light resume , lower her voice to 
 a confidential undertone ; a favor which , consider the shortness of 
 their acquaintance , Rowland be bind to appreciate . " the artist be 
 all crazy about she . when she go into a studio she be fatal to the 
 picture . and when she go into a ball - room what do the other woman 
 say ? eh , Cavaliere ? " 

 " she be very beautiful , " Rowland say , gravely . 

 Mrs. Light , who through her long , gold - case glass be look a little 
 at everything , and at nothing as if she see it , interrupt her random 
 murmur and exclamation , and survey Rowland from head to foot . she 
 look at he all over ; apparently he have not be mention to she as 
 a feature of Roderick 's establishment . it be the gaze , Rowland feel , 
 which the vigilant and ambitious mamma of a beautiful daughter have 
 always at her command for well - dress young man of candid physiognomy . 
 her inspection in this case seem satisfactory . " be you also an 
 artist ? " she inquire with an almost caress inflection . it be clear 
 that what she mean be something of this kind : " be so good as to assure 
 I without delay that you be really the young man of substance and 
 amiability that you appear . " 

 but Rowland answer simply the formal question - not the latent one . 
 " dear I , no ; I be only a friend of Mr. Hudson . " 

 Mrs. Light , with a sigh , return to the statue , and after mistake 
 the Adam for a gladiator , and the Eve for a Pocahontas , declare that 
 she could not judge of such thing unless she see they in the marble . 
 Rowland hesitate a moment , and then speak in the interest of 
 Roderick 's renown , say that he be the happy possessor of several of 
 his friend 's work and that she be welcome to come and see they at his 
 room . she bid the Cavaliere make a note of his address . " ah , you be 
 a patron of the art , " she say . " that be what I should like to be if 
 I have a little money . I delight in beauty in every form . but all these 
 people ask such monstrous price . one must be a millionaire , to think 
 of such thing , eh ? twenty year ago my husband have my portrait paint , 
 here in Rome , by Papucci , who be the great man in those day . I be in 
 a ball dress , with all my jewel , my neck and arm , and all that . the 
 man get six hundred franc , and think he be very well treat . those 
 be the day when a family could live like prince in Italy for five 
 thousand scudi a year . the Cavaliere once upon a time be a great 
 dandy - do not   blush , Cavaliere ; any one can see that , just as any one can 
 see that I be once a pretty woman ! get he to tell you what he make a 
 figure upon . the railroad have bring in the vulgarian . that be what 
 I call it now - the invasion of the vulgarian ! what be poor we to do ? " 

 Rowland have begin to murmur some remedial proposition , when he be 
 interrupt by the voice of Miss Light call across the room , " Mamma ! " 

 " my own love ? " 

 " this gentleman wish to model my bust . please speak to he . " 

 the Cavaliere give a little chuckle . " already ? " he cry . 

 Rowland look round , equally surprised at the promptitude of the 
 proposal . Roderick stand plant before the young girl with his arm 
 fold , look at she as he would have do at the Medicean Venus . he 
 never pay compliment , and Rowland , though he have not hear he speak , 
 could imagine the startling distinctness with which he make his request . 

 " he see I a year ago , " the young girl go on , " and he have be 
 think of I ever since . " her tone , in speak , be peculiar ; it have 
 a kind of studied inexpressiveness , which be yet not the vulgar device 
 of a drawl . 

 " I must make your daughter 's bust - that be all , madame ! " cry Roderick , 
 with warmth . 

 " I have rather you make the poodle 's , " say the young girl . " be it very 
 tiresome ? I have spend half my life sit for my photograph , in every 
 conceivable attitude and with every conceivable coiffure . I think I have 
 pose enough . " 

 " my dear child , " say Mrs. Light , " it may be one 's duty to pose . but as 
 to my daughter 's sit to you , sir - to a young sculptor whom we do not 
 know - it be a matter that need reflection . it be not a favor that be to 
 be have for the mere asking . " 

 " if I do not   make she from life , " say Roderick , with energy , " I will 
 make she from memory , and if the thing be to be do , you have well 
 have it do as well as possible . " 

 " Mamma hesitate , " say Miss Light , " because she do not   know whether 
 you mean she shall pay you for the bust . I can assure you that she will 
 not pay you a sou . " 

 " my darling , you forget yourself , " say Mrs. Light , with an attempt at 
 majestic severity . " of course , " she add , in a moment , with a change of 
 note , " the bust would be my own property . " 

 " of course ! " cry Roderick , impatiently . 

 " Dearest mother , " interpose the young girl , " how can you carry a 
 marble bust about the world with you ? be it not enough to drag the poor 
 original ? " 

 " my dear , you be nonsensical ! " cry Mrs. Light , almost angrily . 

 " you can always sell it , " say the young girl , with the same artful 
 artlessness . 

 Mrs. Light turn to Rowland , who pity she , flushed and irritated . 
 " she be very wicked to - day ! " 

 the Cavaliere grin in silence and walk away on tiptoe , with his hat 
 to his lip , as if to leave the field clear for action . Rowland , on the 
 contrary , wish to avert the come storm . " you have well not refuse , " 
 he say to Miss Light , " until you have see Mr. Hudson 's thing in the 
 marble . your mother be to come and look at some that I possess . " 

 " thank you ; I have no doubt you will see we . I dare say Mr. Hudson be 
 very clever ; but I do not   care for modern sculpture . I can not   look at it ! " 

 " you shall care for my bust , I promise you ! " cry Roderick , with a 
 laugh . 

 " to satisfy Miss Light , " say the Cavaliere , " one of the old Greeks 
 ought to come to life . " 

 " it would be worth his while , " say Roderick , pay , to Rowland 's 
 knowledge , his first compliment . 

 " I might sit to Phidias , if he would promise to be very amusing and make 
 I laugh . what do you say , Stenterello ? would you sit to Phidias ? " 

 " we must talk of this some other time , " say Mrs. Light . " we be in 
 Rome for the winter . many thank . Cavaliere , call the carriage . " the 
 Cavaliere lead the way out , back like a silver - stick , and Miss Light , 
 follow her mother , nod , without look at they , to each of the 
 young man . 

 " immortal power , what a head ! " cry Roderick , when they have go . 
 " there be my fortune ! " 

 " she be certainly very beautiful , " say Rowland . " but I ' m sorry you 
 have undertake her bust . " 

 " and why , pray ? " 

 " I suspect it will bring trouble with it . " 

 " what kind of trouble ? " 

 " I hardly know . they be queer people . the mamma , I suspect , be the 
 least bit of an adventuress . Heaven know what the daughter be . " 

 " she be a goddess ! " cry Roderick . 

 " just so . she be all the more dangerous . " 

 " dangerous ? what will she do to I ? she do not   bite , I imagine . " 

 " it remain to be see . there be two kind of woman - you ought to 
 know it by this time - the safe and the unsafe . Miss Light , if I be not 
 mistaken , be one of the unsafe . a word to the wise ! " 

 " much oblige ! " say Roderick , and he begin to whistle a triumphant air , 
 in honor , apparently , of the advent of his beautiful model . 

 in call this young lady and her mamma " queer people , " Rowland but 
 roughly express his sentiment . they be so mark a variation from 
 the monotonous troop of his fellow - country people that he feel much 
 curiosity as to the source of the change , especially since he doubt 
 greatly whether , on the whole , it elevate the type . for a week he 
 see the two lady drive daily in a well - appoint landau , with the 
 Cavaliere and the poodle in the front seat . from Mrs. Light he receive 
 a gracious salute , temper by her native majesty ; but the young girl , 
 look straight before she , seem profoundly indifferent to observer . 
 her extraordinary beauty , however , have already make observer numerous 
 and give the habitue of the pincian plenty to talk about . the echo 
 of their commentary reach Rowland 's ear ; but he have little taste 
 for random gossip , and desire a distinctly veracious informant . he have 
 find one in the person of Madame Grandoni , for whom Mrs. Light and her 
 beautiful daughter be a pair of old friend . 

 " I have know the mamma for twenty year , " say this judicious critic , 
 " and if you ask any of the people who have be live here as long 
 as I , you will find they remember she well . I have hold the beautiful 
 Christina on my knee when she be a little wizened baby with a very red 
 face and no promise of beauty but those magnificent eye . ten year ago 
 Mrs. Light disappear , and have not since be see in Rome , except for 
 a few day last winter , when she pass through on her way to Naples . 
 then it be you meet the trio in the Ludovisi garden . when I first 
 know she she be the unmarried but very marriageable daughter of an old 
 american painter of very bad landscape , which people use to buy from 
 charity and use for fire - board . his name be savage ; it use to make 
 every one laugh , he be such a mild , melancholy , pitiful old gentleman . 
 he have marry a horrible wife , an Englishwoman who have be on the 
 stage . it be say she use to beat poor Savage with his mahl - stick and 
 when the domestic finance be low to lock he up in his studio and 
 tell he he should not   come out until he have paint half a dozen of 
 his daub . she have a good deal of showy beauty . she would then go 
 forth , and , her beauty help , she would make certain people take the 
 picture . it help she at last to make an English lord run away with 
 she . at the time I speak of she have quite disappear . Mrs. Light 
 be then a very handsome girl , though by no mean so handsome as 
 her daughter have now become . Mr. Light be an american consul , newly 
 appoint at one of the adriatic port . he be a mild , fair - whisker 
 young man , with some little property , and my impression be that he have 
 get into bad company at home , and that his family procure he his place 
 to keep he out of harm 's way . he come up to Rome on a holiday , fall 
 in love with Miss Savage , and marry she on the spot . he have not be 
 marry three year when he be drown in the Adriatic , no one ever 
 know how . the young widow come back to Rome , to her father , and here 
 shortly afterwards , in the shadow of Saint Peter 's , her little girl be 
 bear . it might have be suppose that Mrs. Light would marry again , 
 and I know she have opportunity . but she overreach herself . she 
 would take nothing less than a title and a fortune , and they be not 
 forthcoming . she be admire and very fond of admiration ; very vain , 
 very worldly , very silly . she remain a pretty widow , with a surprising 
 variety of bonnet and a dozen man always in her train . Giacosa date 
 from this period . he call himself a Roman , but I have an impression he 
 come up from Ancona with she . he be l'ami de la maison . he use to hold 
 her bouquet , clean her glove   I be tell , run her errand , get she 
 opera - box , and fight her battle with the shopkeeper . for this he 
 need courage , for she be smother in debt . she at last leave Rome 
 to escape her creditor . many of they must remember she still , but she 
 seem now to have money to satisfy they . she leave her poor old father 
 here alone - helpless , infirm and unable to work . a subscription be 
 shortly afterwards take up among the foreigner , and he be send 
 back to America , where , as I afterwards hear , he die in some sort of 
 asylum . from time to time , for several year , I hear vaguely of Mrs. 
 Light as a wandering beauty at french and german watering - place . once 
 come a rumor that she be go to make a grand marriage in England ; 
 then we hear that the gentleman have think well of it and leave 
 she to keep afloat as she could . she be a terribly scatter - brain 
 creature . she pretend to be a great lady , but I consider that 
 old Filomena , my washer - woman , be in essential a great one . but 
 certainly , after all , she have be fortunate . she embark at last on 
 a lawsuit about some property , with her husband 's family , and go to 
 America to attend to it . she come back triumphant , with a long purse . 
 she reappear in Italy , and establish herself for a while in Venice . 
 then she come to Florence , where she spend a couple of year and where 
 I see she . last year she pass down to Naples , which I should have say 
 be just the place for she , and this winter she have lay siege to Rome . 
 she seem very prosperous . she have take a floor in the Palazzo F - - , 
 she keep her carriage , and Christina and she , between they , must have 
 a pretty milliner 's bill . Giacosa have turn up again , look as if he 
 have be keep on ice at Ancona , for her return . " 

 " what sort of education , " Rowland ask , " do you imagine the mother 's 
 adventure to have be for the daughter ? " 

 " a strange school ! but Mrs. Light tell I , in Florence , that she have 
 give her child the education of a princess . in other word , I suppose , 
 she speak three or four language , and have read several hundred french 
 novel . Christina , I suspect , be very clever . when I see she , I be 
 amazed at her beauty , and , certainly , if there be any truth in face , 
 she ought to have the soul of an angel . perhaps she have . I do not   judge 
 she ; she be an extraordinary young person . she have be tell twenty 
 time a day by her mother , since she be five year old , that she be a 
 beauty of beauty , that her face be her fortune , and that , if she play 
 her card , she may marry a duke . if she have not be fatally corrupt , 
 she be a very superior girl . my own impression be that she be a mixture 
 of good and bad , of ambition and indifference . Mrs. Light , have fail 
 to make her own fortune in matrimony , have transfer her hope to her 
 daughter , and nurse they till they have become a kind of monomania . she 
 have a hobby , which she rid in secret ; but some day she will let you 
 see it . I ' m sure that if you go in some evening unannounced , you will 
 find she scan the tea - leaf in her cup , or tell her daughter 's 
 fortune with a greasy pack of card , preserve for the purpose . she 
 promise she a prince - a reign prince . but if Mrs. Light be silly , 
 she be shrewd , too , and , lest consideration of state should deny 
 her prince the luxury of a love - match , she keep on hand a few common 
 mortal . at the bad she would take a duke , an english lord , or even a 
 young American with a proper number of million . the poor woman must be 
 rather uncomfortable . she be always build castle and knock they 
 down again - always cast her net and pull they in . if her 
 daughter be less of a beauty , her transparent ambition would be very 
 ridiculous ; but there be something in the girl , as one look at she , 
 that seem to make it very possible she be mark out for one of those 
 wonderful romantic fortune that history now and then relate . ' who , 
 after all , be the Empress of the French ? ' Mrs. Light be forever say . 
 ' and beside Christina the Empress be a dowdy ! ' " 

 " and what do Christina say ? " 

 " she make no scruple , as you know , of say that her mother be a fool . 
 what she think , heaven know . I suspect that , practically , she do not 
 commit herself . she be excessively proud , and think herself good enough 
 to occupy the high station in the world ; but she know that her 
 mother talk nonsense , and that even a beautiful girl may look awkward 
 in make unsuccessful advance . so she remain superbly indifferent , 
 and let her mother take the risk . if the prince be secure , so much 
 the well ; if he be not , she need never confess to herself that even a 
 prince have slight she . " 

 " your report be as solid , " Rowland say to Madame Grandoni , thank 
 she , " as if it have be prepare for the Academy of Sciences ; " and he 
 congratulate himself on have listen to it when , a couple of day 
 later , Mrs. Light and her daughter , attend by the Cavaliere and the 
 poodle , come to his room to look at Roderick 's statue . it be more 
 comfortable to know just with whom he be deal . 

 Mrs. Light be prodigiously gracious , and shower down compliment not 
 only on the statue , but on all his possession . " upon my word , " she 
 say , " you man know how to make yourself comfortable . if one of we 
 poor woman have half as many easy - chair and knick - knack , we should be 
 famously abuse . it be really selfish to be live all alone in such a 
 place as this . Cavaliere , how should you like this suite of room and a 
 fortune to fill they with picture and statue ? Christina , love , look at 
 that mosaic table . Mr. Mallet , I could almost beg it from you . yes , 
 that Eve be certainly very fine . we need not   be ashamed of such a 
 great - grandmother as that . if she be really such a beautiful woman , 
 it account for the good look of some of we . where be Mr. what 
 be - his - name , the young sculptor ? why be not   he here to be compliment ? " 

 Christina have remain but for a moment in the chair which Rowland have 
 place for she , have give but a cursory glance at the statue , and 
 then , leave her place , have begin to wander round the room - look at 
 herself in the mirror , touch the ornament and curiosity , glance 
 at the book and print . Rowland 's sitting - room be encumber with 
 bric - a - brac , and she find plenty of occupation . Rowland presently 
 join she , and point out some of the object he most value . 

 " it be an odd jumble , " she say frankly . " some thing be very 
 pretty - some be very ugly . but I like ugly thing , when they have a 
 certain look . prettiness be terribly vulgar nowadays , and it be not 
 every one that know just the sort of ugliness that have chic . but chic 
 be get dreadfully common too . there be a hint of it even in Madame 
 Baldi 's bonnet . I like look at people 's thing , " she add in a 
 moment , turn to Rowland and rest her eye on he . " it help you to 
 find out their character . " 

 " be I to suppose , " ask Rowland , smile , " that you have arrive at any 
 conclusion as to mine ? " 

 " I be rather muddle ; you have too many thing ; one seem to contradict 
 another . you be very artistic and yet you be very prosaic ; you have 
 what be call a ' catholic ' taste and yet you be full of obstinate 
 little prejudice and habit of thought , which , if I know you , I should 
 find very tiresome . I do not   think I like you . " 

 " you make a great mistake , " laugh Rowland ; " I assure you I be very 
 amiable . " 

 " yes , I be probably wrong , and if I know you , I should find out I be 
 wrong , and that would irritate I and make I dislike you more . so you 
 see we be necessary enemy . " 

 " no , I do not   dislike you . " 

 " bad and bad ; for you certainly will not like I . " 

 " you be very discouraging . " 

 " I be fond of face the truth , though some day you will deny that . 
 where be that queer friend of your ? " 

 " you mean Mr. Hudson . he be represent by these beautiful work . " 

 Miss Light look for some moment at Roderick 's statue . " yes , " she 
 say , " they be not so silly as most of the thing we have see . they 
 have no chic , and yet they be beautiful . " 

 " you describe they perfectly , " say Rowland . " they be beautiful , and 
 yet they have no chic . that be it ! " 

 " if he will promise to put none into my bust , I have a mind to let he 
 make it . a request make in those term deserve to be grant . " 

 " in what term ? " 

 " do not   you hear he ? ' Mademoiselle , you almost satisfy my conception 
 of the beautiful . I must model your bust . ' that almost should be 
 reward . he be like I ; he like to face the truth . I think we should 
 get on together . " 

 the Cavaliere approach Rowland , to express the pleasure he have derive 
 from his beautiful " collection . " his smile be exquisitely bland , his 
 accent appealing , caressing , insinuate . but he give Rowland an odd 
 sense of look at a little waxen image , adjust to perform certain 
 gesture and emit certain sound . it have once contain a soul , but the 
 soul have leak out . nevertheless , Rowland reflect , there be more 
 profitless thing than mere sound and gesture , in a consummate Italian . 
 and the Cavaliere , too , have soul enough leave to desire to speak a few 
 word on his own account , and call Rowland 's attention to the fact that 
 he be not , after all , a hire cicerone , but an ancient roman gentleman . 
 Rowland feel sorry for he ; he hardly know why . he assure he in a 
 friendly fashion that he must come again ; that his house be always at 
 his service . the Cavaliere bow down to the ground . " you do I too much 
 honor , " he murmur . " if you will allow I - it be not impossible ! " 

 Mrs. Light , meanwhile , have prepare to depart . " if you be not afraid to 
 come and see two quiet little woman , we shall be most happy ! " she say . 
 " we have no statue nor picture - we have nothing but each other . eh , 
 darling ? " 

 " I beg your pardon , " say Christina . 

 " oh , and the Cavaliere , " add her mother . 

 " the poodle , please ! " cry the young girl . 

 Rowland glance at the Cavaliere ; he be smile more blandly than ever . 

 a few day later Rowland present himself , as civility demand , at 
 Mrs. Light 's door . he find she live in one of the stately house of 
 the Via dell ' Angelo Custode , and , rather to his surprise , be tell she 
 be at home . he pass through half a dozen room and be usher 
 into an immense saloon , at one end of which sit the mistress of the 
 establishment , with a piece of embroidery . she receive he very 
 graciously , and then , point mysteriously to a large screen which be 
 unfold across the embrasure of one of the deep window , " I be keep 
 guard ! " she say . Rowland look interrogative ; whereupon she beckon 
 he forward and motion he to look behind the screen . he obey , and 
 for some moment stand gaze . Roderick , with his back turn , stand 
 before an extemporize pedestal , ardently shape a formless mass 
 of clay . before he sit Christina Light , in a white dress , with her 
 shoulder bare , her magnificent hair twist into a classic coil , and 
 her head admirably poise . Meeting Rowland 's gaze , she smile a little , 
 only with her deep gray eye , without move . she look divinely 
 beautiful . 






 CHAPTER V. Christina 

 the brilliant roman winter come round again , and Rowland enjoy it , 
 in a certain way , more deeply than before . he grow at last to feel that 
 sense of equal possession , of intellectual nearness , which it belong 
 to the peculiar magic of the ancient city to infuse into mind of a 
 cast that she never would have produce . he become passionately , 
 unreasoningly fond of all roman sight and sensation , and to breathe 
 the roman atmosphere begin to seem a needful condition of be . he 
 could not have define and explain the nature of his great love , nor 
 have make up the sum of it by the addition of his calculable pleasure . 
 it be a large , vague , idle , half - profitless emotion , of which perhaps 
 the most pertinent thing that may be say be that it enforce a sort of 
 oppressive reconciliation to the present , the actual , the sensuous - to 
 life on the term that there offer themselves . it be perhaps for this 
 very reason that , in spite of the charm which Rome fling over 
 one 's mood , there run through Rowland 's meditation an undertone of 
 melancholy , natural enough in a mind which find its horizon insidiously 
 limit to the finite , even in very picturesque form . whether it be one 
 that tacitly concede to the Roman Church the monopoly of a guarantee 
 of immortality , so that if one be indispose to bargain with she for 
 the precious gift , one must do without it altogether ; or whether in an 
 atmosphere so heavily weight with echo and memory one grow 
 to believe that there be nothing in one 's consciousness that be not 
 foredoom to moulder and crumble and become dust for the foot , and 
 possible malaria for the lung , of future generation - the fact at least 
 remain that one part half - willingly with one 's hope in Rome , and 
 miss they only under some very exceptional stress of circumstance . for 
 this reason one may perhaps say that there be no other place in which 
 one 's daily temper have such a mellow serenity , and none , at the same 
 time , in which acute attack of depression be more intolerable . Rowland 
 find , in fact , a perfect response to his prevision that to live in Rome 
 be an education to one 's sens and one 's imagination , but he sometimes 
 wonder whether this be not a questionable gain in case of one 's not 
 be prepare to live wholly by one 's imagination and one 's sens . the 
 tranquil profundity of his daily satisfaction seem sometimes to 
 turn , by a mysterious inward impulse , and face itself with questioning , 
 admonish , threaten eye . " but afterwards ... ? " it seem to 
 ask , with a long reverberation ; and he could give no answer but a shy 
 affirmation that there be no such thing as afterwards , and a hope , 
 divide against itself , that his actual way of life would last forever . 
 he often feel heavy - hearted ; he be sombre without know why ; there 
 be no visible cloud in his heaven , but there be cloud - shadow on 
 his mood . shadow project , they often be , without his know it , by 
 an undue apprehension that thing after all might not go so ideally 
 well with Roderick . when he understand his anxiety it vex he , and he 
 rebuke himself for take thing unmanfully hard . if Roderick choose 
 to follow a crooked path , it be no fault of his ; he have give he , he 
 would continue to give he , all that he have offer he - friendship , 
 sympathy , advice . he have not undertake to provide he with unflagge 
 strength of purpose , nor to stand bondsman for unqualified success . 

 if Rowland feel his root strike and spread in the roman soil , 
 Roderick also surrender himself with renew abandon to the local 
 influence . More than once he declare to his companion that he mean 
 to live and die within the shadow of Saint Peter 's , and that he care 
 little if he never again draw breath in american air . " for a man of my 
 temperament , Rome be the only possible place , " he say ; " it be well to 
 recognize the fact early than late . so I shall never go home unless I be 
 absolutely forced . " 

 " what be your idea of ' force ' ? " ask Rowland , smile . " it seem to I 
 you have an excellent reason for go home some day or other . " 

 " ah , you mean my engagement ? " Roderick answer with unaverted eye . 
 " yes , I be distinctly engage , in Northampton , and impatiently wait 
 for ! " and he give a little sympathetic sigh . " to reconcile Northampton 
 and Rome be rather a problem . Mary have well come out here . even at the 
 bad I have no intention of give up Rome within six or eight year , 
 and an engagement of that duration would be rather absurd . " 

 " Miss Garland could hardly leave your mother , " Rowland observe . 

 " oh , of course my mother should come . I think I will suggest it in my 
 next letter . it will take she a year or two to make up her mind to it , 
 but if she consent it will brighten she up . it be too small a life , 
 over there , even for a timid old lady . it be hard to imagine , " he add , 
 " any change in Mary be a change for the well ; but I should like she 
 to take a look at the world and have her notion stretch a little . one 
 be never so good , I suppose , but that one can improve a little . " 

 " if you wish your mother and Miss Garland to come , " Rowland suggest , 
 " you have well go home and bring they . " 

 " oh , I can not   think of leave Europe , for many a day , " Roderick 
 answer . " at present it would quite break the charm . I be just 
 begin to profit , to get use to thing and take they naturally . I be 
 sure the sight of Northampton Main Street would permanently upset I . " 

 it be reassuring to hear that Roderick , in his own view , be but 
 " just begin " to spread his wing , and Rowland , if he have have 
 any foreboding , might have suffer they to be modify by this 
 declaration . this be the first time since their meeting at Geneva that 
 Roderick have mention Miss Garland 's name , but the ice be break , he 
 indulge for some time afterward in frequent allusion to his 
 betrothed , which always have an accent of scrupulous , of almost study , 
 consideration . an uninitiated observer , hear he , would have imagine 
 she to be a person of a certain age - possibly an affectionate maiden 
 aunt - who have once do he a kindness which he highly appreciate : 
 perhaps present he with a check for a thousand dollar . Rowland note 
 the difference between his present frankness and his reticence during 
 the first six month of his engagement , and sometimes wonder whether 
 it be not rather an anomaly that he should expatiate more largely as 
 the happy event recede . he have wonder over the whole matter , first 
 and last , in a great many different way , and look at it in all 
 possible light . there be something terribly hard to explain in the 
 fact of his have fall in love with his cousin . she be not , as 
 Rowland conceive she , the sort of girl he would have be likely to 
 fancy , and the operation of sentiment , in all case so mysterious , be 
 particularly so in this one . just why it be that Roderick should not 
 logically have fancy Miss Garland , his companion would have be at 
 loss to say , but I think the conviction have its root in an unformulated 
 comparison between himself and the accept suitor . Roderick and he be 
 as different as two man could be , and yet Roderick have take it into his 
 head to fall in love with a woman for whom he himself have be keep 
 in reserve , for year , a profoundly characteristic passion . that if he 
 choose to conceive a great notion of the merit of Roderick 's mistress , 
 the irregularity here be hardly Roderick 's , be a view of the case 
 to which poor Rowland do scanty justice . there be woman , he say 
 to himself , whom it be every one 's business to fall in love with a 
 little - woman beautiful , brilliant , artful , easily fascinating . Miss 
 Light , for instance , be one of these ; every man who speak to she do 
 so , if not in the language , at least with something of the agitation , 
 the divine tremor , of a lover . there be other woman - they might have 
 great beauty , they might have small ; perhaps they be generally to 
 be classify as plain - whose triumph in this line be rare , but 
 immutably permanent . such a one preeminently , be Mary Garland . upon 
 the doctrine of probability , it be unlikely that she have have an equal 
 charm for each of they , and be it not possible , therefore , that the 
 charm for Roderick have be simply the charm imagine , unquestioningly 
 accept : the general charm of youth , sympathy , kindness - of the present 
 feminine , in short - enhance indeed by several fine facial trait ? 
 the charm in this case for Rowland be - the charm ! - the mysterious , 
 individual , essential woman . there be an element in the charm , as his 
 companion see it , which Rowland be oblige to recognize , but which 
 he forbear to ponder ; the rather important attraction , namely , of 
 reciprocity . as to Miss Garland be in love with Roderick and become 
 charming thereby , this be a point with which his imagination venture 
 to take no liberty ; partly because it would have be indelicate , 
 and partly because it would have be vain . he content himself with 
 feel that the young girl be still as vivid an image in his memory as 
 she have be five day after he leave she , and with drift nearer and 
 near to the impression that at just that crisis any other girl would 
 have answer Roderick 's sentimental need as well . any other girl 
 indeed would do so still ! Roderick have confess as much to he at 
 Geneva , in say that he have be take at Baden the measure of his 
 susceptibility to female beauty . 

 his extraordinary success in model the bust of the beautiful Miss 
 Light be pertinent evidence of this amiable quality . she sit to he , 
 repeatedly , for a fortnight , and the work be rapidly finish . on one 
 of the last day Roderick ask Rowland to come and give his opinion as 
 to what be still want ; for the sitting have continue to take place 
 in Mrs. Light 's apartment , the studio be pronounce too damp for 
 the fair model . when Rowland present himself , Christina , still in 
 her white dress , with her shoulder bare , be stand before a mirror , 
 readjust her hair , the arrangement of which , on this occasion , have 
 apparently not meet the young sculptor 's approval . he stand beside she , 
 direct the operation with a peremptoriness of tone which seem 
 to Rowland to denote a considerable advance in intimacy . as Rowland 
 enter , Christina be lose patience . " do it yourself , then ! " she 
 cry , and with a rapid movement unloose the great coil of her tress 
 and let they fall over her shoulder . 

 they be magnificent , and with her perfect face divide their rippling 
 flow she look like some immaculate saint of legend be lead to 
 martyrdom . Rowland 's eye presumably betray his admiration , but she 
 own manifest no consciousness of it . if Christina be a coquette , as 
 the remarkable timeliness of this incident might have suggest , she be 
 not a superficial one . 

 " Hudson be a sculptor , " say Rowland , with warmth . " but if I be only a 
 painter ! " 

 " thank Heaven you be not ! " say Christina . " I be have quite enough of 
 this minute inspection of my charm . " 

 " my dear young man , hand off ! " cry Mrs. Light , come forward and 
 seize her daughter 's hair . " Christina , love , I be surprised . " 

 " be it indelicate ? " Christina ask . " I beg Mr. Mallet 's pardon . " Mrs. 
 Light gather up the dusky lock and let they fall through her finger , 
 glance at her visitor with a significant smile . Rowland have never 
 be in the East , but if he have attempt to make a sketch of an old 
 slave - merchant , call attention to the " point " of a circassian 
 beauty , he would have depict such a smile as Mrs. Light 's . " Mamma 's 
 not really shock , " add Christina in a moment , as if she have guess 
 her mother 's by - play . " she be only afraid that Mr. Hudson might have 
 injure my hair , and that , per consequenza , I should sell for less . " 

 " you unnatural child ! " cry mamma . " you deserve that I should make a 
 fright of you ! " and with half a dozen skillful pass she twist the 
 tress into a single picturesque braid , place high on the head , as a 
 kind of coronal . 

 " what do your mother do when she want to do you justice ? " Rowland 
 ask , observe the admirable line of the young girl 's neck . 

 " I do her justice when I say she say very improper thing . what be one 
 to do with such a thorn in the flesh ? " Mrs. Light demand . 

 " think of it at your leisure , Mr. Mallet , " say Christina , " and when you 
 ' ve   discover something , let we hear . but I must tell you that I shall 
 not willingly believe in any remedy of your , for you have something in 
 your physiognomy that particularly provoke I to make the remark that 
 my mother so sincerely deplore . I notice it the first time I see you . 
 I think it be because your face be so broad . for some reason or other , 
 broad face exasperate I ; they fill I with a kind of rabbia . last 
 summer , at Carlsbad , there be an austrian count , with enormous estate 
 and some great office at court . he be very attentive - seriously so ; he 
 be really very far go . Cela ne tenait qu ' a moi ! but I could not ; he 
 be impossible ! he must have measure , from ear to ear , at least a yard 
 and a half . and he be blond , too , which make it bad - as blond as 
 Stenterello ; pure fleece ! so I say to he frankly , ' many thank , Herr 
 Graf ; your uniform be magnificent , but your face be too fat . ' " 

 " I be afraid that mine also , " say Rowland , with a smile , ' seem just 
 now to have assume an unpardonable latitude . " 

 " oh , I take it you know very well that we be look for a husband , 
 and that none but tremendous swell need apply . surely , before these 
 gentleman , mamma , I may speak freely ; they be disintereste . Mr. Mallet 
 will not   do , because , though he be rich , he be not rich enough . Mamma make 
 that discovery the day after we go to see you , move to it by the 
 promising look of your furniture . I hope she be right , eh ? unless you 
 have million , you know , you have no chance . " 

 " I feel like a beggar , " say Rowland . 

 " oh , some well girl than I will decide some day , after mature 
 reflection , that on the whole you have enough . Mr. Hudson , of course , be 
 nowhere ; he have nothing but his genius and his beaux yeux . " 

 Roderick have stand look at Christina intently while she deliver 
 herself , softly and slowly , of this surprising nonsense . when she have 
 finish , she turn and look at he ; their eye meet , and he blush 
 a little . " let I model you , and he who can may marry you ! " he say , 
 abruptly . 

 Mrs. Light , while her daughter talk , have be add a few touch to 
 her coiffure . " she be not so silly as you might suppose , " she say to 
 Rowland , with dignity . " if you will give I your arm , we will go and 
 look at the bust . " 

 " do that represent a silly girl ? " Christina demand , when they stand 
 before it . 

 Rowland transfer his glance several time from the portrait to the 
 original . " it represent a young lady , " he say , " whom I should not 
 pretend to judge off - hand . " 

 " she may be a fool , but you be not sure . many thank ! you have see I 
 half a dozen time . you be either very slow or I be very deep . " 

 " I be certainly slow , " say Rowland . " I do not   expect to make up my mind 
 about you within six month . " 

 " I give you six month if you will promise then a perfectly frank 
 opinion . mind , I shall not forget ; I shall insist upon it . " 

 " well , though I be slow , I be tolerably brave , " say Rowland . " we shall 
 see . " 

 Christina look at the bust with a sigh . " I be afraid , after all , " she 
 say , " that there be very little wisdom in it save what the artist have 
 put there . Mr. Hudson look particularly wise while he be work ; he 
 scowl and growl , but he never open his mouth . it be very kind of 
 he not to have represent I gap . " 

 " if I have talk a lot of stuff to you , " say Roderick , roundly , " the 
 thing would not have be a tenth so good . " 

 " be it good , after all ? Mr. Mallet be a famous connoisseur ; have he not 
 come here to pronounce ? " 

 the bust be in fact a very happy performance , and Roderick have rise to 
 the level of his subject . it be thoroughly a portrait , and not a vague 
 fantasy execute on a graceful theme , as the bust of pretty woman , in 
 modern sculpture , be apt to be . the resemblance be deep and vivid ; 
 there be extreme fidelity of detail and yet a noble simplicity . 
 one could say of the head that , without idealization , it be a 
 representation of ideal beauty . Rowland , however , as we know , be not 
 fond of explode into superlative , and , after examine the piece , 
 content himself with suggest two or three alteration of detail . 

 " Nay , how can you be so cruel ? " demand Mrs. Light , with soft 
 reproachfulness . " it be surely a wonderful thing ! " 

 " Rowland know it be a wonderful thing , " say Roderick , smile . " I can 
 tell that by his face . the other day I finish something he think 
 bad , and he look very differently from this . " 

 " how do Mr. Mallet look ? " ask Christina . 

 " my dear Rowland , " say Roderick , " I be speak of my seated woman . you 
 look as if you have on a pair of tight boot . " 

 " ah , my child , you will not understand that ! " cry Mrs. Light . " you 
 never yet have a pair that be small enough . " 

 " it be a pity , Mr. Hudson , " say Christina , gravely , " that you could 
 not have introduce my foot into the bust . but we can hang a pair of 
 slipper round the neck ! " 

 " I nevertheless like your statue , Roderick , " Rowland rejoin , " well 
 than your joke . this be admirable . Miss Light , you may be proud ! " 

 " thank you , Mr. Mallet , for the permission , " rejoin the young girl . 

 " I be die to see it in the marble , with a red velvet screen behind 
 it , " say Mrs. Light . 

 " place there under the Sassoferrato ! " Christina go on . " I hope you 
 keep well in mind , Mr. Hudson , that you have not a grain of property in 
 your work , and that if mamma choose , she may have it photograph and 
 the copy sell in the Piazza di Spagna , at five franc apiece , without 
 your have a sou of the profit . " 

 " amen ! " say Roderick . " it be so nominate in the bond . my profit be 
 here ! " and he tap his forehead . 

 " it would be pretty if you say here ! " and Christina touch she 
 heart . 

 " my precious child , how you do run on ! " murmur Mrs. Light . 

 " it be Mr. Mallet , " the young girl answer . " I can not   talk a word of 
 sense so long as he be in the room . I do not   say that to make you go , " 
 she add , " I say it simply to justify myself . " 

 Rowland bow in silence . Roderick declare that he must get at work and 
 request Christina to take her usual position , and Mrs. Light propose 
 to her visitor that they should adjourn to her boudoir . this be a 
 small room , hardly more spacious than an alcove , open out of the 
 drawing - room and have no other issue . here , as they enter , on a 
 divan near the door , Rowland perceive the Cavaliere Giacosa , with his 
 arm fold , his head drop upon his breast , and his eye close . 

 " sleep at his post ! " say Rowland with a kindly laugh . 

 " that be a punishable offense , " rejoin Mrs. Light , sharply . she be on 
 the point of call he , in the same tone , when he suddenly open his 
 eye , star a moment , and then rise with a smile and a bow . 

 " excuse I , dear lady , " he say , " I be overcome by the - the great 
 heat . " 

 " Nonsense , Cavaliere ! " cry the lady , " you know we be perish here 
 with the cold ! you have well go and cool yourself in one of the other 
 room . " 

 " I obey , dear lady , " say the Cavaliere ; and with another smile and bow 
 to Rowland he depart , walk very discreetly on his toe . Rowland 
 out - stay he but a short time , for he be not fond of Mrs. Light , 
 and he find nothing very inspiring in her frank intimation that if he 
 choose , he might become a favorite . he be disgusted with himself for 
 please she ; he confound his fatal urbanity . in the court - yard of the 
 palace he overtake the Cavaliere , who have stop at the porter 's lodge 
 to say a word to his little girl . she be a young lady of very tender 
 year and she wear a very dirty pinafore . he have take she up in his 
 arm and be sing an infantine rhyme to she , and she be star at 
 he with big , soft roman eye . on see Rowland he put she down with 
 a kiss , and step forward with a conscious grin , an unresentful 
 admission that he be sensitive both to chubbiness and ridicule . 
 Rowland begin to pity he again ; he have take his dismissal from the 
 drawing - room so meekly . 

 " you do not   keep your promise , " say Rowland , " to come and see I . do not 
 forget it . I want you to tell I about Rome thirty year ago . " 

 " thirty year ago ? ah , dear sir , Rome be Rome still ; a place where 
 strange thing happen ! but happy thing too , since I have your renew 
 permission to call . you do I too much honor . be it in the morning or in 
 the evening that I should least intrude ? " 

 " take your own time , Cavaliere ; only come , sometime . I depend upon you , " 
 say Rowland . 

 the Cavaliere thank he with an humble obeisance . to the Cavaliere , 
 too , he feel that he be , in roman phrase , sympathetic , but the idea of 
 please this extremely reduce gentleman be not disagreeable to he . 

 Miss Light 's bust stand for a while on exhibition in Roderick 's studio , 
 and half the foreign colony come to see it . with the completion of his 
 work , however , Roderick 's visit at the Palazzo F - - by no mean come 
 to an end . he spend half his time in Mrs. Light 's drawing - room , and 
 begin to be talk about as " attentive " to Christina . the success of the 
 bust restore his equanimity , and in the garrulity of his good - humor he 
 suffer Rowland to see that she be just now the object uppermost in 
 his thought . Rowland , when they talk of she , be rather listener 
 than speaker ; partly because Roderick 's own tone be so resonant and 
 exultant , and partly because , when his companion laugh at he for 
 have call she unsafe , he be too perplexed to defend himself . 
 the impression remain that she be unsafe ; that she be a complex , 
 willful , passionate creature , who might easily engulf a too confiding 
 spirit in the eddy of her capricious temper . and yet he strongly feel 
 her charm ; the eddy have a strange fascination ! Roderick , in the glow 
 of that renew admiration provoke by the fix attention of portrayal , 
 be never weary of descant on the extraordinary perfection of her 
 beauty . 

 " I have no idea of it , " he say , " till I begin to look at she with an eye 
 to reproduce line for line and curve for curve . her face be the most 
 exquisite piece of modeling that ever come from creative hand . not 
 a line without meaning , not a hair 's breadth that be not admirably 
 finish . and then her mouth ! it be as if a pair of lip have be shape 
 to utter pure truth without do it dishonor ! " later , after he have be 
 work for a week , he declare if Miss Light be inordinately plain , 
 she would still be the most fascinating of woman . " I ' ve   quite forget 
 her beauty , " he say , " or rather I have cease to perceive it as 
 something distinct and define , something independent of the rest of 
 she . she be all one , and all consummately interesting ! " 

 " what do she do - what do she say , that be so remarkable ? " Rowland 
 have ask . 

 " Say ? sometimes nothing - sometimes everything . she be never the same . 
 sometimes she walk in and take her place without a word , without a 
 smile , gravely , stiffly , as if it be an awful bore . she hardly look 
 at I , and she walk away without even glance at my work . on other 
 day she laugh and chatter and ask endless question , and pour out 
 the most irresistible nonsense . she be a creature of mood ; you can not 
 count upon she ; she keep observation on the stretch . and then , bless 
 you , she have see such a lot ! her talk be full of the oddest allusion ! " 

 " it be altogether a very singular type of young lady , " say Rowland , 
 after the visit which I have relate at length . " it may be a charm , but 
 it be certainly not the orthodox charm of marriageable maidenhood , the 
 charm of shrink innocence and soft docility . our american girl 
 be accuse of be more knowing than any other , and Miss Light be 
 nominally an American . but it have take twenty year of Europe to make 
 she what she be . the first time we see she , I remember you call she a 
 product of the old world , and certainly you be not far wrong . " 

 " ah , she have an atmosphere , " say Roderick , in the tone of high 
 appreciation . 

 " young unmarried woman , " Rowland answer , ' should be careful not to 
 have too much ! " 

 " ah , you do not   forgive she , " cry his companion , " for hit you so 
 hard ! a man ought to be flatter at such a girl as that take so much 
 notice of he . " 

 " a man be never flatter at a woman 's not like he . " 

 " be you sure she do not   like you ? that be to the credit of your 
 humility . a fellow of more vanity might , on the evidence , persuade 
 himself that he be in favor . " 

 " he would have also , " say Rowland , laugh , " to be a fellow of 
 remarkable ingenuity ! " he ask himself privately how the deuce roderick 
 reconcile it to his conscience to think so much more of the girl he 
 be not engage to than of the girl he be . but it amount almost to 
 arrogance , you may say , in poor Rowland to pretend to know how often 
 roderick think of Miss Garland . he wonder gloomily , at any rate , 
 whether for man of his companion 's large , easy power , there be not 
 a large moral law than for narrow mediocrity like himself , who , 
 yield Nature a meagre interest on her investment   such as it be , 
 have no reason to expect from she this affectionate laxity as to their 
 account . be it not a part of the eternal fitness of thing that 
 Roderick , while rhapsodize about Miss Light , should have it at his 
 command to look at you with eye of the most guileless and unclouded 
 blue , and to shake off your musty imputation by a toss of his 
 picturesque brown lock ? or have he , in fact , no conscience to speak of ? 
 happy fellow , either way ! 

 our friend Gloriani come , among other , to congratulate Roderick on 
 his model and what he have make of she . " devilish pretty , through and 
 through ! " he say as he look at the bust . " capital handling of the 
 neck and throat ; lovely work on the nose . you be a detestably lucky 
 fellow , my boy ! but you ought not to have squander such material on a 
 simple bust ; you should have make a great imaginative figure . if I could 
 only have get hold of she , I would have put she into a statue in spite 
 of herself . what a pity she be not a ragged Trasteverine , whom we might 
 have for a franc an hour ! I have be carry about in my head for 
 year a delicious design for a fantastic figure , but it have always 
 stay there for want of a tolerable model . I have see intimation of 
 the type , but Miss Light be the perfection of it . as soon as I see she I 
 say to myself , ' by Jove , there be my statue in the flesh ! ' " 

 " what be your subject ? " ask Roderick . 

 " do not   take it ill , " say Gloriani . " you know I ' m the very deuce for 
 observation . she would make a magnificent Herodias ! " 

 if Roderick have take it ill   which be unlikely , for we know he think 
 Gloriani an ass , and expect little of his wisdom , he might have be 
 soothe by the candid incense of Sam Singleton , who come and sit for an 
 hour in a sort of mental prostration before both bust and artist . 
 but Roderick 's attitude before his patient little devotee be one 
 of undisguise though friendly amusement ; and , indeed , judge from a 
 strictly plastic point of view , the poor fellow 's diminutive stature , 
 his enormous mouth , his pimple and his yellow hair be sufficiently 
 ridiculous . " Nay , do not   envy our friend , " Rowland say to Singleton 
 afterwards , on his expressing , with a little groan of depreciation of 
 his own paltry performance , his sense of the brilliancy of Roderick 's 
 talent . " you sail near the shore , but you sail in smoother water . be 
 content with what you be and paint I another picture . " 

 " oh , I do not   envy Hudson anything he possess , " Singleton say , 
 " because to take anything away would spoil his beautiful completeness . 
 ' complete , ' that be what he be ; while we little cleverness be like 
 half - ripen plum , only good eat on the side that have have a glimpse 
 of the sun . nature have make he so , and fortune confess to it ! he be 
 the handsome fellow in Rome , he have the most genius , and , as a matter 
 of course , the most beautiful girl in the world come and offer to be 
 his model . if that be not completeness , where shall we find it ? " 

 one morning , go into Roderick 's studio , Rowland find the young 
 sculptor entertain Miss Blanchard - if this be not too flattering a 
 description of his gracefully passive tolerance of her presence . he have 
 never like she and never climb into her sky - studio to observe she 
 wonderful manipulation of petal . he have once quote Tennyson against 
 she : - 

 " and be there any moral shut 
 within the bosom of the rose ? " 

 " in all Miss Blanchard 's rose you may be sure there be a moral , " he have 
 say . " you can see it stick out its head , and , if you go to smell the 
 flower , it scratch your nose . " but on this occasion she have come 
 with a propitiatory gift - introduce her friend Mr. Leavenworth . Mr. 
 Leavenworth be a tall , expansive , bland gentleman , with a carefully 
 brush whisker and a spacious , fair , well - favor face , which seem , 
 somehow , to have more room in it than be occupy by a smile of 
 superior benevolence , so that   with his smooth , white forehead   it bear 
 a certain resemblance to a large parlor with a very florid carpet , but 
 no picture on the wall . he hold his head high , talk sonorously , and 
 tell Roderick , within five minute , that he be a widower , travel 
 to distract his mind , and that he have lately retire from the 
 proprietorship of large mine of borax in Pennsylvania . Roderick 
 suppose at first that , in his character of depressed widower , he have 
 come to order a tombstone ; but observe then the extreme blandness 
 of his address to Miss Blanchard , he credit he with a judicious 
 prevision that by the time the tombstone be complete , a monument 
 of his inconsolability might have become an anachronism . but Mr. 
 Leavenworth be disposed to order something . 

 " you will find I eager to patronize our indigenous talent , " he say . " I 
 be put up a little shanty in my native town , and I propose to make 
 a rather nice thing of it . it have be the will of Heaven to plunge I 
 into mourning ; but art have consolation ! in a tasteful home , surround 
 by the memorial of my wandering , I hope to take more cheerful view . 
 I order in Paris the complete appurtenance of a dining - room . do you 
 think you could do something for my library ? it be to be fill 
 with well - select author , and I think a pure white image in this 
 style , " - point to one of Roderick 's statue , - ' stand out against 
 the morocco and gilt , would have a noble effect . the subject I have 
 already fix upon . I desire an allegorical representation of Culture . 
 do you think , now , " ask Mr. Leavenworth , encouragingly , " you could 
 rise to the conception ? " 

 " a most interesting subject for a truly serious mind , " remark Miss 
 Blanchard . 

 Roderick look at she a moment , and then - " the simple thing I 
 could do , " he say , " would be to make a full - length portrait of Miss 
 Blanchard . I could give she a scroll in her hand , and that would do for 
 the allegory . " 

 Miss Blanchard color ; the compliment might be ironical ; and there 
 be ever afterwards a reflection of her uncertainty in her opinion of 
 Roderick 's genius . Mr. Leavenworth respond that with all deference to 
 Miss Blanchard 's beauty , he desire something colder , more monumental , 
 more impersonal . " if I be to be the happy possessor of a likeness of 
 Miss Blanchard , " he add , " I should prefer to have it in no factitious 
 disguise ! " 

 Roderick consent to entertain the proposal , and while they be 
 discuss it , Rowland have a little talk with the fair artist . " who be 
 your friend ? " he ask . 

 " a very worthy man . the architect of his own fortune - which be 
 magnificent . one of nature 's gentleman ! " 

 this be a trifle sententious , and Rowland turn to the bust of Miss 
 Light . like every one else in Rome , by this time , Miss Blanchard have 
 an opinion on the young girl 's beauty , and , in her own fashion , she 
 express it epigrammatically . " she look half like a Madonna and half 
 like a ballerina , " she say . 

 Mr. Leavenworth and Roderick come to an understanding , and the young 
 sculptor good - naturedly promise to do his good to rise to his patron 's 
 conception . " his conception be hang ! " Roderick exclaim , after he have 
 depart . " his conception be sit on a globe with a pen in her ear 
 and a photographic album in her hand . I shall have to conceive , myself . 
 for the money , I ought to be able to ! " 

 Mrs. Light , meanwhile , have fairly establish herself in roman society . 
 " Heaven know how ! " Madame Grandoni say to Rowland , who have mention 
 to her several evidence of the lady 's prosperity . " in such a case 
 there be nothing like audacity . a month ago she know no one but her 
 washerwoman , and now I be tell that the card of roman princess be to 
 be see on her table . she be evidently determined to play a great 
 part , and she have the wit to perceive that , to make remunerative 
 acquaintance , you must seem yourself to be worth know . you must 
 have strike room and a confusing variety of dress , and give good 
 dinner , and so forth . she be spend a lot of money , and you will see 
 that in two or three week she will take upon herself to open the season 
 by give a magnificent ball . of course it be Christina 's beauty that 
 float she . People go to see she because they be curious . " 

 " and they go again because they be charm , " say Rowland . " Miss 
 Christina be a very remarkable young lady . " 

 " oh , I know it well ; I have occasion to say so to myself the other day . 
 she come to see I , of her own free will , and for an hour she be deeply 
 interesting . I think she be an actress , but she believe in her part 
 while she be play it . she take it into her head the other day to 
 believe that she be very unhappy , and she sit there , where you be 
 sit , and tell I a tale of her misery which bring tear into my 
 eye . she cry , herself , profusely , and as naturally as possible . she 
 say she be weary of life and that she know no one but I she could 
 speak frankly to . she must speak , or she would go mad . she sob as if 
 her heart would break . I assure you it be well for you susceptible young 
 man that you do not   see she when she sob . she say , in so many word , 
 that her mother be an immoral woman . Heaven know what she mean . she 
 mean , I suppose , that she make debt that she know she can not   pay . she 
 say the life they lead be horrible ; that it be monstrous a poor girl 
 should be drag about the world to be sell to the high bidder . she 
 be mean for well thing ; she could be perfectly happy in poverty . it 
 be not money she want . I might not believe she , but she really care 
 for serious thing . sometimes she think of take poison ! " 

 " what do you say to that ? " 

 " I recommend she , " say Madame Grandoni , " to come and see I 
 instead . I would help she about as much , and I be , on the whole , less 
 unpleasant . of course I could help she only by let her talk herself 
 out and kiss she and pat her beautiful hand and tell she to 
 be patient and she would be happy yet . about once in two month I expect 
 she to reappear , on the same errand , and meanwhile to quite forget my 
 existence . I believe I melt down to the point of tell she that 
 I would find some good , quiet , affectionate husband for she ; but she 
 declare , almost with fury , that she be sick unto death of husband , 
 and beg I would never again mention the word . and , in fact , it be a 
 rash offer ; for I be sure that there be not a man of the kind that might 
 really make a woman happy but would be afraid to marry mademoiselle . 
 look at in that way she be certainly very much to be pity , and 
 indeed , altogether , though I do not   think she either mean all she say 
 or , by a great deal , say all that she mean . I feel very sorry for 
 she . " 

 Rowland meet the two lady , about this time , at several entertainment , 
 and look at Christina with a kind of distant attendrissement . he 
 imagine more than once that there have be a passionate scene between 
 they about come out , and wonder what argument Mrs. Light have find 
 effective . but Christina 's face tell no tale , and she move about , 
 beautiful and silent , look absently over people 's head , barely 
 heed the man who press about she , and suggest somehow that the 
 soul of a world - weary mortal have find its way into the bloom body 
 of a goddess . " where in the world have Miss Light be before she be 
 twenty , " observer ask , " to have leave all her illusion behind ? " and 
 the general verdict be , that though she be incomparably beautiful , she 
 be intolerably proud . young lady to whom the former distinction be 
 not concede be free to reflect that she be " not at all like . " 

 it would have be difficult to guess , however , how they reconcile this 
 conviction with a variety of conflict evidence , and , in especial , 
 with the spectacle of Roderick 's inveterate devotion . all Rome might 
 behold that he , at least , " like " Christina Light . wherever she 
 appear he be either await she or immediately follow she . he be 
 perpetually at her side , try , apparently , to preserve the thread of 
 a disconnected talk , the fate of which be , to judge by her face , 
 profoundly immaterial to the young lady . People in general smile at the 
 radiant good faith of the handsome young sculptor , and ask each other 
 whether he really suppose that beauty of that quality be mean to 
 we d with poor artist . but although Christina 's deportment , as I have 
 say , be one of superb inexpressiveness , Rowland have derive from 
 roderick no suspicion that he suffer from snubbing , and he be 
 therefore surprised at an incident which befall one evening at a large 
 musical party . Roderick , as usual , be in the field , and , on the lady 
 take the chair which have be arrange for they , he immediately 
 place himself beside Christina . as most of the gentleman be stand , 
 his position make he as conspicuous as Hamlet at Ophelia 's foot , at the 
 play . Rowland be lean , somewhat apart , against the chimney - piece . 
 there be a long , solemn pause before the music begin , and in the midst 
 of it Christina rise , leave her place , come the whole length of the 
 immense room , with every one look at she , and stop before he . she 
 be neither pale nor flushed ; she have a soft smile . 

 " will you do I a favor ? " she ask . 

 " a thousand ! " 

 " not now , but at your early convenience . please remind Mr. Hudson 
 that he be not in a New England village - that it be not the custom in 
 Rome to address one 's conversation exclusively , night after night , to 
 the same poor girl , and that " .... 

 the music break out with a great blare and cover her voice . she make a 
 gesture of impatience , and Rowland offer she his arm and lead she back 
 to her seat . 

 the next day he repeat her word to Roderick , who burst into joyous 
 laughter . " she be a delightfully strange girl ! " he cry . " she must do 
 everything that come into her head ! " 

 " have she never ask you before not to talk to she so much ? " 

 " on the contrary , she have often say to I , ' mind you now , I forbid you 
 to leave I . here come that tiresome so - and - so . ' she care as little 
 about the custom as I do . what could be a well proof than her walk 
 up to you , with five hundred people look at she ? be that the custom 
 for young girl in Rome ? " 

 " why , then , should she take such a step ? " 

 " because , as she sit there , it come into her head . that be reason enough 
 for she . I have imagine she wish I well , as they say here - though 
 she have never distinguish I in such a way as that ! " 

 Madame Grandoni have foretell the truth ; Mrs. Light , a couple of week 
 later , convoke all roman society to a brilliant ball . Rowland go 
 late , and find the staircase so encumbered with flower - pot and 
 servant that he be a long time make his way into the presence of the 
 hostess . at last he approach she , as she stand make courtesy at 
 the door , with her daughter by her side . some of Mrs. Light 's courtesy 
 be very low , for she have the happiness of receive a number of the 
 social potentate of the roman world . she be rosy with triumph , to say 
 nothing of a less metaphysical cause , and be evidently vastly content 
 with herself , with her company , and with the general promise of destiny . 
 her daughter be less overtly jubilant , and distribute her greeting 
 with impartial frigidity . she have never be so beautiful . dress 
 simply in vaporous white , relieve with half a dozen white rose , the 
 perfection of her feature and of her person and the mysterious depth of 
 her expression seem to glow with the white light of a splendid pearl . 
 she recognize no one individually , and make she courtesy slowly , 
 gravely , with her eye on the ground . Rowland fancy that , as he stand 
 before she , her obeisance be slightly exaggerated , as with an intention 
 of irony ; but he smile philosophically to himself , and reflect , as 
 he pass into the room , that , if she dislike he , he have nothing 
 to reproach himself with . he walk about , have a few word with Miss 
 Blanchard , who , with a fillet of cameo in her hair , be lean on the 
 arm of Mr. Leavenworth , and at last come upon the Cavaliere Giacosa , 
 modestly station in a corner . the little gentleman 's coat - lappet be 
 decorate with an enormous bouquet and his neck encase in a voluminous 
 white handkerchief of the fashion of thirty year ago . his arm be 
 fold , and he be survey the scene with contract eyelid , through 
 which you see the glitter of his intensely dark , vivacious pupil . 
 he immediately embark on an elaborate apology for not have yet 
 manifest , as he feel it , his sense of the honor Rowland have do he . 

 " I be always on service with these lady , you see , " he explain , " and 
 that be a duty to which one would not willingly be faithless for an 
 instant . " 

 " evidently , " say Rowland , " you be a very devoted friend . Mrs. Light , 
 in her situation , be very happy in have you . " 

 " we be old friend , " say the Cavaliere , gravely . " old friend . I know 
 the signora many year ago , when she be the prettiest woman in Rome - or 
 rather in Ancona , which be even well . the beautiful Christina , now , be 
 perhaps the most beautiful young girl in Europe ! " 

 " very likely , " say Rowland . 

 " very well , sir , I teach she to read ; I guide she little hand to 
 touch the piano key . " and at these fade memory , the Cavaliere 's eye 
 glitter more brightly . Rowland half expect he to proceed , with a 
 little flash of long - repress passion , " and now - and now , sir , they 
 treat I as you observe the other day ! " but the Cavaliere only look 
 out at he keenly from among his wrinkle , and seem to say , with all 
 the vividness of the italian glance , " oh , I say nothing more . I be not 
 so shallow as to complain ! " 

 evidently the Cavaliere be not shallow , and Rowland repeat 
 respectfully , " you be a devoted friend . " 

 " that be very true . I be a devoted friend . a man may do himself justice , 
 after twenty year ! " 

 Rowland , after a pause , make some remark about the beauty of the ball . 
 it be very brilliant . 

 " stupendous ! " say the Cavaliere , solemnly . " it be a great day . we have 
 four roman prince , to say nothing of other . " and he count they over 
 on his finger and hold up his hand triumphantly . " and there she stand , 
 the girl to whom I - I , Giuseppe Giacosa - teach her alphabet and her 
 piano - scale ; there she stand in her incomparable beauty , and roman 
 prince come and bow to she . here , in his corner , her old master permit 
 himself to be proud . " 

 " it be very friendly of he , " say Rowland , smile . 

 the Cavaliere contract his lid a little more and give another keen 
 glance . " it be very natural , signore . the Christina be a good girl ; she 
 remember my little service . but here come , " he add in a moment , 
 " the young Prince of the Fine Arts . I be sure he have bow low of 
 all . " 

 Rowland look round and see Roderick move slowly across the room and 
 cast about he his usual luminous , unshrinke look . he presently 
 join they , nod familiarly to the Cavaliere , and immediately 
 demand of Rowland , " have you see she ? " 

 " I have see Miss Light , " say Rowland . " she be magnificent . " 

 " I ' m half crazy ! " cry Roderick ; so loud that several person turn 
 round . 

 Rowland see that he be flushed , and lay his hand on his arm . roderick 
 be tremble . " if you will go away , " Rowland say instantly , " I will go 
 with you . " 

 " go away ? " cry Roderick , almost angrily . " I intend to dance with she ! " 

 the Cavaliere have be watch he attentively ; he gently lay his hand 
 on his other arm . " softly , softly , dear young man , " he say . " let I 
 speak to you as a friend . " 

 " oh , speak even as an enemy and I shall not mind it , " Roderick answer , 
 frown . 

 " be very reasonable , then , and go away . " 

 " why the deuce should I go away ? " 

 " because you be in love , " say the Cavaliere . 

 " I might as well be in love here as in the street . " 

 " carry your love as far as possible from Christina . she will not listen 
 to you - she can not . " 

 " she ' can not ' ? " demand Roderick . " she be not a person of whom you may 
 say that . she can if she will ; she do as she choose . " 

 " up to a certain point . it would take too long to explain ; I only beg 
 you to believe that if you continue to love Miss Light you will be 
 very unhappy . have you a princely title ? have you a princely fortune ? 
 otherwise you can never have she . " 

 and the Cavaliere fold his arm again , like a man who have do his 
 duty . roderick wipe his forehead and look askance at Rowland ; he 
 seem to be guess his thought and they make he blush a little . but 
 he smile blandly , and address the Cavaliere , " I ' m much oblige to 
 you for the information , " he say . " now that I have obtain it , let 
 I tell you that I be no more in love with Miss Light than you be . Mr. 
 Mallet know that . I admire she - yes , profoundly . but that be no one 's 
 business but my own , and though I have , as you say , neither a princely 
 title nor a princely fortune , I mean to suffer neither those advantage 
 nor those who possess they to diminish my right . " 

 " if you be not in love , my dear young man , " say the Cavaliere , with 
 his hand on his heart and an apologetic smile , ' so much the well . but 
 let I entreat you , as an affectionate friend , to keep a watch on your 
 emotion . you be young , you be handsome , you have a brilliant genius 
 and a generous heart , but - I may say it almost with authority - Christina 
 be not for you ! " 

 whether Roderick be in love or not , he be nettle by what apparently 
 seem to he an obtrusive negation of an inspiring possibility . " you 
 speak as if she have make her choice ! " he cry . " without pretend to 
 confidential information on the subject , I be sure she have not . " 

 " no , but she must make it soon , " say the Cavaliere . and raise his 
 forefinger , he lay it against his under lip . " she must choose a name 
 and a fortune - and she will ! " 

 " she will do exactly as her inclination prompt ! she will marry the man 
 who please she , if he have not   a dollar ! I know she well than you . " 

 the Cavaliere turn a little paler than usual , and smile more 
 urbanely . " no , no , my dear young man , you do not know she well than 
 I. you have not watch she , day by day , for twenty year . I too have 
 admire she . she be a good girl ; she have never say an unkind word 
 to I ; the blessed Virgin be thank ! but she must have a brilliant 
 destiny ; it have be mark out for she , and she will submit . you have 
 well believe I ; it may save you much suffering . " 

 " we shall see ! " say Roderick , with an excited laugh . 

 " certainly we shall see . but I retire from the discussion , " the 
 Cavaliere add . " I have no wish to provoke you to attempt to prove to 
 I that I be wrong . you be already excited . " 

 " no more than be natural to a man who in an hour or so be to dance the 
 cotillon with Miss Light . " 

 " the cotillon ? have she promise ? " 

 roderick pat the air with a grand confidence . " you will see ! " his 
 gesture might almost have be take to mean that the state of his 
 relation with Miss Light be such that they quite dispense with vain 
 formality . 

 the Cavaliere give an exaggerated shrug . " you make a great many 
 mourner ! " 

 " he have make one already ! " Rowland murmur to himself . this be 
 evidently not the first time that reference have be make between 
 Roderick and the Cavaliere to the young man 's possible passion , and 
 Roderick have fail to consider it the simple and most natural course 
 to say in three word to the vigilant little gentleman that there be 
 no cause for alarm - his affection be preoccupy . Rowland hop , 
 silently , with some dryness , that his motif be of a fine kind 
 than they seem to be . he turn away ; it be irritate to look at 
 Roderick 's radiant , unscrupulous eagerness . the tide be set toward 
 the supper - room and he drift with it to the door . the crowd at this 
 point be dense , and he be oblige to wait for some minute before he 
 could advance . at last he feel his neighbor divide behind he , and 
 turn he see Christina press her way forward alone . she be look 
 at no one , and , save for the fact of she be alone , you would not have 
 suppose she be in her mother 's house . as she recognize Rowland she 
 beckon to he , take his arm , and motion he to lead she into the 
 supper - room . she say nothing until he have force a passage and they 
 stand somewhat isolated . 

 " take I into the most out - of - the - way corner you can find , " she then 
 say , " and then go and get I a piece of bread . " 

 " nothing more ? there seem to be everything conceivable . " 

 " a simple roll . nothing more , on your peril . only bring something for 
 yourself . " 

 it seem to Rowland that the embrasure of a window   embrasure in roman 
 palace be deep   be a retreat sufficiently obscure for Miss Light to 
 execute whatever design she might have contrive against his equanimity . 
 a roll , after he have find she a seat , be easily procure . as he 
 present it , he remark that , frankly speak , he be at loss to 
 understand why she should have select for the honor of a tete - a - tete 
 an individual for whom she have so little taste . 

 " ah yes , I dislike you , " say Christina . " to tell the truth , I have 
 forget it . there be so many people here whom I dislike more , that 
 when I espy you just now , you seem like an intimate friend . but I 
 have not come into this corner to talk nonsense , " she go on . " you must 
 not think I always do , eh ? " 

 " I have never hear you do anything else , " say Rowland , deliberately , 
 have decide that he owe she no compliment . 

 " very good . I like your frankness . it be quite true . you see , I be a 
 strange girl . to begin with , I be frightfully egotistical . do not   flatter 
 yourself you have say anything very clever if you ever take it into 
 your head to tell I so . I know it much well than you . so it be , I 
 can not   help it . I be tired to death of myself ; I would give all I possess 
 to get out of myself ; but somehow , at the end , I find myself so vastly 
 more interesting than nine tenth of the people I meet . if a person 
 wish to do I a favor I would say to he , ' I beg you , with tear in my 
 eye , to interest I . be strong , be positive , be imperious , if you 
 will ; only be something , - something that , in look at , I can forget my 
 detestable self ! ' perhaps that be nonsense too . if it be , I can not   help 
 it . I can only apologize for the nonsense I know to be such and that I 
 talk - oh , for more reason than I can tell you ! I wonder whether , if I 
 be to try , you would understand I . " 

 " I be afraid I should never understand , " say Rowland , " why a person 
 should willingly talk nonsense . " 

 " that prove how little you know about woman . but I like your frankness . 
 when I tell you the other day that you displease I , I have an idea 
 you be more formal , - how do you say it ? - more guinde . I be very 
 capricious . to - night I like you well . " 

 " oh , I be not guinde , " say Rowland , gravely . 

 " I beg your pardon , then , for think so . now I have an idea that you 
 would make a useful friend - an intimate friend - a friend to whom one 
 could tell everything . for such a friend , what would not   I give ! " 

 Rowland look at she in some perplexity . be this touching sincerity , 
 or unfathomable coquetry ? her beautiful eye look divinely candid ; but 
 then , if candor be beautiful , beauty be apt to be subtle . " I hesitate 
 to recommend myself out and out for the office , " he say , " but I believe 
 that if you be to depend upon I for anything that a friend may do , I 
 should not be find want . " 

 " very good . one of the first thing one ask of a friend be to judge 
 one not by isolated act , but by one 's whole conduct . I care for your 
 opinion - I do not   know why . " 

 " nor do I , I confess , " say Rowland with a laugh . 

 " what do you think of this affair ? " she continue , without heed his 
 laugh . 

 " of your ball ? why , it be a very grand affair . " 

 " it be horrible - that be what it be ! it be a mere rabble ! there be 
 people here whom I never see before , people who be never ask . Mamma 
 go about invite every one , ask other people to invite any one 
 they know , do anything to have a crowd . I hope she be satisfied ! it 
 be not my doing . I feel weary , I feel angry , I feel like cry . I have 
 twenty mind to escape into my room and lock the door and let mamma go 
 through with it as she can . by the way , " she add in a moment , without 
 a visible reason for the transition , " can you tell I something to 
 read ? " 

 Rowland star , at the disconnectedness of the question . 

 " can you recommend I some book ? " she repeat . " I know you be a great 
 reader . I have no one else to ask . we can buy no book . we can make 
 debt for jewelry and bonnet and five - button glove , but we can not   spend 
 a sou for idea . and yet , though you may not believe it , I like idea 
 quite as well . " 

 " I shall be most happy to lend you some book , " Rowland say . " I will 
 pick some out to - morrow and send they to you . " 

 " no novel , please ! I be tired of novel . I can imagine well story 
 for myself than any I read . some good poetry , if there be such a thing 
 nowadays , and some memoir and history and book of fact . " 

 " you shall be serve . your taste agree with my own . " 

 she be silent a moment , look at he . then suddenly - " tell I 
 something about Mr. Hudson , " she demand . " you be great friend ! " 

 " oh yes , " say Rowland ; " we be great friend . " 

 " tell I about he . come , begin ! " 

 " where shall I begin ? you know he for yourself . " 

 " no , I do not   know he ; I do not   find he so easy to know . since he have 
 finish my bust and begin to come here disinterestedly , he have become a 
 great talker . he say very fine thing ; but do he mean all he say ? " 

 " few of we do that . " 

 " you do , I imagine . you ought to know , for he tell I you discover 
 he . " Rowland be silent , and Christina continue , " do you consider he 
 very clever ? " 

 " unquestionably . " 

 " his talent be really something out of the common way ? " 

 " so it seem to I . " 

 " in short , he be a man of genius ? " 

 " yes , call it genius . " 

 " and you find he vegetate in a little village and take he by the 
 hand and set he on his foot in Rome ? " 

 " be that the popular legend ? " ask Rowland . 

 " oh , you need not   be modest . there be no great merit in it ; there 
 would have be none at least on my part in the same circumstance . 
 real genius be not so common , and if I have discover one in the 
 wilderness , I would have bring he out into the market - place to see 
 how he would behave . it would be excessively amusing . you must find it 
 so to watch Mr. Hudson , eh ? tell I this : do you think he be go to be 
 a great man - become famous , have his life write , and all that ? " 

 " I do not   prophesy , but I have good hope . " 

 Christina be silent . she stretch out her bare arm and look at it a 
 moment absently , turn it so as to see - or almost to see - the dimple 
 in her elbow . this be apparently a frequent gesture with she ; Rowland 
 have already observe it . it be as coolly and naturally do as if she 
 have be in her room alone . " so he be a man of genius , " she suddenly 
 resume . " do not   you think I ought to be extremely flatter to have a 
 man of genius perpetually hang about ? he be the first I ever see , 
 but I should have know he be not a common mortal . there be something 
 strange about he . to begin with , he have no manner . you may say that it 
 be not for I to blame he , for I have none myself . that be very true , 
 but the difference be that I can have they when I wish to   and very 
 charming one too ; I will show you some day ; whereas Mr. Hudson will 
 never have they . and yet , somehow , one see he be a gentleman . he seem 
 to have something urge , drive , push he , make he restless and 
 defiant . you see it in his eye . they be the fine , by the way , I ever 
 see . when a person have such eye as that you can forgive he his bad 
 manner . I suppose that be what they call the sacred fire . " 

 Rowland make no answer except to ask she in a moment if she would have 
 another roll . she merely shake her head and go on : - 

 " tell I how you find he . where be he - how be he ? " 

 " he be in a place call Northampton . do you ever hear of it ? he be 
 study law - but not learn it . " 

 " it appear it be something horrible , eh ? " 

 " something horrible ? " 

 " this little village . no society , no pleasure , no beauty , no life . " 

 " you have receive a false impression . Northampton be not as gay as 
 Rome , but Roderick have some charming friend . " 

 " tell I about they . who be they ? " 

 " well , there be my cousin , through whom I make his acquaintance : a 
 delightful woman . " 

 " Young - pretty ? " 

 " yes , a good deal of both . and very clever . " 

 " do he make love to she ? " 

 " not in the least . " 

 " well , who else ? " 

 " he live with his mother . she be the good of woman . " 

 " ah yes , I know all that one 's mother be . but she do not count as 
 society . and who else ? " 

 Rowland hesitate . he wonder whether Christina 's insistence be 
 the result of a general interest in Roderick 's antecedent or of a 
 particular suspicion . he look at she ; she be look at he a little 
 askance , wait for his answer . as Roderick have say nothing about his 
 engagement to the Cavaliere , it be probable that with this beautiful 
 girl he have not be more explicit . and yet the thing be announce , it 
 be public ; that other girl be happy in it , proud of it . Rowland feel 
 a kind of dumb anger rise in his heart . he deliberate a moment 
 intently . 

 " what be you frown at ? " Christina ask . 

 " there be another person , " he answer , " the most important of all : the 
 young girl to whom he be engage . " 

 Christina star a moment , raise her eyebrow . " ah , Mr. Hudson be 
 engage ? " she say , very simply . " be she pretty ? " 

 " she be not call a beauty , " say Rowland . he mean to practice great 
 brevity , but in a moment he add , " I have see beauty , however , who 
 please I less . " 

 " ah , she please you , too ? why do not   they marry ? " 

 " Roderick be wait till he can afford to marry . " 

 Christina slowly put out her arm again and look at the dimple in her 
 elbow . " ah , he be engage ? " she repeat in the same tone . " he never 
 tell I . " 

 Rowland perceive at this moment that the people about they be 
 begin to return to the dancing - room , and immediately afterwards 
 he see roderick make his way toward themselves . Roderick present 
 himself before Miss Light . 

 " I do not   claim that you have promise I the cotillon , " he say , " but I 
 consider that you have give I hope which warrant the confidence that 
 you will dance with I . " 

 Christina look at he a moment . " certainly I have make no promise , " 
 she say . " it seem to I that , as the daughter of the house , I should 
 keep myself free and let it depend on circumstance . " 

 " I beseech you to dance with I ! " say Roderick , with vehemence . 

 Christina rise and begin to laugh . " you say that very well , but the 
 Italians do it well . " 

 this assertion seem likely to be put to the proof . Mrs. Light hastily 
 approach , lead , rather than lead by , a tall , slim young man , of an 
 unmistakably southern physiognomy . " my precious love , " she cry , " what 
 a place to hide in ! we have be look for you for twenty minute ; I 
 have choose a cavalier for you , and choose well ! " 

 the young man disengage himself , make a ceremonious bow , join his two 
 hand , and murmur with an ecstatic smile , " may I venture to hope , dear 
 signorina , for the honor of your hand ? " 

 " of course you may ! " say Mrs. Light . " the honor be for we . " 

 Christina hesitate but for a moment , then sweep the young man a 
 courtesy as profound as his own bow . " you be very kind , but you be too 
 late . I have just accept ! " 

 " ah , my own darling ! " murmur - almost moaned - Mrs. Light . 

 Christina and Roderick exchange a single glance - a glance brilliant on 
 both side . she pass her hand into his arm ; he toss his clustering 
 lock and lead she away . 

 a short time afterwards Rowland see the young man whom she have 
 reject lean against a doorway . he be ugly , but what be call 
 distinguish - look . he have a heavy black eye , a sallow complexion , a 
 long , thin neck ; his hair be crop en brosse . he look very young , 
 yet extremely bored . he be star at the ceiling and stroke an 
 imperceptible moustache . Rowland espy the Cavaliere Giacosa hard by , 
 and , have join he , ask he the young man 's name . 

 " oh , " say the Cavaliere , " he be a pezzo grosso ! a Neapolitan . Prince 
 Casamassima . " 






 CHAPTER VI . Frascati 

 one day , on enter Roderick 's lodging   not the modest room on the 
 Ripetta which he have first occupy , but a much more sumptuous apartment 
 on the Corso , Rowland find a letter on the table address to himself . 
 it be from Roderick , and consist of but three line : " I be go to 
 Frascati - for meditation . if I be not at home on Friday , you have 
 well join I . " on Friday he be still absent , and Rowland go out to 
 Frascati . here he find his friend live at the inn and spend his 
 day , accord to his own account , lie under the tree of the Villa 
 Mondragone , read Ariosto . he be in a sombre mood ; " meditation " 
 seem not to have be fruitful . nothing especially pertinent to our 
 narrative have pass between the two young man since Mrs. Light 's ball , 
 save a few word bear on an incident of that entertainment . Rowland 
 inform Roderick , the next day , that he have tell Miss Light of his 
 engagement . " I do not   know whether you will thank I , " he have say , " but 
 it be my duty to let you know it . Miss Light perhaps have already do 
 so . " 

 Roderick look at he a moment , intently , with his color slowly 
 rise . " why should not   I thank you ? " he ask . " I be not ashamed of my 
 engagement . " 

 " as you have not speak of it yourself , I think you might have a reason 
 for not have it know . " 

 " a man do not   gossip about such a matter with stranger , " Roderick 
 rejoin , with the ring of irritation in his voice . 

 " with stranger - no ! " say Rowland , smile . 

 Roderick continue his work ; but after a moment , turn round with a 
 frown : " if you suppose I have a reason for be silent , pray why should 
 you have speak ? " 

 " I do not speak idly , my dear Roderick . I weigh the matter before I 
 speak , and promise myself to let you know immediately afterwards . it 
 seem to I that Miss Light have well know that your affection be 
 pledge . " 

 " the Cavaliere have put it into your head , then , that I be make love to 
 she ? " 

 " no ; in that case I would not have speak to her first . " 

 " do you mean , then , that she be make love to I ? " 

 " this be what I mean , " say Rowland , after a pause . " that girl find you 
 interesting , and be pleased , even though she may play indifference , 
 at your find she so . I say to myself that it might save she some 
 sentimental disappointment to know without delay that you be not at 
 liberty to become indefinitely interested in other woman . " 

 " you seem to have take the measure of my liberty with extraordinary 
 minuteness ! " cry Roderick . 

 " you must do I justice . I be the cause of your separation from Miss 
 Garland , the cause of your be expose to temptation which she hardly 
 even suspect . how could I ever face she , " Rowland demand , with much 
 warmth of tone , " if at the end of it all she should be unhappy ? " 

 " I have no idea that Miss Garland have make such an impression on you . 
 you be too zealous ; I take it she do not   charge you to look after her 
 interest . " 

 " if anything happen to you , I be accountable . you must understand 
 that . " 

 " that be a view of the situation I can not   accept ; in your own interest , 
 no less than in mine . it can only make we both very uncomfortable . I 
 know all I owe you ; I feel it ; you know that ! but I be not a small boy 
 nor an outer barbarian any long , and , whatever I do , I do with my eye 
 open . when I do well , the merit 's mine ; if I do ill , the fault 's mine ! 
 the idea that I make you nervous be detestable . dedicate your nerve 
 to some well cause , and believe that if Miss Garland and I have a 
 quarrel , we shall settle it between ourselves . " 

 Rowland have find himself wonder , shortly before , whether possibly 
 his brilliant young friend be without a conscience ; now it dimly 
 occur to he that he be without a heart . Rowland , as we have already 
 intimate , be a man with a moral passion , and no small part of it have 
 go forth into his relation with Roderick . there have be , from the 
 first , no protestation of friendship on either side , but Rowland have 
 implicitly offer everything that belong to friendship , and Roderick 
 have , apparently , as deliberately accept it . Rowland , indeed , have take 
 an exquisite satisfaction in his companion 's deep , inexpressive assent 
 to his interest in he . " here be an uncommonly fine thing , " he say to 
 himself : " a nature unconsciously grateful , a man in whom friendship do 
 the thing that love alone generally have the credit of - knock the bottom 
 out of pride ! " his reflective judgment of Roderick , as time go on , have 
 indulge in a great many irrepressible vagary ; but his affection , 
 his sense of something in his companion 's whole personality that 
 overmaster his heart and beguile his imagination , have never for an 
 instant falter . he listen to Roderick 's last word , and then he 
 smile as he rarely smile - with bitterness . 

 " I do not   at all like your tell I I be too zealous , " he say . " if I 
 have not be zealous , I should never have care a fig for you . " 

 Roderick flush deeply , and thrust his modeling tool up to the handle 
 into the clay . " say it outright ! you have be a great fool to believe 
 in I . " 

 " I desire to say nothing of the kind , and you do not   honestly believe I 
 do ! " say Rowland . " it seem to I I be really very good - natured even to 
 reply to such nonsense . " 

 Roderick sit down , cross his arm , and fix his eye on the floor . 
 Rowland look at he for some moment ; it seem to he that he 
 have never so clearly read his companion 's strangely commingle 
 character - his strength and his weakness , his picturesque personal 
 attractiveness and his urgent egoism , his exalt ardor and his puerile 
 petulance . it would have make he almost sick , however , to think that , 
 on the whole , Roderick be not a generous fellow , and he be so far from 
 have cease to believe in he that he feel just now , more than ever , 
 that all this be but the painful complexity of genius . Rowland , who 
 have not a grain of genius either to make one say he be an interested 
 reasoner , or to enable one to feel that he could afford a dangerous 
 theory or two , adhere to his conviction of the essential salubrity of 
 genius . suddenly he feel an irresistible compassion for his companion ; 
 it seem to he that his beautiful faculty of production be a 
 double - edge instrument , susceptible of be deal in back - handed blow 
 at its possessor . Genius be priceless , inspired , divine ; but it be 
 also , at its hour , capricious , sinister , cruel ; and man of genius , 
 accordingly , be alternately very enviable and very helpless . it be 
 not the first time he have have a sense of Roderick 's standing helpless in 
 the grasp of his temperament . it have shake he , as yet , but with a half 
 good - humor wantonness ; but , henceforth , possibly , it mean to handle 
 he more roughly . these be not time , therefore , for a friend to have 
 a short patience . 

 " when you err , you say , the fault be your own , " he say at last . " it be 
 because your fault be your own that I care about they . " 

 Rowland 's voice , when he speak with feeling , have an extraordinary 
 amenity . Roderick sit star a moment long at the floor , then he 
 spring up and lay his hand affectionately on his friend 's shoulder . 
 " you be the good man in the world , " he say , " and I be a vile brute . 
 only , " he add in a moment , " you do not   understand I ! " and he look 
 at he with eye of such radiant lucidity that one might have say   and 
 Rowland do almost say so , himself   that it be the fault of one 's own 
 grossness if one fail to read to the bottom of that beautiful soul . 

 Rowland smile sadly . " what be it now ? explain . " 

 " oh , I can not   explain ! " cry Roderick impatiently , return to his 
 work . " I have only one way of express my deep feeling - it be 
 this ! " and he swing his tool . he stand look at the half - wrought clay 
 for a moment , and then fling the instrument down . " and even this half 
 the time play I false ! " 

 Rowland feel that his irritation have not subside , and he himself have no 
 taste for say disagreeable thing . nevertheless he see no sufficient 
 reason to forbear utter the word he have have on his conscience from 
 the beginning . " we must do what we can and be thankful , " he say . " and 
 let I assure you of this - that it will not   help you to become entangle 
 with Miss Light . " 

 Roderick press his hand to his forehead with vehemence and then shake 
 it in the air , despairingly ; a gesture that have become frequent with he 
 since he have be in Italy . " no , no , it be no use ; you do not   understand 
 I ! but I do not   blame you . you can not ! " 

 " you think it will help you , then ? " say Rowland , wonder . 

 " I think that when you expect a man to produce beautiful and wonderful 
 work of art , you ought to allow he a certain freedom of action , you 
 ought to give he a long rope , you ought to let he follow his fancy and 
 look for his material wherever he think he may find it ! a mother can not 
 nurse her child unless she follow a certain diet ; an artist can not   bring 
 his vision to maturity unless he have a certain experience . you 
 demand of we to be imaginative , and you deny we that which feed the 
 imagination . in labor we must be as passionate as the inspire sibyl ; in 
 life we must be mere machine . it will not   do . when you have get an artist 
 to deal with , you must take he as he be , good and bad together . I do not 
 say they be pleasant fellow to know or easy fellow to live with ; I 
 do not   say they satisfy themselves any well than other people . I only 
 say that if you want they to produce , you must let they conceive . if 
 you want a bird to sing , you must not cover up its cage . shoot they , the 
 poor devil , drown they , exterminate they , if you will , in the interest 
 of public morality ; it may be morality would gain - I dare say it would ! 
 but if you suffer they to live , let they live on their own term and 
 accord to their own inexorable need ! " 

 Rowland burst out laugh . " I have no wish whatever either to shoot you 
 or to drown you ! " he say . " why launch such a tirade against a warning 
 offer you altogether in the interest of your free development ? 
 do you really mean that you have an inexorable need of embark on a 
 flirtation with Miss Light ? - a flirtation as to the felicity of which 
 there may be difference of opinion , but which can not at good , under the 
 circumstance , be call innocent . your last summer 's adventure be 
 more so ! as for the term on which you be to live , I have an idea you 
 have arrange they otherwise ! " 

 " I have arrange nothing - thank God ! I do not   pretend to arrange . I 
 be young and ardent and inquisitive , and I admire Miss Light . that be 
 enough . I shall go as far as admiration lead I . I be not afraid . your 
 genuine artist may be sometimes half a madman , but he be not a coward ! " 

 " suppose that in your speculation you should come to grief , not only 
 sentimentally but artistically ? " 

 " come what come will ! if I ' m to fizzle out , the soon I know it the 
 well . sometimes I half suspect it . but let I at least go out and 
 reconnoitre for the enemy , and not sit here wait for he , cudgel 
 my brain for idea that will not   come ! " 

 do what he would , Rowland could not think of Roderick 's theory of 
 unlimited experimentation , especially as apply in the case under 
 discussion , as anything but a pernicious illusion . but he see it be 
 vain to combat long , for inclination be powerfully on Roderick 's 
 side . he lay his hand on Roderick 's shoulder , look at he a moment 
 with troubled eye , then shake his head mournfully and turn away . 

 " I can not   work any more , " say Roderick . " you have upset I ! I will go 
 and stroll on the Pincian . " and he toss aside his working - jacket and 
 prepare himself for the street . as he be arrange his cravat before 
 the glass , something occur to he which make he thoughtful . he 
 stop a few moment afterward , as they be go out , with his hand 
 on the door - knob . " you do , from your own point of view , an indiscreet 
 thing , " he say , " to tell Miss Light of my engagement . " 

 Rowland look at he with a glance which be partly an interrogation , 
 but partly , also , an admission . 

 " if she be the coquette you say , " Roderick add , " you have give she a 
 reason the more . " 

 " and that be the girl you propose to devote yourself to ? " cry Rowland . 

 " oh , I do not   say it , mind ! I only say that she be the most interesting 
 creature in the world ! the next time you mean to render I a service , 
 pray give I notice beforehand ! " 

 it be perfectly characteristic of Roderick that , a fortnight later , he 
 should have let his friend know that he depend upon he for society 
 at Frascati , as freely as if no irritate topic have ever be discuss 
 between they . Rowland think he generous , and he have at any rate a 
 liberal faculty of forget that he have give you any reason to be 
 displeased with he . it be equally characteristic of Rowland that he 
 comply with his friend 's summon without a moment 's hesitation . his 
 cousin Cecilia have once tell he that he be the dupe of his intense 
 benevolence . she put the case with too little favor , or too much , as the 
 reader choose ; it be certain , at least , that he have a constitutional 
 tendency towards magnanimous interpretation . nothing happen , however , 
 to suggest to he that he be delude in think that Roderick 's 
 secondary impulse be wise than his primary one , and that the 
 rounded total of his nature have a harmony perfectly attuned to the most 
 amiable of its brilliant part . Roderick 's humor , for the time , be 
 pitch in a minor key ; he be lazy , listless , and melancholy , but he 
 have never be more friendly and kindly and appealingly submissive . 
 Winter have begin , by the calendar , but the weather be divinely mild , 
 and the two young man take long slow stroll on the hill and lounge 
 away the morning in the villa . the villa at Frascati be delicious 
 place , and replete with romantic suggestiveness . Roderick , as he 
 have say , be meditate , and if a masterpiece be to come of his 
 meditation , Rowland be perfectly willing to bear he company and coax 
 along the process . but Roderick let he know from the first that he be 
 in a miserably sterile mood , and , cudgel his brain as he would , could 
 think of nothing that would serve for the statue he be to make for Mr. 
 Leavenworth . 

 " it be bad out here than in Rome , " he say , " for here I be face to 
 face with the dead blank of my mind ! there I could not   think of anything 
 either , but there I find thing to make I forget that I need to . " 
 this be as frank an allusion to Christina Light as could have be 
 expect under the circumstance ; it seem , indeed , to Rowland 
 surprisingly frank , and a pregnant example of his companion 's often 
 strangely irresponsible way of look at harmful fact . roderick 
 be silent sometimes for hour , with a puzzled look on his face and 
 a constant fold between his even eyebrow ; at other time he talk 
 unceasingly , with a slow , idle , half - nonsensical drawl . Rowland be half 
 a dozen time on the point of ask he what be the matter with he ; 
 he be afraid he be go to be ill . Roderick have take a great fancy 
 to the Villa Mondragone , and use to declaim fantastic compliment to it 
 as they stroll in the winter sunshine on the great terrace which look 
 toward Tivoli and the iridescent Sabine mountain . he carry his volume 
 of Ariosto in his pocket , and take it out every now and then and spout 
 half a dozen stanzas to his companion . he be , as a general thing , very 
 little of a reader ; but at interval he would take a fancy to one of the 
 classic and peruse it for a month in disjoint scrap . he have pick 
 up italian without study , and have a wonderfully sympathetic accent , 
 though in read aloud he ruin the sense of half the line he 
 roll off so sonorously . Rowland , who pronounce badly but understand 
 everything , once say to he that Ariosto be not the poet for a man of 
 his craft ; a sculptor should make a companion of Dante . so he lend he 
 the Inferno , which he have bring with he , and advise he to look into 
 it . Roderick take it with some eagerness ; perhaps it would brighten 
 his wit . he return it the next day with disgust ; he have find it 
 intolerably depressing . 

 " a sculptor should model as Dante write - you be right there , " he say . 
 " but when his genius be in eclipse , Dante be a dreadfully smoky lamp . 
 by what perversity of fate , " he go on , " have it come about that I be a 
 sculptor at all ? a sculptor be such a confoundedly special genius ; there 
 be so few subject he can treat , so few thing in life that bear upon 
 his work , so few mood in which he himself be inclined to it . "   it 
 may be note that Rowland have hear he a dozen time affirm the flat 
 reverse of all this .   " if I have only be a painter - a little quiet , 
 docile , matter - of - fact painter , like our friend Singleton - I should 
 only have to open my Ariosto here to find a subject , to find color and 
 attitude , stuff and composition ; I should only have to look up from 
 the page at that mouldy old fountain against the blue sky , at that 
 cypress alley wander away like a procession of priest in couple , 
 at the crag and hollow of the Sabine hill , to find myself grasp 
 my brush . good of all would be to be Ariosto himself , or one of his 
 brotherhood . then everything in nature would give you a hint , and every 
 form of beauty be part of your stock . you would not   have to look at 
 thing only to say , - with tear of rage half the time , - ' oh , yes , it 
 be wonderfully pretty , but what the deuce can I do with it ? ' but a 
 sculptor , now ! that be a pretty trade for a fellow who have get his 
 living to make and yet be so damnably constitute that he can not   work to 
 order , and consider that , aesthetically , clock ornament do not   pay ! you 
 can not   model the serge - coat cypress , nor those moulder old Tritons 
 and all the sunny sadness of that dry - up fountain ; you can not   put the 
 light into marble - the lovely , caressing , consent italian light that 
 you get so much of for nothing . say that a dozen time in his life a man 
 have a complete sculpturesque vision - a vision in which the imagination 
 recognize a subject and the subject kindle the imagination . it be a 
 remunerative rate of work , and the interval be comfortable ! " 

 one morning , as the two young man be lounge on the sun - warm 
 grass at the foot of one of the slanting pine of the Villa Mondragone , 
 Roderick deliver himself of a tissue of lugubrious speculation as to 
 the possible mischance of one 's genius . " what if the watch should run 
 down , " he ask , " and you should lose the key ? what if you should wake 
 up some morning and find it stop , inexorably , appallingly stop ? 
 such thing have be , and the poor devil to whom they happen have 
 have to grin and bear it . the whole matter of genius be a mystery . it 
 bloweth where it listeth and we know nothing of its mechanism . if it 
 get out of order we can not   mend it ; if it break down altogether we 
 can not   set it go again . we must let it choose its own pace , and hold 
 our breath lest it should lose its balance . it be deal out in different 
 dos , in big cup and little , and when you have consume your portion 
 it be as naif to ask for more as it be for Oliver Twist to ask for more 
 porridge . lucky for you if you ' ve   get one of the big cup ; we drink 
 they down in the dark , and we can not   tell their size until we tip they 
 up and hear the last gurgle . those of some man last for life ; those of 
 other for a couple of year . Nay , what be you smile at so damnably ? " 
 he go on . " nothing be more common than for an artist who have set out 
 on his journey on a high - step horse to find himself all of a sudden 
 dismount and invite to go his way on foot . you can number they by the 
 thousand - the people of two or three success ; the poor fellow whose 
 candle burn out in a night . some of they grope their way along without 
 it , some of they give themselves up for blind and sit down by the 
 wayside to beg . who shall say that I ' m not one of these ? who shall 
 assure I that my credit be for an unlimited sum ? nothing prove it , 
 and I never claim it ; or if I do , I do so in the mere boyish joy of 
 shake off the dust of Northampton . if you believe so , my dear fellow , 
 you do so at your own risk ! what be I , what be the good of we , but 
 an experiment ? do I succeed - do I fail ? it do not   depend on I . I ' m 
 prepared for failure . it will not   be a disappointment , simply because I 
 shall not   survive it . the end of my work shall be the end of my life . when 
 I have play my last card , I shall cease to care for the game . I ' m not 
 make vulgar threat of suicide ; for destiny , I trust , will not   add 
 insult to injury by put I to that abominable trouble . but I have a 
 conviction that if the hour strike here , " and he tap his forehead , 
 " I shall disappear , dissolve , be carry off in a cloud ! for the past 
 ten day I have have the vision of some such fate perpetually swim 
 before my eye . my mind be like a dead calm in the tropic , and my 
 imagination as motionless as the phantom ship in the Ancient Mariner ! " 

 Rowland listen to this outbreak , as he often have occasion to listen to 
 Roderick 's heated monologue , with a number of mental restriction . both 
 in gravity and in gayety he say more than he mean , and you do he 
 simple justice if you privately conclude that neither the glow of 
 purpose nor the chill of despair be of so intense a character as his 
 florid diction imply . the mood of an artist , his exaltation 
 and depression , Rowland have often say to himself , be like the 
 pen - flourish a writing - master make in the air when he begin to set 
 his copy . he may bespatter you with ink , he may hit you in the eye , but 
 he write a magnificent hand . it be nevertheless true that at present 
 poor Roderick give unprecedented token of moral stagnation , and as for 
 genius be hold by the precarious tenure he have sketch , Rowland be 
 at a loss to see whence he could borrow the authority to contradict he . 
 he sigh to himself , and wish that his companion have a trifle more 
 of little Sam Singleton 's evenness of impulse . but then , be Singleton 
 a man of genius ? he answer that such reflection seem to he 
 unprofitable , not to say morbid ; that the proof of the pudding be 
 in the eating ; that he do not   know about bring a genius that have 
 palpably spend its last breath back to life again , but that he be 
 satisfied that vigorous effort be a cure for a great many ill that 
 seem far go . " do not   heed your mood , " he say , " and do not   believe 
 there be any calm so dead that your own lung can not   ruffle it with a 
 breeze . if you have work to do , do not   wait to feel like it ; set to work 
 and you will feel like it . " 

 " set to work and produce abortion ! " cry Roderick with ire . " preach 
 that to other . production with I must be either pleasure or nothing . 
 as I say just now , I must either stay in the saddle or not go at all . 
 I will not   do second - rate work ; I can not   if I would . I have no cleverness , 
 apart from inspiration . I be not a Gloriani ! you be right , " he add 
 after a while ; " this be unprofitable talk , and it make my head ache . I 
 shall take a nap and see if I can dream of a bright idea or two . " 

 he turn his face upward to the parasol of the great pine , close his 
 eye , and in a short time forget his sombre fancy . January though it 
 be , the mild stillness seem to vibrate with faint midsummer sound . 
 Rowland sit listen to they and wish that , for the sake of his own 
 felicity , Roderick 's temper be grace with a certain absent ductility . 
 he be brilliant , but be he , like many brilliant thing , brittle ? 
 suddenly , to his musing sense , the soft atmospheric hum be overscore 
 with distincter sound . he hear voice beyond a mass of shrubbery , at 
 the turn of a neighboring path . in a moment one of they begin to seem 
 familiar , and an instant later a large white poodle emerge into view . 
 he be slowly follow by his mistress . Miss Light pause a moment on 
 see Rowland and his companion ; but , though the former perceive that 
 he be recognize , she make no bow . presently she walk directly toward 
 he . he rise and be on the point of wake Roderick , but she lay 
 her finger on her lip and motion he to forbear . she stand a moment 
 look at Roderick 's handsome slumber . 

 " what delicious oblivion ! " she say . " happy man ! Stenterello " - and she 
 point to his face - " wake he up ! " 

 the poodle extend a long pink tongue and begin to lick Roderick 's 
 cheek . 

 " why , " ask Rowland , " if he be happy ? " 

 " oh , I want companion in misery ! besides , I want to show off my dog . " 
 Roderick rouse himself , sit up , and star . by this time Mrs. Light have 
 approach , walk with a gentleman on each side of she . one of these 
 be the Cavaliere Giacosa ; the other be Prince Casamassima . " I should 
 have like to lie down on the grass and go to sleep , " Christina add . 
 " but it would have be unheard of . " 

 " oh , not quite , " say the Prince , in English , with a tone of great 
 precision . " there be already a Sleeping Beauty in the Wood ! " 

 " Charming ! " cry Mrs. Light . " do you hear that , my dear ? " 

 " when the prince say a brilliant thing , it would be a pity to lose it , " 
 say the young girl . " your servant , sir ! " and she smile at he with a 
 grace that might have reassure he , if he have think her compliment 
 ambiguous . 

 Roderick meanwhile have rise to his foot , and Mrs. Light begin to 
 exclaim on the oddity of their meeting and to explain that the day be 
 so lovely that she have be charm with the idea of spend it in the 
 country . and who would ever have think of find Mr. Mallet and Mr. 
 Hudson sleep under a tree ! 

 " oh , I beg your pardon ; I be not sleep , " say Rowland . 

 " do not   you know that Mr. Mallet be Mr. Hudson 's sheep - dog ? " ask 
 Christina . " he be mount guard to keep away the wolf . " 

 " to indifferent purpose , madame ! " say Rowland , indicate the young 
 girl . 

 " be that the way you spend your time ? " Christina demand of Roderick . 
 " I never yet happen to learn what man be do when they suppose 
 woman be not watch they but it be something vastly below their 
 reputation . " 

 " when , pray , " say Roderick , smooth his ruffled lock , " be woman not 
 watch they ? " 

 " we shall give you something well to do , at any rate . how long have 
 you be here ? it be an age since I have see you . we consider you 
 domicile here , and expect you to play host and entertain we . " 

 Roderick say that he could offer they nothing but to show they the 
 great terrace , with its view ; and ten minute later the group be 
 assemble there . Mrs. Light be extravagant in her satisfaction ; 
 Christina look away at the Sabine mountain , in silence . the prince 
 stand by , frown at the rapture of the eld lady . 

 " this be nothing , " he say at last . " my word of honor . have you see the 
 terrace at San Gaetano ? " 

 " ah , that terrace , " murmur Mrs. Light , amorously . " I suppose it be 
 magnificent ! " 

 " it be four hundred foot long , and pave with marble . and the view be 
 a thousand time more beautiful than this . you see , far away , the blue , 
 blue sea and the little smoke of Vesuvio ! " 

 " Christina , love , " cry Mrs. Light forthwith , " the prince have a terrace 
 four hundred foot long , all pave with marble ! " 

 the Cavaliere give a little cough and begin to wipe his eye - glass . 

 " stupendous ! " say Christina . " to go from one end to the other , the 
 prince must have out his golden carriage . " this be apparently an 
 allusion to one of the other item of the young man 's grandeur . 

 " you always laugh at I , " say the prince . " I know no more what to say ! " 

 she look at he with a sad smile and shake her head . " no , no , dear 
 prince , I do not   laugh at you . heaven forbid ! you be much too serious an 
 affair . I assure you I feel your importance . what do you inform we be 
 the value of the hereditary diamond of the Princess Casamassima ? " 

 " ah , you be laugh at I yet ! " say the poor young man , stand 
 rigid and pale . 

 " it do not   matter , " Christina go on . " we have a note of it ; mamma 
 write all those thing down in a little book ! " 

 " if you be laugh at , dear prince , at least it be in company , " say 
 Mrs. Light , caressingly ; and she take his arm , as if to resist his 
 possible displacement under the shock of her daughter 's sarcasm . but the 
 prince look heavy - eyed toward Rowland and Roderick , to whom the 
 young girl be turn , as if he have much rather his lot be cast with 
 theirs . 

 " be the villa inhabit ? " Christina ask , point to the vast 
 melancholy structure which rise above the terrace . 

 " not privately , " say Roderick . " it be occupy by a jesuit ' college , 
 for little boy . " 

 " can woman go in ? " 

 " I be afraid not . " and Roderick begin to laugh . " Fancy the poor little 
 devil look up from their Latin declension and see Miss Light 
 stand there ! " 

 " I should like to see the poor little devil , with their rosy cheek and 
 their long black gown , and when they be pretty , I should not   scruple 
 to kiss they . but if I can not   have that amusement I must have some other . 
 we must not stand plant on this enchanting terrace as if we be 
 stake drive into the earth . we must dance , we must feast , we must do 
 something picturesque . Mamma have arrange , I believe , that we be to go 
 back to Frascati to lunch at the inn . I decree that we lunch here and 
 send the Cavaliere to the inn to get the provision ! he can take the 
 carriage , which be wait below . " 

 Miss Light carry out this undertaking with unfaltere ardor . the 
 Cavaliere be summon , and he stook to receive her command hat in 
 hand , with his eye cast down , as if she have be a princess addressing 
 her major - domo . she , however , lay her hand with friendly grace upon his 
 button - hole , and call he a dear , good old Cavaliere , for be always 
 so willing . her spirit have rise with the occasion , and she talk 
 irresistible nonsense . " bring the good they have , " she say , " no matter 
 if it ruin we ! and if the good be very bad , it will be all the 
 more amusing . I shall enjoy see Mr. Mallet try to swallow it for 
 propriety 's sake ! Mr. Hudson will say out like a man that it be horrible 
 stuff , and that he will be choke first ! be sure you bring a dish of 
 maccaroni ; the prince must have the diet of the Neapolitan nobility . but 
 I leave all that to you , my poor , dear Cavaliere ; you know what be good ! 
 only be sure , above all , you bring a guitar . Mr. Mallet will play we 
 a tune , I will dance with Mr. Hudson , and mamma will pair off with the 
 prince , of whom she be so fond ! " 

 and as she conclude her recommendation , she pat her bland old 
 servitor caressingly on the shoulder . he look askance at Rowland ; his 
 little black eye glitter ; it seem to say , " do not   I tell you she 
 be a good girl ! " 

 the Cavaliere return with zealous speed , accompany by one of the 
 servant of the inn , laden with a basket contain the material of a 
 rustic luncheon . the porter of the villa be easily induce to furnish 
 a table and half a dozen chair , and the repast , when set forth , be 
 pronounce a perfect success ; not so good as to fail of the proper 
 picturesqueness , nor yet so bad as to defeat the proper function of 
 repast . Christina continue to display the most charming animation , 
 and compel Rowland to reflect privately that , think what one might 
 of she , the harmonious gayety of a beautiful girl be the most beautiful 
 sight in nature . her good - humor be contagious . Roderick , who an hour 
 before have be descant on madness and suicide , commingle his 
 laughter with hers in ardent devotion ; Prince Casamassima stroke 
 his young moustache and find a fine , cool smile for everything ; his 
 neighbor , Mrs. Light , who have Rowland on the other side , make the 
 friendly confidence to each of the young man , and the Cavaliere 
 contribute to the general hilarity by the solemnity of his attention 
 to his plate . as for Rowland , the spirit of kindly mirth prompt he to 
 propose the health of this useful old gentleman , as the effective author 
 of their pleasure . a moment later he wish he have hold his tongue , for 
 although the toast be drunk with demonstrative good - will , the Cavaliere 
 receive it with various small sign of eager self - effacement which 
 suggest to Rowland that his diminished gentility but half relish 
 honor which have a flavor of patronage . to perform punctiliously his 
 mysterious duty toward the two lady , and to elude or to baffle 
 observation on his own merit - this seem the Cavaliere 's modest 
 programme . Rowland perceive that Mrs. Light , who be not always 
 remarkable for tact , seem to have divine his humor on this point . 
 she touch her glass to her lip , but offer he no compliment and 
 immediately give another direction to the conversation . he have bring 
 no guitar , so that when the feast be over there be nothing to hold the 
 little group together . Christina wander away with Roderick to another 
 part of the terrace ; the prince , whose smile have vanish , sit gnaw 
 the head of his cane , near Mrs. Light , and Rowland stroll apart 
 with the Cavaliere , to whom he wish to address a friendly word in 
 compensation for the discomfort he have inflict on his modesty . the 
 Cavaliere be a mine of information upon all roman place and people ; 
 he tell Rowland a number of curious anecdote about the old Villa 
 Mondragone . " if history could always be teach in this fashion ! " think 
 Rowland . " it be the ideal - stroll up and down on the very spot 
 commemorate , hear sympathetic anecdote from deeply indigenous 
 lip . " at last , as they pass , Rowland observe the mournful 
 physiognomy of Prince Casamassima , and , glance toward the other end of 
 the terrace , see that Roderick and Christina have disappear from view . 
 the young man be sit upright , in an attitude , apparently habitual , 
 of ceremonious rigidity ; but his low jaw have fall and be prop 
 up with his cane , and his dull dark eye be fix upon the angle of the 
 villa which have just eclipse Miss Light and her companion . his feature 
 be grotesque and his expression vacuous ; but there be a lurking 
 delicacy in his face which seem to tell you that nature have be 
 make Casamassimas for a great many century , and , though she adapt 
 her mould to circumstance , have learn to mix her material to an 
 extraordinary fineness and to perform the whole operation with extreme 
 smoothness . the prince be stupid , Rowland suspect , but he imagine 
 he be amiable , and he see that at any rate he have the great quality 
 of regard himself in a thoroughly serious light . Rowland touch his 
 companion 's arm and point to the melancholy nobleman . 

 " why in the world do he not go after she and insist on be notice ! " 
 he ask . 

 " oh , he be very proud ! " say the Cavaliere . 

 " that be all very well , but a gentleman who cultivate a passion for 
 that young lady must be prepared to make sacrifice . " 

 " he think he have already make a great many . he come of a very great 
 family - a race of prince who for six hundred year have marry none 
 but the daughter of prince . but he be seriously in love , and he would 
 marry she to - morrow . " 

 " and she will not have he ? " 

 " ah , she be very proud , too ! " the Cavaliere be silent a moment , as if 
 he be measure the propriety of frankness . he seem to have form 
 a high opinion of Rowland 's discretion , for he presently continue : 
 " it would be a great match , for she bring he neither a name nor a 
 fortune - nothing but her beauty . but the signorina will receive no 
 favor ; I know she well ! she would rather have her beauty blast than 
 seem to care about the marriage , and if she ever accept the prince it 
 will be only after he have implore she on his knee ! " 

 " but she do care about it , " say Rowland , " and to bring he to his 
 knee she be work upon his jealousy by pretend to be interested in 
 my friend Hudson . if you say more , you would say that , eh ? " 

 the Cavaliere 's shrewdness exchange a glance with Rowland 's . " by no 
 mean . Miss Light be a singular girl ; she have many romantic idea . 
 she would be quite capable of interesting herself seriously in an 
 interesting young man , like your friend , and do her utmost to 
 discourage a splendid suitor , like the prince . she would act sincerely 
 and she would go very far . but it would be unfortunate for the young 
 man , " he add , after a pause , " for at the last she would retreat ! " 

 " a singular girl , indeed ! " 

 " she would accept the more brilliant parti . I can answer for it . " 

 " and what would be her motive ? " 

 " she would be force . there would be circumstance .... I can not   tell you 
 more . " 

 " but this imply that the reject suitor would also come back . he 
 might grow tired of wait . " 

 " oh , this one be good ! look at he now . " Rowland look , and see that 
 the prince have leave his place by Mrs. Light and be march restlessly 
 to and fro between the villa and the parapet of the terrace . every now 
 and then he look at his watch . " in this country , you know , " say the 
 Cavaliere , " a young lady never go walk alone with a handsome young 
 man . it seem to he very strange . " 

 " it must seem to he monstrous , and if he overlook it he must be very 
 much in love . " 

 " oh , he will overlook it . he be far go . " 

 " who be this exemplary lover , then ; what be he ? " 

 " a Neapolitan ; one of the old house in Italy . he be a prince in your 
 english sense of the word , for he have a princely fortune . he be very 
 young ; he be only just of age ; he see the signorina last winter 
 in Naples . he fall in love with she from the first , but his family 
 interfere , and an old uncle , an ecclesiastic , Monsignor B - - , hurry 
 up to Naples , seize he , and lock he up . meantime he have pass his 
 majority , and he can dispose of himself . his relation be move heaven 
 and earth to prevent his marry Miss Light , and they have send we 
 word that he forfeit his property if he take his wife out of a certain 
 line . I have investigate the question minutely , and I find this be but 
 a fiction to frighten we . he be perfectly free ; but the estate be 
 such that it be no wonder they wish to keep they in their own hand . for 
 Italy , it be an extraordinary case of unincumbered property . the prince 
 have be an orphan from his third year ; he have therefore have a long 
 minority and make no inroad upon his fortune . besides , he be very 
 prudent and orderly ; I be only afraid that some day he will pull the 
 purse - string too tight . all these year his affair have be in the 
 hand of Monsignor B - - , who have manage they to perfection - pay off 
 mortagage , plant forest , open up mine . it be now a magnificent 
 fortune ; such a fortune as , with his name , would justify the young man 
 in pretend to any alliance whatsoever . and he lay it all at the foot 
 of that young girl who be wander in yonder boschetto with a penniless 
 artist . " 

 " he be certainly a phoenix of prince ! the signora must be in a state of 
 bliss . " 

 the Cavaliere look imperturbably grave . " the signora have a high esteem 
 for his character . " 

 " his character , by the way , " rejoin Rowland , with a smile ; " what sort 
 of a character be it ? " 

 " eh , Prince Casamassima be a veritable prince ! he be a very good young 
 man . he be not brilliant , nor witty , but he will not let himself be make 
 a fool of . he be very grave and very devout - though he do propose to 
 marry a protestant . he will handle that point after marriage . he be as 
 you see he there : a young man without many idea , but with a very firm 
 grasp of a single one - the conviction that Prince Casamassima be a very 
 great person , that he greatly honor any young lady by ask for her 
 hand , and that thing be go very strangely when the young lady 
 turn she back upon he . the poor young man , I be sure , be profoundly 
 perplexed . but I whisper to he every day , ' Pazienza , Signor Principe ! ' " 

 " so you firmly believe , " say Rowland , in conclusion , " that Miss Light 
 will accept he just in time not to lose he ! " 

 " I count upon it . she would make too perfect a princess to miss her 
 destiny . " 

 " and you hold that nevertheless , in the mean while , in listen to , 
 say , my friend Hudson , she will have be act in good faith ? " 

 the Cavaliere lift his shoulder a trifle , and give an inscrutable 
 smile . " eh , dear signore , the Christina be very romantic ! " 

 " so much so , you intimate , that she will eventually retract , in 
 consequence not of a change of sentiment , but of a mysterious outward 
 pressure ? " 

 " if everything else fail , there be that resource . but it be mysterious , 
 as you say , and you need not   try to guess it . you will never know . " 

 " the poor signorina , then , will suffer ! " 

 " not too much , I hope . " 

 " and the poor young man ! you maintain that there be nothing but 
 disappointment in store for the infatuated youth who lose his heart to 
 she ! " 

 the Cavaliere hesitate . " he have well , " he say in a moment , " go and 
 pursue his study in Florence . there be very fine antique in the 
 Uffizi ! " 

 Rowland presently join Mrs. Light , to whom her restless protege have 
 not yet return . " that be right , " she say ; ' sit down here ; I have 
 something serious to say to you . I be go to talk to you as a friend . 
 I want your assistance . in fact , I demand it ; it be your duty to render 
 it . look at that unhappy young man . " 

 " yes , " say Rowland , " he seem unhappy . " 

 " he be just come of age , he bear one of the great name in Italy and 
 own one of the great property , and he be pin away with love for 
 my daughter . " 

 " so the Cavaliere tell I . " 

 " the Cavaliere should not   gossip , " say Mrs. Light dryly . " such 
 information should come from I . the prince be pin , as I say ; he be 
 consume , he be devour . it be a real italian passion ; I know what that 
 mean ! " and the lady give a speak glance , which seem to coquet 
 for a moment with retrospect . " meanwhile , if you please , my daughter be 
 hide in the wood with your dear friend Mr. Hudson . I could cry with 
 rage . " 

 " if thing be so bad as that , " say Rowland , " it seem to I that you 
 ought to find nothing easy than to dispatch the Cavaliere to bring the 
 guilty couple back . " 

 " never in the world ! my hand be tie . do you know what Christina 
 would do ? she would tell the Cavaliere to go about his business - Heaven 
 forgive she ! - and send I word that , if she have a mind to , she would 
 walk in the wood till midnight . Fancy the Cavaliere come back and 
 deliver such a message as that before the prince ! think of a girl 
 wantonly make light of such a chance as her ! he would marry she 
 to - morrow , at six o'clock in the morning ! " 

 " it be certainly very sad , " say Rowland . 

 " that cost you little to say . if you have leave your precious young 
 meddler to vegetate in his native village you would have save I a 
 world of distress ! " 

 " Nay , you march into the jaw of danger , " say Rowland . " you come and 
 disinter poor Hudson in his own seclude studio . " 

 " in an evil hour ! I wish to Heaven you would talk with he . " 

 " I have do my good . " 

 " I wish , then , you would take he away . you have plenty of money . do I 
 a favor . take he to travel . go to the East - go to timbuctoo . then , when 
 Christina be Princess Casamassima , " Mrs. Light add in a moment , " he 
 may come back if he choose . " 

 " do she really care for he ? " Rowland ask , abruptly . 

 " she think she do , possibly . she be a live riddle . she must need 
 follow out every idea that come into her head . fortunately , most of 
 they do not   last long ; but this one may last long enough to give the 
 prince a chill . if that be to happen , I do not   know what I should do ! I 
 should be the most miserable of woman . it would be too cruel , after 
 all I ' ve   suffer to make she what she be , to see the labor of year 
 blight by a caprice . for I can assure you , sir , " Mrs. Light go on , 
 " that if my daughter be the great beauty in the world , some of the 
 credit be mine . " 

 Rowland promptly remark that this be obvious . he see that the lady 's 
 irritated nerve demand comfort from flattering reminiscence , and 
 he assume designedly the attitude of a zealous auditor . she begin 
 to retail her effort , her hope , her dream , her presentiment , her 
 disappointment , in the cause of her daughter 's matrimonial fortune . it 
 be a long story , and while it be be unfold , the prince continue 
 to pass to and fro , stiffly and solemnly , like a pendulum mark 
 the time allow for the young lady to come to her sens . Mrs. Light 
 evidently , at an early period , have gather her maternal hope into 
 a sacred sheaf , which she say her prayer and burn incense to , and 
 treat like a sort of fetish . they have be her religion ; she have none 
 other , and she perform her devotion bravely and cheerily , in the 
 light of day . the poor old fetish have be so caressed and manipulate , 
 so thrust in and out of its niche , so pass from hand to hand , so 
 dressed and undressed , so mumbled and fumble over , that it have lose by 
 this time much of its early freshness , and seem a rather batter 
 and disfeatured divinity . but it be still bring forth in moment of 
 trouble to have its tinsel petticoat twist about and be set up 
 on its altar . Rowland observe that Mrs. Light have a genuine maternal 
 conscience ; she consider that she have be perform a sacred duty in 
 bring up Christina to set her cap for a prince , and when the future 
 look dark , she find consolation in think that destiny could never 
 have the heart to deal a blow at so deserve a person . this conscience 
 upside down present to Rowland 's fancy a real physical image ; he be 
 on the point , half a dozen time , of burst out laugh . 

 " I do not   know whether you believe in presentiment , " say Mrs. Light , 
 " and I do not   care ! I have have one for the last fifteen year . People 
 have laugh at it , but they have not   laugh I out of it . it have be 
 everything to I . I could not   have live without it . one must believe in 
 something ! it come to I in a flash , when Christina be five year old . 
 I remember the day and the place , as if it be yesterday . she be a 
 very ugly baby ; for the first two year I could hardly bear to look at 
 she , and I use to spoil my own look with cry about she . she have an 
 italian nurse who be very fond of she and insist that she would grow 
 up pretty . I could not   believe she ; I use to contradict she , and we 
 be forever squabble . I be just a little silly in those day - surely 
 I may say it now - and I be very fond of be amuse . if my daughter 
 be ugly , it be not that she resemble her mamma ; I have no lack of 
 amusement . People accuse I , I believe , of neglect my little girl ; 
 if it be so , I ' ve   make up for it since . one day I go to drive on the 
 Pincio in very low spirit . a trusted friend have greatly disappoint 
 I . while I be there he pass I in a carriage , drive with a 
 horrible woman who have make trouble between we . I get out of my carriage 
 to walk about , and at last sit down on a bench . I can show you the spot 
 at this hour . while I sit there a child come wander along the path - a 
 little girl of four or five , very fantastically dress in crimson and 
 orange . she stop in front of I and star at I , and I star at her 
 queer little dress , which be a cheap imitation of the costume of one 
 of these contadine . at last I look up at her face , and say to myself , 
 ' bless I , what a beautiful child ! what a splendid pair of eye , what a 
 magnificent head of hair ! if my poor Christina be only like that ! ' the 
 child turn away slowly , but look back with its eye fix on I . 
 all of a sudden I give a cry , pounce on it , press it in my arm , 
 and cover it with kiss . it be Christina , my own precious child , so 
 disguise by the ridiculous dress which the nurse have amuse herself in 
 make for she , that her own mother have not recognize she . she know I , 
 but she say afterwards that she have not speak to I because I look 
 so angry . of course my face be sad . I rush with my child to the 
 carriage , drive home post - haste , pull off her rag , and , as I may say , 
 wrap she in cotton . I have be blind , I have be insane ; she be 
 a creature in ten million , she be to be a beauty of beauty , a 
 priceless treasure ! every day , after that , the certainty grow . from that 
 time I live only for my daughter . I watch she , I caress she from 
 morning till night , I worship she . I go to see doctor about she , 
 I take every sort of advice . I be determined she should be perfection . 
 the thing that have be do for that girl , sir - you would not   believe 
 they ; they would make you smile ! nothing be spar ; if I have be tell 
 that she must have a bath every morning of molten pearl , I would have 
 find mean to give it to she . she never raise a finger for herself , 
 she breathe nothing but perfume , she walk upon velvet . she never 
 be out of my sight , and from that day to this I have never say a sharp 
 word to she . by the time she be ten year old she be beautiful as an 
 angel , and so noticed wherever we go that I have to make she wear a 
 veil , like a woman of twenty . her hair reach down to her foot ; her 
 hand be the hand of a princess . then I see that she be as clever 
 as she be beautiful , and that she have only to play her card . she have 
 master , professor , every educational advantage . they tell I she be 
 a little prodigy . she speak french , italian , german , well than 
 most native . she have a wonderful genius for music , and might make she 
 fortune as a pianist , if it be not make for she otherwise ! I travel 
 all over Europe ; every one tell I she be a marvel . the director of the 
 opera in Paris see her dance at a child 's party at Spa , and offer 
 I an enormous sum if I would give she up to he and let he have she 
 educate for the ballet . I say , ' no , I thank you , sir ; she be mean 
 to be something fine than a princesse de theatre . ' I have a passionate 
 belief that she might marry absolutely whom she choose , that she might be 
 a princess out and out . it have never leave I till this hour , and I can 
 assure you that it have sustain I in many embarrassment . financial , 
 some of they ; I do not   mind confess it ! I have raise money on that 
 girl 's face ! I ' ve   take she to the Jews and bid she put up her veil , 
 and ask if the mother of that young lady be not safe ! she , of course , 
 be too young to understand I . and yet , as a child , you would have say 
 she know what be in store for she ; before she could read , she have the 
 manner , the taste , the instinct of a little princess . she would have 
 nothing to do with shabby thing or shabby people ; if she stain one of 
 her frock , she be seize with a kind of frenzy and tear it to piece . 
 at Nice , at Baden , at Brighton , wherever we stay , she use to be send 
 for by all the great people to play with their child . she have play 
 at kissing - game with people who now stand on the step of throne ! I 
 have go so far as to think at time that those childish kiss be a 
 sign - a symbol - a portent . you may laugh at I if you like , but have not 
 such thing happen again and again without half as good a cause , and 
 do not   history notoriously repeat itself ? there be a little spanish 
 girl at a second - rate english boarding - school thirty year ago ! ... the 
 Empress certainly be a pretty woman ; but what be my Christina , pray ? I 
 ' ve   dream of it , sometimes every night for a month . I will not   tell you 
 I have be to consult those old woman who advertise in the newspaper ; 
 you will call I an old imbecile . imbecile if you please ! I have refuse 
 magnificent offer because I believe that somehow or other - if war and 
 revolution be need to bring it about - we should have nothing less 
 than that . there might be another coup d'etat somewhere , and another 
 brilliant young sovereign look out for a wife ! at last , however , " 
 Mrs. Light proceed with incomparable gravity , ' since the overturning 
 of the poor king of Naples and that charming queen , and the expulsion 
 of all those dear little old - fashioned italian grand - duke , and the 
 dreadful radical talk that be go on all over the world , it have come 
 to seem to I that with Christina in such a position I should be really 
 very nervous . even in such a position she would hold her head very high , 
 and if anything should happen to she , she would make no concession 
 to the popular fury . the good thing , if one be prudent , seem to be a 
 nobleman of the high possible rank , short of belong to a reign 
 stock . there you see one stride up and down , look at his watch , and 
 count the minute till my daughter reappear ! " 

 Rowland listen to all this with a huge compassion for the heroine of 
 the tale . what an education , what a history , what a school of character 
 and of moral ! he look at the prince and wonder whether he too have 
 hear Mrs. Light 's story . if he have he be a brave man . " I certainly 
 hope you will keep he , " he say to Mrs. Light . " you have play a 
 dangerous game with your daughter ; it would be a pity not to win . but 
 there be hope for you yet ; here she come at last ! " 

 Christina reappear as he speak these word , stroll beside her 
 companion with the same indifferent tread with which she have depart . 
 Rowland imagine that there be a faint pink flush in her cheek which 
 she have not carry away with she , and there be certainly a light in 
 Roderick 's eye which he have not see there for a week . 

 " bless my soul , how they be all look at we ! " she cry , as they 
 advance . " one would think we be prisoner of the inquisition ! " and 
 she pause and glance from the prince to her mother , and from 
 Rowland to the Cavaliere , and then throw back her head and burst into 
 far - ring laughter . " what be it , pray ? have I be very improper ? be I 
 ruin forever ? dear prince , you be look at I as if I have commit 
 the unpardonable sin ! " 

 " I myself , " say the prince , " would never have venture to ask you to 
 walk with I alone in the country for an hour ! " 

 " the more fool you , dear prince , as the vulgar say ! our walk have be 
 charming . I hope you , on your side , have enjoy each other 's society . " 

 " my dear daughter , " say Mrs. Light , take the arm of her predestine 
 son - in - law , " I shall have something serious to say to you when we reach 
 home . we will go back to the carriage . " 

 " something serious ! decidedly , it be the Inquisition . Mr. Hudson , 
 stand firm , and let we agree to make no confession without confer 
 previously with each other ! they may put we on the rack first . Mr. 
 Mallet , I see also , " Christina add , " have something serious to say to 
 I ! " 

 Rowland have be look at she with the shadow of his lately - stir 
 pity in his eye . " possibly , " he say . " but it must be for some other 
 time . " 

 " I be at your service . I see our good - humor be go . and I only want 
 to be amiable ! it be very discouraging . Cavaliere , you , only , look as if 
 you have a little of the milk of human kindness leave ; from your venerable 
 visage , at least ; there be no tell what you think . give I your arm 
 and take I away ! " 

 the party take its course back to the carriage , which be wait in 
 the ground of the villa , and Rowland and Roderick bid their friend 
 farewell . Christina throw herself back in her seat and close her eye ; 
 a manoeuvre for which Rowland imagine the prince be grateful , as it 
 enable he to look at she without seem to depart from his attitude 
 of distinguished disapproval . Rowland find himself arouse from sleep 
 early the next morning , to see Roderick stand before he , dress for 
 departure , with his bag in his hand . " I be off , " he say . " I be back to 
 work . I have an idea . I must strike while the iron 's hot ! farewell ! " 
 and he depart by the first train . Rowland go alone by the next . 






 CHAPTER VII . Saint Cecilia 's 

 Rowland go often to the coliseum ; he never weary of it . one morning , 
 about a month after his return from Frascati , as he be stroll across 
 the vast arena , he observe a young woman seat on one of the fragment 
 of stone which be range along the line of the ancient parapet . it 
 seem to he that he have see she before , but he be unable to localize 
 her face . pass she again , he perceive that one of the little 
 red - legged french soldier at that time on guard there have approach 
 she and be gallantly make himself agreeable . she smile brilliantly , 
 and Rowland recognize the smile   it have always please he   of a 
 certain comely Assunta , who sometimes open the door for Mrs. Light 's 
 visitor . he wonder what she be do alone in the coliseum , and 
 conjecture that Assunta have admirer as well as her young mistress , but 
 that , be without the same domiciliary conveniencie , she be use 
 this massive heritage of her latin ancestor as a boudoir . in other 
 word , she have an appointment with her lover , who have well , from 
 present appearance , be punctual . it be a long time since Rowland have 
 ascend to the ruinous upper tier of the great circus , and , as the day 
 be radiant and the distant view promise to be particularly clear , 
 he determine to give himself the pleasure . the custodian unlock the 
 great wooden wicket , and he climb through the winding shaft , where 
 the eager roman crowd have billow and trample , not pause till he 
 reach the high accessible point of the ruin . the view be as fine 
 as he have suppose ; the light on the Sabine Mountains have never be 
 more lovely . he gaze to his satisfaction and retrace his step . in 
 a moment he pause again on an abutment somewhat low , from which 
 the glance drop dizzily into the interior . there be chance 
 anfractuositie of ruin in the upper portion of the coliseum which 
 offer a very fair imitation of the rugged face of an Alpine cliff . in 
 those day a multitude of delicate flower and spray of wild herbage 
 have find a friendly soil in the hoary crevice , and they bloom and 
 nod amid the antique masonry as freely as they would have do in the 
 virgin rock . Rowland be turn away , when he hear a sound of voice 
 rise up from below . he have but to step slightly forward to find 
 himself overlook two person who have seat themselves on a narrow 
 ledge , in a sunny corner . they have apparently have an eye to extreme 
 privacy , but they have not observe that their position be command by 
 Rowland 's stand - point . one of these airy adventurer be a lady , thickly 
 veil , so that , even if he have not be stand directly above she , 
 Rowland could not have see her face . the other be a young man , whose 
 face be also invisible , but who , as Rowland stand there , give a toss 
 of his cluster lock which be equivalent to the signature - Roderick 
 Hudson . a moment 's reflection , hereupon , satisfy he of the identity 
 of the lady . he have be unjust to poor Assunta , sit patient in the 
 gloomy arena ; she have not come on her own errand . Rowland 's discovery 
 make he hesitate . should he retire as noiselessly as possible , or 
 should he call out a friendly good morning ? while he be debate the 
 question , he find himself distinctly hear his friend ' word . they 
 be of such a nature as to make he unwilling to retreat , and yet 
 to make it awkward to be discover in a position where it would be 
 apparent that he have hear they . 

 " if what you say be true , " say Christina , with her usual soft 
 deliberateness - it make her word rise with peculiar distinctness to 
 Rowland 's ear - " you be simply weak . I be sorry ! I hop - I really 
 believe - you be not . " 

 " no , I be not weak , " answer Roderick , with vehemence ; " I maintain that 
 I be not weak ! I be incomplete , perhaps ; but I can not   help that . weakness 
 be a man 's own fault ! " 

 " Incomplete , then ! " say Christina , with a laugh . " it be the same thing , 
 so long as it keep you from splendid achievement . be it write , then , 
 that I shall really never know what I have so often dream of ? " 

 " what have you dream of ? " 

 " a man whom I can perfectly respect ! " cry the young girl , with a 
 sudden flame . " a man , at least , whom I can unrestrictedly admire . I meet 
 one , as I have meet more than one before , whom I fondly believe to be 
 cast in a large mould than most of the vile human breed , to be large 
 in character , great in talent , strong in will ! in such a man as that , 
 I say , one 's weary imagination at last may rest ; or it may wander if it 
 will , yet never need to wander far from the deep where one 's heart be 
 anchor . when I first know you , I give no sign , but you have strike 
 I . I observe you , as woman observe , and I fancy you have the sacred 
 fire . " 

 " before heaven , I believe I have ! " cry Roderick . 

 " ah , but so little ! it flicker and tremble and sputter ; it go out , 
 you tell I , for whole week together . from your own account , it be ten 
 to one that in the long run you be a failure . " 

 " I say those thing sometimes myself , but when I hear you say they they 
 make I feel as if I could work twenty year at a sitting , on purpose to 
 refute you ! " 

 " ah , the man who be strong with what I call strength , " Christina 
 reply , " would neither rise nor fall by anything I could say ! I be a 
 poor , weak woman ; I have no strength myself , and I can give no strength . 
 I be a miserable medley of vanity and folly . I be silly , I be ignorant , 
 I be affect , I be false . I be the fruit of a horrible education , sow 
 on a worthless soil . I be all that , and yet I believe I have one merit ! 
 I should know a great character when I see it , and I should delight in 
 it with a generosity which would do something toward the remission of 
 my sin . for a man who should really give I a certain feeling - which 
 I have never have , but which I should know when it come - I would send 
 Prince Casamassima and his million to perdition . I do not   know what you 
 think of I for say all this ; I suppose we have not climb up here 
 under the sky to play propriety . why have you be at such pain to 
 assure I , after all , that you be a little man and not a great one , a 
 weak one and not a strong ? I innocently imagine that your eye declare 
 you be strong . but your voice condemn you ; I always wonder at it ; 
 it be not the voice of a conqueror ! " 

 " give I something to conquer , " cry Roderick , " and when I say that I 
 thank you from my soul , my voice , whatever you think of it , shall speak 
 the truth ! " 

 Christina for a moment say nothing . Rowland be too interested to think 
 of move . " you pretend to such devotion , " she go on , " and yet I 
 be sure you have never really choose between I and that person in 
 America . " 

 " do I the favor not to speak of she , " say Roderick , imploringly . 

 " why not ? I say no ill of she , and I think all kind of good . I be 
 certain she be a far well girl than I , and far more likely to make you 
 happy . " 

 " this be happiness , this present , palpable moment , " say Roderick ; 
 " though you have such a genius for say the thing that torture I ! " 

 " it be great happiness than you deserve , then ! you have never choose , 
 I say ; you have be afraid to choose . you have never really face the 
 fact that you be false , that you have break your faith . you have never 
 look at it and see that it be hideous , and yet say , ' no matter , I 
 will brave the penalty , I will bear the shame ! ' you have close your eye ; 
 you have try to stifle remembrance , to persuade yourself that you be 
 not behave as badly as you seem to be , and there would be some 
 way , after all , of compass bliss and yet escape trouble . you have 
 falter and drift , you have go on from accident to accident , and I 
 be sure that at this present moment you can not   tell what it be you really 
 desire ! " 

 Roderick be sit with his knee draw up and bent , and his hand 
 clapse around his leg . he bend his head and rest his forehead on his 
 knee . 

 Christina go on with a sort of infernal calmness : " I believe that , 
 really , you do not   greatly care for your friend in America any more than 
 you do for I . you be one of the man who care only for themselves and 
 for what they can make of themselves . that be very well when they 
 can make something great , and I could interest myself in a man of 
 extraordinary power who should wish to turn all his passion to account . 
 but if the power should turn out to be , after all , rather ordinary ? 
 Fancy feel one 's self ground in the mill of a third - rate talent ! if 
 you have doubt about yourself , I can not   reassure you ; I have too many 
 doubt myself , about everything in this weary world . you have go up 
 like a rocket , in your profession , they tell I ; be you go to come 
 down like the stick ? I do not   pretend to know ; I repeat frankly what I 
 have say before - that all modern sculpture seem to I weak , and that 
 the only thing I care for be some of the most battered of the antique 
 of the Vatican . no , no , I can not   reassure you ; and when you tell 
 I - with a confidence in my discretion of which , certainly , I be duly 
 sensible - that at time you feel terribly small , why , I can only answer , 
 ' ah , then , my poor friend , I be afraid you be small . ' the language I 
 should like to hear , from a certain person , would be the language of 
 absolute decision . " 

 Roderick raise his head , but he say nothing ; he seem to be 
 exchange a long glance with his companion . the result of it be 
 to make he fle himself back with an inarticulate murmur . Rowland , 
 admonish by the silence , be on the point of turn away , but he be 
 arrest by a gesture of the young girl . she point for a moment into 
 the blue air . roderick follow the direction of her gesture . 

 " be that little flower we see outline against that dark niche , " she 
 ask , " as intensely blue as it look through my veil ? " she speak 
 apparently with the amiable design of direct the conversation into a 
 less painful channel . 

 Rowland , from where he stand , could see the flower she mean - a delicate 
 plant of radiant hue , which sprout from the top of an immense fragment 
 of wall some twenty foot from Christina 's place . 

 Roderick turn his head and look at it without answer . at last , 
 glance round , " put up your veil ! " he say . Christina comply . " do 
 it look as blue now ? " he ask . 

 " ah , what a lovely color ! " she murmur , lean her head on one side . 

 " would you like to have it ? " 

 she star a moment and then break into a light laugh . 

 " would you like to have it ? " he repeat in a ringing voice . 

 " do not   look as if you would eat I up , " she answer . " it be harmless if 
 I say yes ! " 

 Roderick rise to his foot and stand look at the little flower . it 
 be separate from the ledge on which he stand by a rugged surface of 
 vertical wall , which drop straight into the dusky vault behind the 
 arena . suddenly he take off his hat and fling it behind he . Christina 
 then spring to her foot . 

 " I will bring it you , " he say . 

 she seize his arm . " be you crazy ? do you mean to kill yourself ? " 

 " I shall not kill myself . sit down ! " 

 " excuse I . not till you do ! " and she grasp his arm with both hand . 

 Roderick shake she off and point with a violent gesture to her former 
 place . " go there ! " he cry fiercely . 

 " you can never , never ! " she murmur beseechingly , clasp her hand . 
 " I implore you ! " 

 Roderick turn and look at she , and then in a voice which Rowland have 
 never hear he use , a voice almost thunderous , a voice which awaken 
 the echo of the mighty ruin , he repeat , " sit down ! " she hesitate 
 a moment and then she drop on the ground and bury her face in her 
 hand . 

 Rowland have see all this , and he see more . he see Roderick clasp in 
 his left arm the jagged corner of the vertical partition along which he 
 propose to pursue his crazy journey , stretch out his leg , and feel for 
 a resting - place for his foot . Rowland have measure with a glance the 
 possibility of his sustain himself , and pronounce it absolutely nil . 
 the wall be garnish with a series of narrow projection , the remain 
 apparently of a brick cornice support the arch of a vault which have 
 long since collapse . it be by lodge his toe on these loose bracket 
 and grasp with his hand at certain mouldering protuberance on a 
 level with his head , that Roderick intend to proceed . the relic of 
 the cornice be utterly worthless as a support . Rowland have observe 
 this , and yet , for a moment , he have hesitate . if the thing be 
 possible , he feel a sudden admire glee at the thought of Roderick 's 
 do it . it would be finely do , it would be gallant , it would have 
 a sort of masculine eloquence as an answer to Christina 's sinister 
 persiflage . but it be not possible ! Rowland leave his place with a 
 bind , and scramble down some neighboring step , and the next moment 
 a strong pair of hand than Christina 's be lay upon Roderick 's 
 shoulder . 

 he turn , star , pale and angry . Christina rise , pale and star , 
 too , but beautiful in her wonder and alarm . " my dear roderick , " say 
 Rowland , " I be only prevent you from do a very foolish thing . that 
 be an exploit for spider , not for young sculptor of promise . " 

 Roderick wipe his forehead , look back at the wall , and then close 
 his eye , as if with a spasm , of retarded dizziness . " I will not   resist 
 you , " he say . " but I have make you obey , " he add , turn to 
 Christina . " be I weak now ? " 

 she have recover her composure ; she look straight past he and 
 address Rowland : " be so good as to show I the way out of this 
 horrible place ! " 

 he help she back into the corridor ; Roderick follow after a short 
 interval . of course , as they be descend the step , come question 
 for Rowland to answer , and more or less surprise . where have he come 
 from ? how happen he to have appear at just that moment ? Rowland 
 answer that he have be ramble overhead , and that , look out of an 
 aperture , he have see a gentleman prepare to undertake a preposterous 
 gymnastic feat , and a lady swoon away in consequence . interference 
 seem justifiable , and he have make it as prompt as possible . roderick 
 be far from hang his head , like a man who have be catch in the 
 perpetration of an extravagant folly ; but if he hold it more erect than 
 usual Rowland believe that this be much less because he have make 
 a show of personal daring than because he have triumphantly prove to 
 christina that , like a certain person she have dream of , he too could 
 speak the language of decision . Christina descend to the arena in 
 silence , apparently occupy with her own thought . she betray 
 no sense of the privacy of her interview with Roderick need an 
 explanation . Rowland have see strange thing in New York ! the only 
 evidence of her recent agitation be that , on be join by she maid , 
 she declare that she be unable to walk home ; she must have a carriage . 
 a fiacre be find rest in the shadow of the Arch of Constantine , 
 and Rowland suspect that after she have get into it she disburden 
 herself , under her veil , of a few natural tear . 

 Rowland have play eavesdropper to so good a purpose that he might 
 justly have omit the ceremony of denounce himself to Roderick . he 
 prefer , however , to let he know that he have overhear a portion of 
 his talk with Christina . 

 " of course it seem to you , " Roderick say , " a proof that I be utterly 
 infatuate . " 

 " Miss Light seem to I to know very well how far she could go , " 
 Rowland answer . " she be twist you round her finger . I do not   think 
 she exactly mean to defy you ; but your crazy pursuit of that flower 
 be a proof that she could go all length in the way of make a fool of 
 you . " 

 " yes , " say Roderick , meditatively ; ' she be make a fool of I . " 

 " and what do you expect to come of it ? " 

 " nothing good ! " and Roderick put his hand into his pocket and look 
 as if he have announce the most colorless fact in the world . 

 " and in the light of your late interview , what do you make of your young 
 lady ? " 

 " if I could tell you that , it would be plain sailing . but she will not 
 tell I again I be weak ! " 

 " be you very sure you be not weak ? " 

 " I may be , but she shall never know it . " 

 Rowland say no more until they reach the Corso , when he ask his 
 companion whether he be go to his studio . 

 Roderick start out of a reverie and pass his hand over his eye . 
 " oh no , I can not   settle down to work after such a scene as that . I be 
 not afraid of break my neck then , but I feel all in a tremor now . I 
 will go - I will go and sit in the sun on the Pincio ! " 

 " promise I this , first , " say Rowland , very solemnly : " that the next 
 time you meet Miss Light , it shall be on the earth and not in the air . " 

 since his return from Frascati , Roderick have be work doggedly at 
 the statue order by Mr. Leavenworth . to Rowland 's eye he have make a 
 very fair beginning , but he have himself insist , from the first , that 
 he like neither his subject nor his patron , and that it be impossible 
 to feel any warmth of interest in a work which be to be incorporate 
 into the ponderous personality of Mr. Leavenworth . it be all against 
 the grain ; he work without love . nevertheless after a fashion he 
 work , and the figure grow beneath his hand . Miss Blanchard 's friend 
 be order work of art on every side , and his purveyor be in many 
 case person whom Roderick declare it be infamy to be pair with . 
 there have be grand tailor , he say , who decline to make you a coat 
 unless you get the hat you be to wear with it from an artist of their 
 own choosing . it seem to he that he have an equal right to exact that 
 his statue should not form part of the same system of ornament as the 
 " Pearl of Perugia , " a picture by an american confrere who have , in Mr. 
 Leavenworth 's opinion , a prodigious eye for color . as a customer , Mr. 
 Leavenworth use to drop into Roderick 's studio , to see how thing 
 be get on , and give a friendly hint or so . he would seat himself 
 squarely , plant his gold - top cane between his leg , which he hold 
 very much apart , rest his large white hand on the head , and enunciate 
 the principle of spiritual art , as he hoist they one by one , as you 
 might say , out of the depth of his moral consciousness . his benignant 
 and imperturbable pomposity give Roderick the sense of suffocating 
 beneath a large fluffy bolster , and the bad of the matter be that 
 the good gentleman 's placid vanity have an integument whose toughness no 
 sarcastic shaft could pierce . Roderick admit that in thinking 
 over the tribulation of struggle genius , the danger of die of 
 over - patronage have never occur to he . 

 the deter effect of the episode of the Coliseum be apparently of 
 long continuance ; if Roderick 's nerve have be shake his hand need 
 time to recover its steadiness . he cultivate composure upon principle 
 of his own ; by frequent entertainment from which he return at four 
 o'clock in the morning , and lapse into habit which might fairly be 
 call irregular . he have hitherto make few friend among the artistic 
 fraternity ; chiefly because he have take no trouble about it , and 
 there be in his demeanor an elastic independence of the favor of his 
 fellow - mortal which make social advance on his own part peculiarly 
 necessary . Rowland have tell he more than once that he ought to 
 fraternize a trifle more with the other artist , and he have always 
 answer that he have not the small objection to fraternize : 
 let they come ! but they come on rare occasion , and Roderick be not 
 punctilious about return their visit . he declare there be not one 
 of they whose work give he the small desire to make acquaintance 
 with the inside of their head . for Gloriani he profess a superb 
 contempt , and , have be once to look at his ware , never cross 
 his threshold again . the only one of the fraternity for whom by his own 
 admission he care a straw be little Singleton ; but he express his 
 regard only in a kind of sublime hilarity whenever he encounter this 
 humble genius , and quite forget his existence in the interval . he have 
 never be to see he , but Singleton edge his way , from time to time , 
 timidly , into Roderick 's studio , and agree with characteristic modesty 
 that brilliant fellow like the sculptor might consent to receive 
 homage , but could hardly be expect to render it . roderick never 
 exactly accept homage , and apparently do not quite observe whether 
 poor Singleton speak in admiration or in blame . Roderick 's taste as to 
 companion be singularly capricious . there be very good fellow , who 
 be dispose to cultivate he , who bore he to death ; and there be 
 other , in whom even Rowland 's good - nature be unable to discover a 
 pretext for tolerance , in whom he appear to find the high social 
 quality . he use to give the most fantastic reason for his like and 
 dislike . he would declare he could not   speak a civil word to a man 
 who brush his hair in a certain fashion , and he would explain his 
 unaccountable fancy for an individual of imperceptible merit by tell 
 you that he have an ancestor who in the thirteenth century have wall up 
 his wife alive . " I like to talk to a man whose ancestor have wall up 
 his wife alive , " he would say . " you may not see the fun of it , and think 
 poor p - - be a very dull fellow . it be very possible ; I do not   ask you 
 to admire he . but , for reason of my own , I like to have he about . the 
 old fellow leave she for three day with her face uncover , and place 
 a long mirror opposite to she , so that she could see , as he say , if she 
 gown be a fit ! " 

 his relish for an odd flavor in his friend have lead he to make the 
 acquaintance of a number of people outside of Rowland 's well - order 
 circle , and he make no secret of their be very queer fish . he form 
 an intimacy , among other , with a crazy fellow who have come to Rome 
 as an emissary of one of the central american republic , to drive some 
 ecclesiastical bargain with the papal government . the Pope have give he 
 the cold shoulder , but since he have not prosper as a diplomatist , he 
 have seek compensation as a man of the world , and his great flamboyant 
 curricle and negro lackey be for several week one of the striking 
 ornament of the Pincian . he speak a queer jargon of Italian , spanish , 
 French , and English , humorously relieve with scrap of ecclesiastical 
 Latin , and to those who inquire of Roderick what he find to interest 
 he in such a fantastic jackanape , the latter would reply , look 
 at his interlocutor with his lucid blue eye , that it be worth any 
 sacrifice to hear he talk nonsense ! the two have go together one night 
 to a ball give by a lady of some renown in the spanish colony , and very 
 late , on his way home , Roderick come up to Rowland 's room , in whose 
 window he have see a light . Rowland be go to bed , but Roderick 
 fling himself into an armchair and chatter for an hour . the friend of 
 the costa rican envoy be as amusing as himself , and in very much the 
 same line . the mistress of the house have wear a yellow satin dress , and 
 gold heel to her slipper , and at the close of the entertainment have 
 send for a pair of castanet , tuck up her petticoat , and dance a 
 fandango , while the gentleman sit cross - legged on the floor . " it be 
 awfully low , " Roderick say ; " all of a sudden I perceive it , and 
 bolt . nothing of that kind ever amuse I to the end : before it be 
 half over it bore I to death ; it make I sick . hang it , why can not   a 
 poor fellow enjoy thing in peace ? my illusion be all break - winded ; 
 they will not   carry I twenty pace ! I can not   laugh and forget ; my 
 laugh die away before it begin . your friend Stendhal write on his 
 book - cover   I never get far   that he have see too early in life la 
 beaute parfaite . I do not   know how early he see it ; I see it before I be 
 bear - in another state of be ! I can not   describe it positively ; I can 
 only say I do not   find it anywhere now . not at the bottom of champagne 
 glass ; not , strange as it may seem , in that extra half - yard or so of 
 shoulder that some woman have their ball - dress cut to expose . I 
 do not   find it at merry supper - table , where half a dozen ugly man with 
 pomatume head be rapidly grow uglier still with heat and wine ; not 
 when I come away and walk through these squalid black street , and go 
 out into the Forum and see a few old battered stone post stand there 
 like gnaw bone stick into the earth . everything be mean and dusky 
 and shabby , and the man and woman who make up this so - call brilliant 
 society be the mean and shabbiest of all . they have no real 
 spontaneity ; they be all coward and popinjay . they have no more 
 dignity than so many grasshopper . nothing be good but one ! " and he 
 jump up and stand look at one of his statue , which shine vaguely 
 across the room in the dim lamplight . 

 " yes , do tell we , " say Rowland , " what to hold on by ! " 

 " those thing of mine be tolerably good , " he answer . " but my idea 
 be well - and that be what I mean ! " 

 Rowland say nothing . he be willing to wait for Roderick to complete 
 the circle of his metamorphosis , but he have no desire to officiate as 
 chorus to the play . if Roderick choose to fish in troubled water , he 
 must land his prize himself . 

 " you think I ' m an impudent humbug , " the latter say at last , " come 
 up to moralize at this hour of the night . you think I want to throw 
 dust into your eye , to put you off the scent . that be your eminently 
 rational view of the case . " 

 " excuse I from take any view at all , " say Rowland . 

 " you have give I up , then ? " 

 " no , I have merely suspend judgment . I be wait . " 

 " you have cease then positively to believe in I ? " 

 Rowland make an angry gesture . " oh , cruel boy ! when you have hit your 
 mark and make people care for you , you should not   twist your weapon 
 about at that rate in their vital . allow I to say I be sleepy . good 
 night ! " 

 some day afterward it happen that Rowland , on a long afternoon 
 ramble , take his way through one of the quiet corner of the Trastevere . 
 he be particularly fond of this part of Rome , though he could hardly 
 have express the charm he find in it . as you pass away from the 
 dusky , swarm purlieus of the Ghetto , you emerge into a region of 
 empty , soundless , grass - grow lane and alley , where the shabby house 
 seem moulder away in disuse , and yet your footstep bring figure of 
 startling roman type to the doorway . there be few monument here , but 
 no part of Rome seem more historic , in the sense of be weight 
 with a crush past , blight with the melancholy of thing that have 
 have their day . when the yellow afternoon sunshine sleep on the sallow , 
 battered wall , and lengthen the shadow in the grassy courtyard of 
 small closed church , the place acquire a strange fascination . the 
 church of Saint Cecilia have one of these sunny , waste - look court ; 
 the edifice seem abandon to silence and the charity of chance 
 devotion . Rowland never pass it without go in , and he be generally 
 the only visitor . he enter it now , but find that two person have 
 precede he . both be woman . one be at her prayer at one of the side 
 altar ; the other be seat against a column at the upper end of the 
 nave . Rowland walk to the altar , and pay , in a momentary glance at 
 the clever statue of the saint in death , in the niche beneath it , the 
 usual tribute to the charm of polished ingenuity . as he turn away he 
 look at the person seat and recognize Christina Light . see that 
 she perceive he , he advance to speak to she . 

 she be sit in a listless attitude , with her hand in her lap ; 
 she seem to be tired . she be dress simply , as if for walk and 
 escape observation . when he have greet she he glance back at her 
 companion , and recognize the faithful Assunta . 

 Christina smile . " be you look for Mr. Hudson ? he be not here , I be 
 happy to say . " 

 " but you ? " he ask . " this be a strange place to find you . " 

 " not at all ! People call I a strange girl , and I might as well have the 
 comfort of it . I come to take a walk ; that , by the way , be part of 
 my strangeness . I can not   loll all the morning on a sofa , and all the 
 afternoon in a carriage . I get horribly restless . I must move ; I must 
 do something and see something . Mamma suggest a cup of tea . meanwhile I 
 put on an old dress and half a dozen veil , I take Assunta under my arm , 
 and we start on a pedestrian tour . it be a bore that I can not   take the 
 poodle , but he attract attention . we trudge about everywhere ; there 
 be nothing I like so much . I hope you will congratulate I on the 
 simplicity of my taste . " 

 " I congratulate you on your wisdom . to live in Rome and not to walk 
 would , I think , be poor pleasure . but you be terribly far from home , 
 and I be afraid you be tired . " 

 " a little - enough to sit here a while . " 

 " might I offer you my company while you rest ? " 

 " if you will promise to amuse I . I be in dismal spirit . " 

 Rowland say he would do what he could , and bring a chair and place 
 it near she . he be not in love with she ; he disapprove of she ; he 
 mistrust she ; and yet he feel it a kind of privilege to watch she , and 
 he find a peculiar excitement in talk to she . the background of her 
 nature , as he would have call it , be large and mysterious , and it 
 emit strange , fantastic gleam and flash . watch for these rather 
 quicken one 's pulse . moreover , it be not a disadvantage to talk to 
 a girl who make one keep guard on one 's composure ; it diminish one 's 
 chronic liability to utter something less than revised wisdom . 

 Assunta have rise from her prayer , and , as he take his place , be 
 come back to her mistress . but Christina motion she away . " no , no ; 
 while you be about it , say a few dozen more ! " she say . " pray for I , " 
 she add in English . " pray , I say nothing silly . she have be at it 
 half an hour ; I envy her capacity ! " 

 " have you never feel in any degree , " Rowland ask , " the fascination of 
 Catholicism ? " 

 " yes , I have be through that , too ! there be a time when I want 
 immensely to be a nun ; it be not a laugh matter . it be when I be 
 about sixteen year old . I read the Imitation and the Life of Saint 
 Catherine . I fully believe in the miracle of the saint , and I be 
 die to have one of my own . the least little accident that could have 
 be twist into a miracle would have carry I straight into the 
 bosom of the church . I have the real religious passion . it have pass 
 away , and , as I sit here just now , I be wonder what have become of 
 it ! " 

 Rowland have already be sensible of something in this young lady 's tone 
 which he would have call a want of veracity , and this epitome of her 
 religious experience fail to strike he as an absolute statement of 
 fact . but the trait be not disagreeable , for she herself be evidently 
 the foremost dupe of her invention . she have a fictitious history 
 in which she believe much more fondly than in her real one , and an 
 infinite capacity for extemporize reminiscence adapt to the mood 
 of the hour . she like to idealize herself , to take interesting and 
 picturesque attitude to her own imagination ; and the vivacity and 
 spontaneity of her character give she , really , a starting - point in 
 experience ; so that the many - color flower of fiction which blossom 
 in her talk be not so much perversion , as sympathetic exaggeration , 
 of fact . and Rowland feel that whatever she say of herself might have 
 be , under the imagined circumstance ; impulse be there , audacity , the 
 restless , question temperament . " I be afraid I be sadly prosaic , " 
 he say , " for in these many month now that I have be in Rome , I 
 have never cease for a moment to look at Catholicism simply from the 
 outside . I do not   see an opening as big as your finger - nail where I could 
 creep into it ! " 

 " what do you believe ? " ask Christina , look at he . " be you 
 religious ? " 

 " I believe in God . " 

 Christina let her beautiful eye wander a while , and then give a little 
 sigh . " you be much to be envy ! " 

 " you , I imagine , in that line have nothing to envy I . " 

 " yes , I have . rest ! " 

 " you be too young to say that . " 

 " I be not young ; I have never be young ! my mother take care of that . I 
 be a little wrinkle old woman at ten . " 

 " I be afraid , " say Rowland , in a moment , " that you be fond of paint 
 yourself in dark color . " 

 she look at he a while in silence . " do you wish , " she demand at 
 last , " to win my eternal gratitude ? prove to I that I be well than I 
 suppose . " 

 " I should have first to know what you really suppose . " 

 she shake her head . " it would not   do . you would be horrify to learn 
 even the thing I imagine about myself , and shock at the knowledge of 
 evil display in my very mistake . " 

 " well , then , " say Rowland , " I will ask no question . but , at a venture , 
 I promise you to catch you some day in the act of do something very 
 good . " 

 " can it be , can it be , " she ask , " that you too be try to flatter 
 I ? I think you and I have fall , from the first , into rather a 
 truth - speak vein . " 

 " oh , I have not abandon it ! " say Rowland ; and he determine , since he 
 have the credit of homely directness , to push his advantage far . the 
 opportunity seem excellent . but while he be hesitate as to just how 
 to begin , the young girl say , bend forward and clasp her hand in 
 her lap , " please tell I about your religion . " 

 " tell you about it ? I can not ! " say Rowland , with a good deal of 
 emphasis . 

 she flush a little . " be it such a mighty mystery it can not be put into 
 word , nor communicate to my base ear ? " 

 " it be simply a sentiment that make part of my life , and I can not   detach 
 myself from it sufficiently to talk about it . " 

 " Religion , it seem to I , should be eloquent and aggressive . it should 
 wish to make convert , to persuade and illumine , to sway all heart ! " 

 " one 's religion take the color of one 's general disposition . I be not 
 aggressive , and certainly I be not eloquent . " 

 " Beware , then , of find yourself confront with doubt and despair ! I 
 be sure that doubt , at time , and the bitterness that come of it , can 
 be terribly eloquent . to tell the truth , my lonely musing , before 
 you come in , be eloquent enough , in their way . what do you know of 
 anything but this strange , terrible world that surround you ? how do you 
 know that your faith be not a mere crazy castle in the air ; one of those 
 castle that we be call fool for build when we lodge they in this 
 life ? " 

 " I do not   know it , any more than any one know the contrary . but one 's 
 religion be extremely ingenious in do without knowledge . " 

 " in such a world as this it certainly need to be ! " 

 Rowland smile . " what be your particular quarrel with this world ? " 

 " it be a general quarrel . nothing be true , or fix , or permanent . we 
 all seem to be play with shadow more or less grotesque . it all come 
 over I here so dismally ! the very atmosphere of this cold , deserted 
 church seem to mock at one 's longing to believe in something . who care 
 for it now ? who come to it ? who take it seriously ? poor stupid Assunta 
 there give in her adhesion in a jargon she do not   understand , and 
 you and I , proper , passionless tourist , come lounge in to rest from 
 a walk . and yet the catholic church be once the proud institution 
 in the world , and have quite its own way with man 's soul . when such a 
 mighty structure as that turn out to have a flaw , what faith be one to 
 put in one 's poor little view and philosophy ? what be right and what 
 be wrong ? what be one really to care for ? what be the proper rule of 
 life ? I be tired of try to discover , and I suspect it be not worth 
 the trouble . live as most amuse you ! " 

 " your perplexity be so terribly comprehensive , " say Rowland , 
 smile , " that one hardly know where to meet they first . " 

 " I do not   care much for anything you can say , because it be sure to be 
 half - hearted . you be not in the least content , yourself . " 

 " how do you know that ? " 

 " oh , I be an observer ! " 

 " no one be absolutely content , I suppose , but I assure you I complain 
 of nothing . " 

 " so much the bad for your honesty . to begin with , you be in love . " 

 " you would not have I complain of that ! " 

 " and it do not   go well . there be grievous obstacle . so much I know ! 
 you need not   protest ; I ask no question . you will tell no one - I least 
 of all . why do one never see you ? " 

 " why , if I come to see you , " say Rowland , deliberate , " it would not 
 be , it could not   be , for a trivial reason - because I have not be in a 
 month , because I be pass , because I admire you . it would be because 
 I should have something very particular to say . I have not come , because 
 I have be slow in make up my mind to say it . " 

 " you be simply cruel . something particular , in this ocean of inanity ? 
 in common charity , speak ! " 

 " I doubt whether you will like it . " 

 " oh , I hope to heaven it be not a compliment ! " 

 " it may be call a compliment to your reasonableness . you perhaps 
 remember that I give you a hint of it the other day at Frascati . " 

 " have it be hang fire all this time ? Explode ! I promise not to stop 
 my ear . " 

 " it relate to my friend Hudson . " and Rowland pause . she be look at 
 he expectantly ; her face give no sign . " I be rather disturb in mind 
 about he . he seem to I at time to be in an unpromising way . " he 
 pause again , but Christina say nothing . " the case be simply this , " 
 he go on . " it be by my advice he renounce his career at home and 
 embrace his present one . I make he burn his ship . I bring he to 
 Rome , I launch he in the world , and I stand surety , in a measure , 
 to - to his mother , for his prosperity . it be not such smooth sailing as 
 it might be , and I be inclined to put up prayer for fair wind . if he 
 be to succeed , he must work - quietly , devotedly . it be not news to you , 
 I imagine , that Hudson be a great admirer of your . " 

 Christina remain silent ; she turn away her eye with an air , not 
 of confusion , but of deep deliberation . surprising frankness have , as a 
 general thing , strike Rowland as the key - note of her character , but she 
 have more than once give he a suggestion of an unfathomable power 
 of calculation , and her silence now have something which it be hardly 
 extravagant to call portentous . he have of course ask himself how far 
 it be questionable taste to inform an unprotected girl , for the need 
 of a cause , that another man admire she ; the thing , superficially , have 
 an uncomfortable analogy with the shrewdness that use a cat 's paw and 
 let it risk be sing . but he decide that even rigid discretion 
 be not bind to take a young lady at more than her own valuation , 
 and Christina presently reassure he as to the limit of her 
 susceptibility . " Mr. Hudson be in love with I ! " she say . 

 Rowland flinch a trifle . then - " be I , " he ask , " from this point of 
 view of mine , to be glad or sorry ? " 

 " I do not   understand you . " 

 " why , be Hudson to be happy , or unhappy ? " 

 she hesitate a moment . " you wish he to be great in his profession ? and 
 for that you consider that he must be happy in his life ? " 

 " decidedly . I do not   say it be a general rule , but I think it be a rule 
 for he . " 

 " so that if he be very happy , he would become very great ? " 

 " he would at least do himself justice . " 

 " and by that you mean a great deal ? " 

 " a great deal . " 

 Christina sink back in her chair and rest her eye on the cracked 
 and polished slab of the pavement . at last , look up , " you have not 
 forget , I suppose , that you tell I he be engage ? " 

 " by no mean . " 

 " he be still engage , then ? " 

 " to the good of my belief . " 

 " and yet you desire that , as you say , he should be make happy by 
 something I can do for he ? " 

 " what I desire be this . that your great influence with he should 
 be exert for his good , that it should help he and not retard he . 
 understand I . you probably know that your lover have rather a restless 
 time of it . I can answer for two of they . you do not   know your own mind 
 very well , I imagine , and you like be admire , rather at the expense 
 of the admirer . since we be really be frank , I wonder whether I 
 might not say the great word . " 

 " you need not ; I know it . I be a horrible coquette . " 

 " no , not a horrible one , since I be make an appeal to your generosity . 
 I be pretty sure you can not imagine yourself marry my friend . " 

 " there be nothing I can not imagine ! that be my trouble . " 

 Rowland 's brow contract impatiently . " I can not imagine it , then ! " he 
 affirm . 

 Christina flush faintly ; then , very gently , " I be not so bad as you 
 think , " she say . 

 " it be not a question of badness ; it be a question of whether 
 circumstance do not   make the thing an extreme improbability . " 

 " bad and bad . I can be bully , then , or bribe ! " 

 " you be not so candid , " say Rowland , " as you pretend to be . my feeling 
 be this . Hudson , as I understand he , do not need , as an artist , the 
 stimulus of strong emotion , of passion . he be well without it ; he be 
 emotional and passionate enough when he be leave to himself . the soon 
 passion be at rest , therefore , the soon he will settle down to work , 
 and the few emotion he have that be mere emotion and nothing more , 
 the well for he . if you care for he enough to marry he , I should 
 have nothing to say ; I would never venture to interfere . but I strongly 
 suspect you do not , and therefore I would suggest , most respectfully , 
 that you should let he alone . " 

 " and if I let he alone , as you say , all will be well with he for ever 
 more ? " 

 " not immediately and not absolutely , but thing will be easy . he will 
 be well able to concentrate himself . " 

 " what be he do now ? wherein do he dissatisfy you ? " 

 " I can hardly say . he be like a watch that be run down . he be moody , 
 desultory , idle , irregular , fantastic . " 

 " Heavens , what a list ! and it be all poor I ? " 

 " no , not all . but you be a part of it , and I turn to you because you 
 be a more tangible , sensible , responsible cause than the other . " 

 Christina raise her hand to her eye , and bent her head thoughtfully . 
 Rowland be puzzle to measure the effect of his venture ; she rather 
 surprise he by her gentleness . at last , without move , " if I be to 
 marry he , " she ask , " what would have become of his fiancee ? " 

 " I be bind to suppose that she would be extremely unhappy . " 

 Christina say nothing more , and Rowland , to let she make she 
 reflection , leave his place and stroll away . Poor Assunta , sit 
 patiently on a stone bench , and unprovide , on this occasion , with 
 military consolation , give he a bright , frank smile , which might have 
 be construe as an expression of regret for herself , and of sympathy 
 for her mistress . Rowland presently seat himself again near Christina . 

 " what do you think , " she ask , look at he , " of your friend 's 
 infidelity ? " 

 " I do not   like it . " 

 " be he very much in love with she ? " 

 " he ask she to marry he . you may judge . " 

 " be she rich ? " 

 " no , she be poor . " 

 " be she very much in love with he ? " 

 " I know she too little to say . " 

 she pause again , and then resume : " you have settle in your mind , 
 then , that I will never seriously listen to he ? " 

 " I think it unlikely , until the contrary be prove . " 

 " how shall it be prove ? how do you know what pass between we ? " 

 " I can judge , of course , but from appearance ; but , like you , I be an 
 observer . Hudson have not at all the air of a prosperous suitor . " 

 " if he be depressed , there be a reason . he have a bad conscience . one 
 must hope so , at least . on the other hand , simply as a friend , " she 
 continue gently , " you think I can do he no good ? " 

 the humility of her tone , combine with her beauty , as she make this 
 remark , be inexpressibly touching , and Rowland have an uncomfortable 
 sense of be put at a disadvantage . " there be doubtless many good 
 thing you might do , if you have proper opportunity , " he say . " but you 
 seem to be sail with a current which leave you little leisure for 
 quiet benevolence . you live in the whirl and hurry of a world into which 
 a poor artist can hardly find it to his advantage to follow you . " 

 " in plain English , I be hopelessly frivolous . you put it very 
 generously . " 

 " I will not   hesitate to say all my thought , " say Rowland . " for well or 
 bad , you seem to I to belong , both by character and by circumstance , 
 to what be call the world , the great world . you be make to ornament 
 it magnificently . you be not make to be an artist 's wife . " 

 " I see . but even from your point of view , that would depend upon the 
 artist . extraordinary talent might make he a member of the great 
 world ! " 

 Rowland smile . " that be very true . " 

 " if , as it be , " Christina continue in a moment , " you take a low view of 
 I - no , you need not   protest - I wonder what you would think if you know 
 certain thing . " 

 " what thing do you mean ? " 

 " well , for example , how I be bring up . I have have a horrible 
 education . there must be some good in I , since I have perceive it , 
 since I have turn and judge my circumstance . " 

 " my dear Miss Light ! " Rowland murmur . 

 she give a little , quick laugh . " you do not   want to hear ? you do not   want 
 to have to think about that ? " 

 " have I a right to ? you need not   justify yourself . " 

 she turn upon he a moment the quickened light of her beautiful eye , 
 then fall to muse again . " be there not some novel or some play , " she 
 ask at last , " in which some beautiful , wicked woman who have ensnare a 
 young man see his father come to she and beg she to let he go ? " 

 " very likely , " say Rowland . " I hope she consent . " 

 " I forget . but tell I , " she continue , ' shall you consider - admit 
 your proposition - that in cease to flirt with Mr. Hudson , so that 
 he may go about his business , I do something magnanimous , heroic , 
 sublime - something with a fine name like that ? " 

 Rowland , elated with the prospect of gain his point , be about 
 to reply that she would deserve the fine name in the world ; but he 
 instantly suspect that this tone would not please she , and , besides , 
 it would not express his meaning . 

 " you do something I shall greatly respect , " he content himself with 
 say . 

 she make no answer , and in a moment she beckon to her maid . " what have 
 I to do to - day ? " she ask . 

 Assunta meditate . " eh , it be a very busy day ! fortunately I have a 
 well memory than the signorina , " she say , turn to Rowland . she 
 begin to count on her finger . " we have to go to the Pie di Marmo to see 
 about those lace that be send to be wash . you say also that you 
 wish to say three sharp word to the Buonvicini about your pink dress . 
 you want some moss - rosebuds for to - night , and you will not   get they for 
 nothing ! you dine at the Austrian Embassy , and that Frenchman be to 
 powder your hair . you be to come home in time to receive , for the 
 signora give a dance . and so away , away till morning ! " 

 " ah , yes , the moss - rose ! " Christina murmur , caressingly . " I must have 
 a quantity - at least a hundred . nothing but bud , eh ? you must sew they 
 in a kind of immense apron , down the front of my dress . pack tight 
 together , eh ? it will be delightfully barbarous . and then twenty more or 
 so for my hair . they go very well with powder ; do not   you think so ? " and 
 she turn to Rowland . " I be go en Pompadour . " 

 " go where ? " 

 " to the Spanish Embassy , or whatever it be . " 

 " all down the front , signorina ? Dio buono ! you must give I time ! " 
 Assunta cry . 

 " yes , we will go ! " and she leave her place . she walk slowly to the door 
 of the church , look at the pavement , and Rowland could not guess 
 whether she be think of her apron of moss - rosebuds or of her 
 opportunity for moral sublimity . before reach the door she turn 
 away and stand gaze at an old picture , indistinguishable with 
 blackness , over an altar . at last they pass out into the court . 
 glance at she in the open air , Rowland be startle ; he imagine he 
 see the trace of hastily suppress tear . they have lose time , she 
 say , and they must hurry ; she send Assunta to look for a fiacre . she 
 remain silent a while , scratch the ground with the point of her 
 parasol , and then at last , look up , she thank Rowland for his 
 confidence in her " reasonableness . " " it be really very comfortable to be 
 ask , to be expect , to do something good , after all the horrid thing 
 one have be use to do - instruct , command , force to do ! I will 
 think over what you have say to I . " in that deserted quarter fiacre 
 be rare , and there be some delay in Assunta 's procure one . Christina 
 talk of the church , of the picturesque old court , of that strange , 
 decay corner of Rome . Rowland be perplexed ; he be ill at ease . 
 at last the fiacre arrive , but she wait a moment long . " so , 
 decidedly , " she suddenly ask , " I can only harm he ? " 

 " you make I feel very brutal , " say Rowland . 

 " and he be such a fine fellow that it would be really a great pity , eh ? " 

 " I shall praise he no more , " Rowland say . 

 she turn away quickly , but she linger still . " do you remember 
 promise I , soon after we first meet , that at the end of six month you 
 would tell I definitely what you think of I ? " 

 " it be a foolish promise . " 

 " you give it . bear it in mind . I will think of what you have say to I . 
 Farewell . " she step into the carriage , and it roll away . Rowland 
 stand for some minute , look after it , and then go his way with 
 a sigh . if this express general mistrust , he ought , three day 
 afterward , to have be reassure . he receive by the post a note 
 contain these word : - 

 " I have do it . begin and respect I ! 

 " - C. L. " 

 to be perfectly satisfactory , indeed , the note require a commentary . 
 he call that evening upon Roderick , and find one in the information 
 offer he at the door , by the old serve - woman - the startling 
 information that the signorino have go to Naples . 






 CHAPTER VIII . provocation 

 about a month later , Rowland address to his cousin Cecilia a letter of 
 which the following be a portion : - 

 ... " so much for myself ; yet I tell you but a tithe of my own story 
 unless I let you know how matter stand with poor Hudson , for he give 
 I more to think about just now than anything else in the world . I need 
 a good deal of courage to begin this chapter . you warn I , you know , 
 and I make rather light of your warning . I have have all kind of hope 
 and fear , but hitherto , in write to you , I have resolutely put the 
 hope foremost . now , however , my pride have forsake I , and I should 
 like hugely to give expression to a little comfortable despair . I should 
 like to say , ' my dear wise woman , you be right and I be wrong ; you 
 be a shrewd observer and I be a meddlesome donkey ! ' when I think of 
 a little talk we have about the ' salubrity of genius , ' I feel my ear 
 tingle . if this be salubrity , give I rag disease ! I ' m pester to 
 death ; I go about with a chronic heartache ; there be moment when I 
 could shed salt tear . there be a pretty portrait of the most placid 
 of man ! I wish I could make you understand ; or rather , I wish you could 
 make I ! I do not   understand a jot ; it be a hideous , mock mystery ; I 
 give it up ! I do not   in the least give it up , you know ; I ' m incapable 
 of give it up . I sit hold my head by the hour , rack my brain , 
 wonder what under heaven be to be do . you tell I at Northampton 
 that I take the thing too easily ; you would tell I now , perhaps , that 
 I take it too hard . I do , altogether ; but it can not   be help . without 
 flatter myself , I may say I ' m sympathetic . many another man before 
 this would have cast his perplexity to the wind and declare that Mr. 
 Hudson must lie on his bed as he have make it . some man , perhaps , would 
 even say that I be make a mighty ado about nothing ; that I have only 
 to give he rope , and he will tire himself out . but he tug at his rope 
 altogether too hard for I to hold it comfortably . I certainly never 
 pretend the thing be anything else than an experiment ; I promise 
 nothing , I answer for nothing ; I only say the case be hopeful , and 
 that it would be a shame to neglect it . I have do my good , and if 
 the machine be run down I have a right to stand aside and let it 
 scuttle . amen , amen ! no , I can write that , but I can not   feel it . I can not 
 be just ; I can only be generous . I love the poor fellow and I can not   give 
 he up . as for understand he , that be another matter ; nowadays I 
 do not   believe even you would . one 's wit be sadly pester over here , 
 I assure you , and I ' m in the way of see more than one puzzle 
 speciman of human nature . Roderick and Miss Light , between they ! ... 
 have not   I already tell you about Miss Light ? last winter everything be 
 perfection . roderick strike out bravely , do really great thing , and 
 prove himself , as I suppose , thoroughly solid . he be strong , he be 
 first - rate ; I feel perfectly secure and sing private paean of joy . we 
 have pass at a bound into the open sea , and leave danger behind . but 
 in the summer I begin to be puzzle , though I succeed in not be 
 alarm . when we come back to Rome , however , I see that the tide have 
 turn and that we be close upon the rock . it be , in fact , another 
 case of Ulysses alongside of the Sirens ; only Roderick refuse to be 
 tie to the mast . he be the most extraordinary being , the strange 
 mixture of quality . I do not   understand so much force go with so 
 much weakness - such a brilliant gift be subject to such lapse . the 
 poor fellow be incomplete , and it be really not his own fault ; nature 
 have give he the faculty out of hand and bid he be hang with it . 
 I never know a man hard to advise or assist , if he be not in the mood 
 for listen . I suppose there be some key or other to his character , 
 but I try in vain to find it ; and yet I can not   believe that Providence 
 be so cruel as to have turn the lock and throw the key away . he 
 perplex I , as I say , to death , and though he tire out my patience , 
 he still fascinate I . sometimes I think he have not   a grain of 
 conscience , and sometimes I think that , in a way , he have an excess . he 
 take thing at once too easily and too hard ; he be both too lax and too 
 tense , too reckless and too ambitious , too cold and too passionate . he 
 have develop fast even than you prophesy , and for good and evil 
 alike he take up a formidable space . there be too much of he for I , 
 at any rate . yes , he be hard ; there be no mistake about that . he be 
 inflexible , he be brittle ; and though he have plenty of spirit , plenty of 
 soul , he have not   what I call a heart . he have something that Miss Garland 
 take for one , and I ' m pretty sure she be a judge . but she judge on 
 scanty evidence . he have something that Christina Light , here , make 
 believe at time that she take for one , but she be no judge at all ! I 
 think it be establish that , in the long run , egotism make a failure 
 in conduct : be it also true that it make a failure in the art ? ... 
 Roderick 's standard be immensely high ; I must do he that justice . he 
 will do nothing beneath it , and while he be wait for inspiration , his 
 imagination , his nerve , his sens must have something to amuse they . 
 this be a highly philosophical way of say that he have take to 
 dissipation , and that he have just be spend a month at Naples - a 
 city where ' pleasure ' be actively cultivate - in very bad company . 
 be they all like that , all the man of genius ? there be a great many 
 artist here who hammer away at their trade with exemplary industry ; in 
 fact I be surprised at their success in reduce the matter to a steady , 
 daily grind : but I really do not   think that one of they have his exquisite 
 quality of talent . it be in the matter of quantity that he have break 
 down . the bottle will not   pour ; he turn it upside down ; it be no use ! 
 sometimes he declare it be empty - that he have do all he be make to 
 do . this I consider great nonsense ; but I would nevertheless take he on 
 his own term if it be only I that be concern . but I keep think 
 of those two pray , trust neighbor of your , and I feel wretchedly 
 like a swindler . if his work mood come but once in five year I would 
 willingly wait for it and maintain he in leisure , if need be , in the 
 interval ; but that would be a sorry account to present to they . five 
 year of this sort of thing , moreover , would effectually settle the 
 question . I wish he be less of a genius and more of a charlatan ! he be 
 too confoundedly all of one piece ; he will not   throw overboard a grain 
 of the cargo to save the rest . Fancy he thus with all his brilliant 
 personal charm , his handsome head , his careless step , his look as of a 
 nervous nineteenth - century Apollo , and you will understand that there 
 be mighty little comfort in see he in a bad way . he be tolerably 
 foolish last summer at Baden Baden , but he get on his foot , and for a 
 while he be steady . then he begin to waver again , and at last topple 
 over . now , literally , he be lie prone . he come into my room last 
 night , miserably tipsy . I assure you , it do not   amuse I ..... about 
 Miss Light it be a long story . she be one of the great beauty of all 
 time , and worth come barefoot to Rome , like the pilgrim of old , to 
 see . her complexion , her glance , her step , her dusky tress , may have 
 be see before in a goddess , but never in a woman . and you may take 
 this for truth , because I ' m not in love with she . on the contrary ! her 
 education have be simply infernal . she be corrupt , perverse , as proud 
 as the queen of Sheba , and an appalling coquette ; but she be generous , 
 and with patience and skill you may enlist her imagination in a good 
 cause as well as in a bad one . the other day I try to manipulate it a 
 little . Chance offer I an interview to which it be possible to give 
 a serious turn , and I boldly break ground and beg she to suffer 
 my poor friend to go in peace . after a good deal of finesse she 
 consent , and the next day , with a single word , pack he off to 
 Naples to drown his sorrow in debauchery . I have come to the conclusion 
 that she be more dangerous in her virtuous mood than in her vicious 
 one , and that she probably have a way of turn she back which be the 
 most provoking thing in the world . she be an actress , she could not 
 forego do the thing dramatically , and it be the dramatic touch that 
 make it fatal . I wish she , of course , to let he down easily ; but 
 she desire to have the curtain drop on an attitude , and her attitude 
 deprive inflammable young artist of their reason ..... Roderick make an 
 admirable bust of she at the beginning of the winter , and a dozen woman 
 come rush to he to be do , mutatis mutandi , in the same style . 
 they be all great lady and ready to take he by the hand , but he 
 tell they all their face do not   interest he , and send they away 
 vow his destruction . " 

 at this point of his long effusion , Rowland have pause and put by his 
 letter . he keep it three day and then read it over . he be dispose at 
 first to destroy it , but he decide finally to keep it , in the hope that 
 it might strike a spark of useful suggestion from the flint of Cecilia 's 
 good sense . we know he have a talent for take advice . and then it might 
 be , he reflect , that his cousin 's answer would throw some light on 
 Mary Garland 's present vision of thing . in his altered mood he add 
 these few line : - 

 " I unburden myself the other day of this monstrous load of perplexity ; 
 I think it do I good , and I let it stand . I be in a melancholy 
 muddle , and I be try to work myself free . you know I like 
 discussion , in a quiet way , and there be no one with whom I can have it 
 as quietly as with you , most sagacious of cousin ! there be an excellent 
 old lady with whom I often chat , and who talk very much to the point . 
 but Madame Grandoni have dislike Roderick from the first , and if I be 
 to take her advice I would wash my hand of he . you will laugh at I 
 for my long face , but you would do that in any circumstance . I be half 
 ashamed of my letter , for I have a faith in my friend that be deep 
 than my doubt . he be here last evening , talk about the Naples 
 Museum , the Aristides , the bronze , the pompeian fresco , with such 
 a beautiful intelligence that doubt of the ultimate future seem 
 blasphemy . I walk back to his lodge with he , and he be as mild 
 as midsummer moonlight . he have the ineffable something that charm and 
 convince ; my last word about he shall not be a harsh one . " 

 shortly after send his letter , go one day into his friend 's 
 studio , he find Roderick suffer from the grave infliction of a visit 
 from Mr. Leavenworth . Roderick submit with extreme ill grace to be 
 bore , and he be now evidently in a state of high exasperation . he have 
 lately begin a representation of a lazzarone lounge in the sun ; an 
 image of serene , irresponsible , sensuous life . the real lazzarone , he 
 have admit , be a vile fellow ; but the ideal lazzarone - and his own 
 have be subtly idealize - be a precursor of the millennium . 

 Mr. Leavenworth have apparently just transfer his unhurrye gaze to 
 the figure . 

 " something in the style of the Dying Gladiator ? " he sympathetically 
 observe . 

 " oh no , " say Roderick seriously , " he be not die , he be only drunk ! " 

 " ah , but intoxication , you know , " Mr. Leavenworth rejoin , " be not a 
 proper subject for sculpture . Sculpture should not deal with transitory 
 attitude . " 

 " lie dead drunk be not a transitory attitude ! nothing be more 
 permanent , more sculpturesque , more monumental ! " 

 " an entertaining paradox , " say Mr. Leavenworth , " if we have time to 
 exercise our wit upon it . I remember at Florence an intoxicated figure 
 by Michael Angelo which seem to I a deplorable aberration of a 
 great mind . I myself touch liquor in no shape whatever . I have travel 
 through Europe on cold water . the most varied and attractive list of 
 wine be offer I , but I brush they aside . no cork have ever be 
 draw at my command ! " 

 " the movement of draw a cork call into play a very pretty set 
 of muscle , " say Roderick . " I think I will make a figure in that 
 position . " 

 " a Bacchus , realistically treat ! my dear young friend , never trifle 
 with your lofty mission . spotless marble should represent virtue , not 
 vice ! " and Mr. Leavenworth placidly wave his hand , as if to exorcise 
 the spirit of levity , while his glance journey with leisurely 
 benignity to another object - a marble replica of the bust of Miss Light . 
 " an ideal head , I presume , " he go on ; " a fanciful representation of 
 one of the pagan goddesses - a Diana , a Flora , a naiad or dryad ? I often 
 regret that our american artist should not boldly cast off that extinct 
 nomenclature . " 

 " she be neither a naiad nor a dryad , " say Roderick , " and her name be as 
 good as your or mine . " 

 " you call she " - Mr. Leavenworth blandly inquire . 

 " Miss Light , " Rowland interpose , in charity . 

 " ah , our great american beauty ! not a pagan goddess - an american , 
 christian lady ! yes , I have have the pleasure of converse with Miss 
 Light . her conversational power be not remarkable , but her beauty 
 be of a high order . I observe she the other evening at a large party , 
 where some of the proud member of the european aristocracy be 
 present - duchess , princess , countess , and other distinguish by 
 similar title . but for beauty , grace , and elegance my fair countrywoman 
 leave they all nowhere . what woman can compare with a truly refine 
 american lady ? the duchess the other night have no attraction for my 
 eye ; they look coarse and sensual ! it seem to I that the tyranny 
 of class distinction must indeed be terrible when such countenance 
 could inspire admiration . you see more beautiful girl in an hour on 
 Broadway than in the whole tour of Europe . Miss Light , now , on Broadway , 
 would excite no particular remark . " 

 " she have never be there ! " cry Roderick , triumphantly . 

 " I ' m afraid she never will be there . I suppose you have hear the news 
 about she . " 

 " what news ? " Roderick have stand with his back turn , fiercely poke 
 at his lazzarone ; but at Mr. Leavenworth 's last word he face quickly 
 about . 

 " it be the news of the hour , I believe . Miss Light be admire by the 
 high people here . they tacitly recognize her superiority . she have have 
 offer of marriage from various great lord . I be extremely happy 
 to learn this circumstance , and to know that they all have be leave 
 sigh . she have not be dazzle by their title and their gild 
 coronet . she have judge they simply as man , and find they want . one 
 of they , however , a young Neapolitan prince , I believe , have after a long 
 probation succeed in make himself acceptable . Miss Light have at last 
 say yes , and the engagement have just be announce . I be not generally 
 a retailer of gossip of this description , but the fact be allude to 
 an hour ago by a lady with whom I be converse , and here , in Europe , 
 these conversational trifle usurp the lion 's share of one 's attention . 
 I therefore retain the circumstance . yes , I regret that Miss Light 
 should marry one of these use - up foreigner . Americans should stand by 
 each other . if she want a brilliant match we could have fix it for 
 she . if she want a fine fellow - a fine , sharp , enterprise modern 
 man - I would have undertake to find he for she without go out of 
 the city of New York . and if she want a big fortune , I would have 
 find she twenty that she would have have hard work to spend : money 
 down - not tie up in fever - stricken land and worm - eat villa ! what be 
 the name of the young man ? Prince Castaway , or some such thing ! " 

 it be well for Mr. Leavenworth that he be a voluminous and 
 imperturbable talker ; for the current of his eloquence float he 
 past the short , sharp , startled cry with which Roderick greet his 
 " conversational trifle . " the young man stand look at he with part 
 lip and an excited eye . 

 " the position of woman , " Mr. Leavenworth placidly resume , " be certainly 
 a very degraded one in these country . I doubt whether a european 
 princess can command the respect which in our country be exhibit 
 toward the obscure female . the civilization of a country should 
 be measure by the deference show to the weak sex . judge by that 
 standard , where be they , over here ? " 

 though Mr. Leavenworth have not observe Roderick 's emotion , it be not 
 lose upon Rowland , who be make certain uncomfortable reflection upon 
 it . he see that it have instantly become one with the acute irritation 
 produce by the poor gentleman 's oppressive personality , and that 
 an explosion of some sort be imminent . Mr. Leavenworth , with calm 
 unconsciousness , proceed to fire the mine . 

 " and now for our culture ! " he say in the same sonorous tone , demand 
 with a gesture the unveiling of the figure , which stand somewhat apart , 
 muffle in a great sheet . 

 Roderick stand look at he for a moment with concentrated rancor , and 
 then stride to the statue and twitch off the cover . Mr. Leavenworth 
 settle himself into his chair with an air of flattered proprietorship , 
 and scan the unfinished image . " I can conscientiously express myself 
 as gratify with the general conception , " he say . " the figure have 
 considerable majesty , and the countenance wear a fine , open expression . 
 the forehead , however , strike I as not sufficiently intellectual . in 
 a statue of Culture , you know , that should be the great point . the eye 
 should instinctively seek the forehead . could not   you heighten it up a 
 little ? " 

 Roderick , for all answer , toss the sheet back over the statue . " Oblige 
 I , sir , " he say , " oblige I ! never mention that thing again . " 

 " never mention it ? why my dear sir " - 

 " never mention it . it be an abomination ! " 

 " an abomination ! my culture ! " 

 " your indeed ! " cry Roderick . " it be none of mine . I disown it . " 

 " Disown it , if you please , " say Mr. Leavenworth sternly , " but finish it 
 first ! " 

 " I would rather smash it ! " cry Roderick . 

 " this be folly , sir . you must keep your engagement . " 

 " I make no engagement . a sculptor be not   a tailor . do you ever hear of 
 inspiration ? mine be dead ! and it be no laugh matter . you yourself 
 kill it . " 

 " I - I - kill your inspiration ? " cry Mr. Leavenworth , with the accent 
 of righteous wrath . " you be a very ungrateful boy ! if ever I encourage 
 and cheer and sustain any one , I ' m sure I have do so to you . " 

 " I appreciate your good intention , and I do not   wish to be uncivil . but 
 your encouragement be - superfluous . I can not   work for you ! " 

 " I call this ill - humor , young man ! " say Mr. Leavenworth , as if he have 
 find the damn word . 

 " oh , I ' m in an infernal humor ! " Roderick answer . 

 " pray , sir , be it my infelicitous allusion to Miss Light 's marriage ? " 

 " it be your infelicitous everything ! I do not   say that to offend you ; 
 I beg your pardon if it do . I say it by way of make our rupture 
 complete , irretrievable ! " 

 Rowland have stand by in silence , but he now interfere . " listen to I , " 
 he say , lay his hand on Roderick 's arm . " you be stand on the 
 edge of a gulf . if you suffer anything that have pass to interrupt 
 your work on that figure , you take your plunge . it be no matter that 
 you do not   like it ; you will do the wise thing you ever do if you make 
 that effort of will necessary for finish it . destroy the statue then , 
 if you like , but make the effort . I speak the truth ! " 

 Roderick look at he with eye that still inexorableness make almost 
 tender . " you too ! " he simply say . 

 Rowland feel that he might as well attempt to squeeze water from a 
 polished crystal as hope to move he . he turn away and walk into the 
 adjoining room with a sense of sicken helplessness . in a few moment 
 he come back and find that Mr. Leavenworth have depart - presumably in 
 a manner somewhat portentous . Roderick be sit with his elbow on 
 his knee and his head in his hand . 

 Rowland make one more attempt . " you decline to think of what I urge ? " 

 " absolutely . " 

 " there be one more point - that you should not , for a month , go to Mrs. 
 Light 's . " 

 " I go there this evening . " 

 " that too be an utter folly . " 

 " there be such thing as necessary folly . " 

 " you be not reflect ; you be speak in passion . " 

 " why then do you make I speak ? " 

 Rowland meditate a moment . " be it also necessary that you should lose 
 the good friend you have ? " 

 Roderick look up . " that be for you to settle ! " 

 his good friend clap on his hat and strode away ; in a moment the door 
 close behind he . Rowland walk hard for nearly a couple of hour . 
 he pass up the Corso , out of the Porta del Popolo and into the Villa 
 Borghese , of which he make a complete circuit . the keenness of his 
 irritation subside , but it leave he with an intolerable weight upon his 
 heart . when dusk have fall , he find himself near the lodging of his 
 friend Madame Grandoni . he frequently pay she a visit during the hour 
 which precede dinner , and he now ascend her unillumine staircase and 
 ring at her relaxed bell - rope with an especial desire for diversion . he 
 be tell that , for the moment , she be occupy , but that if he would 
 come in and wait , she would presently be with he . he have not sit 
 musing in the firelight for ten minute when he hear the jingle of the 
 door - bell and then a rustling and murmur in the hall . the door of the 
 little saloon open , but before the visitor appear he have recognize 
 her voice . Christina Light sweep forward , precede by her poodle , and 
 almost fill the narrow parlor with the train of her dress . she be 
 color here and there by the flick firelight . 

 " they tell I you be here , " she say simply , as she take a seat . 

 " and yet you come in ? it be very brave , " say Rowland . 

 " you be the brave one , when one think of it ! where be the padrona ? " 

 " occupy for the moment . but she be come . " 

 " how soon ? " 

 " I have already wait ten minute ; I expect she from moment to moment . " 

 " meanwhile we be alone ? " and she glance into the dusky corner of the 
 room . 

 " unless Stenterello count , " say Rowland . 

 " oh , he know my secret - unfortunate brute ! " she sit silent awhile , 
 look into the firelight . then at last , glance at Rowland , " come ! 
 say something pleasant ! " she exclaim . 

 " I have be very happy to hear of your engagement . " 

 " no , I do not   mean that . I have hear that so often , only since 
 breakfast , that it have lose all sense . I mean some of those unexpected , 
 charming thing that you say to I a month ago at Saint Cecilia 's . " 

 " I offend you , then , " say Rowland . " I be afraid I have . " 

 " ah , it occur to you ? why have not   I see you since ? " 

 " really , I do not   know . " and he begin to hesitate for an explanation . " I 
 have call , but you have never be at home . " 

 " you be careful to choose the wrong time . you have a way with a 
 poor girl ! you sit down and inform she that she be a person with whom 
 a respectable young man can not associate without contamination ; your 
 friend be a very nice fellow , you be very careful of his moral , you 
 wish he to know none but nice people , and you beg I therefore to 
 desist . you request I to take these suggestion to heart and to act 
 upon they as promptly as possible . they be not particularly flattering 
 to my vanity . vanity , however , be a sin , and I listen submissively , 
 with an immense desire to be just . if I have many fault I know it , in 
 a general way , and I try on the whole to do my good . ' voyon , ' I say 
 to myself , ' it be not   particularly charming to hear one 's self make out 
 such a low person , but it be worth think over ; there be probably a 
 good deal of truth in it , and at any rate we must be as good a girl as 
 we can . that be the great point ! and then here be a magnificent chance 
 for humility . if there be doubt in the matter , let the doubt count 
 against one 's self . that be what Saint Catherine do , and Saint Theresa , 
 and all the other , and they be say to have have in consequence the 
 most ineffable joy . let we go in for a little ineffable joy ! ' I try 
 it ; I swallow my rise sob , I make you my courtesy , I determine I 
 would not be spiteful , nor passionate , nor vengeful , nor anything that 
 be suppose to be particularly feminine . I be a well girl than 
 you make out - well at least than you think ; but I would let the 
 difference go and do magnificently right , lest I should not do right 
 enough . I think of it a deal for six hour when I know I do not   seem 
 to be , and then at last I do it ! Santo Dio ! " 

 " my dear Miss Light , my dear Miss Light ! " say Rowland , pleadingly . 

 " since then , " the young girl go on , " I have be wait for the 
 ineffable joy . they have not   yet turn up ! " 

 " pray listen to I ! " Rowland urge . 

 " nothing , nothing , nothing have come of it . I have pass the dreary 
 month of my life ! " 

 " my dear Miss Light , you be a very terrible young lady ! " cry Rowland . 

 " what do you mean by that ? " 

 " a good many thing . we will talk they over . but first , forgive I if I 
 have offend you ! " 

 she look at he a moment , hesitate , and then thrust her hand into 
 her muff . " that mean nothing . forgiveness be between equal , and you 
 do not   regard I as your equal . " 

 " really , I do not   understand ! " 

 Christina rise and move for a moment about the room . then turn 
 suddenly , " you do not   believe in I ! " she cry ; " not a grain ! I do not 
 know what I would not give to force you to believe in I ! " 

 Rowland spring up , protest , but before he have time to go far one of 
 the scanty portiere be raise , and Madame Grandoni come in , pull 
 her wig straight . " but you shall believe in I yet , " murmur Christina , 
 as she pass toward her hostess . 

 Madame Grandoni turn tenderly to Christina . " I must give you a very 
 solemn kiss , my dear ; you be the heroine of the hour . you have really 
 accept he , eh ? " 

 " so they say ! " 

 " but you ought to know well . " 

 " I do not   know - I do not   care ! " she stand with her hand in Madame 
 Grandoni 's , but look askance at Rowland . 

 " that be a pretty state of mind , " say the old lady , " for a young person 
 who be go to become a princess . " 

 Christina shrug her shoulder . " every one expect I to go into 
 ecstacie over that ! could anything be more vulgar ? they may chuckle by 
 themselves ! will you let I stay to dinner ? " 

 " if you can dine on a risotto . but I imagine you be expect at home . " 

 " you be right . Prince Casamassima din there , en famille . but I ' m not 
 in his family , yet ! " 

 " do you know you be very wicked ? I have half a mind not to keep you . " 

 Christina drop her eye , reflectively . " I beg you will let I stay , " 
 she say . " if you wish to cure I of my wickedness you must be very 
 patient and kind with I . it will be worth the trouble . you must 
 show confidence in I . " and she give another glance at Rowland . then 
 suddenly , in a different tone , " I do not   know what I ' m say ! " she 
 cry . " I be weary , I be more lonely than ever , I wish I be dead ! " the 
 tear rise to her eye , she struggle with they an instant , and bury 
 her face in her muff ; but at last she burst into uncontrollable sob 
 and fling her arm upon Madame Grandoni 's neck . this shrewd woman give 
 Rowland a significant nod , and a little shrug , over the young girl 's 
 beautiful bow head , and then lead Christina tenderly away into the 
 adjoining room . Rowland , leave alone , stand there for an instant , 
 intolerably puzzle , face to face with Miss Light 's poodle , who have set 
 up a sharp , unearthly cry of sympathy with his mistress . Rowland 
 vent his confusion in deal a rap with his stick at the animal 's 
 unmelodious muzzle , and then rapidly leave the house . he see Mrs. Light 's 
 carriage wait at the door , and hear afterwards that Christina go 
 home to dinner . 

 a couple of day later he go , for a fortnight , to Florence . he have 
 twenty mind to leave Italy altogether ; and at Florence he could at 
 least more freely decide upon his future movement . he feel profoundly , 
 incurably disgusted . reflective benevolence stand prudently aside , and 
 for the time touch the source of his irritation with no soften 
 side - light . 

 it be the middle of March , and by the middle of March in Florence the 
 spring be already warm and deep . he have an infinite relish for the place 
 and the season , but as he stroll by the Arno and pause here and there 
 in the great gallery , they fail to soothe his irritation . he be 
 sore at heart , and as the day go by the soreness deepen rather than 
 heal . he feel as if he have a complaint against fortune ; good - natured 
 as he be , his good - nature this time quite decline to let it pass . he 
 have try to be wise , he have try to be kind , he have embark upon an 
 estimable enterprise ; but his wisdom , his kindness , his energy , have be 
 throw back in his face . he be disappoint , and his disappointment 
 have an angry spark in it . the sense of waste time , of waste hope and 
 faith , keep he constant company . there be time when the beautiful 
 thing about he only exasperate his discontent . he go to the Pitti 
 Palace , and Raphael 's Madonna of the Chair seem , in its soft serenity , 
 to mock he with the suggestion of unattainable repose . he linger on 
 the bridge at sunset , and know that the light be enchanting and the 
 mountain divine , but there seem to be something horribly invidious 
 and unwelcome in the fact . he feel , in a word , like a man who have be 
 cruelly defraud and who wish to have his revenge . life owe he , he 
 think , a compensation , and he would be restless and resentful until he 
 find it . he know - or he seem to know - where he should find it ; but he 
 hardly tell himself , and think of the thing under mental protest , as a 
 man in want of money may think of certain fund that he hold in trust . 
 in his melancholy meditation the idea of something well than all 
 this , something that might softly , richly interpose , something that 
 might reconcile he to the future , something that might make one 's 
 tenure of life deep and zealous instead of harsh and uneven - the idea of 
 concrete compensation , in a word - shape itself soon or later into the 
 image of Mary Garland . 

 very odd , you may say , that at this time of day Rowland should still 
 be brood over a plain girl of whom he have have but the light of 
 glimpse two year before ; very odd that so deep an impression should 
 have be make by so lightly - press an instrument . we must admit the 
 oddity and offer simply in explanation that his sentiment apparently 
 belong to that specie of emotion of which , by the testimony of the 
 poet , the very name and essence be oddity . one night he sleep but 
 half an hour ; he find his thought take a turn which excite he 
 portentously . he walk up and down his room half the night . it look 
 out on the Arno ; the noise of the river come in at the open window ; he 
 feel like dress and go down into the street . toward morning 
 he fling himself into a chair ; though he be wide awake he be less 
 excited . it seem to he that he see his idea from the outside , that he 
 judge it and condemn it ; yet it stand there before he , distinct , 
 and in a certain way imperious . during the day he try to banish it 
 and forget it ; but it fascinate , haunted , at moment frighten he . he 
 try to amuse himself , pay visit , resort to several rather violent 
 device for divert his thought . if on the morrow he have commit a 
 crime , the person whom he have see that day would have testify 
 that he have talk strangely and have not seem like himself . he feel 
 certainly very unlike himself ; long afterwards , in retrospect , he use 
 to reflect that during those day he have for a while be literally 
 beside himself . his idea persist ; it clung to he like a sturdy 
 beggar . the sense of the matter , roughly express , be this : if 
 Roderick be really go , as he himself have phrase it , to " fizzle 
 out , " one might help he on the way - one might smooth the descensus 
 Averno . for forty - eight hour there swam before Rowland 's eye a vision 
 of Roderick , graceful and beautiful as he pass , plunge , like a 
 diver , from an eminence into a misty gulf . the gulf be destruction , 
 annihilation , death ; but if death be decreed , why should not the agony 
 be brief ? beyond this vision there faintly glimmer another , as in the 
 child 's game of the " magic lantern " a picture be superpose on the 
 white wall before the last one have quite fade . it represent Mary 
 Garland stand there with eye in which the horror seem slowly , 
 slowly to expire , and hang , motionless hand which at last make no 
 resistance when his own offer to take they . when , of old , a man be 
 burn at the stake it be cruel to have to be present ; but if one be 
 present it be kind to lend a hand to pile up the fuel and make the 
 flame do their work quickly and the smoke muffle up the victim . with 
 all deference to your kindness , this be perhaps an obligation you would 
 especially feel if you have a reversionary interest in something the 
 victim be to leave behind he . 

 one morning , in the midst of all this , Rowland walk heedlessly out of 
 one of the city gate and find himself on the road to Fiesole . it be a 
 completely lovely day ; the March sun feel like May , as the english poet 
 of Florence say ; the thick - blossom shrub and vine that hang over 
 the wall of villa and podere fling their odorous promise into the warm , 
 still air . Rowland follow the wind , climbing lane ; linger , as he 
 get high , beneath the rusty cypress , beside the low parapet , where 
 you look down on the charming city and sweep the vale of the Arno ; 
 reach the little square before the cathedral , and rest awhile in the 
 massive , dusky church ; then climb higher , to the franciscan convent 
 which be poise on the very apex of the mountain . he ring at the little 
 gateway ; a shabby , senile , red - faced brother admit he with almost 
 maudlin friendliness . there be a dreary chill in the chapel and the 
 corridor , and he pass rapidly through they into the delightfully 
 steep and tangle old garden which run wild over the forehead of the 
 great hill . he have be in it before , and he be very fond of it . the 
 garden hang in the air , and you ramble from terrace to terrace and 
 wonder how it keep from slip down , in full consummation of its 
 bereaved forlornness , into the nakedly romantic gorge beneath . it be 
 just noon when Rowland go in , and after roam about awhile he fling 
 himself in the sun on a mossy stone bench and pull his hat over his 
 eye . the short shadow of the brown - coat cypress above he have 
 grow very long , and yet he have not pass back through the convent . one 
 of the monk , in his faded snuff - color robe , come wander out into 
 the garden , read his greasy little breviary . suddenly he come toward 
 the bench on which Rowland have stretch himself , and pause a moment , 
 attentively . Rowland be linger there still ; he be sit with his 
 head in his hand and his elbow on his knee . he seem not to have 
 hear the sandale tread of the good brother , but as the monk remain 
 watch he , he at last look up . it be not the ignoble old man who 
 have admit he , but a pale , gaunt personage , of a graver and more 
 ascetic , and yet of a benignant , aspect . Rowland 's face bear the trace 
 of extreme trouble . the frate keep his finger in his little book , 
 and fold his arm picturesquely across his breast . it can hardly be 
 determine whether his attitude , as he bend his sympathetic italian 
 eye upon Rowland , be a happy accident or the result of an exquisite 
 spiritual discernment . to Rowland , at any rate , under the emotion of 
 that moment , it seem blessedly opportune . he rise and approach the 
 monk , and lay his hand on his arm . 

 " my brother , " he say , " do you ever see the Devil ? " 

 the frate gaze , gravely , and cross himself . " heaven forbid ! " 

 " he be here , " Rowland go on , " here in this lovely garden , as he be 
 once in Paradise , half an hour ago . but have no fear ; I drive he out . " 
 and Rowland stoop and pick up his hat , which have roll away into a 
 bed of cyclaman , in vague symbolism of an actual physical tussle . 

 " you have be tempt , my brother ? " ask the friar , tenderly . 

 " Hideously ! " 

 " and you have resist - and conquer ! " 

 " I believe I have conquer . " 

 " the bless Saint Francis be praise ! it be well do . if you like , we 
 will offer a mass for you . " 

 " I be not a Catholic , " say Rowland . 

 the frate smile with dignity . " that be a reason the more . " 

 " but it be for you , then , to choose . shake hand with I , " Rowland 
 add ; " that will do as well ; and suffer I , as I go out , to stop a 
 moment in your chapel . " 

 they shake hand and separate . the frate cross himself , open his 
 book , and wander away , in relief against the western sky . Rowland 
 pass back into the convent , and pause long enough in the chapel to 
 look for the alm - box . he have have what be vulgarly term a great scare ; 
 he believe , very poignantly for the time , in the Devil , and he feel an 
 irresistible need to subscribe to any institution which engage to keep 
 he at a distance . 

 the next day he return to Rome , and the day afterwards he go in 
 search of Roderick . he find he on the Pincian with his back turn to 
 the crowd , look at the sunset . " I go to Florence , " Rowland say , 
 " and I think of go far ; but I come back on purpose to give you 
 another piece of advice . once more , you refuse to leave Rome ? " 

 " never ! " say Roderick . 

 " the only chance that I see , then , of your revive your sense of 
 responsibility to - to those various sacred thing you have forget , be 
 in send for your mother to join you here . " 

 roderick star . " for my mother ? " 

 " for your mother - and for Miss Garland . " 

 Roderick still star ; and then , slowly and faintly , his face flush . 
 " for Mary Garland - for my mother ? " he repeat . " send for they ? " 

 " tell I this ; I have often wonder , but till now I have forbear to 
 ask . you be still engaged to Miss Garland ? " 

 roderick frown darkly , but assent . 

 " it would give you pleasure , then , to see she ? " 

 Roderick turn away and for some moment answer nothing . " pleasure ! " 
 he say at last , huskily . " call it pain . " 

 " I regard you as a sick man , " Rowland continue . " in such a case Miss 
 Garland would say that her place be at your side . " 

 Roderick look at he some time askance , mistrustfully . " be this a 
 deep - lay snare ? " he ask slowly . 

 Rowland have come back with all his patience rekindle , but these word 
 give it an almost fatal chill . " heaven forgive you ! " he cry bitterly . 
 " my idea have be simply this . try , in decency , to understand it . I have 
 try to befriend you , to help you , to inspire you with confidence , 
 and I have fail . I take you from the hand of your mother and your 
 betrothed , and it seem to I my duty to restore you to their hand . 
 that be all I have to say . " 

 he be go , but Roderick forcibly detain he . it would have be 
 but a rough way of express it to say that one could never know how 
 Roderick would take a thing . it have happen more than once that when 
 hit hard , deservedly , he have receive the blow with touching gentleness . 
 on the other hand , he have often resent the soft tap . the secondary 
 effect of Rowland 's present admonition seem reassure . " I beg you to 
 wait , " he say , " to forgive that shabby speech , and to let I reflect . " 
 and he walk up and down awhile , reflect . at last he stop , with 
 a look in his face that Rowland have not see all winter . it be a 
 strikingly beautiful look . 

 " how strange it be , " he say , " that the simple device be the last 
 that occur to one ! " and he break into a light laugh . " to see Mary 
 Garland be just what I want . and my mother - my mother can not   hurt I 
 now . " 

 " you will write , then ? " 

 " I will telegraph . they must come , at whatever cost . Striker can arrange 
 it all for they . " 

 in a couple of day he tell Rowland that he have receive a telegraphic 
 answer to his message , inform he that the two lady be to sail 
 immediately for Leghorn , in one of the small steamer which ply between 
 that port and New York . they would arrive , therefore , in less than a 
 month . Rowland pass this month of expectation in no very serene frame 
 of mind . his suggestion have have its source in the deep place of his 
 agitated conscience ; but there be something intolerable in the thought 
 of the suffering to which the event be probably subject those 
 undefended woman . they have scrap together their scanty fund and 
 embark , at twenty - four hour ' notice , upon the dreadful sea , to 
 journey tremulously to shore darken by the shadow of deep alarm . 
 he could only promise himself to be their devoted friend and servant . 
 preoccupy as he be , he be able to observe that expectation , 
 with Roderick , take a form which seem singular even among his 
 characteristic singularity . if redemption - Roderick seem to 
 reason - be to arrive with his mother and his affianced bride , these 
 last moment of error should be doubly erratic . he do nothing ; but 
 inaction , with he , take on an unwonted air of gentle gayety . he laugh 
 and whistle and go often to Mrs. Light 's ; though Rowland know not 
 in what fashion present circumstance have modify his relation with 
 Christina . the month ebb away and Rowland daily expect to hear from 
 roderick that he have go to Leghorn to meet the ship . he hear nothing , 
 and late one evening , not have see his friend in three or four day , 
 he stop at Roderick 's lodge to assure himself that he have go at 
 last . a cab be stand in the street , but as it be a couple of door 
 off he hardly heed it . the hall at the foot of the staircase be dark , 
 like most roman hall , and he pause in the street - doorway on hear 
 the advance footstep of a person with whom he wish to avoid come 
 into collision . while he do so he hear another footstep behind he , 
 and turn round find that Roderick in person have just overtake he . 
 at the same moment a woman 's figure advance from within , into the light 
 of the street - lamp , and a face , half - startle , glance at he out of 
 the darkness . he give a cry - it be the face of Mary Garland . her glance 
 fly past he to Roderick , and in a second a startled exclamation break 
 from her own lip . it make Rowland turn again . Roderick stand there , 
 pale , apparently try to speak , but say nothing . his lip be 
 part and he be waver slightly with a strange movement - the 
 movement of a man who have drink too much . then Rowland 's eye meet Miss 
 Garland 's again , and her own , which have rest a moment on Roderick 's , 
 be formidable ! 






 CHAPTER IX . Mary Garland 

 how it befell that Roderick have fail to be in Leghorn on his mother 's 
 arrival never clearly transpire ; for he undertake to give no elaborate 
 explanation of his fault . he never indulge in profession   touching 
 personal conduct   as to the future , or in remorse as to the past , and 
 as he would have ask no praise if he have travel night and day to 
 embrace his mother as she set foot on shore , he make   in Rowland 's 
 presence , at least   no apology for have leave she to come in search of 
 he . it be to be say that , thank to an unprecedentedly fine season , 
 the voyage of the two lady have be surprisingly rapid , and that , 
 accord to common probability , if Roderick have leave Rome on the 
 morrow   as he declare that he have intend , he would have have a day or 
 two of wait at Leghorn . Rowland 's silent inference be that 
 Christina Light have beguile he into let the time slip , and it be 
 accompany with a silent inquiry whether she have do so unconsciously 
 or maliciously . he have tell she , presumably , that his mother and his 
 cousin be about to arrive ; and it be pertinent to remember hereupon 
 that she be a young lady of mysterious impulse . Rowland hear in due 
 time the story of the adventure of the two lady from Northampton . 
 Miss Garland 's wish , at Leghorn , on find they be leave at the mercy 
 of circumstance , have be to telegraph to roderick and await an 
 answer ; for she know that their arrival be a trifle premature . but Mrs. 
 Hudson 's maternal heart have take the alarm . Roderick 's send for they 
 be , to her imagination , a confession of illness , and his not be 
 at Leghorn , a proof of it ; an hour 's delay be therefore cruel both to 
 herself and to he . she insist on immediate departure ; and , unskille 
 as they be in the mystery of foreign   or even of domestic   travel , 
 they have hurry in tremble eagerness to Rome . they have arrive late 
 in the evening , and , know nothing of inn , have get into a cab 
 and proceed to Roderick 's lodging . at the door , poor Mrs. Hudson 's 
 frightened anxiety have overcome she , and she have sit quake and cry 
 in the vehicle , too weak to move . Miss Garland have bravely go in , 
 grope her way up the dusky staircase , reach Roderick 's door , and , 
 with the assistance of such acquaintance with the italian tongue as she 
 have cull from a phrase - book during the calm hour of the voyage , 
 have learn from the old woman who have her cousin 's household economy in 
 charge that he be in the good of health and spirit , and have go forth 
 a few hour before with his hat on his ear , per divertirsi . 

 these thing Rowland learn during a visit he pay the two lady the 
 evening after their arrival . Mrs. Hudson speak of they at great length 
 and with an air of cling confidence in Rowland which tell he how 
 faithfully time have serve he , in her imagination . but her fright be 
 over , though she be still catch her breath a little , like a person 
 drag ashore out of water uncomfortably deep . she be excessively 
 bewildered and confused , and seem more than ever to demand a tender 
 handling from her friend . before Miss Garland , Rowland be distinctly 
 conscious that he tremble . he wonder extremely what be go on in 
 her mind ; what be her silent commentary on the incident of the night 
 before . he wonder all the more , because he immediately perceive that 
 she be greatly change since their parting , and that the change be by 
 no mean for the bad . she be old , easy , more free , more like 
 a young woman who go sometimes into company . she have more beauty 
 as well , inasmuch as her beauty before have be the depth of her 
 expression , and the source from which this beauty be feed have in 
 these two year evidently not waste themselves . Rowland feel almost 
 instantly - he could hardly have say why : it be in her voice , in she 
 tone , in the air - that a total change have pass over her attitude 
 towards himself . she trust he now , absolutely ; whether or no she 
 like he , she believe he be solid . he feel that during the come 
 week he would need to be solid . Mrs. Hudson be at one of the small 
 hotel , and her sitting - room be frugally light by a couple of 
 candle . Rowland make the most of this dim illumination to try to detect 
 the afterglow of that frighten flash from Miss Garland 's eye 
 the night before . it have be but a flash , for what provoke it have 
 instantly vanish . Rowland have murmur a rapturous blessing on 
 Roderick 's head , as he perceive he instantly apprehend the situation . 
 if he have be drink , its gravity sober he on the spot ; in a 
 single moment he collect his wit . the next moment , with a ringing , 
 jovial cry , he be fold the young girl in his arm , and the next 
 he be beside his mother 's carriage , half smother in her sob and 
 caress . Rowland have recommend a hotel close at hand , and have then 
 discreetly withdraw . Roderick be at this time do his part superbly , 
 and Miss Garland 's brow be serene . it be serene now , twenty - four hour 
 later ; but nevertheless , her alarm have last an appreciable moment . 
 what have become of it ? it have drop down deep into her memory , and 
 it be lie there for the present in the shade . but with another 
 week , Rowland say to himself , it would leap erect again ; the light 
 friction would strike a spark from it . Rowland think he have school 
 himself to face the issue of Mary Garland 's advent , cast it even in 
 a tragical phase ; but in her personal presence - in which he find a 
 poignant mixture of the familiar and the strange - he seem to face 
 it and all that it might bring with it for the first time . in vulgar 
 parlance , he stand uneasy in his shoe . he feel like walk on tiptoe , 
 not to arouse the sleep shadow . he feel , indeed , almost like say 
 that they might have their own way later , if they would only allow 
 to these first few day the clear light of ardent contemplation . for 
 Rowland at last be ardent , and all the bell within his soul be 
 ring bravely in jubilee . Roderick , he learn , have be the whole 
 day with his mother , and have evidently respond to her pure trust . 
 he appear to she appeal eye still unspotted by the world . that 
 be what it be , think Rowland , to be " gifted , " to escape not only the 
 superficial , but the intrinsic penalty of misconduct . the two lady 
 have spend the day within door , rest from the fatigue of travel . 
 Miss Garland , Rowland suspect , be not so fatigued as she suffer 
 it to be assume . she have remain with Mrs. Hudson , to attend to her 
 personal want , which the latter seem to think , now that she be in 
 a foreign land , with a southern climate and a catholic religion , would 
 forthwith become very complex and formidable , though as yet they have 
 simply resolve themselves into a desire for a great deal of tea and for 
 a certain extremely familiar old black and white shawl across her foot , 
 as she lie on the sofa . but the sense of novelty be evidently strong 
 upon Miss Garland , and the light of expectation be in her eye . she be 
 restless and excited ; she move about the room and go often to the 
 window ; she be observe keenly ; she watch the italian servant 
 intently , as they come and go ; she have already have a long colloquy 
 with the French chambermaid , who have expound her view on the roman 
 question ; she note the small difference in the furniture , in the food , 
 in the sound that come in from the street . Rowland feel , in all this , 
 that her intelligence , here , would have a great unfolding . he wish 
 immensely he might have a share in it ; he wish he might show she Rome . 
 that , of course , would be Roderick 's office . but he promise himself at 
 least to take advantage of off - hour . 

 " it behoove you to appreciate your good fortune , " he say to she . " to 
 be young and elastic , and yet old enough and wise enough to discriminate 
 and reflect , and to come to Italy for the first time - that be one of the 
 great pleasure that life offer we . it be but right to remind you of 
 it , so that you make the most of opportunity and do not accuse yourself , 
 later , of have waste the precious season . " 

 Miss Garland look at he , smile intently , and go to the window 
 again . " I expect to enjoy it , " she say . " do not   be afraid ; I be not 
 wasteful . " 

 " I be afraid we be not qualified , you know , " say Mrs. Hudson . " we be 
 tell that you must know so much , that you must have read so many book . 
 our taste have not be cultivate . when I be a young lady at school , I 
 remember I have a medal , with a pink ribbon , for ' proficiency in Ancient 
 history ' - the seven king , or be it the seven hill ? and Quintus Curtius 
 and Julius Caesar and - and that period , you know . I believe I have my 
 medal somewhere in a drawer , now , but I have forget all about the 
 king . but after Roderick come to Italy we try to learn something 
 about it . last winter Mary use to read ' Corinne ' to I in the evening , 
 and in the morning she use to read another book , to herself . what be 
 it , Mary , that book that be so long , you know , - in fifteen volume ? " 

 " it be Sismondi 's italian Republics , " say Mary , simply . 

 Rowland could not help laugh ; whereupon Mary blush . " do you finish 
 it ? " he ask . 

 " yes , and begin another - a short one - Roscoe 's Leo the Tenth . " 

 " do you find they interesting ? " 

 " oh yes . " 

 " do you like history ? " 

 " some of it . " 

 " that be a woman 's answer ! and do you like art ? " 

 she pause a moment . " I have never see it ! " 

 " you have great advantage , now , my dear , with Roderick and Mr. Mallet , " 
 say Mrs. Hudson . " I be sure no young lady ever have such advantage . you 
 come straight to the high authority . Roderick , I suppose , will show 
 you the practice of art , and Mr. Mallet , perhaps , if he will be so 
 good , will show you the theory . as an artist 's wife , you ought to know 
 something about it . " 

 " one learn a good deal about it , here , by simply live , " say Rowland ; 
 " by go and come about one 's daily avocation . " 

 " dear , dear , how wonderful that we should be here in the midst of it ! " 
 murmur Mrs. Hudson . " to think of art be out there in the street ! 
 we do not   see much of it last evening , as we drive from the depot . but 
 the street be so dark and we be so frightened ! but we be very easy 
 now ; be not   we , Mary ? " 

 " I be very happy , " say Mary , gravely , and wander back to the window 
 again . 

 Roderick come in at this moment and kiss his mother , and then 
 go over and join Miss Garland . Rowland sit with Mrs. Hudson , who 
 evidently have a word which she deem of some value for his private ear . 
 she follow Roderick with intensely earnest eye . 

 " I wish to tell you , sir , " she say , " how very grateful - how very 
 thankful - what a happy mother I be ! I feel as if I owe it all to you , 
 sir . to find my poor boy so handsome , so prosperous , so elegant , so 
 famous - and ever to have doubt of you ! what must you think of I ? you 
 be our guardian angel , sir . I often say so to Mary . " 

 Rowland wear , in response to this speech , a rather haggard brow . he 
 could only murmur that he be glad she find Roderick look well . 
 he have of course promptly ask himself whether the good discretion 
 dictate that he should give she a word of warning - just turn the handle 
 of the door through which , later , disappointment might enter . he have 
 determine to say nothing , but simply to wait in silence for Roderick to 
 find effective inspiration in those confidently expectant eye . it be 
 to be suppose that he be seek for it now ; he remain sometime at 
 the window with his cousin . but at last he turn away and come over to 
 the fireside with a contraction of the eyebrow which seem to 
 intimate that Miss Garland 's influence be for the moment , at least , 
 not soothe . she presently follow he , and for an instant Rowland 
 observe she watch he as if she think he strange . " strange 
 enough , " think Rowland , " he may seem to she , if he will ! " roderick 
 direct his glance to his friend with a certain peremptory air , 
 which - roughly interpret - be equivalent to a request to share the 
 intellectual expense of entertain the lady . " good heaven ! " Rowland 
 cry within himself ; " be he already tired of they ? " 

 " to - morrow , of course , we must begin to put you through the mill , " 
 Roderick say to his mother . " and be it hereby know to Mallet that we 
 count upon he to turn the wheel . " 

 " I will do as you please , my son , " say Mrs. Hudson . " so long as I have 
 you with I I do not   care where I go . we must not take up too much of Mr. 
 Mallet 's time . " 

 " his time be inexhaustible ; he have nothing under the sun to do . have 
 you , Rowland ? if you have see the big hole I have be make in it ! 
 where will you go first ? you have your choice - from the Scala Santa to 
 the Cloaca Maxima . " 

 " let we take thing in order , " say Rowland . " we will go first to Saint 
 Peter 's . Miss Garland , I hope you be impatient to see Saint Peter 's . " 

 " I would like to go first to Roderick 's studio , " say Miss Garland . 

 " it be a very nasty place , " say Roderick . " at your pleasure ! " 

 " yes , we must see your beautiful thing before we can look contentedly 
 at anything else , " say Mrs. Hudson . 

 " I have no beautiful thing , " say Roderick . " you may see what there be ! 
 what make you look so odd ? " 

 this inquiry be abruptly address to his mother , who , in response , 
 glance appealingly at Mary and raise a startled hand to her smooth 
 hair . 

 " no , it be your face , " say Roderick . " what have happen to it these two 
 year ? it have change its expression . " 

 " your mother have pray a great deal , " say Miss Garland , simply . 

 " I do not   suppose , of course , it be from do anything bad ! it make 
 you a very good face - very interesting , very solemn . it have very fine 
 line in it ; something might be do with it . " and Rowland hold one of 
 the candle near the poor lady 's head . 

 she be cover with confusion . " my son , my son , " she say with dignity , 
 " I do not   understand you . " 

 in a flash all his old alacrity have come to he . " I suppose a man may 
 admire his own mother ! " he cry . " if you please , madame , you will sit to 
 I for that head . I see it , I see it ! I will make something that a queen 
 can not   get do for she . " 

 Rowland respectfully urge she to assent ; he see Roderick be in the 
 vein and would probably do something eminently original . she give 
 her promise , at last , after many soft , inarticulate protest and a 
 frightened petition that she might be allow to keep her knitting . 

 Rowland return the next day , with plenty of zeal for the part Roderick 
 have assign to he . it have be arrange that they should go to Saint 
 Peter 's . Roderick be in high good - humor , and , in the carriage , be 
 watch his mother with a fine mixture of filial and professional 
 tenderness . Mrs. Hudson look up mistrustfully at the tall , shabby 
 house , and grasp the side of the barouche in her hand , as if she 
 be in a sail - boat , in dangerous water . Rowland sit opposite to Miss 
 Garland . she be totally oblivious of her companion ; from the moment 
 the carriage leave the hotel , she sit gaze , wide - eyed and absorb , at 
 the object about they . if Rowland have feel disposed he might have make 
 a joke of her intense seriousness . from time to time he tell she the 
 name of a place or a building , and she nod , without look at he . 
 when they emerge into the great square between Bernini 's colonnade , 
 she lay her hand on Mrs. Hudson 's arm and sink back in the carriage , 
 star up at the vast yellow facade of the church . inside the 
 church , Roderick give his arm to his mother , and Rowland constitute 
 himself the especial guide of Miss Garland . he walk with she slowly 
 everywhere , and make the entire circuit , tell she all he know of 
 the history of the building . this be a great deal , but she listen 
 attentively , keep her eye fix on the dome . to Rowland himself 
 it have never seem so radiantly sublime as at these moment ; he feel 
 almost as if he have contrive it himself and have a right to be proud of 
 it . he leave Miss Garland a while on the step of the choir , where she 
 have seat herself to rest , and go to join their companion . Mrs. 
 Hudson be watch a great circle of tattered contadini , who be 
 kneel before the image of Saint Peter . the fashion of their tatter 
 fascinate she ; she stand gaze at they in a sort of terrified pity , 
 and could not be induce to look at anything else . Rowland go back to 
 Miss Garland and sit down beside she . 

 " well , what do you think of Europe ? " he ask , smile . 

 " I think it be horrible ! " she say abruptly . 

 " horrible ? " 

 " I feel so strangely - I could almost cry . " 

 " how be it that you feel ? " 

 " so sorry for the poor past , that seem to have die here , in my heart , 
 in an hour ! " 

 " but , surely , you be pleased - you be interested . " 

 " I be overwhelmed . here in a single hour , everything be change . it be 
 as if a wall in my mind have be knock down at a stroke . before I 
 lie an immense new world , and it make the old one , the poor little 
 narrow , familiar one I have always know , seem pitiful . " 

 " but you do not   come to Rome to keep your eye fasten on that narrow 
 little world . forget it , turn your back on it , and enjoy all this . " 

 " I want to enjoy it ; but as I sit here just now , look up at that 
 golden mist in the dome , I seem to see in it the vague shape of 
 certain people and thing at home . to enjoy , as you say , as these thing 
 demand of one to enjoy they , be to break with one 's past . and breaking 
 be a pain ! " 

 " do not   mind the pain , and it will cease to trouble you . enjoy , enjoy ; it 
 be your duty . your especially ! " 

 " why mine especially ? " 

 " because I be very sure that you have a mind capable of do the 
 most liberal justice to everything interesting and beautiful . you be 
 extremely intelligent . " 

 " you do not   know , " say Miss Garland , simply . 

 " in that matter one feel . I really think that I know well than you . 
 I do not   want to seem patronize , but I suspect that your mind be 
 susceptible of a great development . give it the good company , trust it , 
 let it go ! " 

 she look away from he for some moment , down the gorgeous vista of 
 the great church . " but what you say , " she say at last , " mean change ! " 

 " change for the well ! " cry Rowland . 

 " how can one tell ? as one stand , one know the bad . it seem to I 
 very frightful to develop , " she add , with her complete smile . 

 " one be in for it in one way or another , and one might as well do it 
 with a good grace as with a bad ! since one can not   escape life , it be 
 well to take it by the hand . " 

 " be this what you call life ? " she ask . 

 " what do you mean by ' this ' ? " 

 " Saint Peter 's - all this splendor , all Rome - picture , ruin , statue , 
 beggar , monk . " 

 " it be not all of it , but it be a large part of it . all these thing 
 be impregnate with life ; they be the fruit of an old and complex 
 civilization . " 

 " an old and complex civilization : I be afraid I do not   like that . " 

 " do not   conclude on that point just yet . wait till you have test 
 it . while you wait , you will see an immense number of very beautiful 
 thing - thing that you be make to understand . they will not   leave you as 
 they find you ; then you can judge . do not   tell I I know nothing about 
 your understanding . I have a right to assume it . " 

 Miss Garland gaze awhile aloft in the dome . " I be not sure I understand 
 that , " she say . 

 " I hope , at least , that at a cursory glance it please you , " say 
 Rowland . " you need not   be afraid to tell the truth . what strike some 
 people be that it be so remarkably small . " 

 " oh , it be large enough ; it be very wonderful . there be thing in Rome , 
 then , " she add in a moment , turn and look at he , " that be 
 very , very beautiful ? " 

 " lot of they . " 

 " some of the most beautiful thing in the world ? " 

 " unquestionably . " 

 " what be they ? which thing have most beauty ? " 

 " that be accord to taste . I should say the statue . " 

 " how long will it take to see they all ? to know , at least , something 
 about they ? " 

 " you can see they all , as far as mere seeing go , in a fortnight . but 
 to know they be a thing for one 's leisure . the more time you spend among 
 they , the more you care for they . " after a moment 's hesitation he go 
 on : " why should you grudge time ? it be all in your way , since you be to 
 be an artist 's wife . " 

 " I have think of that , " she say . " it may be that I shall always live 
 here , among the most beautiful thing in the world ! " 

 " very possibly ! I should like to see you ten year hence . " 

 " I dare say I shall seem greatly alter . but I be sure of one thing . " 

 " of what ? " 

 " that for the most part I shall be quite the same . I ask nothing well 
 than to believe the fine thing you say about my understanding , but even 
 if they be true , it will not   matter . I shall be what I be make , what I be 
 now - a young woman from the country ! the fruit of a civilization not old 
 and complex , but new and simple . " 

 " I be delighted to hear it : that be an excellent foundation . " 

 " perhaps , if you show I anything more , you will not always think so 
 kindly of it . therefore I warn you . " 

 " I be not frightened . I should like vastly to say something to you : be 
 what you be , be what you choose ; but do , sometimes , as I tell you . " 

 if Rowland be not frightened , neither , perhaps , be Miss Garland ; but 
 she seem at least slightly disturbed . she propose that they should 
 join their companion . 

 Mrs. Hudson speak under her breath ; she could not be accuse of the want 
 of reverence sometimes attribute to Protestants in the great Catholic 
 temple . " Mary , dear , " she whisper , ' suppose we have to kiss that 
 dreadful brass toe . if I could only have keep our door - knocker , at 
 Northampton , as bright as that ! I think it be so heathenish ; but Roderick 
 say he think it be sublime . " 

 Roderick have evidently grow a trifle perverse . " it be sublime than 
 anything that your religion ask you to do ! " he exclaim . 

 " surely our religion sometimes give we very difficult duty , " say 
 Miss Garland . 

 " the duty of sit in a whitewashed meeting - house and listen to a 
 nasal Puritan ! I admit that be difficult . but it be not sublime . I be 
 speak of ceremony , of form . it be in my line , you know , to make 
 much of form . I think this be a very beautiful one . could not   you do 
 it ? " he demand , look at his cousin . 

 she look back at he intently and then shake her head . " I think not ! " 

 " why not ? " 

 " I do not   know ; I could not ! " 

 during this little discussion our four friend be stand near the 
 venerable image of Saint Peter , and a squalid , savage - look peasant , 
 a tattered ruffian of the most orthodox italian aspect , have be 
 perform his devotion before it . he turn away , cross himself , 
 and Mrs. Hudson give a little shudder of horror . 

 " after that , " she murmur , " I suppose he think he be as good as any 
 one ! and here be another . oh , what a beautiful person ! " 

 a young lady have approach the sacred effigy , after have wander 
 away from a group of companion . she kiss the brazen toe , touch it 
 with her forehead , and turn round , face our friend . Rowland then 
 recognize Christina Light . he be stupefy : have she suddenly embrace 
 the catholic faith ? it be but a few week before that she have treat 
 he to a passionate profession of indifference . have she enter the 
 church to put herself en regle with what be expect of a Princess 
 Casamassima ? while Rowland be mentally ask these question she be 
 approach he and his friend , on her way to the great altar . at first 
 she do not perceive they . 

 Mary Garland have be gaze at she . " you tell I , " she say gently , to 
 Rowland , " that Rome contain some of the most beautiful thing in the 
 world . this surely be one of they ! " 

 at this moment Christina 's eye meet Rowland 's and before give he 
 any sign of recognition she glance rapidly at his companion . she see 
 Roderick , but she give he no bow ; she look at Mrs. Hudson , she look 
 at Mary Garland . at Mary Garland she look fixedly , piercingly , from 
 head to foot , as the slow pace at which she be advance make possible . 
 then suddenly , as if she have perceive Roderick for the first time , 
 she give he a charming nod , a radiant smile . in a moment he be at her 
 side . she stop , and he stand talk to she ; she continue to look at 
 Miss Garland . 

 " why , Roderick know she ! " cry Mrs. Hudson , in an awe - strike whisper . 
 " I suppose she be some great princess . " 

 " she be - almost ! " say Rowland . " she be the most beautiful girl in 
 Europe , and Roderick have make her bust . " 

 " her bust ? dear , dear ! " murmur Mrs. Hudson , vaguely shocked . " what a 
 strange bonnet ! " 

 " she have very strange eye , " say Mary , and turn away . 

 the two lady , with Rowland , begin to descend toward the door of the 
 church . on their way they pass Mrs. Light , the Cavaliere , and the 
 poodle , and Rowland inform his companion of the relation in which 
 these personage stand to Roderick 's young lady . 

 " think of it , Mary ! " say Mrs. Hudson . " what splendid people he must 
 know ! no wonder he find Northampton dull ! " 

 " I like the poor little old gentleman , " say Mary . 

 " why do you call he poor ? " Rowland ask , strike with the observation . 

 " he seem so ! " she answer simply . 

 as they be reach the door they be overtake by Roderick , whose 
 interview with Miss Light have perceptibly brighten his eye . " so you 
 be acquaint with princess ! " say his mother softly , as they pass 
 into the portico . 

 " Miss Light be not a princess ! " say Roderick , curtly . 

 " but Mr. Mallet say so , " urge Mrs. Hudson , rather disappointed . 

 " I mean that she be go to be ! " say Rowland . 

 " it be by no mean certain that she be even go to be ! " roderick 
 answer . 

 " ah , " say Rowland , " I give it up ! " 

 roderick almost immediately demand that his mother should sit to he , 
 at his studio , for her portrait , and Rowland venture to add another 
 word of urgency . if Roderick 's idea really hold he , it be an immense 
 pity that his inspiration should be waste ; inspiration , in these day , 
 have become too precious a commodity . it be arrange therefore that , for 
 the present , during the morning , Mrs. Hudson should place herself at 
 her son 's service . this involve but little sacrifice , for the good 
 lady 's appetite for antiquity be diminutive and bird - like , the 
 usual round of gallery and church fatigue she , and she be glad 
 to purchase immunity from sight - seeing by a regular afternoon drive . it 
 become natural in this way that , Miss Garland have her morning 
 free , Rowland should propose to be the young lady 's guide in whatever 
 exploration she might be dispose to make . she say she know nothing 
 about it , but she have a great curiosity , and would be glad to see 
 anything that he would show she . Rowland could not find it in his heart 
 to accuse Roderick of neglect of the young girl ; for it be natural that 
 the inspiration of a capricious man of genius , when they come , should 
 be imperious ; but of course he wonder how Miss Garland feel , as the 
 young man 's promise wife , on be thus expeditiously hand over to 
 another man to be entertain . however she feel , he be certain he would 
 know little about it . there have be , between they , none but indirect 
 allusion to her engagement , and Rowland have no desire to discuss it 
 more largely ; for he have no quarrel with matter as they stand . they 
 wear the same delightful aspect through the lovely month of May , and the 
 ineffable charm of Rome at that period seem but the radiant sympathy 
 of nature with his happy opportunity . the weather be divine ; each 
 particular morning , as he walk from his lodging to Mrs. Hudson 's 
 modest inn , seem to have a blessing upon it . the eld lady have 
 usually go off to the studio , and he find Miss Garland sit alone 
 at the open window , turn the leaf of some book of artistic or 
 antiquarian reference that he have give she . she always have a smile , she 
 be always eager , alert , responsive . she might be grave by nature , she 
 might be sad by circumstance , she might have secret doubt and pang , 
 but she be essentially young and strong and fresh and able to enjoy . 
 her enjoyment be not especially demonstrative , but it be curiously 
 diligent . Rowland feel that it be not amusement and sensation that she 
 covet , but knowledge - fact that she might noiselessly lay away , piece 
 by piece , in the perfumed darkness of her serious mind , so that , under 
 this head at least , she should not be a perfectly portionless bride . she 
 never merely pretend to understand ; she let thing go , in her modest 
 fashion , at the moment , but she watch they on their way , over the 
 crest of the hill , and when her fancy seem not likely to be miss it 
 go hurry after they and run breathless at their side , as it be , 
 and beg they for the secret . Rowland take an immense satisfaction in 
 observe that she never mistook the second - good for the good , and 
 that when she be in the presence of a masterpiece , she recognize the 
 occasion as a mighty one . she say many thing which he think very 
 profound - that be , if they really have the fine intention he suspect . 
 this point he usually try to ascertain ; but he be oblige to proceed 
 cautiously , for in her mistrustful shyness it seem to she that 
 cross - examination must necessarily be ironical . she wish to know just 
 where she be go - what she would gain or lose . this be partly on 
 account of a native intellectual purity , a temper of mind that have 
 not live with its door ajar , as one might say , upon the high - road of 
 thought , for pass idea to drop in and out at their pleasure ; but have 
 make much of a few long visit from guest cherish and honor - guest 
 whose presence be a solemnity . but it be even more because she be 
 conscious of a sort of grow self - respect , a sense of devote her 
 life not to her own end , but to those of another , whose life would be 
 large and brilliant . she have be bring up to think a great deal of 
 " nature " and nature 's innocent law ; but now Rowland have speak to she 
 ardently of culture ; her strenuous fancy have respond , and she be 
 pursue culture into retreat where the need for some intellectual 
 effort give a noble severity to her purpose . she wish to be very sure , 
 to take only the good , know it to be the good . there be something 
 exquisite in this labor of pious self - adornment , and Rowland help it , 
 though its fruit be not for he . in spite of her lurking rigidity 
 and angularity , it be very evident that a nervous , impulsive sense 
 of beauty be constantly at play in her soul , and that her actual 
 experience of beautiful thing move she in some very deep place . for 
 all that she be not demonstrative , that her manner be simple , and her 
 small - talk of no very ample flow ; for all that , as she have say , she be 
 a young woman from the country , and the country be West Nazareth , and 
 West Nazareth be in its way a stubborn little fact , she be feel 
 the direct influence of the great amenity of the world , and they be 
 shape she with a divinely intelligent touch . " oh exquisite virtue of 
 circumstance ! " cry Rowland to himself , " that take we by the hand 
 and lead we forth out of corner where , perforce , our attitude be a 
 trifle contract , and beguile we into test mistrust faculty ! " 
 when he say to Mary Garland that he wish he might see she ten year 
 hence , he be pay mentally an equal compliment to circumstance and 
 to the girl herself . capacity be there , it could be freely trust ; 
 observation would have but to sow its generous seed . " a superior 
 woman " - the idea have harsh association , but he watch it image 
 itself in the vagueness of the future with a kind of hopeless 
 confidence . 

 they go a great deal to Saint Peter 's , for which Rowland have an 
 exceeding affection , a large measure of which he succeed in infusing 
 into his companion . she confess very speedily that to climb the long , 
 low , yellow step , beneath the huge florid facade , and then to push 
 the ponderous leathern apron of the door , to find one 's self confront 
 with that builded , luminous sublimity , be a sensation of which the 
 keenness renew itself with surprising generosity . in those day the 
 hospitality of the Vatican have not be curtail , and it be an easy 
 and delightful matter to pass from the gorgeous church to the solemn 
 company of the antique marble . here Rowland have with his companion a 
 great deal of talk , and find himself expound aesthetic a perte de 
 vue . he discover that she make note of her like and dislike in a 
 new - look little memorandum book , and he wonder to what extent she 
 report his own discourse . these be charming hour . the gallery have 
 be so cold all winter that Rowland have be an exile from they ; but 
 now that the sun be already scorch in the great square between the 
 colonnade , where the twin fountain flash almost fiercely , the marble 
 coolness of the long , image - border vista make they a delightful 
 refuge . the great herd of tourist have almost depart , and our two 
 friend often find themselves , for half an hour at a time , in sole and 
 tranquil possession of the beautiful Braccio Nuovo . here and there be 
 an open window , where they linger and lean , look out into the 
 warm , dead air , over the tower of the city , at the soft - hue , historic 
 hill , at the stately shabby garden of the palace , or at some sunny , 
 empty , grass - grow court , lose in the heart of the labyrinthine pile . 
 they go sometimes into the chamber paint by Raphael , and of course 
 pay their respect to the Sistine Chapel ; but Mary 's evident preference 
 be to linger among the statue . once , when they be stand before 
 that noble of sculptured portrait , the so - call demosthene , in the 
 Braccio Nuovo , she make the only spontaneous allusion to her project 
 marriage , direct or indirect , that have yet fall from her lip . " I be 
 so glad , " she say , " that Roderick be a sculptor and not a painter . " 

 the allusion reside chiefly in the extreme earnestness with which the 
 word be utter . Rowland immediately ask she the reason of her 
 gladness . 

 " it be not that painting be not fine , " she say , " but that sculpture be 
 fine . it be more manly . " 

 Rowland try at time to make her talk about herself , but in this she 
 have little skill . she seem to he so much old , so much more pliant 
 to social us than when he have see she at home , that he have a 
 desire to draw from she some categorical account of her occupation and 
 thought . he tell she his desire and what suggest it . " it appear , 
 then , " she say , " that , after all , one can grow at home ! " 

 " unquestionably , if one have a motive . your growth , then , be 
 unconscious ? you do not watch yourself and water your root ? " 

 she pay no heed to his question . " I be willing to grant , " she say , 
 " that Europe be more delightful than I suppose ; and I do not   think that , 
 mentally , I have be stingy . but you must admit that America be well 
 than you have suppose . " 

 " I have not a fault to find with the country which produce you ! " 
 Rowland think he might risk this , smile . 

 " and yet you want I to change - to assimilate Europe , I suppose you 
 would call it . " 

 " I have feel that desire only on general principle . shall I tell you 
 what I feel now ? America have make you thus far ; let America finish you ! 
 I should like to ship you back without delay and see what become 
 of you . that sound unkind , and I admit there be a cold intellectual 
 curiosity in it . " 

 she shake her head . " the charm be break ; the thread be snap ! I 
 prefer to remain here . " 

 invariably , when he be inclined to make of something they be talk 
 of a direct application to herself , she wholly fail to assist he ; she 
 make no response . Whereupon , once , with a spark of ardent irritation , he 
 tell she she be very ' secretive . " at this she color a little , and 
 he say that in default of any large confidence it would at least be 
 a satisfaction to make she confess to that charge . but even this 
 satisfaction she deny he , and his only revenge be in make , two 
 or three time afterward , a softly ironical allusion to her slyness . he 
 tell she that she be what be call in French a sournoise . " very good , " 
 she answer , almost indifferently , " and now please tell I again - I 
 have forget it - what you say an ' architrave ' be . " 

 it be on the occasion of she ask he a question of this kind that 
 he charge she , with a humorous emphasis in which , also , if she have 
 be curious in the matter , she might have detect a spark of restless 
 ardor , with have an insatiable avidity for fact . " you be always 
 snatch at information , " he say ; " you will never consent to have any 
 disintereste conversation . " 

 she frown a little , as she always do when he arrest their talk upon 
 something personal . but this time she assent , and say that she know 
 she be eager for fact . " one must make hay while the sun shin , " she 
 add . " I must lay up a store of learn against dark day . somehow , 
 my imagination refuse to compass the idea that I may be in Rome 
 indefinitely . " 

 he know he have divine her real motif ; but he feel that if he might 
 have say to she - what it seem impossible to say - that fortune 
 possibly have in store for her a bitter disappointment , she would have 
 be capable of answer , immediately after the first sense of pain , 
 " say then that I be lay up resource for solitude ! " 

 but all the accusation be not his . he have be watch , once , during 
 some brief argument , to see whether she would take her forefinger out 
 of her Murray , into which she have insert it to keep a certain page . 
 it would have be hard to say why this point interest he , for he have 
 not the slight real apprehension that she be dry or pedantic . the 
 simple human truth be , the poor fellow be jealous of science . 
 in preach science to she , he have over - estimate his power of 
 self - effacement . suddenly , sink science for the moment , she look at 
 he very frankly and begin to frown . at the same time she let the Murray 
 slide down to the ground , and he be so charm with this circumstance 
 that he make no movement to pick it up . 

 " you be singularly inconsistent , Mr. Mallet , " she say . 

 " how ? " 

 " that first day that we be in Saint Peter 's you say thing that 
 inspire I . you bade I plunge into all this . I be all ready ; I only 
 want a little push ; yours be a great one ; here I be in mid - ocean ! and 
 now , as a reward for my bravery , you have repeatedly snub I . " 

 " distinctly , then , " say Rowland , " I strike you as inconsistent ? " 

 " that be the word . " 

 " then I have play my part very ill . " 

 " your part ? what be your part suppose to have be ? " 

 he hesitate a moment . " that of usefulness , pure and simple . " 

 " I do not   understand you ! " she say ; and pick up her Murray , she 
 fairly bury herself in it . 

 that evening he say something to she which necessarily increase her 
 perplexity , though it be not utter with such an intention . " do you 
 remember , " he ask , " my beg you , the other day , to do occasionally 
 as I tell you ? it seem to I you tacitly consent . " 

 " very tacitly . " 

 " I have never yet really presume on your consent . but now I would 
 like you to do this : whenever you catch I in the act of what you call 
 inconsistency , ask I the meaning of some architectural term . I will 
 know what you mean ; a word to the wise ! " 

 one morning they spend among the ruin of the Palatine , that sunny 
 desolation of crumble , over - tangle fragment , half excavate and half 
 identify , know as the Palace of the Caesars . nothing in Rome be more 
 interesting , and no locality have such a confusion of picturesque charm . 
 it be a vast , ramble garden , where you stumble at every step on the 
 disinter bone of the past ; where damp , frescoed corridor , relic , 
 possibly , of Nero 's Golden House , serve as gigantic bower , and where , 
 in the springtime , you may sit on a latin inscription , in the shade of 
 a flower almond - tree , and admire the composition of the Campagna . 
 the day leave a deep impression on Rowland 's mind , partly owe to its 
 intrinsic sweetness , and partly because his companion , on this occasion , 
 let her Murray lie unopened for an hour , and ask several question 
 irrelevant to the Consuls and the Caesars . she have begin by say 
 that it be come over she , after all , that Rome be a ponderously sad 
 place . the sirocco be gently blow , the air be heavy , she be tired , 
 she look a little pale . 

 " everything , " she say , ' seem to say that all thing be vanity . if one 
 be do something , I suppose one feel a certain strength within one to 
 contradict it . but if one be idle , surely it be depress to live , year 
 after year , among the ash of thing that once be mighty . if I be 
 to remain here I should either become permanently ' low , ' as they say , or 
 I would take refuge in some dog daily work . " 

 " what work ? " 

 " I would open a school for those beautiful little beggar ; though I be 
 sadly afraid I should never bring myself to scold they . " 

 " I be idle , " say Rowland , " and yet I have keep up a certain spirit . " 

 " I do not   call you idle , " she answer with emphasis . 

 " it be very good of you . do you remember our talk about that in 
 Northampton ? " 

 " during that picnic ? perfectly . have your come abroad succeed , for 
 yourself , as well as you hop ? " 

 " I think I may say that it have turn out as well as I expect . " 

 " be you happy ? " 

 " do not   I look so ? " 

 " so it seem to I . but " - and she hesitate a moment - " I imagine you 
 look happy whether you be so or not . " 

 " I ' m like that ancient comic mask that we see just now in yonder 
 excavate fresco : I be make to grin . " 

 " shall you come back here next winter ? " 

 " very probably . " 

 " be you settle here forever ? " 

 " ' forever ' be a long time . I live only from year to year . " 

 " shall you never marry ? " 

 Rowland give a laugh . " ' forever ' - ' never ! ' you handle large idea . I 
 have not take a vow of celibacy . " 

 " would not   you like to marry ? " 

 " I should like it immensely . " 

 to this she make no rejoinder : but presently she ask , " why do not   you 
 write a book ? " 

 Rowland laugh , this time more freely . " a book ! what book should I 
 write ? " 

 " a history ; something about art or antiquity . " 

 " I have neither the learning nor the talent . " 

 she make no attempt to contradict he ; she simply say she have suppose 
 otherwise . " you ought , at any rate , " she continue in a moment , " to do 
 something for yourself . " 

 " for myself ? I should have suppose that if ever a man seem to live 
 for himself " - 

 " I do not   know how it seem , " she interrupt , " to careless observer . 
 but we know - we know that you have live - a great deal - for we . " 

 her voice tremble slightly , and she bring out the last word with a 
 little jerk . 

 " she have have that speech on her conscience , " think Rowland ; ' she have 
 be think she owe it to I , and it seem to she that now be her 
 time to make it and have do with it . " 

 she go on in a way which confirm these reflection , speak with 
 due solemnity . " you ought to be make to know very well what we all feel . 
 Mrs. Hudson tell I that she have tell you what she feel . of course 
 Roderick have express himself . I have be want to thank you too ; I 
 do , from my heart . " 

 Rowland make no answer ; his face at this moment resemble the tragic 
 mask much more than the comic . but Miss Garland be not look at he ; 
 she have take up her Murray again . 

 in the afternoon she usually drive with Mrs. Hudson , but Rowland 
 frequently see she again in the evening . he be apt to spend half an 
 hour in the little sit - room at the hotel - pension on the slope of the 
 Pincian , and Roderick , who din regularly with his mother , be present 
 on these occasion . Rowland see he little at other time , and for 
 three week no observation pass between they on the subject of Mrs. 
 Hudson 's advent . to Rowland 's vision , as the week elapse , the benefit 
 to proceed from the presence of the two lady remain shrouded in 
 mystery . Roderick be peculiarly inscrutable . he be preoccupy with 
 his work on his mother 's portrait , which be take a very happy turn ; 
 and often , when he sit silent , with his hand in his pocket , his leg 
 outstretche , his head throw back , and his eye on vacancy , it be to 
 be suppose that his fancy be hover about the half - shape image in 
 his studio , exquisite even in its immaturity . he say little , but his 
 silence do not of necessity imply disaffection , for he evidently find 
 it a deep personal luxury to lounge away the hour in an atmosphere so 
 charge with feminine tenderness . he be not alert , he suggest nothing 
 in the way of excursion   Rowland be the prime mover in such as be 
 attempt , but he conform passively at least to the tranquil temper 
 of the two woman , and make no harsh comment nor sombre allusion . 
 Rowland wonder whether he have , after all , do his friend injustice in 
 deny he the sentiment of duty . he refuse invitation , to Rowland 's 
 knowledge , in order to dine at the jejune little table - d'hote ; wherever 
 his spirit might be , he be present in the flesh with religious 
 constancy . Mrs. Hudson 's felicity betray itself in a remarkable 
 tendency to finish her sentence and wear her good black silk gown . her 
 tremor have tremble away ; she be like a child who discover that 
 the shaggy monster it have so long be afraid to touch be an inanimate 
 terror , compound of straw and saw - dust , and that it be even a safe 
 audacity to tickle its nose . as to whether the love - knot of which Mary 
 Garland have the keeping still hold firm , who should pronounce ? the young 
 girl , as we know , do not wear it on her sleeve . she always sit at 
 the table , near the candle , with a piece of needle - work . this be the 
 attitude in which Rowland have first see she , and he think , now that 
 he have see she in several other , it be not the least become . 






 CHAPTER X. the Cavaliere 

 there befell at last a couple of day during which Rowland be unable 
 to go to the hotel . late in the evening of the second one Roderick come 
 into his room . in a few moment he announce that he have finish the 
 bust of his mother . 

 " and it be magnificent ! " he declare . " it be one of the good thing I 
 have do . " 

 " I believe it , " say Rowland . " never again talk to I about your 
 inspiration be dead . " 

 " why not ? this may be its last kick ! I feel very tired . but it be a 
 masterpiece , though I do say it . they tell we we owe so much to our 
 parent . well , I ' ve   pay the filial debt handsomely ! " he walk up and 
 down the room a few moment , with the purpose of his visit evidently 
 still undischarged . " there be one thing more I want to say , " he 
 presently resume . " I feel as if I ought to tell you ! " he stop before 
 Rowland with his head high and his brilliant glance uncloude . " your 
 invention be a failure ! " 

 " my invention ? " Rowland repeat . 

 " bring out my mother and Mary . " 

 " a failure ? " 

 " it be no use ! they do not   help I . " 

 Rowland have fancy that Roderick have no more surprise for he ; but he 
 be now star at he , wide - eye . 

 " they bear I ! " Roderick go on . 

 " oh , oh ! " cry Rowland . 

 " listen , listen ! " say Roderick with perfect gentleness . " I be not 
 complain of they ; I be simply state a fact . I be very sorry for 
 they ; I be greatly disappointed . " 

 " have you give they a fair trial ? " 

 " should not   you say so ? it seem to I I have behave beautifully . " 

 " you have do very well ; I have be build great hope on it . " 

 " I have do too well , then . after the first forty - eight hour my own 
 hope collapse . but I determine to fight it out ; to stand within the 
 temple ; to let the spirit of the Lord descend ! do you want to know the 
 result ? another week of it , and I shall begin to hate they . I shall want 
 to poison they . " 

 " miserable boy ! " cry Rowland . " they be the lovely of woman ! " 

 " very likely ! but they mean no more to I than a Bible text to an 
 atheist ! " 

 " I utterly fail , " say Rowland , in a moment , " to understand your 
 relation to Miss Garland . " 

 Roderick shrug his shoulder and let his hand drop at his side . 
 " she adore I ! that be my relation . " and he smile strangely . 

 " have you break your engagement ? " 

 " break it ? you can not   break a ray of moonshine . " 

 " have you absolutely no affection for she ? " 

 Roderick place his hand on his heart and hold it there a moment . 
 " dead - dead - dead ! " he say at last . 

 " I wonder , " Rowland ask presently , " if you begin to comprehend the 
 beauty of Miss Garland 's character . she be a person of the high 
 merit . " 

 " evidently - or I would not have care for she ! " 

 " have that no charm for you now ? " 

 " oh , do not   force a fellow to say rude thing ! " 

 " well , I can only say that you do not   know what you be give up . " 

 Roderick give a quickened glance . " do you know , so well ? " 

 " I admire she immeasurably . " 

 Roderick smile , we may almost say sympathetically . " you have not waste 
 time . " 

 Rowland 's thought be crowd upon he fast . if Roderick be 
 resolute , why oppose he ? if Mary be to be sacrifice , why , in that 
 way , try to save she ? there be another way ; it only need a little 
 presumption to make it possible . Rowland try , mentally , to summon 
 presumption to his aid ; but whether it come or not , it find conscience 
 there before it . Conscience have only three word , but they be cogent . 
 " for her sake - for her sake , " it dumbly murmur , and Rowland resume 
 his argument . " I do not   know what I would not   do , " he say , " rather than 
 that Miss Garland should suffer . " 

 " there be one thing to be say , " Roderick answer reflectively . " she be 
 very strong . " 

 " well , then , if she be strong , believe that with a long chance , a 
 well chance , she will still regain your affection . " 

 " do you know what you ask ? " cry Roderick . " make love to a girl I 
 hate ? " 

 " you hate ? " 

 " as her lover , I should hate she ! " 

 " listen to I ! " say Rowland with vehemence . 

 " no , listen you to I ! do you really urge my marry a woman who would 
 bore I to death ? I would let she know it in very good season , and then 
 where would she be ? " 

 Rowland walk the length of the room a couple of time and then stop 
 suddenly . " go your way , then ! say all this to she , not to I ! " 

 " to she ? I be afraid of she ; I want you to help I . " 

 " my dear roderick , " say Rowland with an eloquent smile , " I can help you 
 no more ! " 

 Roderick frown , hesitate a moment , and then take his hat . " oh , well , " 
 he say , " I be not so afraid of she as all that ! " and he turn , as if 
 to depart . 

 " stop ! " cry Rowland , as he lay his hand on the door . 

 roderick pause and stand wait , with his irritated brow . 

 " come back ; sit down there and listen to I . of anything you be to say 
 in your present state of mind you would live most bitterly to repent . 
 you do not   know what you really think ; you do not   know what you really 
 feel . you do not   know your own mind ; you do not   do justice to Miss 
 Garland . all this be impossible here , under these circumstance . you be 
 blind , you be deaf , you be under a spell . to break it , you must leave 
 Rome . " 

 " Leave Rome ! Rome be never so dear to I . " 

 " that be not of the small consequence . leave it instantly . " 

 " and where shall I go ? " 

 " go to some place where you may be alone with your mother and Miss 
 Garland . " 

 " alone ? you will not come ? " 

 " oh , if you desire it , I will come . " 

 roderick incline his head a little , look at his friend askance . " I 
 do not   understand you , " he say ; " I wish you like Miss Garland either a 
 little less , or a little more . " 

 Rowland feel himself color , but he pay no heed to Roderick 's speech . 
 " you ask I to help you , " he go on . " on these present condition I can 
 do nothing . but if you will postpone all decision as to the continuance 
 of your engagement a couple of month long , and meanwhile leave Rome , 
 leave Italy , I will do what I can to ' help you , ' as you say , in the 
 event of your still wish to break it . " 

 " I must do without your help then ! your condition be impossible . I 
 will leave Rome at the time I have always intend - at the end of June . 
 my room and my mother 's be take till then ; all my arrangement be 
 make accordingly . then , I will depart ; not before . " 

 " you be not frank , " say Rowland . " your real reason for staying have 
 nothing to do with your room . " 

 Roderick 's face betray neither embarrassment nor resentment . " if I ' m 
 not frank , it be for the first time in my life . since you know so much 
 about my real reason , let I hear it ! no , stop ! " he suddenly add , " I 
 will not   trouble you . you be right , I have a motive . on the twenty - fourth 
 of June Miss Light be to be marry . I take an immense interest in all 
 that concern she , and I wish to be present at her wedding . " 

 " but you say the other day at Saint Peter 's that it be by no mean 
 certain her marriage would take place . " 

 " apparently I be wrong : the invitation , I be tell , be go out . " 

 Rowland feel that it would be utterly vain to remonstrate , and that the 
 only thing for he be to make the good term possible . " if I offer no 
 further opposition to your wait for Miss Light 's marriage , " he say , 
 " will you promise , meanwhile and afterwards , for a certain period , to 
 defer to my judgment - to say nothing that may be a cause of suffer to 
 Miss Garland ? " 

 " for a certain period ? what period ? " Roderick demand . 

 " ah , do not   drive so close a bargain ! do not   you understand that I have 
 take you away from she , that I suffer in every nerve in consequence , 
 and that I must do what I can to restore you ? " 

 " do what you can , then , " say Roderick gravely , put out his hand . 
 " do what you can ! " his tone and his hand - shake seem to constitute a 
 promise , and upon this they part . 

 Roderick 's bust of his mother , whether or no it be a discharge of what 
 he call the filial debt , be at least a most admirable production . 
 Rowland , at the time it be finish , meet gloriani one evening , and this 
 unscrupulous genius immediately begin to ask question about it . " I be 
 tell our high - fly friend have come down , " he say . " he have be do 
 a queer little old woman . " 

 " a queer little old woman ! " Rowland exclaim . " my dear sir , she be 
 Hudson 's mother . " 

 " all the more reason for her be queer ! it be a bust for terra - cotta , 
 eh ? " 

 " by no mean ; it be for marble . " 

 " that be a pity . it be describe to I as a charming piece of 
 quaintness : a little demure , thin - lipped old lady , with her head on 
 one side , and the pretty wrinkle in the world - a sort of fairy 
 godmother . " 

 " go and see it , and judge for yourself , " say Rowland . 

 " no , I see I shall be disappoint . it be quite the other thing , the 
 sort of thing they put into the campo - santos . I wish that boy would 
 listen to I an hour ! " 

 but a day or two later Rowland meet he again in the street , and , as 
 they be near , propose they should adjourn to Roderick 's studio . 
 he consent , and on enter they find the young master . Roderick 's 
 demeanor to Gloriani be never conciliatory , and on this occasion 
 supreme indifference be apparently all he have to offer . but Gloriani , 
 like a genuine connoisseur , care nothing for his manner ; he care only 
 for his skill . in the bust of Mrs. Hudson there be something almost 
 touch ; it be an exquisite example of a rule sense of beauty . the 
 poor lady 's small , neat , timorous face have certainly no great character , 
 but Roderick have reproduce its sweetness , its mildness , its minuteness , 
 its still maternal passion , with the most unerring art . it be perfectly 
 unflattered , and yet admirably tender ; it be the poetry of fidelity . 
 Gloriani stand look at it a long time most intently . roderick 
 wander away into the neighboring room . 

 " I give it up ! " say the sculptor at last . " I do not   understand it . " 

 " but you like it ? " say Rowland . 

 " like it ? it be a pearl of pearl . tell I this , " he add : " be he very 
 fond of his mother ; be he a very good son ? " and he give Rowland a sharp 
 look . 

 " why , she adore he , " say Rowland , smile . 

 " that be not an answer ! but it be none of my business . only if I , in his 
 place , be suspect of have - what shall I call it ? - a cold heart , 
 manage to do that piece of work , oh , oh ! I should be call a pretty 
 lot of name . Charlatan , poseur , arrangeur ! but he can do as he choose ! 
 my dear young man , I know you do not   like I , " he go on , as Roderick 
 come back . " it be a pity ; you be strong enough not to care about I at 
 all . you be very strong . " 

 " not at all , " say Roderick curtly . " I be very weak ! " 

 " I tell you last year that you would not   keep it up . I be a great ass . 
 you will ! " 

 " I beg your pardon - I will not ! " retort Roderick . 

 " though I ' m a great ass , all the same , eh ? well , call I what you will , 
 so long as you turn out this sort of thing ! I do not   suppose it make any 
 particular difference , but I should like to say now I believe in you . " 

 Roderick stand look at he for a moment with a strange hardness in 
 his face . it flush slowly , and two glitter , angry tear fill his 
 eye . it be the first time Rowland have ever see they there ; he see 
 they but once again . poor Gloriani , he be sure , have never in his life 
 speak with less of irony ; but to Roderick there be evidently a sense 
 of mockery in his profession of faith . he turn away with a muttered , 
 passionate imprecation . Gloriani be accustom to deal with complex 
 problem , but this time he be hopelessly puzzle . " what be the matter 
 with he ? " he ask , simply . 

 Rowland give a sad smile , and touch his forehead . " Genius , I suppose . " 

 Gloriani send another parting , linger look at the bust of Mrs. 
 Hudson . " well , it be deuce perfect , it be deuce simple ; I do believe 
 in he ! " he say . " but I ' m glad I ' m not a genius . it make , " he add 
 with a laugh , as he look for Roderick to wave he good - by , and see his 
 back still turn , " it make a more sociable studio . " 

 Rowland have purchase , as he suppose , temporary tranquillity for Mary 
 Garland ; but his own humor in these day be not especially peaceful . he 
 be attempt , in a certain sense , to lead the ideal life , and he find 
 it , at the least , not easy . the day pass , but bring with they no 
 official invitation to Miss Light 's wedding . he occasionally meet she , 
 and he occasionally meet Prince Casamassima ; but always separately , 
 never together . they be apparently take their happiness in the 
 inexpressive manner proper to people of social eminence . Rowland 
 continue to see Madame Grandoni , for whom he feel a confirm 
 affection . he have always talk to she with frankness , but now he make 
 she a confidant of all his hidden dejection . Roderick and Roderick 's 
 concern have be a common theme with he , and it be in the natural 
 course to talk of Mrs. Hudson 's arrival and Miss Garland 's fine smile . 
 Madame Grandoni be an intelligent listener , and she lose no time in 
 put his case for he in a nutshell . " at one moment you tell I the 
 girl be plain , " she say ; " the next you tell I she be pretty . I will 
 invite they , and I shall see for myself . but one thing be very clear : 
 you be in love with she . " 

 Rowland , for all answer , glanced round to see that no one hear she . 

 " More than that , " she add , " you have be in love with she these two 
 year . there be that certain something about you ! ... I know you be a 
 mild , sweet fellow , but you have a touch of it more than be natural . 
 why do not   you tell I at once ? you would have save I a great deal of 
 trouble . and poor Augusta Blanchard too ! " and herewith Madame Grandoni 
 communicate a pertinent fact : Augusta Blanchard and Mr. Leavenworth 
 be go to make a match . the young lady have be stay for a month 
 at Albano , and Mr. Leavenworth have be dance attendance . the event 
 be a matter of course . Rowland , who have be lately reproach himself 
 with a failure of attention to Miss Blanchard 's doing , make some such 
 observation . 

 " but you do not find it so ! " cry his hostess . " it be a matter of 
 course , perhaps , that Mr. Leavenworth , who seem to be go about 
 Europe with the sole view of pick up furniture for his ' home , ' as he 
 call it , should think Miss Blanchard a very handsome piece ; but it be 
 not a matter of course - or it need not   have be - that she should be 
 willing to become a sort of superior table - ornament . she would have 
 accept you if you have try . " 

 " you be suppose the insupposable , " say Rowland . " she never give I a 
 particle of encouragement . " 

 " what would you have have she do ? the poor girl do she good , and I be 
 sure that when she accept Mr. Leavenworth she think of you . " 

 " she think of the pleasure her marriage would give I . " 

 " ay , pleasure indeed ! she be a thoroughly good girl , but she have she 
 little grain of feminine spite , like the rest . well , he be rich than 
 you , and she will have what she want ; but before I forgive you I must 
 wait and see this new arrival - what do you call she ? - Miss Garland . if 
 I like she , I will forgive you ; if I do not , I shall always bear you a 
 grudge . " 

 Rowland answer that he be sorry to forfeit any advantage she might 
 offer he , but that his exculpatory passion for Miss Garland be a 
 figment of her fancy . Miss Garland be engage to another man , and he 
 himself have no claim . 

 " well , then , " say Madame Grandoni , " if I like she , we will have it that 
 you ought to be in love with she . if you fail in this , it will be a 
 double misdemeanor . the man she be engage to do not   care a straw for 
 she . leave I alone and I will tell she what I think of you . " 

 as to Christina Light 's marriage , Madame Grandoni could make no definite 
 statement . the young girl , of late , have make her several fly 
 visit , in the interval of the usual pre - matrimonial shopping and 
 dress - fitting ; she have speak of the event with a toss of her head , as a 
 matter which , with a wise old friend who view thing in their 
 essence , she need not pretend to treat as a solemnity . it be for Prince 
 Casamassima to do that . " it be what they call a marriage of reason , " she 
 once say . " that mean , you know , a marriage of madness ! " 

 " what have you say in the way of advice ? " Rowland ask . 

 " very little , but that little have favor the prince . I know nothing of 
 the mystery of the young lady 's heart . it may be a gold - mine , but at 
 any rate it be a mine , and it be a long journey down into it . but the 
 marriage in itself be an excellent marriage . it be not only brilliant , 
 but it be safe . I think Christina be quite capable of make it a 
 mean of misery ; but there be no position that would be sacred to she . 
 Casamassima be an irreproachable young man ; there be nothing against 
 he but that he be a prince . it be not often , I fancy , that a prince have 
 be put through his pace at this rate . no one know the wedding - day ; 
 the card of invitation have be print half a dozen time over , with 
 a different date ; each time Christina have destroy they . there be 
 people in Rome who be furious at the delay ; they want to get away ; they 
 be in a dreadful fright about the fever , but they be die to see the 
 wedding , and if the day be fix , they would make their arrangement 
 to wait for it . I think it very possible that after have keep they a 
 month and produce a dozen case of malaria , Christina will be marry 
 at midnight by an old friar , with simply the legal witness . " 

 " it be true , then , that she have become a Catholic ? " 

 " so she tell I . one day she get up in the depth of despair ; at her 
 wit 's end , I suppose , in other word , for a new sensation . suddenly it 
 occur to she that the catholic church might after all hold the key , 
 might give she what she want ! she send for a priest ; he happen to be 
 a clever man , and he contrive to interest she . she put on a black dress 
 and a black lace veil , and look handsomer than ever she rustle into 
 the catholic church . the prince , who be very devout , and who have she 
 heresy sorely on his conscience , be throw into an ecstasy . may she 
 never have a caprice that please he less ! " 

 Rowland have already ask Madame Grandoni what , to her perception , be 
 the present state of matter between Christina and Roderick ; and he now 
 repeat his question with some earnestness of apprehension . " the girl 
 be so deucedly dramatic , " he say , " that I do not   know what coup de 
 theatre she may have in store for we . such a stroke be her turn 
 Catholic ; such a stroke would be she some day make she courtesy to a 
 disappoint world as Princess Casamassima , marry at midnight , in her 
 bonnet . she might do - she may do - something that would make even more 
 starer ! I ' m prepare for anything . " 

 " you mean that she might elope with your sculptor , eh ? " 

 " I ' m prepare for anything ! " 

 " do you mean that he be ready ? " 

 " do you think that she be ? " 

 " they be a precious pair ! I think this . you by no mean exhaust the 
 subject when you say that Christina be dramatic . it be my belief that in 
 the course of her life she will do a certain number of thing from pure 
 disintereste passion . she be immeasurably proud , and if that be often 
 a fault in a virtuous person , it may be a merit in a vicious one . she 
 need to think well of herself ; she know a fine character , easily , 
 when she meet one ; she hat to suffer by comparison , even though the 
 comparison be make by herself alone ; and when the estimate she may 
 have make of herself grow vague , she need to do something to give 
 it definite , impressive form . what she will do in such a case will be 
 well or bad , accord to her opportunity ; but I imagine it will 
 generally be something that will drive her mother to despair ; something 
 of the sort usually term ' unworldly . ' " 

 Rowland , as he be take his leave , after some further exchange of 
 opinion , render Miss Light the tribute of a deeply meditative sigh . 
 " she have bother I half to death , " he say , " but somehow I can not 
 manage , as I ought , to hate she . I admire she , half the time , and a good 
 part of the rest I pity she . " 

 " I think I most pity she ! " say Madame Grandoni . 

 this enlightened woman come the next day to call upon the two lady 
 from Northampton . she carry their shy affection by storm , and make 
 they promise to drink tea with she on the evening of the morrow . her 
 visit be an era in the life of poor Mrs. Hudson , who do nothing but 
 make sudden desultory allusion to she , for the next thirty - six hour . 
 " to think of she be a foreigner ! " she would exclaim , after much 
 intent reflection , over her knitting ; ' she speak so beautifully ! " 
 then in a little while , " she be not   so much dressed as you might have 
 expect . do you notice how easy it be in the waist ? I wonder if that 
 be the fashion ? " or , " she be very old to wear a hat ; I should never dare 
 to wear a hat ! " or , " do you notice her hand ? - very pretty hand for 
 such a stout person . a great many ring , but nothing very handsome . I 
 suppose they be hereditary . " or , " she be certainly not handsome , but 
 she be very sweet - looking . I wonder why she do not   have something 
 do to her tooth . " Rowland also receive a summon to Madame Grandoni 's 
 tea - drinking , and go betime , as he have be request . he be eagerly 
 desirous to lend his mute applause to Mary Garland 's debut in the roman 
 social world . the two lady have arrive , with Roderick , silent and 
 careless , in attendance . Miss Blanchard be also present , escort by 
 Mr. Leavenworth , and the party be complete by a dozen artist of both 
 sex and various nationality . it be a friendly and easy assembly , 
 like all Madame Grandoni 's party , and in the course of the evening 
 there be some excellent music . People play and sing for Madame 
 Grandoni , on easy term , who , elsewhere , be not to be hear for the 
 asking . she be herself a superior musician , and singer find it a 
 privilege to perform to her accompaniment . Rowland talk to various 
 person , but for the first time in his life his attention visibly 
 wander ; he could not keep his eye off Mary Garland . Madame Grandoni 
 have say that he sometimes speak of she as pretty and sometimes as 
 plain ; to - night , if he have have occasion to describe her appearance , he 
 would have call she beautiful . she be dress more than he have ever 
 see she ; it be become , and give she a deep color and an ampler 
 presence . two or three person be introduce to she who be 
 apparently witty people , for she sit listen to they with her 
 brilliant natural smile . Rowland , from an opposite corner , reflect 
 that he have never vary in his appreciation of Miss Blanchard 's classic 
 contour , but that somehow , to - night , it impress he hardly more 
 than an effigy stamp upon a coin of low value . roderick could not be 
 accuse of rancor , for he have approach Mr. Leavenworth with unstudied 
 familiarity , and , lounge against the wall , with hand in pocket , be 
 discourse to he with candid serenity . now that he have do he an 
 impertinence , he evidently find he less intolerable . Mr. Leavenworth 
 stand stir his tea and silently opening and shut his mouth , 
 without look at the young sculptor , like a large , drowsy dog snap 
 at fly . Rowland have find it disagreeable to be tell Miss Blanchard 
 would have marry he for the asking , and he would have feel some 
 embarrassment in go to speak to she if his modesty have not find 
 incredulity so easy . the facile side of a union with Miss Blanchard have 
 never be present to his mind ; it have strike he as a thing , in all 
 way , to be compass with a great effort . he have half an hour 's talk 
 with she ; a farewell talk , as it seem to he - a farewell not to a real 
 illusion , but to the idea that for he , in that matter , there could ever 
 be an acceptable pis - aller . he congratulate Miss Blanchard upon her 
 engagement , and she receive his compliment with a touch of primness . 
 but she be always a trifle prim , even when she be quote Mrs. 
 Browning and George Sand , and this harmless defect do not prevent she 
 respond on this occasion that Mr. Leavenworth have a " glorious heart . " 
 Rowland wish to manifest an extreme regard , but toward the end of the 
 talk his zeal relax , and he fall a - think that a certain natural 
 ease in a woman be the most delightful thing in the world . there be 
 Christina Light , who have too much , and here be Miss Blanchard , who have 
 too little , and there be Mary Garland   in whom the quality be wholly 
 uncultivated , who have just the right amount . 

 he go to Madame Grandoni in an adjoining room , where she be pour 
 out tea . 

 " I will make you an excellent cup , " she say , " because I have forgive 
 you . " 

 he look at she , answer nothing ; but he swallow his tea with great 
 gusto , and a slight deepening of his color ; by all of which one would 
 have know that he be gratify . in a moment he intimate that , in so 
 far as he have sin , he have forgive himself . 

 " she be a lovely girl , " say Madame Grandoni . " there be a great deal 
 there . I have take a great fancy to she , and she must let I make a 
 friend of she . " 

 " she be very plain , " say Rowland , slowly , " very simple , very ignorant . " 

 " which , be interpret , mean , ' she be very handsome , very subtle , 
 and have read hundred of volume on winter evening in the country . ' " 

 " you be a veritable sorceress , " cry Rowland ; " you frighten I away ! " 
 as he be turn to leave she , there rise above the hum of voice in 
 the drawing - room the sharp , grotesque note of a bark dog . their eye 
 meet in a glance of intelligence . 

 " there be the sorceress ! " say Madame Grandoni . " the sorceress and her 
 necromantic poodle ! " and she hasten back to the post of hospitality . 

 Rowland follow she , and find Christina Light stand in the middle 
 of the drawing - room , and look about in perplexity . her poodle , 
 sit on his haunch and gaze at the company , have apparently be 
 express a sympathetic displeasure at the absence of a welcome . but 
 in a moment Madame Grandoni have come to the young girl 's relief , and 
 Christina have tenderly kiss she . 

 " I have no idea , " say Christina , survey the assembly , " that you have 
 such a lot of grand people , or I would not have come in . the servant 
 say nothing ; he take I for an invitee . I come to spend a neighborly 
 half - hour ; you know I have not   many left ! it be too dismally dreary at 
 home . I hop I should find you alone , and I bring Stenterello to play 
 with the cat . I do not   know that if I have know about all this I would 
 have dare to come in ; but since I ' ve   stumble into the midst of it , I 
 beg you will let I stay . I be not dress , but be I very hideous ? I will 
 sit in a corner and no one will notice I . my dear , sweet lady , do let 
 I stay . pray , why do not   you ask I ? I never have be to a little 
 party like this . they must be very charming . no dancing - tea and 
 conversation ? no tea , thank you ; but if you could spare a biscuit for 
 Stenterello ; a sweet biscuit , please . really , why do not   you ask I ? 
 do you have these thing often ? Madame Grandoni , it be very unkind ! " and 
 the young girl , who have deliver herself of the foregoing succession of 
 sentence in her usual low , cool , penetrate voice , utter these last 
 word with a certain tremor of feeling . " I see , " she go on , " I do very 
 well for ball and great banquet , but when people wish to have a 
 cosy , friendly , comfortable evening , they leave I out , with the big 
 flower - pot and the gilt candlestick . " 

 " I ' m sure you be welcome to stay , my dear , " say Madame Grandoni , " and 
 at the risk of displease you I must confess that if I do not   invite 
 you , it be because you be too grand . your dress will do very well , 
 with its fifty flounce , and there be no need of your go into a 
 corner . indeed , since you be here , I propose to have the glory of it . 
 you must remain where my people can see you . " 

 " they be evidently determined to do that by the way they stare . do they 
 think I intend to dance a tarantella ? who be they all ; do I know they ? " 
 and linger in the middle of the room , with her arm pass into Madame 
 Grandoni 's , she let her eye wander slowly from group to group . 
 they be of course observe she . stand in the little circle 
 of lamplight , with the hood of an eastern burnous , shoot with silver 
 thread , fall back from her beautiful head , one hand gathering 
 together its voluminous , shimmering fold , and the other play with 
 the silken top - knot on the uplifted head of her poodle , she be a figure 
 of radiant picturesqueness . she seem to be a sort of extemporize 
 tableau vivant . Rowland 's position make it become for he to speak 
 to she without delay . as she look at he he see that , judge by the 
 light of her beautiful eye , she be in a humor of which she have not yet 
 treat he to a speciman . in a simple person he would have call it 
 exquisite kindness ; but in this young lady 's deportment the flower be 
 one thing and the perfume another . " tell I about these people , " she 
 say to he . " I have no idea there be so many people in Rome I have not 
 see . what be they all talk about ? it be all beyond I , I suppose . 
 there be Miss Blanchard , sit as usual in profile against a dark 
 object . she be like a head on a postage - stamp . and there be that nice 
 little old lady in black , Mrs. Hudson . what a dear little woman for a 
 mother ! Comme elle est proprette ! and the other , the fiancee , of course 
 she be here . ah , I see ! " she pause ; she be look intently at Miss 
 Garland . Rowland measure the intentness of her glance , and suddenly 
 acquire a firm conviction . " I should like so much to know she ! " she 
 say , turn to Madame Grandoni . " she have a charming face ; I be sure 
 she be an angel . I wish very much you would introduce I . no , on second 
 thought , I have rather you do not . I will speak to her bravely myself , 
 as a friend of her cousin . " Madame Grandoni and Rowland exchange 
 glance of baffled conjecture , and Christina fling off her burnous , 
 crumple it together , and , with uplifted finger , toss it into a 
 corner , give it in charge to her poodle . he station himself upon it , 
 on his haunch , with upright vigilance . Christina cross the room with 
 the step and smile of a minister angel , and introduce herself to 
 Mary Garland . she have once tell Rowland that she would show he , some 
 day , how gracious her manner could be ; she be now redeem her 
 promise . Rowland , watch she , see Mary Garland rise slowly , in 
 response to her greeting , and look at she with serious deep - gaze eye . 
 the almost dramatic opposition of these two keenly interesting girl 
 touch Rowland with a nameless apprehension , and after a moment he 
 prefer to turn away . in do so he notice Roderick . the young 
 sculptor be stand plant on the train of a lady 's dress , gaze 
 across at Christina 's movement with undisguised earnestness . there be 
 several more piece of music ; Rowland sit in a corner and listen to 
 they . when they be over , several people begin to take their leave , 
 Mrs. Hudson among the number . Rowland see she come up to Madame 
 Grandoni , cling shyly to Mary Garland 's arm . Miss Garland have a 
 brilliant eye and a deep color in her cheek . the two lady look 
 about for Roderick , but Roderick have his back turn . he have approach 
 Christina , who , with an absent air , be sit alone , where she have 
 take her place near Miss Garland , look at the guest pass out of the 
 room . Christina 's eye , like Miss Garland 's , be bright , but her cheek 
 be pale . Hearing Roderick 's voice , she look up at he sharply ; then 
 silently , with a single quick gesture , motion he away . he obey she , 
 and come and join his mother in bid good night to Madame Grandoni . 
 Christina , in a moment , meet Rowland 's glance , and immediately beckon 
 he to come to she . he be familiar with her spontaneity of movement , 
 and be scarcely surprised . she make a place for he on the sofa beside 
 she ; he wonder what be come now . he be not sure it be not a mere 
 fancy , but it seem to he that he have never see she look just as 
 she be look then . it be a humble , touching , appeal look , and it 
 throw into wonderful relief the nobleness of her beauty . " how many more 
 metamorphosis , " he ask himself , " be I to be treat to before we have 
 do ? " 

 " I want to tell you , " say Christina . " I have take an immense fancy to 
 Miss Garland . be not   you glad ? " 

 " delighted ! " exclaim poor Rowland . 

 " ah , you do not   believe it , " she say with soft dignity . 

 " be it so hard to believe ? " 

 " not that people in general should admire she , but that I should . but I 
 want to tell you ; I want to tell some one , and I can not   tell Miss Garland 
 herself . she think I already a horrid false creature , and if I be to 
 express to she frankly what I think of she , I should simply disgust she . 
 she would be quite right ; she have repose , and from that point of view I 
 and my doing must seem monstrous . unfortunately , I have not   repose . I 
 be tremble now ; if I could ask you to feel my arm , you would see ! 
 but I want to tell you that I admire Miss Garland more than any of the 
 people who call themselves her friend - except of course you . oh , I know 
 that ! to begin with , she be extremely handsome , and she do not   know 
 it . " 

 " she be not generally think handsome , " say Rowland . 

 " evidently ! that be the vulgarity of the human mind . her head have great 
 character , great natural style . if a woman be not to be a supreme beauty 
 in the regular way , she will choose , if she be wise , to look like that . 
 she will not be think pretty by people in general , and desecrate , as 
 she pass , by the stare of every vile wretch who choose to thrust his 
 nose under her bonnet ; but a certain number of superior people will find 
 it one of the delightful thing of life to look at she . that lot be as 
 good as another ! then she have a beautiful character ! " 

 " you find that out soon ! " say Rowland , smile . 

 " how long do it take you ? I find it out before I ever speak to she . 
 I meet she the other day in Saint Peter 's ; I know it then . I know it - do 
 you want to know how long I have know it ? " 

 " really , " say Rowland , " I do not   mean to cross - examine you . " 

 " do you remember mamma 's ball in December ? we have some talk and you 
 then mention she - not by name . you say but three word , but I see 
 you admire she , and I know that if you admire she she must have a 
 beautiful character . that be what you require ! " 

 " upon my word , " cry Rowland , " you make three word go very far ! " 

 " oh , Mr. Hudson have also speak of she . " 

 " ah , that be well ! " say Rowland . 

 " I do not   know ; he do not   like she . " 

 " do he tell you so ? " the question leave Rowland 's lip before he could 
 stay it , which he would have do on a moment 's reflection . 

 Christina look at he intently . " no ! " she say at last . " that would 
 have be dishonorable , would not   it ? but I know it from my knowledge of 
 he . he do not   like perfection ; he be not bent upon be safe , in 
 his liking ; he be willing to risk something ! poor fellow , he risk too 
 much ! " 

 Rowland be silent ; he do not care for the thrust ; but he be 
 profoundly mystified . Christina beckon to her poodle , and the 
 dog march stiffly across to she . she give a love twist to his 
 rise - color top - knot , and bid he go and fetch her burnous . he obey , 
 gather it up in his tooth , and return with great solemnity , drag 
 it along the floor . 

 " I do her justice . I do her full justice , " she go on , with soft 
 earnestness . " I like to say that , I like to be able to say it . she be 
 full of intelligence and courage and devotion . she do not   do I a 
 grain of justice ; but that be no harm . there be something so fine in the 
 aversion of a good woman ! " 

 " if you would give Miss Garland a chance , " say Rowland , " I be sure she 
 would be glad to be your friend . " 

 " what do you mean by a chance ? she have only to take it . I tell she 
 I like she immensely , and she frown as if I have say something 
 disgusting . she look very handsome when she frown . " Christina rise , 
 with these word , and begin to gather her mantle about she . " I do not 
 often like woman , " she go on . " in fact I generally detest they . but 
 I should like to know Miss Garland well . I should like to have a 
 friendship with she ; I have never have one ; they must be very delightful . 
 but I shall not   have one now , either - not if she can help it ! ask she what 
 she think of I ; see what she will say . I do not   want to know ; keep it 
 to yourself . it be too sad . so we go through life . it be fatality - that 
 be what they call it , be not   it ? we please the people we do not   care for , 
 we displease those we do ! but I appreciate she , I do her justice ; that 
 be the more important thing . it be because I have imagination . she have 
 none . never mind ; it be her only fault . I do her justice ; I understand 
 very well . " she keep softly murmur and look about for Madame 
 Grandoni . she see the good lady near the door , and put out her hand to 
 Rowland for good night . she hold his hand an instant , fix he with 
 her eye , the live splendor of which , at this moment , be something 
 transcendent . " yes , I do her justice , " she repeat . " and you do she 
 more ; you would lay down your life for she . " with this she turn away , 
 and before he could answer , she leave he . she go to Madame Grandoni , 
 grasp she two hand , and hold out her forehead to be kiss . the next 
 moment she be go . 

 " that be a happy accident ! " say Madame Grandoni . " she never look so 
 beautiful , and she make my little party brilliant . " 

 " beautiful , verily ! " Rowland answer . " but it be no accident . " 

 " what be it , then ? " 

 " it be a plan . she wish to see Miss Garland . she know she be to be 
 here . " 

 " how so ? " 

 " By Roderick , evidently . " 

 " and why do she wish to see Miss Garland ? " 

 " Heaven know ! I give it up ! " 

 " ah , the wicked girl ! " murmur Madame Grandoni . 

 " no , " say Rowland ; " do not   say that now . she be too beautiful . " 

 " oh , you man ! the good of you ! " 

 " well , then , " cry Rowland , ' she be too good ! " 

 the opportunity present itself the next day , he fail not , as you 
 may imagine , to ask Mary Garland what she think of Miss Light . it be 
 a Saturday afternoon , the time at which the beautiful marble of the 
 Villa Borghese be throw open to the public . Mary have tell he that 
 Roderick have promise to take she to see they , with his mother , and he 
 join the party in the splendid casino . the warm weather have leave so 
 few stranger in Rome that they have the place almost to themselves . Mrs. 
 Hudson have confess to an invincible fear of treading , even with the 
 help of her son 's arm , the polished marble floor , and be sit 
 patiently on a stool , with fold hand , look shyly , here and there , 
 at the undraped paganism around she . Roderick have saunter off alone , 
 with an irritated brow , which seem to betray the conflict between 
 the instinct of observation and the perplexity of circumstance . 
 Miss Garland be wander in another direction , and though she be 
 consult her catalogue , Rowland fancy it be from habit ; she too 
 be preoccupy . he join she , and she presently sit down on a divan , 
 rather wearily , and close her Murray . then he ask she abruptly how 
 Christina have please she . 

 she start the least bit at the question , and he feel that she have be 
 thinking of Christina . 

 " I do not   like she ! " she say with decision . 

 " what do you think of she ? " 

 " I think she be false . " this be say without petulance or bitterness , 
 but with a very positive air . 

 " but she wish to please you ; she try , " Rowland rejoin , in a 
 moment . 

 " I think not . she wish to please herself ! " 

 Rowland feel himself at liberty to say no more . no allusion to Christina 
 have pass between they since the day they meet she at Saint Peter 's , 
 but he know that she know , by that infallible sixth sense of a woman who 
 love , that this strange , beautiful girl have the power to injure she . 
 to what extent she have the will , Mary be uncertain ; but last night 's 
 interview , apparently , have not reassure she . it be , under these 
 circumstance , equally unbecoming for Rowland either to depreciate or 
 to defend Christina , and he have to content himself with simply have 
 verify the girl 's own assurance that she have make a bad impression . 
 he try to talk of indifferent matter - about the statue and the 
 fresco ; but to - day , plainly , aesthetic curiosity , with Miss Garland , 
 have fold its wing . curiosity of another sort have take its place . 
 Mary be long , he be sure , to question he about Christina ; but she 
 find a dozen reason for hesitate . her question would imply that 
 Roderick have not treat she with confidence , for information on this 
 point should properly have come from he . they would imply that she be 
 jealous , and to betray her jealousy be intolerable to her pride . for 
 some minute , as she sit scratch the brilliant pavement with the 
 point of her umbrella , it be to be suppose that her pride and her 
 anxiety hold an earnest debate . at last anxiety win . 

 " a propos of Miss Light , " she ask , " do you know she well ? " 

 " I can hardly say that . but I have see she repeatedly . " 

 " do you like she ? " 

 " yes and no . I think I be sorry for she . " 

 Mary have speak with her eye on the pavement . at this she look up . 
 " sorry for she ? why ? " 

 " well - she be unhappy . " 

 " what be her misfortune ? " 

 " well - she have a horrible mother , and she have have a most injurious 
 education . " 

 for a moment Miss Garland be silent . then , " be not   she very beautiful ? " 
 she ask . 

 " do not   you think so ? " 

 " that be measure by what man think ! she be extremely clever , too . " 

 " oh , incontestably . " 

 " she have beautiful dress . " 

 " yes , any number of they . " 

 " and beautiful manner . " 

 " yes - sometimes . " 

 " and plenty of money . " 

 " money enough , apparently . " 

 " and she receive great admiration . " 

 " very true . " 

 " and she be to marry a prince . " 

 " so they say . " 

 Miss Garland rise and turn to rejoin her companion , comment these 
 admission with a pregnant silence . " Poor Miss Light ! " she say at 
 last , simply . and in this it seem to Rowland there be a touch of 
 bitterness . 

 very late on the following evening his servant bring he the card of a 
 visitor . he be surprised at a visit at such an hour , but it may be 
 say that when he read the inscription - Cavaliere Giuseppe Giacosa - his 
 surprise decline . he have have an unformulated conviction that there be 
 to be a sequel to the apparition at Madame Grandoni 's ; the Cavaliere have 
 come to usher it in . 

 he have come , evidently , on a portentous errand . he be as pale as ash 
 and prodigiously serious ; his little cold black eye have grow ardent , 
 and he have leave his caressing smile at home . he salute Rowland , 
 however , with his usual obsequious bow . 

 " you have more than once do I the honor to invite I to call upon 
 you , " he say . " I be ashamed of my long delay , and I can only say to 
 you , frankly , that my time this winter have not be my own . " Rowland 
 assent , ungrudgingly fumble for the italian correlative of the adage 
 " well late than never , " beg he to be seat , and offer he a 
 cigar . the Cavaliere sniff imperceptibly the fragrant weed , and then 
 declare that , if his kind host would allow he , he would reserve it for 
 consumption at another time . he apparently desire to intimate that 
 the solemnity of his errand leave he no breath for idle smoke - puffing . 
 Rowland stay himself , just in time , from an enthusiastic offer of a 
 dozen more cigar , and , as he watch the Cavaliere stow his treasure 
 tenderly away in his pocket - book , reflect that only an italian could 
 go through such a performance with uncompromised dignity . " I must 
 confess , " the little old man resume , " that even now I come on business 
 not of my own - or my own , at least , only in a secondary sense . I have 
 be dispatch as an ambassador , an envoy extraordinary , I may say , by 
 my dear friend Mrs. Light . " 

 " if I can in any way be of service to Mrs. Light , I shall be happy , " 
 Rowland say . 

 " well then , dear sir , Casa Light be in commotion . the signora be in 
 trouble - in terrible trouble . " for a moment Rowland expect to hear 
 that the signora 's trouble be of a nature that a loan of five thousand 
 franc would assuage . but the Cavaliere continue : " Miss Light have 
 commit a great crime ; she have plunge a dagger into the heart of her 
 mother . " 

 " a dagger ! " cry Rowland . 

 the Cavaliere pat the air an instant with his finger - tip . " I speak 
 figuratively . she have break off her marriage . " 

 " break it off ? " 

 " short ! she have turn the prince from the door . " and the Cavaliere , 
 when he have make this announcement , fold his arm and bend upon 
 Rowland his intense , inscrutable gaze . it seem to Rowland that he 
 detect in the polished depth of it a sort of fantastic gleam of 
 irony or of triumph ; but superficially , at least , Giacosa do nothing 
 to discredit his character as a presumably sympathetic representative of 
 Mrs. Light 's affliction . 

 Rowland hear his news with a kind of fierce disgust ; it seem the 
 sinister counterpart of Christina 's preternatural mildness at Madame 
 Grandoni 's tea - party . she have be too plausible to be honest . without 
 be able to trace the connection , he yet instinctively associate she 
 present rebellion with her meeting with Mary Garland . if she have not 
 see Mary , she would have let thing stand . it be monstrous to suppose 
 that she could have sacrifice so brilliant a fortune to a mere movement 
 of jealousy , to a refined instinct of feminine deviltry , to a desire to 
 frighten poor Mary from her security by again appear in the field . 
 yet Rowland remember his first impression of she ; she be " dangerous , " 
 and she have measure in each direction the perturb effect of her 
 rupture . she be smile her sweetest smile at it ! for half an hour 
 Rowland simply detest she , and long to denounce she to her face . of 
 course all he could say to Giacosa be that he be extremely sorry . " but 
 I be not surprised , " he add . 

 " you be not surprised ? " 

 " with Miss Light everything be possible . be not   that true ? " 

 another ripple seem to play for an instant in the current of the old 
 man 's irony , but he waive response . " it be a magnificent marriage , " 
 he say , solemnly . " I do not respect many people , but I respect Prince 
 Casamassima . " 

 " I should judge he indeed to be a very honorable young man , " say 
 Rowland . 

 " eh , young as he be , he be make of the old stuff . and now , perhaps he 
 be blow his brain out . he be the last of his house ; it be a great 
 house . but Miss Light will have put an end to it ! " 

 " be that the view she take of it ? " Rowland venture to ask . 

 this time , unmistakably , the Cavaliere smile , but still in that very 
 out - of - the - way place . " you have observe Miss Light with attention , " he 
 say , " and this bring I to my errand . Mrs. Light have a high opinion 
 of your wisdom , of your kindness , and she have reason to believe you have 
 influence with her daughter . " 

 " I - with her daughter ? not a grain ! " 

 " that be possibly your modesty . Mrs. Light believe that something may 
 yet be do , and that Christina will listen to you . she beg you to come 
 and see she before it be too late . " 

 " but all this , my dear Cavaliere , be none of my business , " Rowland 
 object . " I can not   possibly , in such a matter , take the responsibility 
 of advise Miss Light . " 

 the Cavaliere fix his eye for a moment on the floor , in brief but 
 intense reflection . then look up , " unfortunately , " he say , ' she have 
 no man near she whom she respect ; she have no father ! " 

 " and a fatally foolish mother ! " Rowland give himself the satisfaction of 
 exclaim . 

 the Cavaliere be so pale that he could not easily have turn paler ; 
 yet it seem for a moment that his dead complexion blanch . " eh , 
 signore , such as she be , the mother appeal to you . a very handsome 
 woman - dishevel , in tear , in despair , in dishabille ! " 

 Rowland reflect a moment , not on the attraction of Mrs. Light 
 under the circumstance thus indicate by the Cavaliere , but on the 
 satisfaction he would take in accuse Christina to her face of have 
 strike a cruel blow . 

 " I must add , " say the Cavaliere , " that Mrs. Light desire also to speak 
 to you on the subject of Mr. Hudson . " 

 " she consider Mr. Hudson , then , connect with this step of her 
 daughter 's ? " 

 " intimately . he must be get out of Rome . " 

 " Mrs. Light , then , must get an order from the Pope to remove he . it be 
 not in my power . " 

 the Cavaliere assent , deferentially . " Mrs. Light be equally helpless . 
 she would leave Rome to - morrow , but Christina will not budge . an order 
 from the Pope would do nothing . a bull in council would do nothing . " 

 " she be a remarkable young lady , " say Rowland , with bitterness . 

 but the Cavaliere rise and respond coldly , " she have a great spirit . " 
 and it seem to Rowland that her great spirit , for mysterious reason , 
 give he more pleasure than the distressing use she make of it give he 
 pain . he be on the point of charge he with his inconsistency , when 
 Giacosa resume : " but if the marriage can be save , it must be save . it 
 be a beautiful marriage . it will be save . " 

 " Notwithstanding Miss Light 's great spirit to the contrary ? " 

 " Miss Light , notwithstanding her great spirit , will call Prince 
 Casamassima back . " 

 " heaven grant it ! " say Rowland . 

 " I do not   know , " say the Cavaliere , solemnly , " that heaven will have 
 much to do with it . " 

 Rowland give he a questioning look , but he lay his finger on his lip . 
 and with Rowland 's promise to present himself on the morrow at Casa 
 Light , he shortly afterwards depart . he leave Rowland revolve many 
 thing : Christina 's magnanimity , Christina 's perversity , Roderick 's 
 contingent fortune , Mary Garland 's certain trouble , and the Cavaliere 's 
 own fine ambiguity . 

 Rowland 's promise to the Cavaliere oblige he to withdraw from an 
 excursion which he have arrange with the two lady from Northampton . 
 before go to Casa Light he repair in person to Mrs. Hudson 's hotel , 
 to make his excuse . 

 he find Roderick 's mother sit with tearful eye , star at an open 
 note that lie in her lap . at the window sit Miss Garland , who turn she 
 intense regard upon he as he come in . Mrs. Hudson quickly rise and come 
 to he , hold out the note . 

 " in pity 's name , " she cry , " what be the matter with my boy ? if he be 
 ill , I entreat you to take I to he ! " 

 " he be not ill , to my knowledge , " say Rowland . " what have you there ? " 

 " a note - a dreadful note . he tell we we be not to see he for a week . 
 if I could only go to his room ! but I be afraid , I be afraid ! " 

 " I imagine there be no need of go to his room . what be the occasion , 
 may I ask , of his note ? " 

 " he be to have go with we on this drive to - what be the place ? - to 
 Cervara . you know it be arrange yesterday morning . in the evening he 
 be to have din with we . but he never come , and this morning arrive 
 this awful thing . oh dear , I ' m so excited ! would you mind read it ? " 

 Rowland take the note and glance at its half - dozen line . " I can not go 
 to Cervara , " they run ; " I have something else to do . this will occupy I 
 perhaps for a week , and you will not see I . do not   miss I - learn not to 
 miss I . R. H. " 

 " why , it mean , " Rowland comment , " that he have take up a piece 
 of work , and that it be all - absorbing . that be very good news . " this 
 explanation be not sincere ; but he have not the courage not to offer it 
 as a stop - gap . but he find he need all his courage to maintain it , 
 for Miss Garland have leave her place and approach he , formidably 
 unsatisfie . 

 " he do not work in the evening , " say Mrs. Hudson . " can not   he come 
 for five minute ? why do he write such a cruel , cold note to his poor 
 mother - to poor Mary ? what have we do that he act so strangely ? it 
 be this wicked , infectious , heathenish place ! " and the poor lady 's 
 suppress mistrust of the Eternal City break out passionately . " oh , 
 dear Mr. Mallet , " she go on , " I be sure he have the fever and he be 
 already delirious ! " 

 " I be very sure it be not that , " say Miss Garland , with a certain 
 dryness . 

 she be still look at Rowland ; his eye meet her , and his own glance 
 fall . this make he angry , and to carry off his confusion he pretend 
 to be look at the floor , in meditation . after all , what have he to be 
 ashamed of ? for a moment he be on the point of make a clean breast of 
 it , of cry out , " dearest friend , I abdicate : I can not   help you ! " but 
 he check himself ; he feel so impatient to have his three word with 
 Christina . he grasp his hat . 

 " I will see what it be ! " he cry . and then he be glad he have not 
 abdicate , for as he turn away he glance again at Mary and see that , 
 though her eye be full of trouble , they be not hard and accuse , 
 but charge with appeal friendship . 

 he go straight to Roderick 's apartment , deem this , at an early 
 hour , the safe place to seek he . he find he in his sitting - room , 
 which have be closely darken to keep out the heat . the carpet and 
 rug have be remove , the floor of speckle concrete be bare and 
 lightly sprinkle with water . here and there , over it , certain strongly 
 perfume flower have be scatter . Roderick be lie on his divan in 
 a white dressing - gown , star up at the frescoed ceiling . the room 
 be deliciously cool , and fill with the moist , sweet odor of the 
 circumjacent rose and violet . all this seem highly fantastic , and 
 yet Rowland hardly feel surprised . 

 " your mother be greatly alarmed at your note , " he say , " and I come 
 to satisfy myself that , as I believe , you be not ill . " Roderick lie 
 motionless , except that he slightly turn his head toward his friend . 
 he be smell a large white rose , and he continue to present it to 
 his nose . in the darkness of the room he look exceedingly pale , but 
 his handsome eye have an extraordinary brilliancy . he let they rest for 
 some time on Rowland , lie there like a Buddhist in an intellectual 
 swoon , whose perception should be slowly ebb back to temporal 
 matter . " oh , I ' m not ill , " he say at last . " I have never be 
 well . " 

 " your note , nevertheless , and your absence , " Rowland say , " have very 
 naturally alarm your mother . I advise you to go to she directly and 
 reassure she . " 

 " go to she ? go to she would be bad than stay away . stay away 
 at present be a kindness . " and he inhale deeply his huge rose , look 
 up over it at Rowland . " my presence , in fact , would be indecent . " 

 " Indecent ? Pray explain . " 

 " why , you see , as regard Mary Garland . I be divinely happy ! do not 
 it strike you ? you ought to agree with I . you wish I to spare her 
 feeling ; I spare they by stay away . last night I hear something " - 

 " I hear it , too , " say Rowland with brevity . " and it be in honor of 
 this piece of news that you have take to your bed in this fashion ? " 

 " extreme meet ! I can not   get up for joy . " 

 " may I inquire how you hear your joyous news ? - from Miss Light 
 herself ? " 

 " by no mean . it be bring I by her maid , who be in my service as 
 well . " 

 " Casamassima 's loss , then , be to a certainty your gain ? " 

 " I do not   talk about certainty . I do not   want to be arrogant , I do not 
 want to offend the immortal god . I ' m keep very quiet , but I can not 
 help be happy . I shall wait a while ; I shall bide my time . " 

 " and then ? " 

 " and then that transcendent girl will confess to I that when she throw 
 overboard her prince she remember that I adore she ! " 

 " I feel bound to tell you , " be in the course of a moment Rowland 's 
 response to this speech , " that I be now on my way to Mrs. Light 's . " 

 " I congratulate you , I envy you ! " Roderick murmur , imperturbably . 

 " Mrs. Light have send for I to remonstrate with her daughter , with whom 
 she have take it into her head that I have influence . I do not   know to 
 what extent I shall remonstrate , but I give you notice I shall not speak 
 in your interest . " 

 Roderick look at he a moment with a lazy radiance in his eye . " pray 
 do not ! " he simply answer . 

 " you deserve I should tell she you be a very shabby fellow . " 

 " my dear Rowland , the comfort with you be that I can trust you . you be 
 incapable of do anything disloyal . " 

 " you mean to lie here , then , smell your rose and nurse your 
 vision , and leave your mother and Miss Garland to fall ill with 
 anxiety ? " 

 " can I go and flaunt my felicity in their face ? wait till I get use 
 to it a trifle . I have do they a palpable wrong , but I can at least 
 forbear to add insult to injury . I may be an arrant fool , but , for 
 the moment , I have take it into my head to be prodigiously pleased . I 
 should not   be able to conceal it ; my pleasure would offend they ; so I 
 lock myself up as a dangerous character . " 

 " well , I can only say , ' may your pleasure never grow less , or your 
 danger great ! ' " 

 Roderick close his eye again , and sniff at his rose . " God 's will be 
 do ! " 

 on this Rowland leave he and repair directly to Mrs. Light 's . this 
 afflict lady hurry forward to meet he . since the Cavaliere 's report 
 of her condition she have somewhat smooth and trim the exuberance 
 of her distress , but she be evidently in extreme tribulation , and she 
 clutch Rowland by his two hand , as if , in the shipwreck of her hope , 
 he be her single float spar . Rowland greatly pity she , for there 
 be something respectable in passionate grief , even in a very bad cause ; 
 and as pity be akin to love , he endure she rather well than he have 
 do hitherto . 

 " speak to she , plead with she , command she ! " she cry , press and 
 shake his hand . " she will not heed we , no more than if we be a pair 
 of clock a - ticking . perhaps she will listen to you ; she always like 
 you . " 

 " she always dislike I , " say Rowland . " but that do not   matter now . 
 I have come here simply because you send for I , not because I can help 
 you . I can not advise your daughter . " 

 " oh , cruel , deadly man ! you must advise she ; you shall not   leave this house 
 till you have advise she ! " the poor woman passionately retort . " look 
 at I in my misery and refuse to help I ! oh , you need not   be afraid , I 
 know I ' m a fright , I have not   an idea what I have on . if this go 
 on , we may both as well turn scarecrow . if ever a woman be desperate , 
 frantic , heart - break , I be that woman . I can not   begin to tell you . to 
 have nourish a serpent , sir , all these year ! to have lavish one 's 
 self upon a viper that turn and sting her own poor mother ! to have 
 toil and pray , to have push and struggle , to have eat the bread 
 of bitterness , and all the rest of it , sir - and at the end of all thing 
 to find myself at this pass . it can not   be , it be too cruel , such thing 
 do not   happen , the Lord do not   allow it . I ' m a religious woman , sir , 
 and the Lord know all about I . with his own hand he have give I his 
 reward ! I would have lain down in the dust and let she walk over I ; I 
 would have give she the eye out of my head , if she have take a fancy 
 to they . no , she be a cruel , wicked , heartless , unnatural girl ! I speak 
 to you , Mr. Mallet , in my dire distress , as to my only friend . there be 
 not   a creature here that I can look to - not one of they all that I have 
 faith in . but I always admire you . I say to Christina the first time I 
 see you that there at last be a real gentleman . come , do not   disappoint 
 I now ! I feel so terribly alone , you see ; I feel what a nasty , hard , 
 heartless world it be that have come and devour my dinner and dance 
 to my fiddle , and yet that have not   a word to throw to I in my agony ! 
 oh , the money , alone , that I have put into this thing , would melt the 
 heart of a Turk ! " 

 during this frenzied outbreak Rowland have have time to look round the 
 room , and to see the Cavaliere sit in a corner , like a major - domo on 
 the divan of an antechamber , pale , rigid , and inscrutable . 

 " I have it at heart to tell you , " Rowland say , " that if you consider my 
 friend Hudson " - 

 Mrs. Light give a toss of her head and hand . " oh , it be not that . she 
 tell I last night to bother she no long with Hudson , Hudson ! she do 
 not   care a button for Hudson . I almost wish she do ; then perhaps one 
 might understand it . but she do not   care for anything in the wide 
 world , except to do she own hard , wicked will , and to crush I and shame 
 I with her cruelty . " 

 " ah , then , " say Rowland , " I be as much at sea as you , and my presence 
 here be an impertinence . I should like to say three word to Miss Light 
 on my own account . but I must absolutely and inexorably decline to urge 
 the cause of Prince Casamassima . this be simply impossible . " 

 Mrs. Light burst into angry tear . " because the poor boy be a prince , 
 eh ? because he be of a great family , and have an income of million , eh ? 
 that be why you grudge he and hate he . I know there be vulgar people 
 of that way of feeling , but I do not   expect it of you . make an effort , 
 Mr. Mallet ; rise to the occasion ; forgive the poor fellow his splendor . 
 be just , be reasonable ! it be not his fault , and it be not mine . he be 
 the good , the kind young man in the world , and the most correct and 
 moral and virtuous ! if he be stand here in rag , I would say it all 
 the same . the man first - the money afterwards : that be always my motto , 
 and always will be . what do you take I for ? do you suppose I would 
 give Christina to a vicious person ? do you suppose I would sacrifice my 
 precious child , little comfort as I have in she , to a man against whose 
 character one word could be breathe ? Casamassima be only too good , he 
 be a saint of saint , he be stupidly good ! there be not   such another 
 in the length and breadth of Europe . what he have be through in this 
 house , not a common peasant would endure . Christina have treat he as 
 you would not   treat a dog . he have be insult , outraged , persecute ! 
 he have be drive hither and thither till he do not   know where he 
 be . he have stand there where you stand - there , with his name and his 
 million and his devotion - as white as your handkerchief , with hot tear 
 in his eye , and I ready to go down on my knee to he and say , ' my own 
 sweet prince , I could kiss the ground you tread on , but it be not   decent 
 that I should allow you to enter my house and expose yourself to these 
 horror again . ' and he would come back , and he would come back , and go 
 through it all again , and take all that be give he , and only want the 
 girl the more ! I be his confidant ; I know everything . he use to beg 
 my forgiveness for Christina . what do you say to that ? I seize he once 
 and kiss he , I do ! to find that and to find all the rest with it , 
 and to believe it be a gift straight from the pity angel of heaven , 
 and then to see it dash away before your eye and to stand here 
 helpless - oh , it be a fate I hope you may ever be spar ! " 

 " it would seem , then , that in the interest of Prince Casamassima himself 
 I ought to refuse to interfere , " say Rowland . 

 Mrs. Light look at he hard , slowly dry her eye . the intensity 
 of her grief and anger give she a kind of majesty , and Rowland , for 
 the moment , feel ashamed of the ironical ring of his observation . " very 
 good , sir , " she say . " I ' m sorry your heart be not so tender as your 
 conscience . my compliment to your conscience ! it must give you great 
 happiness . Heaven help I ! since you fail we , we be indeed drive to 
 the wall . but I have fight my own battle before , and I have never lose 
 courage , and I do not   see why I should break down now . Cavaliere , come 
 here ! " 

 Giacosa rise at her summon and advance with his usual deferential 
 alacrity . he shake hand with Rowland in silence . 

 " Mr. Mallet refuse to say a word , " Mrs. Light go on . " time press , 
 every moment be precious . Heaven know what that poor boy may be do . 
 if at this moment a clever woman should get hold of he she might be as 
 ugly as she please ! it be horrible to think of it . " 

 the Cavaliere fix his eye on Rowland , and his look , which the night 
 before have be singular , be now most extraordinary . there be a 
 nameless force of anguish in it which seem to grapple with the young 
 man 's reluctance , to plead , to entreat , and at the same time to be 
 glaze over with a reflection of strange thing . 

 suddenly , though most vaguely , Rowland feel the presence of a new 
 element in the drama that be go on before he . he look from the 
 Cavaliere to Mrs. Light , whose eye be now quite dry , and be fix 
 in stony hardness on the floor . 

 " if you could bring yourself , " the Cavaliere say , in a low , soft , 
 caress voice , " to address a few word of solemn remonstrance to Miss 
 Light , you would , perhaps , do more for we than you know . you would 
 save several person a great pain . the dear signora , first , and then 
 Christina herself . Christina in particular . I too , I might take the 
 liberty to add ! " 

 there be , to Rowland , something acutely touch in this humble 
 petition . he have always feel a sort of imaginative tenderness for poor 
 little unexplained Giacosa , and these word seem a supreme contortion 
 of the mysterious obliquity of his life . all of a sudden , as he watch 
 the Cavaliere , something occur to he ; it be something very odd , and 
 it stay his glance suddenly from again turn to Mrs. Light . his idea 
 embarrass he , and to carry off his embarrassment , he repeat that 
 it be folly to suppose that his word would have any weight with 
 Christina . 

 the Cavaliere step forward and lay two finger on Rowland 's breast . 
 " do you wish to know the truth ? you be the only man whose word she 
 remember . " 

 Rowland be go from surprise to surprise . " I will say what I can ! " 
 he say . by this time he have venture to glance at Mrs. Light . she be 
 look at he askance , as if , upon this , she be suddenly mistrust 
 his motif . 

 " if you fail , " she say sharply , " we have something else ! but please to 
 lose no time . " 

 she have hardly speak when the sound of a short , sharp growl cause the 
 company to turn . Christina 's fleecy poodle stand in the middle of the 
 vast saloon , with his muzzle lower , in pompous defiance of the three 
 conspirator against the comfort of his mistress . this young lady 's 
 claim for he seem justified ; he be an animal of amazingly delicate 
 instinct . he have precede Christina as a sort of van - guard of defense , 
 and she now slowly advanced from a neighboring room . 

 " you will be so good as to listen to Mr. Mallet , " her mother say , in a 
 terrible voice , " and to reflect carefully upon what he say . I suppose 
 you will admit that he be disintereste . in half an hour you shall hear 
 from I again ! " and pass her hand through the Cavaliere 's arm , she 
 sweep rapidly out of the room . 

 Christina look hard at Rowland , but offer he no greeting . she be 
 very pale , and , strangely enough , it at first seem to Rowland that 
 her beauty be in eclipse . but he very soon perceive that it have only 
 change its character , and that if it be a trifle less brilliant than 
 usual , it be admirably touching and noble . the clouded light of her 
 eye , the magnificent gravity of her feature , the conscious erectness 
 of her head , might have belong to a depose sovereign or a condemn 
 martyr . " why have you come here at this time ? " she ask . 

 " your mother send for I in press term , and I be very glad to have 
 an opportunity to speak to you . " 

 " have you come to help I , or to persecute I ? " 

 " I have as little power to do one as I have desire to do the other . 
 I come in great part to ask you a question . first , your decision be 
 irrevocable ? " 

 Christina 's two hand have be hang clasp in front of she ; she 
 separate they and fling they apart by an admirable gesture . 

 " would you have do this if you have not see Miss Garland ? " 

 she look at he with quicken attention ; then suddenly , " this be 
 interesting ! " she cry . " let we have it out . " and she fling herself 
 into a chair and point to another . 

 " you do not   answer my question , " Rowland say . 

 " you have no right , that I know of , to ask it . but it be a very clever 
 one ; so clever that it deserve an answer . very likely I would not . " 

 " last night , when I say that to myself , I be extremely angry , " Rowland 
 rejoin . 

 " oh , dear , and you be not angry now ? " 

 " I be less angry . " 

 " how very stupid ! but you can say something at least . " 

 " if I be to say what be uppermost in my mind , I would say that , face 
 to face with you , it be never possible to condemn you . " 

 " Perche ? " 

 " you know , yourself ! but I can at least say now what I feel last night . 
 it seem to I that you have consciously , cruelly deal a blow at that 
 poor girl . do you understand ? " 

 " wait a moment ! " and with her eye fix on he , she incline her head 
 on one side , meditatively . then a cold , brilliant smile cover 
 her face , and she make a gesture of negation . " I see your train of 
 reasoning , but it be quite wrong . I mean no harm to Miss Garland ; I 
 should be extremely sorry to make her suffer . tell I you believe that . " 

 this be say with ineffable candor . Rowland hear himself answer , " I 
 believe it ! " 

 " and yet , in a sense , your supposition be true , " Christina continue . 
 " I conceive , as I tell you , a great admiration for Miss Garland , and I 
 frankly confess I be jealous of she . what I envy she be simply 
 her character ! I say to myself , ' she , in my place , would not   marry 
 Casamassima . ' I could not help say it , and I say it so often that I 
 find a kind of inspiration in it . I hat the idea of be bad than 
 she - of do something that she would not   do . I might be bad by nature , 
 but I need not   be by volition . the end of it all be that I find it 
 impossible not to tell the prince that I be his very humble servant , 
 but that I could not marry he . " 

 " be you sure it be only of Miss Garland 's character that you be 
 jealous , not of - not of " - 

 " speak out , I beg you . we be talk philosophy ! " 

 " not of her affection for her cousin ? " 

 " sure be a good deal to ask . still , I think I may say it ! there be two 
 reason ; one , at least , I can tell you : her affection have not a shadow 's 
 weight with Mr. Hudson ! why then should one fear it ? " 

 " and what be the other reason ? " 

 " excuse I ; that be my own affair . " 

 Rowland be puzzle , baffle , charmed , inspire , almost , all at once . " I 
 have promise your mother , " he presently resume , " to say something in 
 favor of Prince Casamassima . " 

 she shake her head sadly . " Prince Casamassima need nothing that you can 
 say for he . he be a magnificent parti . I know it perfectly . " 

 " you know also of the extreme affliction of your mother ? " 

 " her affliction be demonstrative . she have be abuse I for the last 
 twenty - four hour as if I be the vilest of the vile . " to see Christina 
 sit there in the purity of her beauty and say this , might have make one 
 bow one 's head with a kind of awe . " I have fail of respect to she 
 at other time , but I have not do so now . since we be talk 
 philosophy , " she pursue with a gentle smile , " I may say it be a simple 
 matter ! I do not   love he . or rather , perhaps , since we be talk 
 philosophy , I may say it be not a simple matter . I speak just now of 
 inspiration . the inspiration have be great , but - I frankly confess 
 it - the choice have be hard . shall I tell you ? " she demand , with 
 sudden ardor ; " will you understand I ? it be on the one side the world , 
 the splendid , beautiful , powerful , interesting world . I know what that 
 be ; I have taste of the cup , I know its sweetness . ah , if I choose , if I 
 let myself go , if I fling everything to the wind , the world and I would 
 be famous friend ! I know its merit , and I think , without vanity , it 
 would see mine . you would see some fine thing ! I should like to be a 
 princess , and I think I should be a very good one ; I would play my part 
 well . I be fond of luxury , I be fond of a great society , I be fond of 
 be look at . I be corrupt , corruptible , corruption ! ah , what a pity 
 that could not   be , too ! mercy of Heaven ! " there be a passionate tremor 
 in her voice ; she cover her face with her hand and sit motionless . 
 Rowland see that an intense agitation , hitherto successfully repress , 
 underlay her calmness , and he could easily believe that her battle have 
 be fierce . she rise quickly and turn away , walk a few pace , and 
 stop . in a moment she be face he again , with tear in her eye 
 and a flush in her cheek . " but you need not   think I ' m afraid ! " she 
 say . " I have choose , and I shall hold to it . I have something here , 
 here , here ! " and she pat her heart . " it be my own . I shall not   part 
 with it . be it what you call an ideal ? I do not   know ; I do not   care ! it be 
 bright than the Casamassima diamond ! " 

 " you say that certain thing be your own affair , " Rowland presently 
 rejoin ; " but I must nevertheless make an attempt to learn what all 
 this mean - what it promise for my friend Hudson . be there any hope for 
 he ? " 

 " this be a point I can not   discuss with you minutely . I like he very 
 much . " 

 " would you marry he if he be to ask you ? " 

 " he have ask I . " 

 " and if he ask again ? " 

 " I shall marry no one just now . " 

 " Roderick , " say Rowland , " have great hope . " 

 " do he know of my rupture with the prince ? " 

 " he be make a great holiday of it . " 

 Christina pull her poodle towards she and begin to smooth his silky 
 fleece . " I like he very much , " she repeat ; " much more than I use to . 
 since you tell I all that about he at Saint Cecilia 's , I have feel a 
 great friendship for he . there be something very fine about he ; he be 
 not afraid of anything . he be not afraid of failure ; he be not afraid of 
 ruin or death . " 

 " poor fellow ! " say Rowland , bitterly ; " he be fatally picturesque . " 

 " Picturesque , yes ; that be what he be . I be very sorry for he . " 

 " your mother tell I just now that you have say that you do not   care a 
 straw for he . " 

 " very likely ! I mean as a lover . one do not   want a lover one pity , 
 and one do not   want - of all thing in the world - a picturesque 
 husband ! I should like Mr. Hudson as something else . I wish he be my 
 brother , so that he could never talk to I of marriage . then I could 
 adore he . I would nurse he , I would wait on he and save he all 
 disagreeable rub and shock . I be much strong than he , and I would 
 stand between he and the world . indeed , with Mr. Hudson for my brother , 
 I should be willing to live and die an old maid ! " 

 " have you ever tell he all this ? " 

 " I suppose so ; I ' ve   tell he five hundred thing ! if it would please 
 you , I will tell he again . " 

 " oh , Heaven forbid ! " cry poor Rowland , with a groan . 

 he be linger there , weigh his sympathy against his irritation , 
 and feel it sink in the scale , when the curtain of a distant doorway 
 be lift and Mrs. Light pass across the room . she stop half - way , 
 and give the young person a flushed and menacing look . it find 
 apparently little to reassure she , and she move away with a passionate 
 toss of her drapery . Rowland think with horror of the sinister 
 compulsion to which the young girl be to be subject . in this ethereal 
 flight of hers there be a certain painful effort and tension of wing ; 
 but it be none the less piteous to imagine she be rudely jerk down 
 to the base earth she be do her adventurous utmost to spurn . she 
 would need all her magnanimity for her own trial , and it seem gross to 
 make further demand upon it on Roderick 's behalf . 

 Rowland take up his hat . " you ask a while ago if I have come to help 
 you , " he say . " if I know how I might help you , I should be particularly 
 glad . " 

 she stand silent a moment , reflect . then at last , look up , " you 
 remember , " she say , " your promise I six month ago to tell I what 
 you finally think of I ? I should like you to tell I now . " 

 he could hardly help smile . Madame Grandoni have insist on the fact 
 that Christina be an actress , though a sincere one ; and this little 
 speech seem a glimpse of the cloven foot . she have play her great 
 scene , she have make her point , and now she have her eye at the hole 
 in the curtain and she be watch the house ! but she blush as she 
 perceive his smile , and her blush , which be beautiful , make her fault 
 venial . 

 " you be an excellent girl ! " he say , in a particular tone , and give she 
 his hand in farewell . 

 there be a great chain of room in Mrs. Light 's apartment , the pride 
 and joy of the hostess on festal evening , through which the departing 
 visitor pass before reach the door . in one of the first of these 
 Rowland find himself waylay and arrest by the distract lady 
 herself . 

 " well , well ? " she cry , seize his arm . " have she listen to you - have 
 you move she ? " 

 " in Heaven 's name , dear madame , " Rowland beg , " leave the poor girl 
 alone ! she be behave very well ! " 

 " behave very well ? be that all you have to tell I ? I do not   believe 
 you say a proper word to she . you be conspire together to kill I ! " 

 Rowland try to soothe she , to remonstrate , to persuade she that it be 
 equally cruel and unwise to try to force matter . but she answer he 
 only with harsh lamentation and imprecation , and end by tell he 
 that her daughter be her property , not his , and that his interference 
 be most insolent and most scandalous . her disappointment seem really 
 to have craze she , and his only possible rejoinder be to take a 
 summary departure . 

 a moment later he come upon the Cavaliere , who be sit with his 
 elbow on his knee and his head in his hand , so bury in thought that 
 Rowland have to call he before he rouse himself . Giacosa look at he 
 a moment keenly , and then give a shake of the head , interrogatively . 

 Rowland give a shake negative , to which the Cavaliere respond by a 
 long , melancholy sigh . " but her mother be determined to force matter , " 
 say Rowland . 

 " it seem that it must be ! " 

 " do you consider that it must be ? " 

 " I do not   differ with Mrs. Light ! " 

 " it will be a great cruelty ! " 

 the Cavaliere give a tragic shrug . " eh ! it be not   an easy world . " 

 " you should do nothing to make it hard , then . " 

 " what will you have ? it be a magnificent marriage . " 

 " you disappoint I , Cavaliere , " say Rowland , solemnly . " I imagine you 
 appreciate the great elevation of Miss Light 's attitude . she do not 
 love the prince ; she have let the matter stand or fall by that . " 

 the old man grasp he by the hand and stand a moment with avert 
 eye . at last , look at he , he hold up two finger . 

 " I have two heart , " he say , " one for myself , one for the world . this 
 one oppose Miss Light , the other adore she ! one suffer horribly at 
 what the other do . " 

 " I do not   understand double people , Cavaliere , " Rowland say , " and I 
 do not   pretend to understand you . but I have guess that you be go 
 to play some secret card . " 

 " the card be Mrs. Light 's , not mine , " say the Cavaliere . 

 " it be a menace , at any rate ? " 

 " the sword of Damocles ! it hang by a hair . Christina be to be give ten 
 minute to recant , under penalty of have it fall . on the blade there 
 be something write in strange character . do not   scratch your head ; you 
 will not make it out . " 

 " I think I have guess it , " Rowland say , after a pregnant silence . the 
 Cavaliere look at he blankly but intently , and Rowland add , " though 
 there be some sign , indeed , I do not   understand . " 

 " puzzle they out at your leisure , " say the Cavaliere , shake his hand . 
 " I hear Mrs. Light ; I must go to my post . I wish you be a Catholic ; I 
 would beg you to step into the first church you come to , and pray for we 
 the next half - hour . " 

 " for ' we ' ? for whom ? " 

 " for all of we . at any rate remember this : I worship the Christina ! " 

 Rowland hear the rustle of Mrs. Light 's dress ; he turn away , and the 
 Cavaliere go , as he say , to his post . Rowland for the next couple of 
 day ponder his riddle . 






 CHAPTER XI . Mrs. Hudson 

 of Roderick , meanwhile , Rowland see nothing ; but he immediately go to 
 Mrs. Hudson and assure she that her son be in even exceptionally good 
 health and spirit . after this he call again on the two lady from 
 Northampton , but , as Roderick 's absence continue , he be able neither 
 to furnish nor to obtain much comfort . Miss Garland 's apprehensive 
 face seem to he an image of his own state of mind . he be profoundly 
 depressed ; he feel that there be a storm in the air , and he wish 
 it would come , without more delay , and perform its ravage . on the 
 afternoon of the third day he go into Saint Peter 's , his frequent 
 resort whenever the outer world be disagreeable . from a heart - ache to 
 a roman rain there be few importunate pain the great church do not 
 help he to forget . he have wander there for half an hour , when he come 
 upon a short figure , lurk in the shadow of one of the great pier . he 
 see it be that of an artist , hastily transfer to his sketch - book a 
 memento of some fleeting variation in the scenery of the basilica ; and 
 in a moment he perceive that the artist be little Sam Singleton . 

 Singleton pocket his sketch - book with a guilty air , as if it cost his 
 modesty a pang to be detect in this greedy culture of opportunity . 
 Rowland always enjoy meet he ; talk with he , in these day , 
 be as good as a wayside gush of clear , cold water , on a long , hot walk . 
 there be , perhaps , no drinking - vessel , and you have to apply your lip 
 to some simple natural conduit ; but the result be always a sense of 
 extreme moral refreshment . on this occasion he mentally bless the 
 ingenuous little artist , and hear presently with keen regret that he 
 be to leave Rome on the morrow . Singleton have come to bid farewell 
 to Saint Peter 's , and he be gather a few supreme memory . he have 
 earn a purse - full of money , and he be mean to take a summer 's 
 holiday ; go to Switzerland , to Germany , to Paris . in the autumn he 
 be to return home ; his family - compose , as Rowland know , of a father 
 who be cashier in a bank and five unmarried sister , one of whom give 
 lyceum - lecture on woman 's right , the whole resident at Buffalo , New 
 York - have be write he peremptory letter and appeal to he as 
 a son , brother , and fellow - citizen . he would have be grateful for 
 another year in Rome , but what must be must be , and he have lay up 
 treasure which , in Buffalo , would seem infinite . they talk some time ; 
 Rowland hop they might meet in Switzerland , and take a walk or two 
 together . Singleton seem to feel that Buffalo have mark he for her 
 own ; he be afraid he should not see Rome again for many a year . 

 " so you expect to live at Buffalo ? " Rowland ask sympathetically . 

 " well , it will depend upon the view - upon the attitude - of my family , " 
 Singleton reply . " oh , I think I shall get on ; I think it can be do . 
 if I find it can be do , I shall really be quite proud of it ; as an 
 artist of course I mean , you know . do you know I have some nine hundred 
 sketch ? I shall live in my portfolio . and so long as one be not in 
 Rome , pray what do it matter where one be ? but how I shall envy all 
 you Romans - you and Mr. Gloriani , and Mr. Hudson , especially ! " 

 " do not   envy Hudson ; he have nothing to envy . " 

 Singleton grin at what he consider a harmless jest . " yes , he be 
 go to be the great man of our time ! and I say , Mr. Mallet , be not   it 
 a mighty comfort that it be we who have turn he out ? " 

 " between ourselves , " say Rowland , " he have disappoint I . " 

 Singleton star , open - mouthed . " dear I , what do you expect ? " 

 " truly , " say Rowland to himself , " what do I expect ? " 

 " I confess , " cry Singleton , " I can not   judge he rationally . he 
 fascinate I ; he be the sort of man one make one 's hero of . " 

 " strictly speak , he be not a hero , " say Rowland . 

 Singleton look intensely grave , and , with almost tearful eye , " be 
 there anything amiss - anything out of the way , about he ? " he timidly 
 ask . then , as Rowland hesitate to reply , he quickly add , " please , 
 if there be , do not   tell I ! I want to know no evil of he , and I think 
 I should hardly believe it . in my memory of this roman artist - life , 
 he will be the central figure . he will stand there in radiant relief , as 
 beautiful and unspotted as one of his own statue ! " 

 " amen ! " say Rowland , gravely . he remember afresh that the sea be 
 inhabit by big fish and little , and that the latter often find their 
 way down the throat of the former . Singleton be go to spend the 
 afternoon in take last look at certain other place , and Rowland 
 offer to join he on his sentimental circuit . but as they be 
 prepare to leave the church , he hear himself suddenly address from 
 behind . turn , he behold a young woman whom he immediately recognize 
 as Madame Grandoni 's maid . her mistress be present , she say , and 
 beg to confer with he before he depart . 

 this summon oblige Rowland to separate from Singleton , to whom he bid 
 farewell . he follow the messenger , and presently find Madame Grandoni 
 occupy a liberal area on the step of the tribune , behind the great 
 altar , where , spread a shawl on the polished red marble , she have 
 comfortably seat herself . he expect that she have something especial 
 to impart , and she lose no time in bring forth her treasure . 

 " do not   shout very loud , " she say , " remember that we be in church ; 
 there be a limit to the noise one may make even in Saint Peter 's . 
 Christina Light be marry this morning to Prince Casamassima . " 

 Rowland do not shout at all ; he give a deep , short murmur : 
 " Married - this morning ? " 

 " marry this morning , at seven o'clock , le plus tranquillement du 
 monde , before three or four person . the young couple leave Rome an hour 
 afterwards . " 

 for some moment this seem to he really terrible ; the dark little 
 drama of which he have catch a glimpse have play itself out . he have 
 believe that Christina would resist ; that she have succumb be a proof 
 that the pressure have be cruel . Rowland 's imagination follow she 
 forth with an irresistible tremor into the world toward which she be 
 roll away , with her detest husband and her stifle ideal ; but it 
 must be confess that if the first impulse of his compassion be 
 for Christina , the second be for Prince Casamassima . Madame Grandoni 
 acknowledge an extreme curiosity as to the secret spring of these 
 strange doing : Casamassima 's sudden dismissal , his still more sudden 
 recall , the hurried private marriage . " listen , " say Rowland , hereupon , 
 " and I will tell you something . " and he relate , in detail , his last 
 visit to Mrs. Light and his talk with this lady , with Christina , and 
 with the Cavaliere . 

 " good , " she say ; " it be all very curious . but it be a riddle , and I 
 only half guess it . " 

 " well , " say Rowland , " I desire to harm no one ; but certain supposition 
 have take shape in my mind which serve as a solvent to several 
 ambiguity . " 

 " it be very true , " Madame Grandoni answer , " that the Cavaliere , as he 
 stand , have always need to be explain . " 

 " he be explain by the hypothesis that , three - and - twenty year ago , at 
 Ancona , Mrs. Light have a lover . " 

 " I see . Ancona be dull , Mrs. Light be lively , and - three - and - twenty 
 year ago - perhaps , the Cavaliere be fascinating . doubtless it would be 
 fair to say that he be fascinated . poor Giacosa ! " 

 " he have have his compensation , " Rowland say . " he have be passionately 
 fond of Christina . " 

 " naturally . but have Christina never wonder why ? " 

 " if she have be near guess , her mother 's shabby treatment of he 
 would have put she off the scent . Mrs. Light 's conscience have apparently 
 tell she that she could expiate an hour 's too great kindness by twenty 
 year ' contempt . so she keep her secret . but what be the profit of 
 have a secret unless you can make some use of it ? the day at last come 
 when she could turn hers to account ; she could let the skeleton out of 
 the closet and create a panic . " 

 " I do not   understand . " 

 " neither do I morally , " say Rowland . " I only conceive that there be a 
 horrible , fabulous scene . the poor Cavaliere stand outside , at the 
 door , white as a corpse and as dumb . the mother and daughter have it out 
 together . Mrs. Light burn her ship . when she come out she have three 
 line of write in her daughter 's hand , which the Cavaliere be 
 dispatch with to the prince . they overtake the young man in time , and , 
 when he reappear , he be delighted to dispense with further waiting . I 
 do not   know what he think of the look in his bride 's face ; but that be 
 how I roughly reconstruct history . " 

 " Christina be force to decide , then , that she could not afford not to 
 be a princess ? " 

 " she be reduce by humiliation . she be assure that it be not for she 
 to make condition , but to thank her star that there be none make for 
 she . if she persist , she might find it come to pass that there would 
 be condition , and the formal rupture - the rupture that the world would 
 hear of and pry into - would then proceed from the prince and not from 
 she . " 

 " that be all nonsense ! " say Madame Grandoni , energetically . 

 " to we , yes ; but not to the proud girl in the world , deeply wound 
 in her pride , and not stop to calculate probability , but muffle 
 her shame , with an almost sensuous relief , in a splendor that stand 
 within her grasp and ask no question . be it not possible that the 
 late Mr. Light have make an outbreak before witness who be still 
 live ? " 

 " certainly her marriage now , " say Madame Grandoni , less analytically , 
 " have the advantage that it take she away from her - parent ! " 

 this lady 's farth comment upon the event be not immediately 
 pertinent to our history ; there be some other comment of which 
 Rowland have a deeply oppressive foreboding . he call , on the evening 
 of the morrow upon Mrs. Hudson , and find Roderick with the two 
 lady . their companion have apparently but lately enter , and Rowland 
 afterwards learn that it be his first appearance since the writing of 
 the note which have so distress his mother . he have fling himself upon 
 a sofa , where he sit with his chin upon his breast , star before he 
 with a sinister spark in his eye . he fix his gaze on Rowland , but give 
 he no greeting . he have evidently be say something to startle the 
 woman ; Mrs. Hudson have go and seat herself , timidly and imploringly , 
 on the edge of the sofa , try to take his hand . Miss Garland be 
 apply herself to some needlework with conscious intentness . 

 Mrs. Hudson give Rowland , on his entrance , a touching look of gratitude . 
 " oh , we have such blessed news ! " she say . " Roderick be ready to leave 
 Rome . " 

 " it be not blessed news ; it be most damnable news ! " cry Roderick . 

 " oh , but we be very glad , my son , and I be sure you will be when you 
 get away . you be look most dreadfully thin ; be not   he , Mr. Mallet ? 
 it be plain enough you need a change . I ' m sure we will go wherever you 
 like . where would you like to go ? " 

 Roderick turn his head slowly and look at she . he have let she take 
 his hand , which she press tenderly between her own . he gaze at 
 she for some time in silence . " poor mother ! " he say at last , in a 
 portentous tone . 

 " my own dear son ! " murmur Mrs. Hudson in all the innocence of her 
 trust . 

 " I do not   care a straw where you go ! I do not   care a straw for anything ! " 

 " oh , my dear boy , you must not say that before all of we here - before 
 Mary , before Mr. Mallet ! " 

 " Mary - Mr. Mallet ? " Roderick repeat , almost savagely . he release 
 himself from the clasp of his mother 's hand and turn away , lean 
 his elbow on his knee and hold his head in his hand . there be a 
 silence ; Rowland say nothing because he be watch Miss Garland . " why 
 should I stand on ceremony with Mary and Mr. Mallet ? " Roderick presently 
 add . " Mary pretend to believe I ' m a fine fellow , and if she believe 
 it as she ought to , nothing I can say will alter her opinion . Mallet 
 know I ' m a hopeless humbug ; so I need not   mince my word with he . " 

 " ah , my dear , do not   use such dreadful language ! " say Mrs. Hudson . " be 
 not   we all devoted to you , and proud of you , and wait only to hear 
 what you want , so that we may do it ? " 

 Roderick get up , and begin to walk about the room ; he be evidently in a 
 restless , reckless , profoundly demoralize condition . Rowland feel that 
 it be literally true that he do not care a straw for anything , but 
 he observe with anxiety that Mrs. Hudson , who do not know on what 
 delicate ground she be treading , be disposed to chide he caressingly , 
 as a mere expression of tenderness . he foresee that she would bring down 
 the hover thunderbolt on her head . 

 " in God 's name , " Roderick cry , " do not   remind I of my obligation ! it 
 be intolerable to I , and I do not   believe it be pleasant to Mallet . 
 I know they be tremendous - I know I shall never repay they . I ' m 
 bankrupt ! do you know what that mean ? " 

 the poor lady sit star , dismayed , and Rowland angrily interfere . 
 " do not   talk such stuff to your mother ! " he cry . " do not   you see you be 
 frightening she ? " 

 " frighten she ? she may as well be frighten first as last . do I 
 frighten you , mother ? " Roderick demand . 

 " oh , Roderick , what do you mean ? " whimper the poor lady . " Mr. Mallet , 
 what do he mean ? " 

 " I mean that I ' m an angry , savage , disappointed , miserable man ! " 
 Roderick go on . " I mean that I can not   do a stroke of work nor think 
 a profitable thought ! I mean that I ' m in a state of helpless rage and 
 grief and shame ! helpless , helpless - that be what it be . you can not   help 
 I , poor mother - not with kiss , nor tear , nor prayer ! Mary can not 
 help I - not for all the honor she do I , nor all the big book on art 
 that she pore over . Mallet can not   help I - not with all his money , nor 
 all his good example , nor all his friendship , which I ' m so profoundly 
 well aware of : not with it all multiply a thousand time and repeat 
 to all eternity ! I think you would help I , you and Mary ; that be why 
 I send for you . but you can not , do not   think it ! the soon you give up 
 the idea the well for you . give up be proud of I , too ; there 
 's nothing leave of I to be proud of ! a year ago I be a mighty fine 
 fellow ; but do you know what have become of I now ? I have go to the 
 devil ! " 

 there be something in the ring of Roderick 's voice , as he utter these 
 word , which send they home with convincing force . he be not talk 
 for effect , or the mere sensuous pleasure of extravagant and paradoxical 
 utterance , as have often enough be the case ere this ; he be not 
 even talk viciously or ill - humoredly . he be talk passionately , 
 desperately , and from an irresistible need to throw off the oppressive 
 burden of his mother 's confidence . his cruel eloquence bring the poor 
 lady to her foot , and she stand there with clasped hand , petrify 
 and voiceless . Mary Garland quickly leave her place , come straight to 
 Roderick , and lay her hand on his arm , look at he with all her 
 torment heart in her eye . he make no movement to disengage himself ; 
 he simply shake his head several time , in dogged negation of her 
 heal power . Rowland have be live for the past month in such 
 intolerable expectancy of disaster that now that the ice be break , and 
 the fatal plunge take , his foremost feeling be almost elation ; but 
 in a moment his orderly instinct and his natural love of superficial 
 smoothness overtake it . 

 " I really do not   see , Roderick , " he say , " the profit of your talk in 
 just this way at just this time . do not   you see how you be make your 
 mother suffer ? " 

 " do I enjoy it myself ? " cry Roderick . " be the suffering all on your 
 side and theirs ? do I look as if I be happy , and be stir you 
 up with a stick for my amusement ? here we all be in the same boat ; we 
 might as well understand each other ! these woman must know that I ' m not 
 to be count on . that sound remarkably cool , no doubt , and I certainly 
 do not   deny your right to be utterly disgusted with I . " 

 " will you keep what you have get to say till another time , " say Mary , 
 " and let I hear it alone ? " 

 " oh , I will let you hear it as often as you please ; but what be the use 
 of keep it ? I ' m in the humor ; it will not   keep ! it be a very simple 
 matter . I ' m a failure , that be all ; I ' m not a first - rate man . I ' m 
 second - rate , tenth - rate , anything you please . after that , it be all 
 one ! " 

 Mary Garland turn away and bury her face in her hand ; but Roderick , 
 strike , apparently , in some unwonted fashion with her gesture , draw 
 she towards he again , and go on in a somewhat different tone . " it be 
 hardly worth while we should have any private talk about this , Mary , " he 
 say . " the thing would be comfortable for neither of we . it be well , 
 after all , that it be say once for all and dismiss . there be 
 thing I can not   talk to you about . can I , at least ? you be such a queer 
 creature ! " 

 " I can imagine nothing you should not   talk to I about , " say Mary . 

 " you be not afraid ? " he demand , sharply , look at she . 

 she turn away abruptly , with lowered eye , hesitate a moment . 
 " anything you think I should hear , I will hear , " she say . and then she 
 return to her place at the window and take up her work . 

 " I have have a great blow , " say Roderick . " I be a great ass , but it 
 do not   make the blow any easy to bear . " 

 " Mr. Mallet , tell I what Roderick mean ! " say Mrs. Hudson , who have 
 find her voice , in a tone more peremptory than Rowland have ever hear 
 her use . 

 " he ought to have tell you before , " say Roderick . " really , Rowland , 
 if you will allow I to say so , you ought ! you could have give a much 
 well account of all this than I myself ; well , especially , in that 
 it would have be more lenient to I . you ought to have let they down 
 gently ; it would have save they a great deal of pain . but you always 
 want to keep thing so smooth ! allow I to say that it be very weak of 
 you . " 

 " I hereby renounce such weakness ! " say Rowland . 

 " oh , what be it , sir ; what be it ? " groan Mrs. Hudson , insistently . 

 " it be what Roderick say : he be a failure ! " 

 Mary Garland , on hear this declaration , give Rowland a single glance 
 and then rise , lay down her work , and walk rapidly out of the room . 
 Mrs. Hudson toss her head and timidly bristle . " this from you , Mr. 
 Mallet ! " she say with an injure air which Rowland find harrowing . 

 but Roderick , most characteristically , do not in the least resent his 
 friend 's assertion ; he send he , on the contrary , one of those large , 
 clear look of his , which seem to express a stoical pleasure in 
 Rowland 's frankness , and which set his companion , then and there , 
 wonder again , as he have so often do before , at the extraordinary 
 contradiction of his temperament . " my dear mother , " Roderick say , " if 
 you have have eye that be not blind by this sad maternal vanity , you 
 would have see all this for yourself ; you would have see that I ' m 
 anything but prosperous . " 

 " be it anything about money ? " cry Mrs. Hudson . " oh , do write to Mr. 
 Striker ! " 

 " money ? " say Roderick . " I have not   a cent of money ; I ' m bankrupt ! " 

 " oh , Mr. Mallet , how could you let he ? " ask Mrs. Hudson , terribly . 

 " everything I have be at his service , " say Rowland , feel ill . 

 " of course Mr. Mallet will help you , my son ! " cry the poor lady , 
 eagerly . 

 " oh , leave Mr. Mallet alone ! " say Roderick . " I have squeeze he dry ; 
 it be not my fault , at least , if I have not ! " 

 " Roderick , what have you do with all your money ? " his mother demand . 

 " throw it away ! it be no such great amount . I have do nothing this 
 winter . " 

 " you have do nothing ? " 

 " I have do no work ! why in the world do not   you guess it and spare I 
 all this ? could not   you see I be idle , distract , dissipate ? " 

 " dissipate , my dear son ? " Mrs. Hudson repeat . 

 " that be over for the present ! but could not   you see - could not   Mary 
 see - that I be in a damnably bad way ? " 

 " I have no doubt Miss Garland see , " say Rowland . 

 " Mary have say nothing ! " cry Mrs. Hudson . 

 " oh , she be a fine girl ! " Rowland say . 

 " have you do anything that will hurt poor Mary ? " Mrs. Hudson ask . 

 " I have only be think night and day of another woman ! " 

 Mrs. Hudson drop helplessly into her seat again . " oh dear , dear , have 
 not   we well go home ? " 

 " not to get out of her way ! " Roderick say . " she have start on a career 
 of her own , and she do not   care a straw for I . my head be fill 
 with she ; I could think of nothing else ; I would have sacrifice 
 everything to she - you , Mary , Mallet , my work , my fortune , my future , my 
 honor ! I be in a fine state , eh ? I do not   pretend to be give you good 
 news ; but I ' m tell the simple , literal truth , so that you may know 
 why I have go to the dog . she pretend to care greatly for all this , 
 and to be willing to make any sacrifice in return ; she have a magnificent 
 chance , for she be be force into a mercenary marriage with a man 
 she detest . she lead I to believe that she would give this up , and 
 break short off , and keep herself free and sacred and pure for I . this 
 be a great honor , and you may believe that I value it . it turn 
 my head , and I live only to see my happiness come to pass . she do 
 everything to encourage I to hope it would ; everything that her 
 infernal coquetry and falsity could suggest . " 

 " oh , I say , this be too much ! " Rowland break out . 

 " do you defend she ? " Roderick cry , with a renewal of his passion . " do 
 you pretend to say that she give I no hope ? " he have be speak 
 with grow bitterness , quite lose sight of his mother 's pain and 
 bewilderment in the passionate joy of publish his wrong . since he 
 be hurt , he must cry out ; since he be in pain , he must scatter his 
 pain abroad . of his never think of other , save as they speak and 
 move from his cue , as it be , this extraordinary insensibility to the 
 injurious effect of his eloquence be a capital example ; the more so 
 as the motive of his eloquence be never an appeal for sympathy or 
 compassion , thing to which he seem perfectly indifferent and of which 
 he could make no use . the great and characteristic point with he be 
 the perfect absoluteness of his own emotion and experience . he never 
 see himself as part of a whole ; only as the clear - cut , sharp - edge , 
 isolate individual , rejoice or rag , as the case might be , but 
 need in any case absolutely to affirm himself . all this , to Rowland , 
 be ancient history , but his perception of it stir within he afresh , 
 at the sight of Roderick 's sense of have be betray . that he , 
 under the circumstance , should not in fairness be the first to lodge a 
 complaint of betrayal be a point to which , at his leisure , Rowland be 
 of course capable of render impartial justice ; but Roderick 's 
 present desperation be so peremptory that it impose itself on one 's 
 sympathy . " do you pretend to say , " he go on , " that she do not   lead 
 I along to the very edge of fulfillment and stupefy I with all that 
 she suffer I to believe , all that she sacredly promise ? it amuse 
 she to do it , and she know perfectly well what she really mean . she 
 never mean to be sincere ; she never dream she could be . she be a 
 ravenous flirt , and why a flirt be a flirt be more than I can tell you . 
 I can not   understand play with those matter ; for I they be serious , 
 whether I take they up or lie they down . I do not   see what be in your 
 head , Rowland , to attempt to defend Miss Light ; you be the first to 
 cry out against she ! you tell I she be dangerous , and I pooh - poohe 
 you . you be right ; you be always right . she be as cold and false and 
 heartless as she be beautiful , and she have sell her heartless beauty to 
 the high bidder . I hope he know what he get ! " 

 " oh , my son , " cry Mrs. Hudson , plaintively , " how could you ever care 
 for such a dreadful creature ? " 

 " it would take long to tell you , dear mother ! " 

 Rowland 's lately - deepen sympathy and compassion for Christina be 
 still throb in his mind , and he feel that , in loyalty to it , he 
 must say a word for she . " you believe in she too much at first , " he 
 declare , " and you believe in she too little now . " 

 Roderick look at he with eye almost lurid , beneath lower brow . 
 " she be an angel , then , after all ? - that be what you want to prove ! " 
 he cry . " that be console for I , who have lose she ! you be always 
 right , I say ; but , dear friend , in mercy , be wrong for once ! " 

 " oh yes , Mr. Mallet , be merciful ! " say Mrs. Hudson , in a tone which , 
 for all its gentleness , make Rowland stare . the poor fellow 's stare 
 cover a great deal of concentrated wonder and apprehension - a 
 presentiment of what a small , sweet , feeble , elderly lady might be 
 capable of , in the way of suddenly generate animosity . there be no 
 space in Mrs. Hudson 's tiny maternal mind for complication of feeling , 
 and one emotion exist only by turn another over flat and perch 
 on top of it . she be evidently not follow Roderick at all in his 
 dusky aberration . sit without , in dismay , she only see that all be 
 darkness and trouble , and as Roderick 's glory have now quite outstrip 
 her power of imagination and urge he beyond her jurisdiction , so that 
 he have become a thing too precious and sacred for blame , she find it 
 infinitely comfortable to lay the burden of their common affliction upon 
 Rowland 's broad shoulder . have he not promise to make they all rich and 
 happy ? and this be the end of it ! Rowland feel as if his trial be , 
 in a sense , only begin . " have not   you well forget all this , my 
 dear ? " Mrs. Hudson say . " have not   you well just quietly attend to your 
 work ? " 

 " work , madame ? " cry Roderick . " my work be over . I can not   work - I have 
 not   work all winter . if I be fit for anything , this sentimental 
 collapse would have be just the thing to cure I of my apathy and 
 break the spell of my idleness . but there be a perfect vacuum here ! " and 
 he tap his forehead . " it be big than ever ; it grow big every 
 hour ! " 

 " I ' m sure you have make a beautiful likeness of your poor little 
 mother , " say Mrs. Hudson , coaxingly . 

 " I have do nothing before , and I have do nothing since ! I quarrel 
 with an excellent man , the other day , from mere exasperation of my 
 nerve , and throw away five thousand dollar ! " 

 " throw away - five thousand dollar ! " Roderick have be wander among 
 formidable abstraction and allusion too dark to penetrate . but here 
 be a concrete fact , lucidly state , and poor Mrs. Hudson , for a moment , 
 look it in the face . she repeat her son 's word a third time with a 
 gasp murmur , and then , suddenly , she burst into tear . roderick 
 go to she , sit down beside she , put his arm round she , fix his eye 
 coldly on the floor , and wait for she to weep herself out . she lean 
 her head on his shoulder and sob break - heartedly . she say not a 
 word , she make no attempt to scold ; but the desolation of her tear be 
 overwhelming . it last some time - too long for Rowland 's courage . he 
 have stand silent , wish simply to appear very respectful ; but the 
 elation that be mention a while since have utterly ebb , and he find 
 his situation intolerable . he walk away - not , perhaps , on tiptoe , but 
 with a total absence of bravado in his tread . 

 the next day , while he be at home , the servant bring he the card of 
 a visitor . he read with surprise the name of Mrs. Hudson , and hurry 
 forward to meet she . he find she in his sitting - room , lean on the 
 arm of her son and look very pale , her eye red with weeping , and her 
 lip tightly compress . her advent puzzle he , and it be not for 
 some time that he begin to understand the motive of it . Roderick 's 
 countenance throw no light upon it ; but Roderick 's countenance , full of 
 light as it be , in a way , itself , have never throw light upon anything . 
 he have not be in Rowland 's room for several week , and he immediately 
 begin to look at those of his own work that adorn they . he lose 
 himself in silent contemplation . Mrs. Hudson have evidently arm herself 
 with dignity , and , so far as she might , she mean to be impressive . 
 her success may be measure by the fact that Rowland 's whole attention 
 centre in the fear of see she begin to weep . she tell he that she 
 have come to he for practical advice ; she beg to remind he that she 
 be a stranger in the land . where be they to go , please ? what be 
 they to do ? Rowland glance at Roderick , but Roderick have his back 
 turn and be gaze at his Adam with the intensity with which he might 
 have examine Michael Angelo 's Moses . 

 " roderick say he do not   know , he do not   care , " Mrs. Hudson say ; 
 " he leave it entirely to you . " 

 many another man , in Rowland 's place , would have greet this 
 information with an irate and sarcastic laugh , and tell his visitor 
 that he thank they infinitely for their confidence , but that , really , 
 as thing stand now , they must settle these matter between themselves ; 
 many another man might have so demean himself , even if , like Rowland , 
 he have be in love with Mary Garland and pressingly conscious that 
 her destiny be also part of the question . but Rowland swallow all 
 hilarity and all sarcasm , and let himself seriously consider Mrs. 
 Hudson 's petition . his wit , however , be but indifferently at his 
 command ; they be dull by his sense of the inexpressible change in 
 Mrs. Hudson 's attitude . her visit be evidently intend as a formal 
 reminder of the responsiblitie Rowland have wear so lightly . Mrs. Hudson 
 be doubtless too sincerely humble a person to suppose that if he have 
 be recreant to his vow of vigilance and tenderness , her still , small 
 presence would operate as a chastisement . but by some diminutive logical 
 process of her own she have convince herself that she have be weakly 
 trustful , and that she have suffer Rowland to think too meanly , not 
 only of her understanding , but of her social consequence . a visit in 
 her good gown would have an admonitory effect as regard both of these 
 attribute ; it would cancel some favor receive , and show he that she 
 be no such fool ! these be the reflection of a very shy woman , 
 who , determine for once in her life to hold up her head , be perhaps 
 carry it a trifle extravagantly . 

 " you know we have very little money to spend , " she say , as Rowland 
 remain silent . " Roderick tell I that he have debt and nothing at all 
 to pay they with . he say I must write to Mr. Striker to sell my house 
 for what it will bring , and send I out the money . when the money come 
 I must give it to he . I ' m sure I do not   know ; I never hear of anything 
 so dreadful ! my house be all I have . but that be all Roderick will say . 
 we must be very economical . " 

 before this speech be finish Mrs. Hudson 's voice have begin to quaver 
 softly , and her face , which have no capacity for the expression of 
 superior wisdom , to look as humbly appealing as before . Rowland turn 
 to Roderick and speak like a school - master . " come away from those 
 statue , and sit down here and listen to I ! " 

 Roderick start , but obey with the most graceful docility . 

 " what do you propose to your mother to do ? " Rowland ask . 

 " Propose ? " say Roderick , absently . " oh , I propose nothing . " 

 the tone , the glance , the gesture with which this be say be horribly 
 irritate   though obviously without the slight intention of be 
 so , and for an instant an imprecation rise to Rowland 's lip . but he 
 check it , and he be afterwards glad he have do so . " you must do 
 something , " he say . " choose , select , decide ! " 

 " my dear Rowland , how you talk ! " Roderick cry . " the very point of the 
 matter be that I can not   do anything . I will do as I ' m tell , but I do not 
 call that do . we must leave Rome , I suppose , though I do not   see why . 
 we have get no money , and you have to pay money on the railroad . " 

 Mrs. Hudson surreptitiously wring her hand . " listen to he , please ! " 
 she cry . " not leave Rome , when we have staid here later than any 
 Christians ever do before ! it be this dreadful place that have make we 
 so unhappy . " 

 " that be very true , " say Roderick , serenely . " if I have not come to 
 Rome , I would not   have rise , and if I have not rise , I should not   have 
 fall . " 

 " Fallen - fall ! " murmur Mrs. Hudson . " just hear he ! " 

 " I will do anything you say , Rowland , " Roderick add . " I will do 
 anything you want . I have not be unkind to my mother - have I , mother ? 
 I be unkind yesterday , without mean it ; for after all , all that have 
 to be say . murder will out , and my low spirit can not   be hide . but we 
 talk it over and make it up , do not   we ? it seem to I we do . 
 let Rowland decide it , mother ; whatever he suggest will be the right 
 thing . " and Roderick , who have hardly remove his eye from the statue , 
 get up again and go back to look at they . 

 Mrs. Hudson fix her eye upon the floor in silence . there be not 
 a trace in Roderick 's face , or in his voice , of the bitterness of his 
 emotion of the day before , and not a hint of his have the light 
 weight upon his conscience . he look at Rowland with his frank , 
 luminous eye as if there have never be a difference of opinion between 
 they ; as if each have ever be for both , unalterably , and both for each . 

 Rowland have receive a few day before a letter from a lady of his 
 acquaintance , a worthy Scotswoman domicile in a villa upon one of the 
 olive - cover hill near Florence . she hold her apartment in the villa 
 upon a long lease , and she enjoy for a sum not worth mention the 
 possession of an extraordinary number of noble , stone - floor room , 
 with ceiling vault and frescoed , and bar window command the 
 lovely view in the world . she be a needy and thrifty spinster , who 
 never hesitate to declare that the lovely view be all very well , but 
 that for her own part she live in the villa for cheapness , and that 
 if she have a clear three hundred pound a year she would go and really 
 enjoy life near her sister , a baronet 's lady , at Glasgow . she be now 
 propose to make a visit to that exhilarate city , and she desire to 
 turn an honest penny by sub - letting for a few week her historic italian 
 chamber . the term on which she occupy they enable she to ask a rent 
 almost jocosely small , and she beg Rowland to do what she call a 
 little genteel advertising for she . would he say a good word for her 
 room to his numerous friend , as they leave Rome ? he say a good word 
 for they now to Mrs. Hudson , and tell she in dollar and cent how cheap 
 a summer 's lodging she might secure . he dwell upon the fact that she 
 would strike a truce with table - d'hote and have a cook of her own , 
 amenable possibly to instruction in the Northampton mystery . he 
 have touch a tender chord ; Mrs. Hudson become almost cheerful . her 
 sentiment upon the table - d'hote system and upon foreign household 
 habit generally be remarkable , and , if we have space for it , would 
 repay analysis ; and the idea of reclaim a lost soul to the puritanic 
 canon of cookery quite lighten the burden of her depression . while 
 Rowland set forth his case roderick be slowly walk round the 
 magnificent Adam , with his hand in his pocket . Rowland wait for he 
 to manifest an interest in their discussion , but the statue seem to 
 fascinate he and he remain calmly heedless . Rowland be a practical 
 man ; he possess conspicuously what be call the sense of detail . he 
 enter into Mrs. Hudson 's position minutely , and tell she exactly why 
 it seem good that she should remove immediately to the florentine 
 villa . she receive his advice with great frigidity , look hard at the 
 floor and sigh , like a person well on her guard against an insidious 
 optimism . but she have nothing well to propose , and Rowland receive 
 her permission to write to his friend that he have let the room . 

 Roderick assent to this decision without either sigh or smile . " a 
 florentine villa be a good thing ! " he say . " I be at your service . " 

 " I ' m sure I hope you will get well there , " moan his mother , 
 gather her shawl together . 

 Roderick lay one hand on her arm and with the other point to 
 Rowland 's statue . " better or bad , remember this : I do those thing ! " 
 he say . 

 Mrs. Hudson gaze at they vaguely , and Rowland say , " remember it 
 yourself ! " 

 " they be horribly good ! " say Roderick . 

 Rowland solemnly shrug his shoulder ; it seem to he that he 
 have nothing more to say . but as the other be go , a last light 
 pulsation of the sense of undischarged duty lead he to address to 
 roderick a few word of parting advice . " you will find the Villa 
 Pandolfini very delightful , very comfortable , " he say . " you ought to 
 be very contented there . whether you work or whether you loaf , it be a 
 place for an artist to be happy in . I hope you will work . " 

 " I hope I may ! " say Roderick with a magnificent smile . 

 " when we meet again , have something to show I . " 

 " when we meet again ? where the deuce be you go ? " Roderick demand . 

 " oh , I hardly know ; over the Alps . " 

 " over the Alps ! you be go to leave I ? " Roderick cry . 

 Rowland have most distinctly mean to leave he , but his resolution 
 immediately waver . he glance at Mrs. Hudson and see that her eyebrow 
 be lift and her lip part in soft irony . she seem to accuse he 
 of a craven shirking of trouble , to demand of he to repair his 
 cruel havoc in her life by a solemn renewal of zeal . but Roderick 's 
 expectation be the oddest ! such as they be , Rowland ask himself 
 why he should not   make a bargain with they . " you desire I to go with 
 you ? " he ask . 

 " if you do not   go , I will not   - that be all ! how in the world shall I get 
 through the summer without you ? " 

 " how will you get through it with I ? that be the question . " 

 " I do not   pretend to say ; the future be a dead blank . but without you it 
 be not a blank - it be certain damnation ! " 

 " mercy , mercy ! " murmur Mrs. Hudson . 

 Rowland make an effort to stand firm , and for a moment succeed . " if I 
 go with you , will you try to work ? " 

 Roderick , up to this moment , have be look as unperturbed as if the 
 deep agitation of the day before be a thing of the remote past . but at 
 these word his face change formidably ; he flush and scowl , and all 
 his passion return . " try to work ! " he cry . " try - try ! work - work ! in 
 God 's name do not   talk that way , or you will drive I mad ! do you suppose 
 I ' m try not to work ? do you suppose I stand rot here for the fun 
 of it ? do not   you suppose I would try to work for myself before I try 
 for you ? " 

 " Mr. Mallet , " cry Mrs. Hudson , piteously , " will you leave I alone 
 with this ? " 

 Rowland turn to she and inform she , gently , that he would go with 
 she to Florence . after he have so pledge himself he think not at all 
 of the pain of his position as mediator between the mother 's resentful 
 grief and the son 's incurable weakness ; he drink deep , only , of the 
 satisfaction of not separate from Mary Garland . if the future be a 
 blank to Roderick , it be hardly less so to himself . he have at moment 
 a lively foreboding of impend calamity . he pay it no especial 
 deference , but it make he feel indisposed to take the future into his 
 account . when , on his go to take leave of Madame Grandoni , this lady 
 ask at what time he would come back to Rome , he answer that he be 
 come back either never or forever . when she ask he what he mean , 
 he say he really could not   tell she , and part from she with much 
 genuine emotion ; the more so , doubtless , that she bless he in a quite 
 love , maternal fashion , and tell he she honestly believe he to be 
 the good fellow in the world . 

 the Villa Pandolfini stand directly upon a small grass - grow piazza , 
 on the top of a hill which slop straight from one of the gate of 
 Florence . it offer to the outer world a long , rather low facade , 
 color a dull , dark yellow , and pierce with window of various size , 
 no one of which , save those on the ground floor , be on the same level 
 with any other . within , it have a great , cool , gray cortile , with high , 
 light arch around it , heavily - cornice door , of majestic altitude , 
 opening out of it , and a beautiful mediaeval well on one side of it . 
 Mrs. Hudson 's room open into a small garden support on immense 
 substruction , which be plant on the farth side of the hill , as 
 it slop steeply away . this garden be a charming place . its south wall 
 be curtain with a dense orange vine , a dozen fig - tree offer you 
 their large - leaved shade , and over the low parapet the soft , grave 
 tuscan landscape keep you company . the room themselves be as high as 
 chapel and as cool as royal sepulchre . silence , peace , and security 
 seem to abide in the ancient house and make it an ideal refuge for 
 ache heart . Mrs. Hudson have a stunt , brown - face Maddalena , who 
 wear a crimson handkerchief pass over her coarse , black lock and tie 
 under her sharp , pertinacious chin , and a smile which be as brilliant 
 as a prolonged flash of lightning . she smile at everything in life , 
 especially the thing she do not   like and which keep her talent for 
 mendacity in healthy exercise . a glance , a word , a motion be sufficient 
 to make she show her tooth at you like a cheerful she - wolf . this 
 inexpugnable smile constitute her whole vocabulary in her dealing with 
 her melancholy mistress , to whom she have be bequeath by the late 
 occupant of the apartment , and who , to Rowland 's satisfaction , 
 promise to be divert from her maternal sorrow by the still 
 deep perplexity of Maddalena 's theory of roasting , sweeping , and 
 bed - making . 

 Rowland take room at a villa a trifle nearer Florence , whence in 
 the summer morning he have five minute ' walk in the sharp , black , 
 shadow - strip project by wind , flower - top wall , to join his 
 friend . the life at the Villa Pandolfini , when it have fairly define 
 itself , be tranquil and monotonous , but it might have borrow from 
 exquisite circumstance an absorbing charm . if a sensible shadow rest 
 upon it , this be because it have an inherent vice ; it be feign a 
 repose which it very scantily feel . Roderick have lose no time in give 
 the full measure of his uncompromising chagrin , and as he be the 
 central figure of the little group , as he hold its heart - string all in 
 his own hand , it reflect faithfully the eclipse of his own genius . no 
 one have venture upon the cheerful commonplace of say that the change 
 of air and of scene would restore his spirit ; this would have have , 
 under the circumstance , altogether too silly a sound . the change in 
 question have do nothing of the sort , and his companion have , at least , 
 the comfort of their perspicacity . an essential spring have dry up 
 within he , and there be no visible spiritual law for make it flow 
 again . he be rarely violent , he express little of the irritation and 
 ennui that he must have constantly feel ; it be as if he believe that 
 a spiritual miracle for his redemption be just barely possible , and be 
 therefore worth wait for . the most that one could do , however , be 
 to wait grimly and doggedly , suppress an imprecation as , from time to 
 time , one look at one 's watch . an attitude of positive urbanity toward 
 life be not to be expect ; it be do one 's duty to hold one 's 
 tongue and keep one 's hand off one 's own windpipe , and other people 's . 
 Roderick have long silence , fit of profound lethargy , almost of 
 stupefaction . he use to sit in the garden by the hour , with his head 
 throw back , his leg outstretche , his hand in his pocket , and his 
 eye fasten upon the blinding summer sky . he would gather a dozen 
 book about he , tumble they out on the ground , take one into his lap , 
 and leave it with the page unturne . these mood would alternate with 
 hour of extreme restlessness , during which he mysteriously absent 
 himself . he bear the heat of the italian summer like a salamander , and 
 use to start off at high noon for long walk over the hill . he often 
 go down into Florence , ramble through her close , dim street , and 
 lounge away morning in the church and gallery . on many of these 
 occasion Rowland bear he company , for they be the time when he 
 be most like his former self . before Michael Angelo 's statue and the 
 picture of the early Tuscans , he quite forget his own infelicity , and 
 pick up the thread of his old aesthetic loquacity . he have a particular 
 fondness for Andrea del Sarto , and affirm that if he have be a 
 painter he would have take the author of the Madonna del Sacco for his 
 model . he find in Florence some of his roman friend , and go down on 
 certain evening to meet they . More than once he ask Mary Garland to 
 go with he into town , and show she the thing he most care for . he 
 have some modeling clay bring up to the villa and deposit in a room 
 suitable for his work ; but when this have be do he turn the key in 
 the door and the clay never be touch . his eye be heavy and his hand 
 cold , and his mother put up a secret prayer that he might be induce 
 to see a doctor . but on a certain occasion , when her prayer become 
 articulate , he have a great outburst of anger and beg she to know , 
 once for all , that his health be well than it have ever be . on 
 the whole , and most of the time , he be a sad spectacle ; he look so 
 hopelessly idle . if he be not querulous and bitter , it be because he 
 have take an extraordinary vow not to be ; a vow heroic , for he , a vow 
 which those who know he well have the tenderness to appreciate . talk 
 with he be like skating on thin ice , and his companion have a constant 
 mental vision of spot designate " dangerous . " 

 this be a difficult time for Rowland ; he say to himself that he would 
 endure it to the end , but that it must be his last adventure of the 
 kind . Mrs. Hudson divide her time between look askance at her son , 
 with her hand tightly clasped about her pocket - handkerchief , as if she 
 be wring it dry of the last hour 's tear , and turn her eye 
 much more directly upon Rowland , in the mute , the feeble , the most 
 intolerable reproachfulness . she never phrase her accusation , but he 
 feel that in the unillumined void of the poor lady 's mind they loom 
 up like vaguely - outline monster . her demeanor cause he the acute 
 suffering , and if , at the outset of his enterprise , he have see , how 
 dimly soever , one of those plaintive eye - beam in the opposite scale , 
 the brilliancy of Roderick 's promise would have count for little . 
 they make their way to the soft spot in his conscience and keep it 
 chronically ache . if Mrs. Hudson have be loquacious and vulgar , he 
 would have bear even a less valid persecution with great fortitude . 
 but somehow , neat and noiseless and dismally lady - like , as she sit 
 there , keep her grievance green with her soft - drop tear , her 
 displeasure convey an overwhelming imputation of brutality . he feel 
 like a reckless trustee who have speculate with the widow 's mite , and be 
 haunt with the reflection of ruin that he see in her tearful eye . he 
 do everything conceivable to be polite to Mrs. Hudson , and to treat she 
 with distinguished deference . perhaps his exasperate nerve make he 
 overshoot the mark , and render his civility a trifle peremptory . she 
 seem capable of believe that he be try to make a fool of she ; 
 she would have think he cruelly recreant if he have suddenly 
 depart in desperation , and yet she give he no visible credit for his 
 constancy . woman be say by some authority to be cruel ; I do not   know 
 how true this be , but it may at least be pertinent to remark that Mrs. 
 Hudson be very much of a woman . it often seem to Rowland that he 
 have too decidedly forfeit his freedom , and that there be something 
 positively grotesque in a man of his age and circumstance live in 
 such a moral bondage . 

 but Mary Garland have help he before , and she help he now - help 
 he not less than he have assure himself she would when he find himself 
 drift to Florence . yet her help be render in the same unconscious , 
 unacknowledged fashion as before ; there be no explicit change in their 
 relation . after that distressing scene in Rome which have immediately 
 precede their departure , it be of course impossible that there should 
 not be on Miss Garland 's part some frankness of allusion to Roderick 's 
 sad condition . she have be present , the reader will remember , during 
 only half of his unsparing confession , and Rowland have not see she 
 confront with any absolute proof of Roderick 's passion for Christina 
 Light . but he know that she know far too much for her happiness ; 
 Roderick have tell he , shortly after their settlement at the Villa 
 Pandolfini , that he have have a " tremendous talk " with his cousin . Rowland 
 ask no question about it ; he prefer not to know what have pass 
 between they . if their interview have be purely painful , he wish 
 to ignore it for Miss Garland 's sake ; and if it have sow the seed of 
 reconciliation , he wish to close his eye to it for his own - for the 
 sake of that unshaped idea , forever dismiss and yet forever present , 
 which hover in the background of his consciousness , with a hang 
 head , as it be , and yet an unshamed glance , and whose light motion 
 be an effectual bribe to patience . be the engagement break ? Rowland 
 wonder , yet without ask . but it hardly matter , for if , as be 
 more than probable , Miss Garland have peremptorily release her cousin , 
 her own heart have by no mean recover its liberty . it be very certain 
 to Rowland 's mind that if she have give he up she have by no mean 
 cease to care for he passionately , and that , to exhaust her charity 
 for his weakness , Roderick would have , as the phrase be , a long row to 
 hoe . she speak of Roderick as she might have do of a person suffer 
 from a serious malady which demand much tenderness ; but if Rowland 
 have find it possible to accuse she of dishonesty he would have say now 
 that she believe appreciably less than she pretend to in her victim 's 
 be an involuntary patient . there be woman whose love be care - taking 
 and patronizing , and who rather prefer a weak man because he give they 
 a comfortable sense of strength . it do not in the least please Rowland 
 to believe that Mary Garland be one of these ; for he hold that such 
 woman be only male in petticoat , and he be convince that Miss 
 Garland 's heart be construct after the most perfect feminine model . 
 that she be a very different woman from Christina Light do not at all 
 prove that she be less a woman , and if the Princess Casamassima have 
 go up into a high place to publish her disrelish of a man who lack 
 the virile will , it be very certain that Mary Garland be not a person 
 to put up , at any point , with what might be call the princess 's 
 leaving . it be Christina 's constant practice to remind you of the 
 complexity of her character , of the subtlety of her mind , of her 
 troublous faculty of see everything in a dozen different light . Mary 
 Garland have never pretend not to be simple ; but Rowland have a theory 
 that she have really a more multitudinous sense of human thing , a more 
 delicate imagination , and a fine instinct of character . she do you the 
 honor of her mind with a grace far less regal , but be not that faculty 
 of quite as remarkable an adjustment ? if in poor Christina 's strangely 
 commingled nature there be circle within circle , and depth beneath 
 depth , it be to be believe that Mary Garland , though she do not amuse 
 herself with drop stone into her soul , and wait to hear they 
 fall , lay quite as many source of spiritual life under contribution . 
 she have believe Roderick be a fine fellow when she bid he farewell 
 beneath the Northampton elm , and this belief , to her young , strenuous , 
 concentrated imagination , have mean many thing . if it be to grow cold , 
 it would be because disenchantment have become total and win the battle 
 at each successive point . 

 Miss Garland have even in her face and carriage something of the 
 preoccupied and weary look of a person who be watch at a sick - bed ; 
 Roderick 's broken fortune , his dead ambition , be a cruel burden to 
 the heart of a girl who have believe that he possess " genius , " and 
 suppose that genius be to one 's spiritual economy what full pocket 
 be to one 's domestic . and yet , with she , Rowland never feel , as 
 with Mrs. Hudson , that undercurrent of reproach and bitterness toward 
 himself , that impertinent implication that he have defraud she of 
 happiness . be this justice , in Miss Garland , or be it mercy ? the 
 answer would have be difficult , for she have almost let Rowland feel 
 before leave Rome that she like he well enough to forgive he an 
 injury . it be partly , Rowland fancy , that there be occasional 
 lapse , deep and sweet , in her sense of injury . when , on arrive 
 at Florence , she see the place Rowland have bring they to in their 
 trouble , she have give he a look and say a few word to he that 
 have seem not only a remission of guilt but a positive reward . 
 this happen in the court of the villa - the large gray quadrangle , 
 overstretch , from edge to edge of the red - tile roof , by the soft 
 italian sky . Mary have feel on the spot the sovereign charm of the 
 place ; it be reflect in her deeply intelligent glance , and Rowland 
 immediately accuse himself of not have do the villa justice . Miss 
 Garland take a mighty fancy to Florence , and use to look down wistfully 
 at the tower city from the window and garden . roderick have now no 
 pretext for not be her cicerone , Rowland be no long at liberty , as 
 he have be in Rome , to propose frequent excursion to she . Roderick 's 
 own invitation , however , be not frequent , and Rowland more than once 
 venture to introduce she to a gallery or a church . these expedition 
 be not so blissful , to his sense , as the ramble they have take 
 together in Rome , for his companion only half surrender herself to her 
 enjoyment , and seem to have but a divided attention at her command . 
 often , when she have begin with look intently at a picture , her 
 silence , after an interval , make he turn and glance at she . he usually 
 find that if she be look at the picture still , she be not see 
 it . her eye be fix , but her thought be wander , and an image 
 more vivid than any that Raphael or Titian have draw have superpose 
 itself upon the canvas . she ask few question than before , and 
 seem to have lose heart for consult guide - book and encyclopaedia . 
 from time to time , however , she utter a deep , full murmur of 
 gratification . florence in midsummer be perfectly void of traveler , 
 and the dense little city give forth its aesthetic aroma with a large 
 frankness , as the nightingale sing when the listener have depart . 
 the church be deliciously cool , but the gray street be stifle , 
 and the great , dove - tail polygon of pavement as hot to the tread as 
 molten lava . Rowland , who suffer from intense heat , would have find 
 all this uncomfortable in solitude ; but Florence have never charm he 
 so completely as during these midsummer stroll with his preoccupied 
 companion . one evening they have arrange to go on the morrow to the 
 Academy . Miss Garland keep her appointment , but as soon as she appear , 
 Rowland see that something painful have befall she . she be do she 
 good to look at her ease , but her face bear the mark of tear . Rowland 
 tell she that he be afraid she be ill , and that if she prefer to 
 give up the visit to Florence he would submit with what grace he might . 
 she hesitate a moment , and then say she prefer to adhere to their 
 plan . " I be not well , " she presently add , " but it be a moral malady , 
 and in such case I consider your company beneficial . " 

 " but if I be to be your doctor , " say Rowland , " you must tell I how 
 your illness begin . " 

 " I can tell you very little . it begin with Mrs. Hudson be unjust to 
 I , for the first time in her life . and now I be already well ! " 

 I mention this incident because it confirm an impression of Rowland 's 
 from which he have derive a certain consolation . he know that Mrs. 
 Hudson consider her son 's ill - regulate passion for Christina Light a 
 very regrettable affair , but he suspect that her manifest compassion 
 have be all for Roderick , and not in the least for Mary Garland . she 
 be fond of the young girl , but she have value she primarily , during the 
 last two year , as a kind of assistant priestess at Roderick 's shrine . 
 Roderick have honor she by ask she to become his wife , but that poor 
 Mary have any right in consequence Mrs. Hudson be quite incapable 
 of perceive . her sentiment on the subject be of course not very 
 vigorously formulate , but she be unprepared to admit that Miss Garland 
 have any ground for complaint . Roderick be very unhappy ; that be 
 enough , and Mary 's duty be to join her patience and her prayer to 
 those of his doting mother . Roderick might fall in love with whom he 
 please ; no doubt that woman train in the mysterious roman art be 
 only too proud and too happy to make it easy for he ; and it be very 
 presuming in poor , plain Mary to feel any personal resentment . Mrs. 
 Hudson 's philosophy be of too narrow a scope to suggest that a mother 
 may forgive where a mistress can not , and she think herself greatly 
 aggrieve that Miss Garland be not so disinterested as herself . she be 
 ready to drop dead in Roderick 's service , and she be quite capable 
 of see her companion falter and grow faint , without a tremor of 
 compassion . Mary , apparently , have give some intimation of her belief 
 that if constancy be the flower of devotion , reciprocity be the 
 guarantee of constancy , and Mrs. Hudson have rebuke her fail faith 
 and call it cruelty . that Miss Garland have find it hard to reason 
 with Mrs. Hudson , that she suffer deeply from the eld lady 's 
 softly bitter imputation , and that , in short , he have companionship 
 in misfortune - all this make Rowland find a certain luxury in his 
 discomfort . 

 the party at Villa Pandolfini use to sit in the garden in the evening , 
 which Rowland almost always spend with they . their entertainment be in 
 the heavily perfume air , in the dim , far starlight , in the crenelate 
 tower of a neighboring villa , which loom vaguely above they in the 
 warm darkness , and in such conversation as depressing reflection 
 allow . Roderick , clothe always in white , roam about like a restless 
 ghost , silent for the most part , but make from time to time a brief 
 observation , characterize by the most fantastic cynicism . Roderick 's 
 contribution to the conversation be indeed always so fantastic that , 
 though half the time they weary he unspeakably , Rowland make an 
 effort to treat they humorously . with Rowland alone Roderick talk a 
 great deal more ; often about thing relate to his own work , or about 
 artistic and aesthetic matter in general . he talk as well as ever , 
 or even well ; but his talk always end in a torrent of groan and 
 curse . when this current set in , Rowland straightway turn his back 
 or stop his ear , and Roderick now witness these movement with 
 perfect indifference . when the latter be absent from the star - light 
 circle in the garden , as often happen , Rowland know nothing of his 
 whereabouts ; he suppose he to be in Florence , but he never learn 
 what he do there . all this be not enliven , but with an even , 
 muffle tread the day follow each other , and bring the month 
 of August to a close . one particular evening at this time be most 
 enchanting ; there be a perfect moon , look so extraordinarily large 
 that it make everything its light fall upon seem small ; the heat be 
 temper by a soft west wind , and the wind be laden with the odor of 
 the early harvest . the hill , the vale of the Arno , the shrunken river , 
 the dome of Florence , be vaguely effaced by the dense moonshine ; they 
 look as if they be melt out of sight like an exorcised vision . 
 Rowland have find the two lady alone at the villa , and he have sit with 
 they for an hour . he feel absolutely hush by the solemn splendor of 
 the scene , but he have risk the remark that , whatever life might yet 
 have in store for either of they , this be a night that they would never 
 forget . 

 " it be a night to remember on one 's death - bed ! " Miss Garland exclaim . 

 " oh , Mary , how can you ! " murmur Mrs. Hudson , to whom this savor 
 of profanity , and to whose shrink sense , indeed , the accumulate 
 loveliness of the night seem to have something shameless and defiant . 

 they be silent after this , for some time , but at last Rowland 
 address certain idle word to Miss Garland . she make no reply , and he 
 turn to look at she . she be sit motionless , with her head press 
 to Mrs. Hudson 's shoulder , and the latter lady be gaze at he through 
 the silvered dusk with a look which give a sort of spectral solemnity to 
 the sad , weak meaning of her eye . she have the air , for the moment , of 
 a little old malevolent fairy . Miss Garland , Rowland perceive in an 
 instant , be not absolutely motionless ; a tremor pass through her 
 figure . she be weep , or on the point of weeping , and she could not 
 trust herself to speak . Rowland leave his place and wander to another 
 part of the garden , wonder at the motive of her sudden tear . of 
 woman 's sob in general he have a sovereign dread , but these , somehow , 
 give he a certain pleasure . when he return to his place Miss Garland 
 have raise her head and banish her tear . she come away from Mrs. 
 Hudson , and they stand for a short time lean against the parapet . 

 " it seem to you very strange , I suppose , " say Rowland , " that there 
 should be any trouble in such a world as this . " 

 " I use to think , " she answer , " that if any trouble come to I I would 
 bear it like a stoic . but that be at home , where thing do not   speak to 
 we of enjoyment as they do here . here it be such a mixture ; one do not 
 know what to choose , what to believe . beauty stand there - beauty such 
 as this night and this place , and all this sad , strange summer , have 
 be so full of - and it penetrate to one 's soul and lodge there , and 
 keep say that man be not make to suffer , but to enjoy . this place 
 have undermine my stoicism , but - shall I tell you ? I feel as if I be 
 say something sinful - I love it ! " 

 " if it be sinful , I absolve you , " say Rowland , " in so far as I have 
 power . we be make , I suppose , both to suffer and to enjoy . as you say , 
 it be a mixture . just now and here , it seem a peculiarly strange one . 
 but we must take thing in turn . " 

 his word have a singular aptness , for he have hardly utter they when 
 Roderick come out from the house , evidently in his dark mood . he 
 stand for a moment gaze hard at the view . 

 " it be a very beautiful night , my son , " say his mother , go to he 
 timidly , and touch his arm . 

 he pass his hand through his hair and let it stay there , clasp 
 his thick lock . " beautiful ? " he cry ; " of course it be beautiful ! 
 everything be beautiful ; everything be insolent , defiant , atrocious with 
 beauty . nothing be ugly but I - I and my poor dead brain ! " 

 " oh , my dear son , " plead poor Mrs. Hudson , " do not   you feel any 
 well ? " 

 Roderick make no immediate answer ; but at last he speak in a different 
 voice . " I come expressly to tell you that you need not   trouble 
 yourself any long to wait for something to turn up . nothing will 
 turn up ! it be all over ! I say when I come here I would give it a 
 chance . I have give it a chance . have not   I , eh ? have not   I , Rowland ? 
 it be no use ; the thing be a failure ! do with I now what you please . I 
 recommend you to set I up there at the end of the garden and shoot I . " 

 " I feel strongly inclined , " say Rowland gravely , " to go and get my 
 revolver . " 

 " oh , mercy on we , what language ! " cry Mrs. Hudson . 

 " why not ? " Roderick go on . " this would be a lovely night for it , and I 
 should be a lucky fellow to be bury in this garden . but bury I alive , 
 if you prefer . take I back to Northampton . " 

 " Roderick , will you really come ? " cry his mother . 

 " oh yes , I will go ! I might as well be there as anywhere - revert to 
 idiocy and live upon alm . I can do nothing with all this ; perhaps I 
 should really like Northampton . if I ' m to vegetate for the rest of my 
 day , I can do it there well than here . " 

 " oh , come home , come home , " Mrs. Hudson say , " and we shall all be safe 
 and quiet and happy . my dear son , come home with your poor mother ! " 

 " let we go , then , and go quickly ! " 

 Mrs. Hudson fling herself upon his neck for gratitude . " we will go 
 to - morrow ! " she cry . " the Lord be very good to I ! " 

 Mary Garland say nothing to this ; but she look at Rowland , and her 
 eye seem to contain a kind of alarmed appeal . Rowland note it with 
 exultation , but even without it he would have break into an eager 
 protest . 

 " be you serious , Roderick ? " he demand . 

 " serious ? of course not ! how can a man with a crack in his brain be 
 serious ? how can a muddlehead reason ? but I ' m not jest , either ; I 
 can no more make joke than utter oracle ! " 

 " be you willing to go home ? " 

 " willing ? God forbid ! I be simply amenable to force ; if my mother 
 choose to take I , I will not   resist . I can not ! I have come to that ! " 

 " let I resist , then , " say Rowland . " go home as you be now ? I can not 
 stand by and see it . " 

 it may have be true that Roderick have lose his sense of humor , but he 
 scratch his head with a gesture that be almost comical in its effect . 
 " you be a queer fellow ! I should think I would disgust you horribly . " 

 " stay another year , " Rowland simply say . 

 " do nothing ? " 

 " you shall do something . I be responsible for your do something . " 

 " to whom be you responsible ? " 

 Rowland , before reply , glance at Miss Garland , and his glance make 
 she speak quickly . " not to I ! " 

 " I ' m responsible to myself , " Rowland declare . 

 " my poor , dear fellow ! " say Roderick . 

 " oh , Mr. Mallet , be not   you satisfied ? " cry Mrs. Hudson , in the tone 
 in which Niobe may have address the avenge archer , after she have 
 see her eldest - bear fall . " it be out of all nature keep he here . 
 when we be in a poor way , surely our own dear native land be the place 
 for we . do leave we to ourselves , sir ! " 

 this just fail of be a dismissal in form , and Rowland bow his 
 head to it . roderick be silent for some moment ; then , suddenly , he 
 cover his face with his two hand . " take I at least out of this 
 terrible Italy , " he cry , " where everything mock and reproach and 
 torment and elude I ! take I out of this land of impossible beauty 
 and put I in the midst of ugliness . set I down where nature be coarse 
 and flat , and man and manner be vulgar . there must be something 
 awfully ugly in Germany . pack I off there ! " 

 Rowland answer that if he wish to leave Italy the thing might be 
 arrange ; he would think it over and submit a proposal on the morrow . 
 he suggest to Mrs. Hudson , in consequence , that she should spend the 
 autumn in Switzerland , where she would find a fine tonic climate , plenty 
 of fresh milk , and several pension at three franc and a half a day . 
 Switzerland , of course , be not ugly , but one could not have everything . 

 Mrs. Hudson neither thank he nor assent ; but she weep and pack 
 her trunk . Rowland have a theory , after the scene which lead to these 
 preparation , that Mary Garland be weary of wait for Roderick to 
 come to his sens , that the faith which have bravely bear his manhood 
 company hitherto , on the tortuous march he be lead it , have begin 
 to believe it have go far enough . this theory be not vitiate by 
 something she say to he on the day before that on which Mrs. Hudson 
 have arrange to leave Florence . 

 " Cousin Sarah , the other evening , " she say , " ask you to please leave 
 we . I think she hardly know what she be say , and I hope you have not 
 take offense . " 

 " by no mean ; but I honestly believe that my leave you would 
 contribute greatly to Mrs. Hudson 's comfort . I can be your hidden 
 providence , you know ; I can watch you at a distance , and come upon the 
 scene at critical moment . " 

 Miss Garland look for a moment at the ground ; and then , with sudden 
 earnestness , " I beg you to come with we ! " she say . 

 it need hardly be add that after this Rowland go with they . 






 CHAPTER XII . the Princess Casamassima 

 Rowland have a very friendly memory of a little mountain inn , accessible 
 with moderate trouble from Lucerne , where he have once spend a blissful 
 ten day . he have at that time be trudge , knapsack on back , over half 
 Switzerland , and not be , on his leg , a particularly light weight , 
 it be no shame to he to confess that he be mortally tired . the inn 
 of which I speak present striking analogy with a cow - stable ; but 
 in spite of this circumstance , it be crowd with hungry tourist . 
 it stand in a high , shallow valley , with flower - strew Alpine meadow 
 slop down to it from the base of certain rugged rock whose outline 
 be grotesque against the evening sky . Rowland have see grander place 
 in Switzerland that please he less , and whenever afterwards he wish 
 to think of Alpine opportunity at their good , he recall this grassy 
 concave among the mountain - top , and the August day he spend there , 
 rest deliciously , at his length , in the lee of a sun - warm boulder , 
 with the light cool air stir about his temple , the waft odor of 
 the pine in his nostril , the tinkle of the cattle - bell in his ear , 
 the vast progression of the mountain shadow before his eye , and a 
 volume of Wordsworth in his pocket . his face , on the swiss hill - side , 
 have be scorch to within a shade of the color nowadays call 
 magenta , and his bed be a pallet in a loft , which he share with a 
 german botanist of colossal stature - every inch of he quake at an 
 open window . these have be drawback to felicity , but Rowland hardly 
 care where or how he be lodge , for he spend the livelong day under 
 the sky , on the crest of a slope that look at the Jungfrau . he 
 remember all this on leave Florence with his friend , and he 
 reflect that , as the midseason be over , accommodation would be more 
 ample , and charge more modest . he communicate with his old friend the 
 landlord , and , while September be yet young , his companion establish 
 themselves under his guidance in the grassy valley . 

 he have cross the Saint Gothard Pass with they , in the same carriage . 
 during the journey from Florence , and especially during this portion 
 of it , the cloud that hang over the little party have be almost 
 dissipate , and they have look at each other , in the close contiguity 
 of the train and the posting - carriage , without either accuse or 
 consoling glance . it be impossible not to enjoy the magnificent 
 scenery of the Apennines and the italian Alps , and there be a tacit 
 agreement among the traveler to abstain from sombre allusion . the 
 effect of this delicate compact seem excellent ; it ensure they a 
 week 's intellectual sunshine . Roderick sit and gaze out of the window 
 with a fascinated stare , and with a perfect docility of attitude . he 
 concern himself not a particle about the itinerary , or about any 
 of the wayside arrangement ; he take no trouble , and he give none . he 
 assent to everything that be propose , talk very little , and lead 
 for a week a perfectly contemplative life . his mother rarely remove 
 her eye from he ; and if , a while before , this would have extremely 
 irritated he , he now seem perfectly unconscious of her observation 
 and profoundly indifferent to anything that might befall he . they spend 
 a couple of day on the Lake of Como , at a hotel with white portico 
 smother in oleander and myrtle , and the terrace - step lead down 
 to little boat with strip awning . they agree it be the earthly 
 paradise , and they pass the morning stroll through the perfume 
 alley of classic villa , and the evening float in the moonlight in 
 a circle of outlined mountain , to the music of silver - trickle 
 oar . one day , in the afternoon , the two young man take a long stroll 
 together . they follow the wind footway that lead toward Como , close 
 to the lake - side , past the gate of villa and the wall of vineyard , 
 through little hamlet prop on a dozen arch , and bath their foot 
 and their pendant tatter in the gray - green ripple ; past frescoed wall 
 and crumble campanile and grassy village piazzas , and the mouth 
 of soft ravine that wound upward , through belt of swing vine and 
 vaporous olive and splendid chestnut , to high ledge where white chapel 
 gleam amid the paler boskage , and bare cliff - surface , with their 
 sun - crack lip , drink in the azure light . it all be confoundingly 
 picturesque ; it be the Italy that we know from the steel engraving in 
 old keepsake and annual , from the vignette on music - sheet and 
 the drop - curtain at theatre ; an Italy that we can never confess to 
 ourselves - in spite of our own change and of Italy 's - that we have 
 cease to believe in . Rowland and Roderick turn aside from the little 
 paved footway that clamber and dip and wound and double beside 
 the lake , and stretch themselves idly beneath a fig - tree , on a grassy 
 promontory . Rowland have never know anything so divinely soothing as the 
 dreamy softness of that early autumn afternoon . the iridescent mountain 
 shut he in ; the little wave , beneath he , fret the white pebble at 
 the lazy interval ; the festoon vine above he sway just visibly 
 in the all but motionless air . 

 Roderick lie observe it all with his arm throw back and his hand 
 under his head . " this suit I , " he say ; " I could be happy here and 
 forget everything . why not stay here forever ? " he keep his position for 
 a long time and seem lose in his thought . Rowland speak to he , but 
 he make vague answer ; at last he close his eye . it seem to Rowland , 
 also , a place to stay in forever ; a place for perfect oblivion of the 
 disagreeable . suddenly Roderick turn over on his face , and bury it 
 in his arm . there have be something passionate in his movement ; but 
 Rowland be nevertheless surprised , when he at last jerk himself back 
 into a sit posture , to perceive the trace of tear in his eye . 
 Roderick turn to his friend , stretch his two hand out toward the 
 lake and mountain , and shake they with an eloquent gesture , as if his 
 heart be too full for utterance . 

 " pity I , sir ; pity I ! " he presently cry . " look at this lovely world , 
 and think what it must be to be dead to it ! " 

 " dead ? " say Rowland . 

 " dead , dead ; dead and bury ! bury in an open grave , where you lie 
 star up at the sailing cloud , smell the wave flower , and 
 hear all nature live and grow above you ! that be the way I feel ! " 

 " I be glad to hear it , " say Rowland . " death of that sort be very near 
 to resurrection . " 

 " it be too horrible , " Roderick go on ; " it have all come over I here 
 tremendously ! if I be not ashamed , I could shed a bushel of tear . for 
 one hour of what I have be , I would give up anything I may be ! " 

 " never mind what you have be ; be something well ! " 

 " I shall never be anything again : it be no use talk ! but I do not   know 
 what secret spring have be touch since I have lain here . something 
 in my heart seem suddenly to open and let in a flood of beauty and 
 desire . I know what I have lose , and I think it horrible ! mind you , 
 I know it , I feel it ! remember that hereafter . do not   say that he 
 be stupefy and senseless ; that his perception be dull and his 
 aspiration dead . say that he tremble in every nerve with a sense of 
 the beauty and sweetness of life ; that he rebel and protest and 
 shriek ; that he be bury alive , with his eye open , and his heart 
 beat to madness ; that he cling to every blade of grass and every 
 way - side thorn as he pass ; that it be the most horrible spectacle you 
 ever witness ; that it be an outrage , a murder , a massacre ! " 

 " good heaven , man , be you insane ? " Rowland cry . 

 " I never have be sane . I do not   want to be bad company , and in this 
 beautiful spot , at this delightful hour , it seem an outrage to break 
 the charm . but I be bid farewell to Italy , to beauty , to honor , to 
 life ! I only want to assure you that I know what I lose . I know it in 
 every pulse of my heart ! here , where these thing be all lovely , I 
 take leave of they . Farewell , farewell ! " 

 during their passage of the Saint Gothard , Roderick absent himself 
 much of the time from the carriage , and ramble far in advance , along 
 the huge zigzag of the road . he display an extraordinary activity ; 
 his light weight and slender figure make he an excellent pedestrian , 
 and his friend frequently see he skirt the edge of plunge chasm , 
 loosen the stone on long , steep slope , or lift himself against 
 the sky , from the top of rocky pinnacle . Mary Garland walk a great 
 deal , but she remain near the carriage to be with Mrs. Hudson . Rowland 
 remain near it to be with Miss Garland . he trudge by her side up that 
 magnificent ascent from Italy , and find himself regret that the 
 Alps be so low , and that their trudging be not to last a week . she 
 be exhilarate ; she like to walk ; in the way of mountain , until 
 within the last few week , she have see nothing great than Mount 
 Holyoke , and she find that the alp amply justify their reputation . 
 Rowland know that she love nature , but he be strike afresh with the 
 vivacity of her observation of it , and with her knowledge of plant and 
 stone . at that season the wild flower have mostly depart , but a few 
 of they linger , and Miss Garland never fail to espy they in their 
 outlying corner . they interest she greatly ; she be charm when 
 they be old friend , and charm even more when they be new . she 
 display a very light foot in go in quest of they , and have soon 
 cover the front seat of the carriage with a tangle of strange 
 vegetation . Rowland of course be alert in her service , and he gather 
 for her several botanical specimen which at first seem inaccessible . 
 one of these , indeed , have at first appear easy of capture than his 
 attempt attest , and he have pause a moment at the base of the little 
 peak on which it grow , measure the risk of farth pursuit . suddenly , 
 as he stand there , he remember Roderick 's defiance of danger and of 
 Miss Light , at the coliseum , and he be seize with a strong desire to 
 test the courage of his companion . she have just scramble up a grassy 
 slope near he , and have see that the flower be out of reach . as he 
 prepare to approach it , she call to he eagerly to stop ; the thing 
 be impossible ! Poor Rowland , whose passion have be terribly starve , 
 enjoy immensely the thought of have her care , for three minute , 
 what become of he . he be the least brutal of man , but for a moment he 
 be perfectly indifferent to her suffering . 

 " I can get the flower , " he call to she . " will you trust I ? " 

 " I do not   want it ; I would rather not have it ! " she cry . 

 " will you trust I ? " he repeat , look at she . 

 she look at he and then at the flower ; he wonder whether she would 
 shriek and swoon , as Miss Light have do . " I wish it be something 
 well ! " she say simply ; and then stand watch he , while he begin to 
 clamber . Rowland be not shape for an acrobat , and his enterprise 
 be difficult ; but he keep his wit about he , make the most of narrow 
 foot - hold and coign of vantage , and at last secure his prize . 
 he manage to stick it into his buttonhole and then he contrive to 
 descend . there be more than one chance for an ugly fall , but he evade 
 they all . it be doubtless not gracefully do , but it be do , and 
 that be all he have propose to himself . he be red in the face when 
 he offer Miss Garland the flower , and she be visibly pale . she have 
 watch he without move . all this have pass without the knowledge 
 of Mrs. Hudson , who be doze beneath the hood of the carriage . Mary 
 Garland 's eye do not perhaps display that ardent admiration which 
 be formerly confer by the queen of beauty at a tournament ; but they 
 express something in which Rowland find his reward . " why do you do 
 that ? " she ask , gravely . 

 he hesitate . he feel that it be physically possible to say , " because 
 I love you ! " but that it be not morally possible . he lower his pitch 
 and answer , simply , " because I want to do something for you . " 

 " suppose you have fall , " say Miss Garland . 

 " I believe I would not fall . and you believe it , I think . " 

 " I believe nothing . I simply trust you , as you ask I . " 

 " Quod erat demonstrandum ! " cry Rowland . " I think you know Latin . " 

 when our four friend be establish in what I have call their 
 grassy valley , there be a good deal of scramble over slope both 
 grassy and stony , a good deal of flower - pluck on narrow ledge , a 
 great many long walk , and , thank to the lucid mountain air , not a 
 little exhilaration . Mrs. Hudson be oblige to intermit her suspicion 
 of the deleterious atmosphere of the old world , and to acknowledge the 
 edify purity of the breeze of Engelthal . she be certainly more 
 placid than she have be in Italy ; have always live in the country , 
 she have miss in Rome and Florence that social solitude mitigate by 
 bush and rock which be so dear to the true New England temperament . 
 the little unpainted inn at Engelthal , with its plank partition , its 
 milk - pan stand in the sun , its " help , " in the form of angular young 
 woman of the country - side , remind she of place of summer sojourn 
 in her native land ; and the beautiful historic chamber of the Villa 
 Pandolfini pass from her memory without a regret , and without have 
 in the least modify her ideal of domiciliary grace . Roderick have 
 change his sky , but he have not change his mind ; his humor be still 
 that of which he have give Rowland a glimpse in that tragic explosion on 
 the Lake of Como . he keep his despair to himself , and he go doggedly 
 about the ordinary business of life ; but it be easy to see that his 
 spirit be mortally heavy , and that he live and move and talk simply 
 from the force of habit . in that sad half - hour among the italian olive 
 there have be such a fierce sincerity in his tone , that Rowland 
 begin to abdicate the critical attitude . he begin to feel that it be 
 essentially vain to appeal to the poor fellow 's will ; there be no will 
 leave ; its place be an impotent void . this view of the case indeed be 
 occasionally contravene by certain indication on Roderick 's part of 
 the power of resistance to disagreeable obligation : one might still 
 have say , if one have be dispose to be didactic at any hazard , 
 that there be a method in his madness , that his moral energy have its 
 sleeping and its wake hour , and that , in a cause that please it , it 
 be capable of rise with the dawn . but on the other hand , pleasure , in 
 this case , be quite at one with effort ; evidently the great bliss in 
 life , for Roderick , would have be to have a plastic idea . and then , it 
 be impossible not to feel tenderly to a despair which have so cease to 
 be aggressive - not to forgive a great deal of apathy to a temper 
 which have so unlearn its irritability . Roderick say frankly that 
 Switzerland make he less miserable than Italy , and the Alps seem less 
 to mock at his enforce leisure than the Apennines . he indulge in 
 long ramble , generally alone , and be very fond of climb into dizzy 
 place , where no sound could overtake he , and there , fling himself 
 on the never - trodden moss , of pull his hat over his eye and lounge 
 away the hour in perfect immobility . Rowland sometimes walk with 
 he ; though Roderick never invite he , he seem duly grateful for his 
 society . Rowland now make it a rule to treat he like a perfectly sane 
 man , to assume that all thing be well with he , and never to allude 
 to the prosperity he have forfeit or to the work he be not do . he 
 would have still say , have you question he , that Roderick 's condition 
 be a mood - certainly a puzzle one . it might last yet for many a weary 
 hour ; but it be a long lane that have no turning . Roderick 's blue would 
 not last forever . Rowland 's interest in Miss Garland 's relation with 
 her cousin be still profoundly attentive , and perplex as he be on 
 all side , he find nothing transparent here . after their arrival at 
 Engelthal , Roderick appear to seek the young girl 's society more than 
 he have do hitherto , and this revival of ardor could not fail to set 
 his friend a - wondering . they sit together and stroll together , and 
 Miss Garland often read aloud to he . one day , on their come to 
 dinner , after he have be lie half the morning at her foot , in the 
 shadow of a rock , Rowland ask he what she have be read . 

 " I do not   know , " Roderick say , " I do not   heed the sense . " Miss Garland 
 hear this , and Rowland look at she . she look at Roderick sharply 
 and with a little blush . " I listen to Mary , " Roderick continue , 
 " for the sake of her voice . it be distractingly sweet ! " at this Miss 
 Garland 's blush deepen , and she look away . 

 Rowland , in Florence , as we know , have suffer his imagination to 
 wander in the direction of certain conjecture which the reader may deem 
 unflattering to Miss Garland 's constancy . he have ask himself whether 
 her faith in Roderick have not falter , and that demand of hers which 
 have bring about his own departure for Switzerland have seem almost 
 equivalent to a confession that she need his help to believe . Rowland 
 be essentially a modest man , and he do not risk the supposition that 
 Miss Garland have contrast he with Roderick to his own advantage ; but 
 he have a certain consciousness of duty resolutely do which allow 
 itself to fancy , at moment , that it might be not illogically reward 
 by the bestowal of such stray grain of enthusiasm as have crumble away 
 from her estimate of his companion . if some day she have declare , in a 
 sudden burst of passion , that she be outwearie and sicken , and that 
 she give up her recreant lover , Rowland 's expectation would have go 
 half - way to meet she . and certainly if her passion have take this course 
 no generous critic would utterly condemn she . she have be neglect , 
 ignore , forsaken , treat with a contempt which no girl of a fine 
 temper could endure . there be girl , indeed , whose fineness , like that 
 of Burd Helen in the ballad , lie in cling to the man of their love 
 through thick and thin , and in bow their head to all hard usage . this 
 attitude have often an exquisite beauty of its own , but Rowland deem 
 that he have solid reason to believe it never could be Mary Garland 's . 
 she be not a passive creature ; she be not soft and meek and grateful 
 for chance bounty . with all her reserve of manner she be proud and 
 eager ; she ask much and she want what she ask ; she believe in 
 fine thing and she never could long persuade herself that fine thing 
 miss be as beautiful as fine thing achieve . once Rowland pass an 
 angry day . he have dream - it be the most insubstantial of dream - that 
 she have give he the right to believe that she look to he to 
 transmute her discontent . and yet here she be throw herself back 
 into Roderick 's arm at his light overture , and play with his own 
 half fearful , half shameful hope ! Rowland declare to himself that 
 his position be essentially detestable , and that all the philosophy 
 he could bring to bear upon it would make it neither honorable nor 
 comfortable . he would go away and make an end of it . he do not go away ; 
 he simply take a long walk , stay away from the inn all day , and on his 
 return find Miss Garland sit out in the moonlight with Roderick . 

 Rowland , commune with himself during the restless ramble in question , 
 have determine that he would at least cease to observe , to heed , or 
 to care for what Miss Garland and Roderick might do or might not do 
 together . nevertheless , some three day afterward , the opportunity 
 present itself , he deliberately broach the subject with Roderick . 
 he know this be inconsistent and faint - hearted ; it be indulgence 
 to the finger that itch to handle forbid fruit . but he say to 
 himself that it be really more logical to be inconsistent than the 
 reverse ; for they have formerly discuss these mystery very candidly . 
 be it not perfectly reasonable that he should wish to know the sequel 
 of the situation which Roderick have then delineate ? Roderick have make 
 he promise , and it be to be expect that he should ascertain how 
 the promise have be keep . Rowland could not say to himself that if 
 the promise have be extort for Mary Garland 's sake , his present 
 attention to they be equally disintereste ; and so he have to admit 
 that he be indeed faint - hearted . he may perhaps be deem too narrow 
 a casuist , but we have repeat more than once that he be solidly 
 burden with a conscience . 

 " I imagine , " he say to Roderick , " that you be not sorry , at present , 
 to have allow yourself to be dissuade from make a final rupture 
 with Miss Garland . " 

 Roderick eye he with the vague and absent look which have lately become 
 habitual to his face , and repeat " dissuade ? " 

 " do not   you remember that , in Rome , you wish to break your engagement , 
 and that I urge you to respect it , though it seem to hang by so 
 slender a thread ? I wish you to see what would come of it ? if I be not 
 mistaken , you be reconcile to it . " 

 " oh yes , " say Roderick , " I remember what you say ; you make it a 
 kind of personal favor to yourself that I should remain faithful . I 
 consent , but afterwards , when I think of it , your attitude greatly 
 amuse I . have it ever be see before ? - a man ask another man to 
 gratify he by not suspend his attention to a pretty girl ! " 

 " it be as selfish as anything else , " say Rowland . " one man put his 
 selfishness into one thing , and one into another . it would have utterly 
 mar my comfort to see Miss Garland in low spirit . " 

 " but you like she - you admire she , eh ? so you intimate . " 

 " I admire she profoundly . " 

 " it be your originality then - to do you justice you have a great deal , 
 of a certain sort - to wish her happiness secure in just that fashion . 
 many a man would have like well himself to make the woman he admire 
 happy , and would have welcome her low spirit as an opening for 
 sympathy . you be awfully queer about it . " 

 " so be it ! " say Rowland . " the question be , be you not glad I be 
 queer ? be you not find that your affection for Miss Garland have a 
 permanent quality which you rather underestimate ? " 

 " I do not   pretend to say . when she arrive in Rome , I find I do not 
 care for she , and I honestly propose that we should have no humbug 
 about it . if you , on the contrary , think there be something to be 
 gain by have a little humbug , I be willing to try it ! I do not   see 
 that the situation be really change . Mary Garland be all that she ever 
 be - more than all . but I do not   care for she ! I do not   care for anything , 
 and I do not   find myself inspire to make an exception in her favor . the 
 only difference be that I do not   care now , whether I care for she or not . 
 of course , marry such a useless lout as I be be out of the question 
 for any woman , and I should pay Miss Garland a poor compliment to assume 
 that she be in a hurry to celebrate our nuptial . " 

 " oh , you be in love ! " say Rowland , not very logically . it must be 
 confess , at any cost , that this assertion be make for the sole 
 purpose of hear Roderick deny it . 

 but it quite fail of its aim . Roderick give a liberal shrug of his 
 shoulder and an irresponsible toss of his head . " call it what you 
 please ! I be past care for name . " 

 Rowland have not only be illogical , he have also be slightly 
 disingenuous . he do not believe that his companion be in love ; he 
 have argue the false to learn the true . the true be that Roderick be 
 again , in some degree , under a charm , and that he find a healing virtue 
 in Mary 's presence , indispose though he be to admit it . he have say , 
 shortly before , that her voice be sweet to his ear ; and this be a 
 promising beginning . if her voice be sweet it be probable that her 
 glance be not amiss , that her touch have a quiet magic , and that her 
 whole personal presence have learn the art of not be irritate . 
 so Rowland reason , and invest Mary Garland with a still fine 
 loveliness . 

 it be true that she herself help he little to definite conclusion , 
 and that he remain in puzzled doubt as to whether these happy touch 
 be still a matter of the heart , or have become simply a matter of the 
 conscience . he watch for sign that she rejoice in Roderick 's renew 
 acceptance of her society ; but it seem to he that she be on her 
 guard against interpret it too largely . it be now her turn - he 
 fancy that he sometimes gather from certain nameless indication of 
 glance and tone and gesture - it be now her turn to be indifferent , to 
 care for other thing . again and again Rowland ask himself what these 
 thing be that Miss Garland might be suppose to care for , to the 
 injury of ideal constancy ; and again , have designate they , he divide 
 they into two portion . one be that large experience , in general , 
 which have come to she with her arrival in Europe ; the vague sense , bear 
 in upon her imagination , that there be more thing one might do with 
 one 's life than youth and ignorance and Northampton have dream of ; the 
 revision of old pledge in the light of new emotion . the other be the 
 experience , in especial , of Rowland 's - what ? here Rowland always pause , 
 in perfect sincerity , to measure afresh his possible claim to the young 
 girl 's regard . what might he call it ? it have be more than civility and 
 yet it have be less than devotion . it have speak of a desire to serve , 
 but it have say nothing of a hope of reward . nevertheless , Rowland 's 
 fancy hover about the idea that it be recompensable , and his 
 reflection end in a reverie which perhaps do not define it , but 
 at least , on each occasion , add a little to its volume . since Miss 
 Garland have ask he as a sort of favor to herself to come also to 
 Switzerland , he think it possible she might let he know whether he 
 seem to have effectively serve she . the day pass without her do 
 so , and at last Rowland walk away to an isolated eminence some 
 five mile from the inn and murmur to the silent rock that she be 
 ungrateful . listen nature seem not to contradict he , so that , 
 on the morrow , he ask the young girl , with an infinitesimal touch of 
 irony , whether it strike she that his deflection from his florentine 
 plan have be attend with brilliant result . 

 " why , we be delighted that you be with we ! " she answer . 

 he be anything but satisfied with this ; it seem to imply that she have 
 forget that she have solemnly ask he to come . he remind she 
 of her request , and recall the place and time . " that evening on the 
 terrace , late , after Mrs. Hudson have go to bed , and roderick be 
 absent . " 

 she perfectly remember , but the memory seem to trouble she . " I be 
 afraid your kindness have be a great charge upon you , " she say . " you 
 want very much to do something else . " 

 " I want above all thing to oblige you , and I make no sacrifice . but 
 if I have make an immense one , it would be more than make up to I by any 
 assurance that I have help roderick into a well mood . " 

 she be silent a moment , and then , " why do you ask I ? " she say . " you 
 be able to judge quite as well as I. " 

 Rowland blush ; he desire to justify himself in the most veracious 
 manner . " the truth be , " he say , " that I be afraid I care only in the 
 second place for Roderick 's hold up his head . what I care for in the 
 first place be your happiness . " 

 " I do not   know why that should be , " she answer . " I have certainly 
 do nothing to make you so much my friend . if you be to tell I you 
 intend to leave we to - morrow , I be afraid that I should not venture 
 to ask you to stay . but whether you go or stay , let we not talk of 
 Roderick ! " 

 " but that , " say Rowland , " do not   answer my question . be he well ? " 

 " no ! " she say , and turn away . 

 he be careful not to tell she that he intend to leave they . one day , 
 shortly after this , as the two young man sit at the inn - door watch 
 the sunset , which on that evening be very striking and lurid , Rowland 
 make an attempt to sound his companion 's present sentiment touch 
 Christina Light . " I wonder where she be , " he say , " and what sort of a 
 life she be lead her prince . " 

 Roderick at first make no response . he be watch a figure on 
 the summit of some distant rock , opposite to they . the figure be 
 apparently descend into the valley , and in relief against the crimson 
 screen of the western sky , it look gigantic . " Christina Light ? " 
 Roderick at last repeat , as if arouse himself from a reverie . " where 
 she be ? it be extraordinary how little I care ! " 

 " have you , then , completely get over it ? " 

 to this Roderick make no direct reply ; he sit brood a while . " she be 
 a humbug ! " he presently exclaim . 

 " possibly ! " say Rowland . " but I have know bad one . " 

 " she disappoint I ! " Roderick continue in the same tone . 

 " have she , then , really give you hope ? " 

 " oh , do not   recall it ! " Roderick cry . " why the devil should I think 
 of it ? it be only three month ago , but it seem like ten year . " 
 his friend say nothing more , and after a while he go on of his 
 own accord . " I believe there be a future in it all ! she please 
 I - please I ; and when an artist - such as I be - be pleased , you 
 know ! " and he pause again . " you never see she as I do ; you never hear 
 she in her great moment . but there be no use talk about that ! at 
 first she would not   regard I seriously ; she chaff I and make light 
 of I . but at last I force she to admit I be a great man . think of 
 that , sir ! Christina Light call I a great man . a great man be what 
 she be look for , and we agree to find our happiness for life in 
 each other . to please I she promise not to marry till I give she 
 leave . I be not in a marrying way myself , but it be damnation to think 
 of another man possess she . to spare my sensibility , she promise 
 to turn off her prince , and the idea of she do so make I as happy as 
 to see a perfect statue shape itself in the block . you have see how 
 she keep her promise ! when I learn it , it be as if the statue have 
 suddenly crack and turn hideous . she die for I , like that ! " and 
 he snap his finger . " be it wound vanity , disappointed desire , 
 betray confidence ? I be sure I do not   know ; you certainly have some 
 name for it . " 

 " the poor girl do the good she could , " say Rowland . 

 " if that be she good , so much the bad for she ! I have hardly think 
 of she these two month , but I have not forgive she . " 

 " well , you may believe that you be avenge . I can not   think of she as 
 happy . " 

 " I do not   pity she ! " say Roderick . then he relapse into silence , and 
 the two sit watch the colossal figure as it make its way downward 
 along the jagged silhouette of the rock . " who be this mighty man , " 
 cry Roderick at last , " and what be he come down upon we for ? we be 
 small people here , and we can not   undertake to keep company with giant . " 

 " wait till we meet he on our own level , " say Rowland , " and perhaps he 
 will not overtop we . " 

 " for ten minute , at least , " Roderick rejoin , " he will have be a 
 great man ! " at this moment the figure sink beneath the horizon line 
 and become invisible in the uncertain light . suddenly Roderick say , " I 
 would like to see she once more - simply to look at she . " 

 " I would not advise it , " say Rowland . 

 " it be her beauty that do it ! " Roderick go on . " it be all her 
 beauty ; in comparison , the rest be nothing . what befool I be to 
 think of it as my property ! and I have make it mine - no one else have 
 study it as I have , no one else understand it . what do that stick of 
 a Casamassima know about it at this hour ? I should like to see it just 
 once more ; it be the only thing in the world of which I can say so . " 

 " I would not advise it , " Rowland repeat . 

 " that be right , dear Rowland , " say Roderick ; " do not   advise ! that be no 
 use now . " 

 the dusk meanwhile have thicken , and they have not perceive a figure 
 approach they across the open space in front of the house . suddenly 
 it step into the circle of light project from the door and window , 
 and they behold little Sam Singleton stop to stare at they . he be 
 the giant whom they have see descend along the rock . when this be 
 make apparent Roderick be seize with a fit of intense hilarity - it be 
 the first time he have laugh in three month . Singleton , who carry 
 a knapsack and walking - staff , receive from Rowland the friendly 
 welcome . he be in the serene possible humor , and if in the way of 
 luggage his knapsack contain nothing but a comb and a second shirt , he 
 produce from it a dozen admirable sketch . he have be trudge over 
 half Switzerland and make everywhere the most vivid pictorial note . 
 they be mostly in a box at Interlaken , and in gratitude for Rowland 's 
 appreciation , he presently telegraph for his box , which , accord to 
 the excellent swiss method , be punctually deliver by post . the night 
 be cold , and our friend , with three or four other chance sojourner , 
 sit in - door over a fire of log . even with Roderick sit moodily in 
 the outer shadow they make a sympathetic little circle , and they turn 
 over Singleton 's drawing , while he perch in the chimney - corner , 
 blushing and grinning , with his foot on the round of his chair . he have 
 be pedestrianize for six week , and he be glad to rest awhile at 
 Engelthal . it be an economic repose , however , for he sally forth 
 every morning , with his sketching tool on his back , in search of 
 material for new study . Roderick 's hilarity , after the first evening , 
 have subside , and he watch the little painter 's serene activity with a 
 gravity that be almost portentous . Singleton , who be not in the secret 
 of his personal misfortune , still treat he with timid frankness as 
 the rise star of american art . Roderick have say to Rowland , at 
 first , that Singleton remind he of some curious little insect with a 
 remarkable mechanical instinct in its antennae ; but as the day go by 
 it be apparent that the modest landscapist 's unflagge industry grow 
 to have an oppressive meaning for he . it point a moral , and Roderick 
 use to sit and con the moral as he see it figure in Singleton 's bent 
 back , on the hot hill - side , protrude from beneath his white umbrella . 
 one day he wander up a long slope and overtake he as he sit at work ; 
 Singleton relate the incident afterwards to Rowland , who , after give 
 he in Rome a hint of Roderick 's aberration , have strictly keep his own 
 counsel . 

 " be you always like this ? " say Roderick , in almost sepulchral accent . 

 " like this ? " repeat Singleton , blink confusedly , with an alarm 
 conscience . 

 " you remind I of a watch that never run down . if one listen hard one 
 hear you always - tic - tic , tic - tic . " 

 " oh , I see , " say Singleton , beam ingenuously . " I be very equable . " 

 " you be very equable , yes . and do you find it pleasant to be equable ? " 

 Singleton turn and grin more brightly , while he suck the water 
 from his camel's - hair brush . then , with a quickened sense of his 
 indebtedness to a Providence that have endow he with intrinsic 
 facility , " oh , delightful ! " he exclaim . 

 Roderick stand look at he a moment . " damnation ! " he say at last , 
 solemnly , and turn his back . 

 one morning , shortly after this , Rowland and Roderick take a long walk . 
 they have walk before in a dozen different direction , but they have not 
 yet cross a charming little woode pass , which shut in their valley 
 on one side and descend into the vale of Engelberg . in come from 
 Lucerne they have approach their inn by this path , and , feel that 
 they know it , have hitherto neglect it in favor of untrodden way . but 
 at last the list of these be exhaust , and Rowland propose the walk 
 to Engelberg as a novelty . the place be half bleak and half pastoral ; a 
 huge white monastery rise abruptly from the green floor of the valley 
 and complicate its picturesqueness with an element rare in Swiss 
 scenery . hard by be a group of chalet and inn , with the usual 
 appurtenance of a prosperous swiss resort - lean brown guide in baggy 
 homespun , lounge under carve wooden gallery , stack of alpenstock 
 in every doorway , sun - scorch englishman without shirt - collar . our two 
 friend sit a while at the door of an inn , discuss a pint of wine , 
 and then Roderick , who be indefatigable , announce his intention of 
 climb to a certain rocky pinnacle which overhang the valley , and , 
 accord to the testimony of one of the guide , command a view of the 
 Lake of Lucerne . to go and come back be only a matter of an hour , but 
 Rowland , with the prospect of his homeward trudge before he , confess 
 to a preference for lounge on his bench , or at most stroll a trifle 
 far and take a look at the monastery . Roderick go off alone , and 
 his companion after a while bend his step to the monasterial church . it 
 be remarkable , like most of the church of Catholic Switzerland , for 
 a hideous style of devotional ornament ; but it have a certain cold and 
 musty picturesqueness , and Rowland linger there with some tenderness 
 for Alpine piety . while he be near the high - altar some people come in 
 at the west door ; but he do not notice they , and be presently engage 
 in decipher a curious old german epitaph on one of the mural tablet . 
 at last he turn away , wonder whether its syntax or its theology be 
 the more uncomfortable , and , to this infinite surprise , find himself 
 confront with the Prince and Princess Casamassima . 

 the surprise on Christina 's part , for an instant , be equal , and at 
 first she seem disposed to turn away without let it give place to 
 a greeting . the prince , however , salute gravely , and then Christina , in 
 silence , put out her hand . Rowland immediately ask whether they be 
 stay at Engelberg , but Christina only look at he without speak . 
 the prince answer his question , and relate that they have be 
 make a month 's tour in Switzerland , that at Lucerne his wife have be 
 somewhat obstinately indispose , and that the physician have recommend 
 a week 's trial of the tonic air and goat 's milk of Engelberg . the 
 scenery , say the prince , be stupendous , but the life be terribly 
 sad - and they have three day more ! it be a blessing , he urbanely add , 
 to see a good roman face . 

 Christina 's attitude , her solemn silence and her penetrate gaze 
 seem to Rowland , at first , to savor of affectation ; but he presently 
 perceive that she be profoundly agitated , and that she be afraid of 
 betray herself . " do let we leave this hideous edifice , " she say ; 
 " there be thing here that set one 's tooth on edge . " they move slowly 
 to the door , and when they stand outside , in the sunny coolness of the 
 valley , she turn to Rowland and say , " I be extremely glad to see 
 you . " then she glance about she and observe , against the wall of the 
 church , an old stone seat . she look at Prince Casamassima a moment , 
 and he smile more intensely , Rowland think , than the occasion 
 demand . " I wish to sit here , " she say , " and speak to Mr. 
 Mallet - alone . " 

 " at your pleasure , dear friend , " say the prince . 

 the tone of each be measure , to Rowland 's ear ; but that of Christina 
 be dry , and that of her husband be splendidly urbane . Rowland 
 remember that the Cavaliere Giacosa have tell he that Mrs. Light 's 
 candidate be thoroughly a prince , and our friend wonder how he 
 relish a peremptory accent . Casamassima be an italian of the 
 undemonstrative type , but Rowland nevertheless divine that , like other 
 prince before he , he have make the acquaintance of the thing call 
 compromise . " shall I come back ? " he ask with the same smile . 

 " in half an hour , " say Christina . 

 in the clear outer light , Rowland 's first impression of she be that she 
 be more beautiful than ever . and yet in three month she could hardly 
 have change ; the change be in Rowland 's own vision of she , which that 
 last interview , on the eve of her marriage , have make unprecedentedly 
 tender . 

 " how come you here ? " she ask . " be you stay in this place ? " 

 " I be stay at Engelthal , some ten mile away ; I walk over . " 

 " be you alone ? " 

 " I be with Mr. Hudson . " 

 " be he here with you ? " 

 " he go half an hour ago to climb a rock for a view . " 

 " and his mother and that young girl , where be they ? " 

 " they also be at Engelthal . " 

 " what do you do there ? " 

 " what do you do here ? " say Rowland , smile . 

 " I count the minute till my week be up . I hate mountain ; they depress 
 I to death . I be sure Miss Garland like they . " 

 " she be very fond of they , I believe . " 

 " you believe - do not   you know ? but I have give up try to imitate Miss 
 Garland , " say Christina . 

 " you surely need imitate no one . " 

 " do not   say that , " she say gravely . " so you have walk ten mile this 
 morning ? and you be to walk back again ? " 

 " back again to supper . " 

 " and Mr. Hudson too ? " 

 " Mr. Hudson especially . he be a great walker . " 

 " you man be happy ! " Christina cry . " I believe I should enjoy the 
 mountain if I could do such thing . it be sit still and have they 
 scowl down at you ! Prince Casamassina never rid . he only go on a 
 mule . he be carry up the Faulhorn on a litter . " 

 " on a litter ? " say Rowland . 

 " in one of those machine - a chaise a porteur - like a woman . " 

 Rowland receive this information in silence ; it be equally unbecoming 
 to either relish or deprecate its irony . 

 " be Mr. Hudson to join you again ? will he come here ? " Christina ask . 

 " I shall soon begin to expect he . " 

 " what shall you do when you leave Switzerland ? " Christina continue . 
 " shall you go back to Rome ? " 

 " I rather doubt it . my plan be very uncertain . " 

 " they depend upon Mr. Hudson , eh ? " 

 " in a great measure . " 

 " I want you to tell I about he . be he still in that perverse state of 
 mind that afflict you so much ? " 

 Rowland look at her mistrustfully , without answer . he be 
 indisposed , instinctively , to tell she that Roderick be unhappy ; it be 
 possible she might offer to help he back to happiness . she immediately 
 perceive his hesitation . 

 " I see no reason why we should not be frank , " she say . " I should think 
 we be excellently place for that sort of thing . you remember that 
 formerly I care very little what I say , do not   you ? well , I care 
 absolutely not at all now . I say what I please , I do what I please ! how 
 do Mr. Hudson receive the news of my marriage ? " 

 " very badly , " say Rowland . 

 " with rage and reproach ? " and as Rowland hesitate again - " with silent 
 contempt ? " 

 " I can tell you but little . he speak to I on the subject , but I stop 
 he . I tell he it be none of his business , or of mine . " 

 " that be an excellent answer ! " say Christina , softly . " yet it be a 
 little your business , after those sublime protestation I treat you 
 to . I be really very fine that morning , eh ? " 

 " you do yourself injustice , " say Rowland . " I should be at liberty now 
 to believe you be insincere . " 

 " what do it matter now whether I be insincere or not ? I can not 
 conceive of anything matter less . I be very fine - be not   it true ? " 

 " you know what I think of you , " say Rowland . and for fear of be 
 force to betray his suspicion of the cause of her change , he take 
 refuge in a commonplace . " your mother , I hope , be well . " 

 " my mother be in the enjoyment of superb health , and may be see 
 every evening at the Casino , at the Baths of Lucca , confide to every 
 new - comer that she have marry her daughter to a pearl of a prince . " 

 Rowland be anxious for news of Mrs. Light 's companion , and the natural 
 course be frankly to inquire about he . " and the Cavaliere Giacosa be 
 well ? " he ask . 

 Christina hesitate , but she betray no other embarrassment . " the 
 Cavaliere have retire to his native city of Ancona , upon a pension , for 
 the rest of his natural life . he be a very good old man ! " 

 " I have a great regard for he , " say Rowland , gravely , at the same time 
 that he privately wonder whether the Cavaliere 's pension be pay 
 by Prince Casamassima for service render in connection with his 
 marriage . have the Cavaliere receive his commission ? " and what do you 
 do , " Rowland continue , " on leave this place ? " 

 " we go to Italy - we go to Naples . " she rise and stand silent a moment , 
 look down the valley . the figure of Prince Casamassima appear in 
 the distance , balance his white umbrella . as her eye rest upon it , 
 Rowland imagine that he see something deep in the strange expression 
 which have lurk in her face while he talk to she . at first he have 
 be dazzle by her bloom beauty , to which the lapse of week have 
 only add splendor ; then he have see a heavy ray in the light of her 
 eye - a sinister intimation of sadness and bitterness . it be the outward 
 mark of her sacrifice ideal . her eye grow cold as she look at her 
 husband , and when , after a moment , she turn they upon Rowland , they 
 strike he as intensely tragical . he feel a singular mixture of sympathy 
 and dread ; he wish to give she a proof of friendship , and yet it 
 seem to he that she have now turn her face in a direction where 
 friendship be impotent to interpose . she half read his feeling , 
 apparently , and she give a beautiful , sad smile . " I hope we may never 
 meet again ! " she say . and as Rowland give she a protest look - " you 
 have see I at my good . I wish to tell you solemnly , I be sincere ! I 
 know appearance be against I , " she go on quickly . " there be a great 
 deal I can not   tell you . perhaps you have guess it ; I care very little . 
 you know , at any rate , I do my good . it would not   serve ; I be beat 
 and break ; they be strong than i. now it be another affair ! " 

 " it seem to I you have a large chance for happiness yet , " say 
 Rowland , vaguely . 

 " happiness ? I mean to cultivate rapture ; I mean to go in for bliss 
 ineffable ! you remember I tell you that I be , in part , the world 's and 
 the devil 's . now they have take I all . it be their choice ; may they 
 never repent ! " 

 " I shall hear of you , " say Rowland . 

 " you will hear of I . and whatever you do hear , remember this : I be 
 sincere ! " 

 Prince Casamassima have approach , and Rowland look at he with a 
 good deal of simple compassion as a part of that " world " against which 
 Christina have launch her mysterious menace . it be obvious that he 
 be a good fellow , and that he could not , in the nature of thing , be 
 a positively bad husband ; but his distinguished inoffensiveness only 
 deepen the infelicity of Christina 's situation by deprive she 
 defiant attitude of the sanction of relative justice . so long as she have 
 be free to choose , she have esteem he : but from the moment she be 
 force to marry he she have detest he . Rowland read in the young 
 man 's elastic italian mask a profound consciousness of all this ; and 
 as he find there also a record of other curious thing - of pride , of 
 temper , of bigotry , of an immense heritage of more or less aggressive 
 tradition - he reflect that the matrimonial conjunction of his two 
 companion might be sufficiently prolific in incident . 

 " you be go to Naples ? " Rowland say to the prince by way of 
 conversation . 

 " we be go to Paris , " Christina interpose , slowly and softly . 
 " we be go to London . we be go to Vienna . we be go to St. 
 Petersburg . " 

 Prince Casamassima drop his eye and fret the earth with the point 
 of his umbrella . while he engage Rowland 's attention Christina turn 
 away . when Rowland glance at she again he see a change pass over her 
 face ; she be observe something that be conceal from his own eye 
 by the angle of the church - wall . in a moment Roderick step into 
 sight . 

 he stop short , astonish ; his face and figure be jade , his 
 garment dusty . he look at Christina from head to foot , and then , 
 slowly , his cheek flush and his eye expand . Christina return his 
 gaze , and for some moment there be a singular silence . " you do not   look 
 well ! " Christina say at last . 

 Roderick answer nothing ; he only look and look , as if she have be 
 a statue . " you be no less beautiful ! " he presently cry . 

 she turn away with a smile , and stand a while gaze down the valley ; 
 Roderick star at Prince Casamassima . Christina then put out her hand 
 to Rowland . " farewell , " she say . " if you be near I in future , 
 do not   try to see I ! " and then , after a pause , in a low tone , " I be 
 sincere ! " she address herself again to Roderick and ask he some 
 commonplace about his walk . but he say nothing ; he only look at 
 she . Rowland at first have expect an outbreak of reproach , but it be 
 evident that the danger be every moment diminish . he be forget 
 everything but her beauty , and as she stand there and let he feast upon 
 it , Rowland be sure that she know it . " I will not   say farewell to you , " 
 she say ; " we shall meet again ! " and she move gravely away . Prince 
 Casamassima take leave courteously of Rowland ; upon Roderick he bestow 
 a bow of exaggerated civility . Roderick appear not to see it ; he 
 be still watch Christina , as she pass over the grass . his eye 
 follow she until she reach the door of her inn . here she stop and 
 look back at he . 






 CHAPTER XIII . Switzerland 

 on the homeward walk , that evening , Roderick preserve a silence which 
 Rowland allow to make he uneasy . early on the morrow roderick , 
 say nothing of his intention , start off on a walk ; Rowland see 
 he stride with light step along the rugged path to Engelberg . he be 
 absent all day and he give no account of himself on his return . he say 
 he be deadly tired , and he go to bed early . when he have leave the room 
 Miss Garland draw near to Rowland . 

 " I wish to ask you a question , " she say . " what happen to Roderick 
 yesterday at Engelberg ? " 

 " you have discover that something happen ? " Rowland answer . 

 " I be sure of it . be it something painful ? " 

 " I do not   know how , at the present moment , he judge it . he meet the 
 Princess Casamassima . " 

 " thank you ! " say Miss Garland , simply , and turn away . 

 the conversation have be brief , but , like many small thing , it 
 furnish Rowland with food for reflection . when one be look for 
 symptom one easily find they . this be the first time Mary Garland have 
 ask Rowland a question which it be in Roderick 's power to answer , 
 the first time she have frankly betray Roderick 's reticence . Rowland 
 venture to think it mark an era . 

 the next morning be sultry , and the air , usually so fresh at those 
 altitude , be oppressively heavy . Rowland lounge on the grass a while , 
 near Singleton , who be at work under his white umbrella , within view of 
 the house ; and then in quest of coolness he wander away to the rocky 
 ridge whence you look across at the Jungfrau . to - day , however , the 
 white summit be invisible ; their head be muffle in sullen cloud 
 and the valley beneath they curtain in dun - color mist . Rowland have 
 a book in his pocket , and he take it out and open it . but his page 
 remain unturned ; his own thought be more importunate . his interview 
 with Christina Light have make a great impression upon he , and he be 
 haunt with the memory of her almost blameless bitterness , and of all 
 that be tragic and fatal in her late transformation . these thing 
 be immensely appealing , and Rowland think with infinite impatience 
 of Roderick 's have again encounter they . it require little 
 imagination to apprehend that the young sculptor 's condition have 
 also appeal to Christina . his consummate indifference , his supreme 
 defiance , would make he a magnificent trophy , and Christina have 
 announce with sufficient distinctness that she have say good - by to 
 scruple . it be her fancy at present to treat the world as a garden of 
 pleasure , and if , hitherto , she have play with Roderick 's passion on 
 its stem , there be little doubt that now she would pluck it with an 
 unfaltere hand and drain it of its acrid sweetness . and why the 
 deuce need roderick have go march back to destruction ? Rowland 's 
 meditation , even when they begin in rancor , often bring he peace ; 
 but on this occasion they usher in a quite peculiar quality of unrest . 
 he feel conscious of a sudden collapse in his moral energy ; a current 
 that have be flow for two year with liquid strength seem at last 
 to pause and evaporate . Rowland look away at the stagnant vapor on 
 the mountain ; their dreariness seem a symbol of the dreariness which 
 his own generosity have bequeath he . at last he have arrive at the 
 uttermost limit of the deference a sane man might pay to other people 's 
 folly ; nay , rather , he have transgress it ; he have be befool on a 
 gigantic scale . he turn to his book and try to woo back patience , 
 but it give he cold comfort and he toss it angrily away . he pull 
 his hat over his eye , and try to wonder , dispassionately , whether 
 atmospheric condition have not something to do with his ill - humor . he 
 remain for some time in this attitude , but be finally arouse from 
 it by a singular sense that , although he have hear nothing , some one have 
 approach he . he look up and see Roderick stand before he on the 
 turf . his mood make the spectacle unwelcome , and for a moment he feel 
 like utter an uncivil speech . Roderick stand look at he with an 
 expression of countenance which have of late become rare . there be an 
 unfamiliar spark in his eye and a certain imperious alertness in his 
 carriage . confirm habit , with Rowland , come speedily to the front . 
 " what be it now ? " he ask himself , and invite Roderick to sit down . 
 Roderick have evidently something particular to say , and if he remain 
 silent for a time it be not because he be ashamed of it . 

 " I would like you to do I a favor , " he say at last . " lend I some 
 money . " 

 " how much do you wish ? " Rowland ask . 

 " say a thousand franc . " 

 Rowland hesitate a moment . " I do not   wish to be indiscreet , but may I 
 ask what you propose to do with a thousand franc ? " 

 " to go to Interlaken . " 

 " and why be you go to interlaken ? " 

 Roderick reply without a shadow of wavering , " because that woman be to 
 be there . " 

 Rowland burst out laugh , but Roderick remain serenely grave . " you 
 have forgive she , then ? " say Rowland . 

 " not a bit of it ! " 

 " I do not   understand . " 

 " neither do I. I only know that she be incomparably beautiful , and that 
 she have wake I up amazingly . besides , she ask I to come . " 

 " she ask you ? " 

 " yesterday , in so many word . " 

 " ah , the jade ! " 

 " exactly . I be willing to take she for that . " 

 " why in the name of common sense do you go back to she ? " 

 " why do I find she stand there like a goddess who have just step 
 out of her cloud ? why do I look at she ? before I know where I be , the 
 harm be do . " 

 Rowland , who have be sit erect , throw himself back on the grass and 
 lay for some time star up at the sky . at last , raise himself , " be 
 you perfectly serious ? " he ask . 

 " deadly serious . " 

 " your idea be to remain at interlaken some time ? " 

 " indefinitely ! " say Roderick ; and it seem to his companion that the 
 tone in which he say this make it immensely well worth hearing . 

 " and your mother and cousin , meanwhile , be to remain here ? it will soon 
 be get very cold , you know . " 

 " it do not   seem much like it to - day . " 

 " very true ; but to - day be a day by itself . " 

 " there be nothing to prevent their go back to Lucerne . I depend upon 
 your taking charge of they . " 

 at this Rowland recline upon the grass again ; and again , after 
 reflection , he face his friend . " how would you express , " he ask , " the 
 character of the profit that you expect to derive from your excursion ? " 

 " I see no need of express it . the proof of the pudding be in the 
 eating ! the case be simply this . I desire immensely to be near Christina 
 Light , and it be such a huge refreshment to find myself again desire 
 something , that I propose to drift with the current . as I say , she have 
 wake I up , and it be possible something may come of it . she make I 
 feel as if I be alive again . this , " and he glance down at the inn , " I 
 call death ! " 

 " that I be very grateful to hear . you really feel as if you might do 
 something ? " 

 " do not   ask too much . I only know that she make my heart beat , make I 
 see vision . " 

 " you feel encouraged ? " 

 " I feel excited . " 

 " you be really look well . " 

 " I be glad to hear it . now that I have answer your question , please 
 to give I the money . " 

 Rowland shake his head . " for that purpose , I can not ! " 

 " you can not ? " 

 " it be impossible . your plan be rank folly . I can not   help you in it . " 

 Roderick flush a little , and his eye expand . " I will borrow what 
 money I can , then , from Mary ! " this be not viciously say ; it have 
 simply the ring of passionate resolution . 

 instantly it bring Rowland to term . he take a bunch of key from 
 his pocket and toss it upon the grass . " the little brass one open my 
 dressing - case , " he say . " you will find money in it . " 

 Roderick let the key lie ; something seem to have strike he ; he 
 look askance at his friend . " you be awfully gallant ! " 

 " you certainly be not . your proposal be an outrage . " 

 " very likely . it be a proof the more of my desire . " 

 " if you have so much steam on , then , use it for something else . you say 
 you be awake again . I be delighted ; only be so in the good sense . be 
 not   it very plain ? if you have the energy to desire , you have also the 
 energy to reason and to judge . if you can care to go , you can also care 
 to stay , and stay be the more profitable course , the inspiration , 
 on that side , for a man who have his self - confidence to win back again , 
 should be great . " 

 Roderick , plainly , do not relish this simple logic , and his eye grow 
 angry as he listen to its echo . " oh , the devil ! " he cry . 

 Rowland go on . " do you believe that hang about Christina Light will 
 do you any good ? do you believe it will not ? in either case you should keep 
 away from she . if it will not , it be your duty ; and if it will , you can get 
 on without it . " 

 " do I good ? " cry Roderick . " what do I want of ' good ' - what should I 
 do with ' good ' ? I want what she give I , call it by what name you will . 
 I want to ask no question , but to take what come and let it fill the 
 impossible hour ! but I do not   come to discuss the matter . " 

 " I have not the least desire to discuss it , " say Rowland . " I simply 
 protest . " 

 Roderick meditate a moment . " I have never yet think twice of 
 accept a favor of you , " he say at last ; " but this one stick in my 
 throat . " 

 " it be not a favor ; I lend you the money only under compulsion . " 

 " well , then , I will take it only under compulsion ! " Roderick exclaim . 
 and he spring up abruptly and march away . 

 his word be ambiguous ; Rowland lie on the grass , wonder what they 
 mean . half an hour have not elapse before Roderick reappear , heat 
 with rapid walking , and wipe his forehead . he fling himself down and 
 look at his friend with an eye which express something purer than 
 bravado and yet base than conviction . 

 " I have do my good ! " he say . " my mother be out of money ; she be 
 expect next week some circular note from London . she have only ten 
 franc in her pocket . Mary Garland give I every sou she possess in 
 the world . it make exactly thirty - four franc . that be not enough . " 

 " you ask Miss Garland ? " cry Rowland . 

 " I ask she . " 

 " and tell she your purpose ? " 

 " I name no name . but she know ! " 

 " what do she say ? " 

 " not a syllable . she simply empty her purse . " 

 Rowland turn over and bury his face in his arm . he feel a movement 
 of irrepressible elation , and he barely stifle a cry of joy . now , 
 surely , Roderick have shatter the last link in the chain that bind 
 Mary to he , and after this she would be free ! ... when he turn about 
 again , Roderick be still sit there , and he have not touch the key 
 which lie on the grass . 

 " I do not   know what be the matter with I , " say Roderick , " but I have an 
 insurmountable aversion to take your money . " 

 " the matter , I suppose , be that you have a grain of wisdom leave . " 

 " no , it be not that . it be a kind of brute instinct . I find it extremely 
 provoking ! " he sit there for some time with his head in his hand and 
 his eye on the ground . his lip be compress , and he be evidently , 
 in fact , in a state of profound irritation . " you have succeed in 
 make this thing excessively unpleasant ! " he exclaim . 

 " I be sorry , " say Rowland , " but I can not   see it in any other way . " 

 " that I believe , and I resent the range of your vision pretend to 
 be the limit of my action . you can not   feel for I nor judge for I , and 
 there be certain thing you know nothing about . I have suffer , sir ! " 
 Roderick go on with increase emphasis . " I have suffer damnable 
 torment . have I be such a placid , contented , comfortable man this 
 last six month , that when I find a chance to forget my misery , I should 
 take such pain not to profit by it ? you ask too much , for a man who 
 himself have no occasion to play the hero . I do not   say that invidiously ; 
 it be your disposition , and you can not   help it . but decidedly , there be 
 certain thing you know nothing about . " 

 Rowland listen to this outbreak with open eye , and Roderick , if 
 he have be less intent upon his own eloquence , would probably have 
 perceive that he turn pale . " these thing - what be they ? " Rowland 
 ask . 

 " they be woman , principally , and what relate to woman . woman for 
 you , by what I can make out , mean nothing . you have no imagination - no 
 sensibility ! " 

 " that be a serious charge , " say Rowland , gravely . 

 " I do not   make it without proof ! " 

 " and what be your proof ? " 

 Roderick hesitate a moment . " the way you treat Christina Light . I 
 call that grossly obtuse . " 

 " obtuse ? " Rowland repeat , frown . 

 " Thick - skinned , beneath your good fortune . " 

 " my good fortune ? " 

 " there it be - it be all news to you ! you have please she . I do not   say 
 she be die of love for you , but she take a fancy to you . " 

 " we will let this pass ! " say Rowland , after a silence . 

 " oh , I do not   insist . I have only her own word for it . " 

 " she tell you this ? " 

 " you notice , at least , I suppose , that she be not afraid to speak . I 
 never repeat it , not because I be jealous , but because I be curious 
 to see how long your ignorance would last if leave to itself . " 

 " I frankly confess it would have last forever . and yet I do not 
 consider that my insensibility be prove . " 

 " oh , do not   say that , " cry Roderick , " or I shall begin to suspect - what 
 I must do you the justice to say that I never have suspect - that you 
 be a trifle conceited . upon my word , when I think of all this , your 
 protest , as you call it , against my follow Christina Light seem 
 to I thoroughly offensive . there be something monstrous in a man 's 
 pretend to lay down the law to a sort of emotion with which he be 
 quite unacquainted - in his ask a fellow to give up a lovely woman for 
 conscience ' sake , when he have never have the impulse to strike a blow for 
 one for passion 's ! " 

 " oh , oh ! " cry Rowland . 

 " all that be very easy to say , " Roderick go on ; " but you must remember 
 that there be such thing as nerve , and sens , and imagination , and 
 a restless demon within that may sleep sometimes for a day , or for six 
 month , but that soon or later wake up and thump at your rib till 
 you listen to he ! if you can not   understand it , take it on trust , and let 
 a poor imaginative devil live his life as he can ! " 

 Roderick 's word seem at first to Rowland like something hear in a 
 dream ; it be impossible they have be actually speak - so supreme an 
 expression be they of the insolence of egotism . reality be never so 
 consistent as that ! but Roderick sit there balance his beautiful 
 head , and the echo of his strident accent still linger along the 
 half - muffle mountain - side . Rowland suddenly feel that the cup of his 
 chagrin be full to overflow , and his long - gather bitterness surge 
 into the simple , wholesome passion of anger for waste kindness . but 
 he speak without violence , and Roderick be probably at first far from 
 measure the force that lie beneath his word . 

 " you be incredibly ungrateful , " he say . " you be talk arrogant 
 nonsense . what do you know about my sensibility and my imagination ? 
 how do you know whether I have love or suffer ? if I have hold my 
 tongue and not trouble you with my complaint , you find it the most 
 natural thing in the world to put an ignoble construction on my silence . 
 I love quite as well as you ; indeed , I think I may say rather well . I 
 have be constant . I have be willing to give more than I receive . I 
 have not forsake one mistress because I think another more beautiful , 
 nor give up the other and believe all manner of evil about she because 
 I have not my way with she . I have be a good friend to Christina Light , 
 and it seem to I my friendship do she quite as much honor as your 
 love ! " 

 " your love - your suffering - your silence - your friendship ! " cry 
 Roderick . " I declare I do not   understand ! " 

 " I dare say not . you be not use to understand such thing - you be 
 not use to hear I talk of my feeling . you be altogether too 
 much take up with your own . be as much so as you please ; I have always 
 respect your right . only when I have keep myself in durance on purpose 
 to leave you an open field , do not , by way of thank I , come and call 
 I an idiot . " 

 " oh , you claim then that you have make sacrifice ? " 

 " several ! you have never suspect it ? " 

 " if I have , do you suppose I would have allow it ? " cry Roderick . 

 " they be the sacrifice of friendship and they be easily make ; only 
 I do not   enjoy have they throw back in my tooth . " 

 this be , under the circumstance , a sufficiently generous speech ; but 
 Roderick be not in the humor to take it generously . " come , be more 
 definite , " he say . " let I know where it be the shoe have pinch . " 

 Rowland frown ; if Roderick would not take generosity , he should have 
 full justice . " it be a perpetual sacrifice , " he say , " to live with a 
 perfect egotist . " 

 " I be an egotist ? " cry Roderick . 

 " do it never occur to you ? " 

 " an egotist to whom you have make perpetual sacrifice ? " he repeat 
 the word in a singular tone ; a tone that denote neither exactly 
 indignation nor incredulity , but   strange as it may seem   a sudden 
 violent curiosity for news about himself . 

 " you be selfish , " say Rowland ; " you think only of yourself and believe 
 only in yourself . you regard other people only as they play into your 
 own hand . you have always be very frank about it , and the thing 
 seem so mixed up with the temper of your genius and the very structure 
 of your mind , that often one be willing to take the evil with the good 
 and to be thankful that , consider your great talent , you be no 
 bad . but if one believe in you , as I have do , one pay a tax upon 
 it . " 

 Roderick lean his elbow on his knee , clasp his hand together , and 
 cross they , shadewise , over his eye . in this attitude , for a 
 moment , he sit look coldly at his friend . " so I have make you very 
 uncomfortable ? " he go on . 

 " extremely so . " 

 " I have be eager , grasping , obstinate , vain , ungrateful , indifferent , 
 cruel ? " 

 " I have accuse you , mentally , of all these thing , with the exception 
 of vanity . " 

 " you have often hat I ? " 

 " never . I should have part company with you before come to that . " 

 " but you have want to part company , to bid I go my way and be 
 hang ! " 

 " repeatedly . then I have have patience and forgive you . " 

 " forgiven I , eh ? suffer all the while ? " 

 " yes , you may call it suffering . " 

 " why do you never tell I all this before ? " 

 " because my affection be always strong than my resentment ; because 
 I prefer to err on the side of kindness ; because I have , myself , in a 
 measure , launch you in the world and throw you into temptation ; and 
 because nothing short of your unwarrantable aggression just now could 
 have make I say these painful thing . " 

 Roderick pick up a blade of long grass and begin to bite it ; Rowland 
 be puzzle by his expression and manner . they seem strangely cynical ; 
 there be something revolt in his deepening calmness . " I must have 
 be hideous , " Roderick presently resume . 

 " I be not talk for your entertainment , " say Rowland . 

 " of course not . for my edification ! " as Roderick say these word there 
 be not a ray of warmth in his brilliant eye . 

 " I have speak for my own relief , " Rowland go on , " and so that you 
 need never again go so utterly astray as you have do this morning . " 

 " it have be a terrible mistake , then ? " what his tone express be not 
 willful mockery , but a kind of persistent irresponsibility which Rowland 
 find equally exasperating . he answer nothing . 

 " and all this time , " Roderick continue , " you have be in love ? tell I 
 the woman . " 

 Rowland feel an immense desire to give he a visible , palpable pang . 
 " her name be Mary Garland , " he say . 

 apparently he succeed . the surprise be great ; Roderick color as he 
 have never do . " Mary Garland ? Heaven forgive we ! " 

 Rowland observe the " we ; " Roderick throw himself back on the turf . the 
 latter lie for some time star at the sky . at last he spring to his 
 foot , and Rowland rise also , rejoice keenly , it must be confess , in 
 his companion 's confusion . 

 " for how long have this be ? " Roderick demand . 

 " since I first know she . " 

 " two year ! and you have never tell she ? " 

 " never . " 

 " you have tell no one ? " 

 " you be the first person . " 

 " why have you be silent ? " 

 " because of your engagement . " 

 " but you have do your good to keep that up . " 

 " that be another matter ! " 

 " it be very strange ! " say Roderick , presently . " it be like something in 
 a novel . " 

 " we need not   expatiate on it , " say Rowland . " all I wish to do be to 
 rebut your charge that I be an abnormal being . " 

 but still Roderick ponder . " all these month , while I be go on ! I 
 wish you have mention it . " 

 " I act as be necessary , and that be the end of it . " 

 " you have a very high opinion of she ? " 

 " the high . " 

 " I remember now your occasionally express it and my be strike with 
 it . but I never dream you be in love with she . it be a pity she do 
 not   care for you ! " 

 Rowland have make his point and he have no wish to prolong the 
 conversation ; but he have a desire to hear more of this , and he remain 
 silent . 

 " you hope , I suppose , that some day she may ? " 

 " I should not   have offer to say so ; but since you ask I , I do . " 

 " I do not   believe it . she idolize I , and if she never be to see I 
 again she would idolize my memory . " 

 this might be profound insight , and it might be profound fatuity . 
 Rowland turn away ; he could not trust himself to speak . 

 " my indifference , my neglect of she , must have seem to you horrible . 
 altogether , I must have appear simply hideous . " 

 " do you really care , " Rowland ask , " what you appear ? " 

 " certainly . I have be damnably stupid . be not   an artist suppose to be 
 a man of perception ? I be hugely disgusted . " 

 " well , you understand now , and we can start afresh . " 

 " and yet , " say Roderick , " though you have suffer , in a degree , I 
 do not   believe you have suffer so much as some other man would have 
 do . " 

 " very likely not . in such matter quantitative analysis be difficult . " 

 Roderick pick up his stick and stand look at the ground . 
 " nevertheless , I must have seem hideous , " he repeat - " hideous . " he 
 turn away , scowl , and Rowland offer no contradiction . 

 they be both silent for some time , and at last Roderick give a heavy 
 sigh and begin to walk away . " where be you go ? " Rowland then ask . 

 " oh , I do not   care ! to walk ; you have give I something to think 
 of . " this seem a salutary impulse , and yet Rowland feel a nameless 
 perplexity . " to have be so stupid damn I more than anything ! " 
 Roderick go on . " certainly , I can shut up shop now . " 

 Rowland feel in no smile humor , and yet , in spite of himself , he could 
 almost have smile at the very consistency of the fellow . it be egotism 
 still : aesthetic disgust at the graceless contour of his conduct , but 
 never a hint of simple sorrow for the pain he have give . Rowland let 
 he go , and for some moment stand watch he . suddenly Mallet become 
 conscious of a singular and most illogical impulse - a desire to stop 
 he , to have another word with he - not to lose sight of he . he call 
 he and Roderick turn . " I should like to go with you , " say Rowland . 

 " I be fit only to be alone . I be damned ! " 

 " you have well not think of it at all , " Rowland cry , " than think in 
 that way . " 

 " there be only one way . I have be hideous ! " and he break off and 
 march away with his long , elastic step , swing his stick . Rowland 
 watch he and at the end of a moment call to he . Roderick stop 
 and look at he in silence , and then abruptly turn , and disappear 
 below the crest of a hill . 

 Rowland pass the remainder of the day uncomfortably . he be half 
 irritated , half depressed ; he have an insufferable feeling of have be 
 place in the wrong , in spite of his excellent cause . Roderick do not 
 come home to dinner ; but of this , with his passion for brood away the 
 hour on far - off mountain side , he have almost make a habit . Mrs. Hudson 
 appear at the noonday repast with a face which show that Roderick 's 
 demand for money have unseal the fountain of her distress . little 
 Singleton consume an enormous and well - earn dinner . Miss Garland , 
 Rowland observe , have not contribute her scanty assistance to her 
 kinsman 's pursuit of the Princess Casamassima without an effort . the 
 effort be visible in her pale face and her silence ; she look so ill 
 that when they leave the table Rowland feel almost bind to remark upon 
 it . they have come out upon the grass in front of the inn . 

 " I have a headache , " she say . and then suddenly , look about at the 
 menacing sky and motionless air , " it be this horrible day ! " 

 Rowland that afternoon try to write a letter to his cousin Cecilia , 
 but his head and his heart be alike heavy , and he trace upon the 
 paper but a single line . " I believe there be such a thing as be too 
 reasonable . but when once the habit be form , what be one to do ? " he 
 have occasion to use his key and he feel for they in his pocket ; they 
 be miss , and he remember that he have leave they lie on the 
 hill - top where he have have his talk with Roderick . he go forth in 
 search of they and find they where he have throw they . he fling 
 himself down in the same place again ; he feel indisposed to walk . he 
 be conscious that his mood have vastly change since the morning ; 
 his extraordinary , acute sense of his right have be replace by the 
 familiar , chronic sense of his duty . only , his duty now seem 
 impracticable ; he turn over and bury his face in his arm . he lie 
 so a long time , think of many thing ; the sum of they all be that 
 Roderick have beat he . at last he be startle by an extraordinary 
 sound ; it take he a moment to perceive that it be a portentous growl 
 of thunder . he rouse himself and see that the whole face of the sky have 
 alter . the cloud that have hang motionless all day be move from 
 their station , and get into position , as it be , for a battle . the 
 wind be rise ; the sallow vapor be turn dark and consolidate 
 their mass . it be a striking spectacle , but Rowland judge well to 
 observe it briefly , as a storm be evidently imminent . he take his way 
 down to the inn and find Singleton still at his post , profit by the 
 last of the rapidly - fail light to finish his study , and yet at the 
 same time take rapid note of the actual condition of the cloud . 

 " we be go to have a most interesting storm , " the little painter 
 gleefully cry . " I should like awfully to do it . " 

 Rowland adjure he to pack up his tool and decamp , and repair to 
 the house . the air by this time have become portentously dark , and the 
 thunder be incessant and tremendous ; in the midst of it the lightning 
 flash and vanish , like the treble shrilling upon the bass . the 
 innkeeper and his servant have crowd to the doorway , and be look 
 at the scene with face which seem a proof that it be unprecedented . 
 as Rowland approach , the group divide , to let some one pass from 
 within , and Mrs. Hudson come forth , as white as a corpse and trembling 
 in every limb . 

 " my boy , my boy , where be my boy ? " she cry . " Mr. Mallet , why be you 
 here without he ? bring he to I ! " 

 " have no one see Mr. Hudson ? " Rowland ask of the other . " have he not 
 return ? " 

 each one shake his head and look grave , and Rowland attempt to 
 reassure Mrs. Hudson by say that of course he have take refuge in a 
 chalet . 

 " go and find he , go and find he ! " she cry , insanely . " do not   stand 
 there and talk , or I shall die ! " it be now as dark as evening , and 
 Rowland could just distinguish the figure of Singleton scampering 
 homeward with his box and easel . " and where be Mary ? " Mrs. Hudson go 
 on ; " what in mercy 's name have become of she ? Mr. Mallet , why do you 
 ever bring we here ? " 

 there come a prodigious flash of lightning , and the limitless tumult 
 about they turn clear than midsummer noonday . the brightness last 
 long enough to enable Rowland to see a woman 's figure on the top of 
 an eminence near the house . it be Mary Garland , question the lurid 
 darkness for Roderick . Rowland spring out to interrupt her vigil , but in 
 a moment he encounter she , retreat . he seize her hand and hurry 
 she to the house , where , as soon as she step into the cover 
 gallery , Mrs. Hudson fall upon she with frantic lamentation . 

 " do you see nothing , - nothing ? " she cry . " tell Mr. Mallet he must go 
 and find he , with some man , some light , some wrapping . go , go , go , 
 sir ! in mercy , go ! " 

 Rowland be extremely perturb by the poor lady 's vociferous folly , for 
 he deem her anxiety superfluous . he have offer his suggestion with 
 sincerity ; nothing be more probable than that Roderick have find 
 shelter in a herdsman 's cabin . these be numerous on the neighboring 
 mountain , and the storm have give fair warning of its approach . Miss 
 Garland stand there very pale , say nothing , but look at he . he 
 expect that she would check her cousin 's importunity . " could you find 
 he ? " she suddenly ask . " would it be of use ? " 

 the question seem to he a flash intenser than the lightning that be 
 rake the sky before they . it shatter his dream that he weigh in 
 the scale ! but before he could answer , the full fury of the storm be 
 upon they ; the rain descend in sound torrent . every one fall back 
 into the house . there have be no time to light lamp , and in the little 
 uncarpeted parlor , in the unnatural darkness , Rowland feel Mary 's hand 
 upon his arm . for a moment it have an eloquent pressure ; it seem to 
 retract her senseless challenge , and to say that she believe , for 
 Roderick , what he believe . but nevertheless , think Rowland , the cry 
 have come , her heart have speak ; her first impulse have be to sacrifice 
 he . he have be uncertain before ; here , at least , be the comfort of 
 certainty ! 

 it must be confess , however , that the certainty in question do little 
 to enliven the gloom of that formidable evening . there be a noisy 
 crowd about he in the room - noisy even with the accompaniment of the 
 continual thunder - peal ; lodger and servant , chattering , shuffle , 
 and bustling , and annoy he equally by make too light of the 
 tempest and by vociferate their alarm . in the disorder , it be some 
 time before a lamp be light , and the first thing he see , as it be 
 swing from the ceiling , be the white face of Mrs. Hudson , who be be 
 carry out of the room in a swoon by two stout maid - servant , with Mary 
 Garland force a passage . he render what help he could , but when they 
 have lay the poor woman on her bed , Miss Garland motion he away . 

 " I think you make she bad , " she say . 

 Rowland go to his own chamber . the partition in swiss mountain - inn 
 be thin , and from time to time he hear Mrs. Hudson moaning , three 
 room off . consider its great fury , the storm take long to expend 
 itself ; it be upwards of three hour before the thunder cease . but 
 even then the rain continue to fall heavily , and the night , which have 
 come on , be impenetrably black . this last till near midnight . Rowland 
 think of Mary Garland 's challenge in the porch , but he think even 
 more that , although the fetid interior of a high - nestle chalet may 
 offer a convenient refuge from an Alpine tempest , there be no possible 
 music in the universe so sweet as the sound of Roderick 's voice . at 
 midnight , through his dripping window - pane , he see a star , and he 
 immediately go downstairs and out into the gallery . the rain have 
 cease , the cloud - mass be dissever here and there , and several 
 star be visible . in a few minute he hear a step behind he , and , 
 turning , see Miss Garland . he ask about Mrs. Hudson and learn that 
 she be sleep , exhaust by her fruitless lamentation . Miss Garland 
 keep scan the darkness , but she say nothing to cast doubt on 
 Roderick 's have find a refuge . Rowland notice it . " this also have I 
 guarantee ! " he say to himself . there be something that Mary wish to 
 learn , and a question presently reveal it . 

 " what make he start on a long walk so suddenly ? " she ask . " I see he 
 at eleven o'clock , and then he mean to go to Engelberg , and sleep . " 

 " on his way to interlaken ? " Rowland say . 

 " yes , " she answer , under cover of the darkness . 

 " we have some talk , " say Rowland , " and he seem , for the day , to have 
 give up Interlaken . " 

 " do you dissuade he ? " 

 " not exactly . we discuss another question , which , for the time , 
 supersede his plan . " 

 Miss Garland be silent . then - " may I ask whether your discussion be 
 violent ? " she say . 

 " I be afraid it be agreeable to neither of we . " 

 " and Roderick leave you in - in irritation ? " 

 " I offer he my company on his walk . he decline it . " 

 Miss Garland pace slowly to the end of the gallery and then come back . 
 " if he have go to Engelberg , " she say , " he would have reach the 
 hotel before the storm begin . " 

 Rowland feel a sudden explosion of ferocity . " oh , if you like , " he 
 cry , " he can start for interlaken as soon as he come back ! " 

 but she do not even notice his wrath . " will he come back early ? " she 
 go on . 

 " we may suppose so . " 

 " he will know how anxious we be , and he will start with the first 
 light ! " 

 Rowland be on the point of declare that Roderick 's readiness to throw 
 himself into the feeling of other make this extremely probable ; but he 
 check himself and say , simply , " I expect he at sunrise . " 

 Miss Garland bent her eye once more upon the irresponsive darkness , and 
 then , in silence , go into the house . Rowland , it must be aver , in 
 spite of his resolution not to be nervous , find no sleep that night . 
 when the early dawn begin to tremble in the east , he come forth again 
 into the open air . the storm have completely purge the atmosphere , and 
 the day give promise of cloudless splendor . Rowland watch the early 
 sun - shafts slowly reach high , and remember that if Roderick 
 do not come back to breakfast , there be two thing to be take 
 into account . one be the heaviness of the soil on the mountain - side , 
 saturate with the rain ; this would make he walk slowly : the other 
 be the fact that , speak without irony , he be not remarkable for 
 throw himself into the sentiment of other . Breakfast , at the inn , 
 be early , and by breakfast - time Roderick have not appear . then Rowland 
 admit that he be nervous . neither Mrs. Hudson nor Miss Garland have 
 leave their apartment ; Rowland have a mental vision of they sit there 
 pray and listen ; he have no desire to see they more directly . there 
 be a couple of man who hang about the inn as guide for the ascent of 
 the Titlis ; Rowland send each of they forth in a different direction , 
 to ask the news of Roderick at every chalet door within a morning 's 
 walk . then he call Sam Singleton , whose peregrination have make he an 
 excellent mountaineer , and whose zeal and sympathy be now unbounded , 
 and the two start together on a voyage of research . by the time 
 they have lose sight of the inn , Rowland be oblige to confess that , 
 decidedly , Roderick have have time to come back . 

 he wander about for several hour , but he find only the sunny 
 stillness of the mountain - side . before long he part company with 
 Singleton , who , to his suggestion that separation would multiply their 
 resource , assent with a silent , frighten look which reflect too 
 vividly his own rapidly - dawn thought . the day be magnificent ; the 
 sun be everywhere ; the storm have lash the low slope into a deep 
 flush of autumnal color , and the snow - peak rear themselves against 
 the near horizon in glare block and dazzle spire . Rowland make his 
 way to several chalet , but most of they be empty . he thump at their 
 low , foul door with a kind of nervous , savage anger ; he challenge the 
 stupid silence to tell he something about his friend . some of these 
 place have evidently not be open in month . the silence everywhere 
 be horrible ; it seem to mock at his impatience and to be a conscious 
 symbol of calamity . in the midst of it , at the door of one of the 
 chalet , quite alone , sit a hideous cretin , who grin at Rowland over 
 his goitre when , hardly know what he do , he question he . the 
 creature 's family be scatter on the mountain - side ; he could give 
 Rowland no help to find they . Rowland climb into many awkward 
 place , and skirt , intently and peeringly , many an ugly chasm and 
 steep - dropping ledge . but the sun , as I have say , be everywhere ; it 
 illumine the deep place over which , not know where to turn next , 
 he halt and linger , and show he nothing but the stony Alpine 
 void - nothing so human even as death . at noon he pause in his quest and 
 sit down on a stone ; the conviction be press upon he that the bad 
 that be now possible be true . he suspend his search ; he be afraid 
 to go on . he sit there for an hour , sick to the depth of his soul . 
 without his knowing why , several thing , chiefly trivial , that have 
 happen during the last two year and that he have quite forget , 
 become vividly present to his mind . he be arouse at last by the sound 
 of a stone dislodge near by , which rattle down the mountain . in a 
 moment , on a steep , rocky slope opposite to he , he behold a figure 
 cautiously descend - a figure which be not roderick . it be 
 Singleton , who have see he and begin to beckon to he . 

 " come down - come down ! " cry the painter , steadily make his own way 
 down . Rowland see that as he move , and even as he select his foothold 
 and watch his step , he be look at something at the bottom of the 
 cliff . this be a great rugged wall which have fall backward from 
 the perpendicular , and the descent , though difficult , be with care 
 sufficiently practicable . 

 " what do you see ? " cry Rowland . 

 Singleton stop , look across at he and seem to hesitate ; then , 
 " come down - come down ! " he simply repeat . 

 Rowland 's course be also a steep descent , and he attack it so 
 precipitately that he afterwards marvel he have not break his neck . 
 it be a ten minute ' headlong scramble . half - way down he see something 
 that make he dizzy ; he see what Singleton have see . in the gorge below 
 they a vague white mass lie tumble upon the stone . he let himself go , 
 blindly , fiercely . Singleton have reach the rocky bottom of the ravine 
 before he , and have bound forward and fall upon his knee . Rowland 
 overtake he and his own leg collapse . the thing that yesterday be 
 his friend lie before he as the chance of the last breath have leave it , 
 and out of it Roderick 's face star upward , open - eye , at the sky . 

 he have fall from a great height , but he be singularly little 
 disfigure . the rain have spend its torrent upon he , and his clothe 
 and hair be as wet as if the billow of the ocean have fling he upon 
 the strand . an attempt to move he would show some hideous fracture , 
 some horrible physical dishonor ; but what Rowland see on first look 
 at he be only a strangely serene expression of life . the eye be 
 dead , but in a short time , when Rowland have close they , the whole 
 face seem to awake . the rain have wash away all blood ; it be as if 
 Violence , have do her work , have steal away in shame . Roderick 's 
 face might have sham she ; it look admirably handsome . 

 " he be a beautiful man ! " say Singleton . 

 they look up through their horror at the cliff from which he have 
 apparently fall , and which lift its blank and stony face above 
 he , with no care now but to drink the sunshine on which his eye be 
 closed , and then Rowland have an immense outbreak of pity and anguish . at 
 last they speak of carry he back to the inn . " there must be three or 
 four man , " Rowland say , " and they must be bring here quickly . I have 
 not the least idea where we be . " 

 " we be at about three hour ' walk from home , " say Singleton . " I will 
 go for help ; I can find my way . " 

 " remember , " say Rowland , " whom you will have to face . " 

 " I remember , " the excellent fellow answer . " there be nothing I could 
 ever do for he in life ; I will do what I can now . " 

 he go off , and Rowland stay there alone . he watch for seven long 
 hour , and his vigil be forever memorable . the most rational of man be 
 for an hour the most passionate . he revile himself with transcendent 
 bitterness , he accuse himself of cruelty and injustice , he would 
 have lain down there in Roderick 's place to unsay the word that have 
 yesterday drive he forth on his lonely ramble . roderick have be fond 
 of say that there be such thing as necessary folly , and Rowland 
 be now prove it . at last he grow almost used to the dumb exultation 
 of the cliff above he . he see that Roderick be a mass of hideous 
 injury , and he try to understand what have happen . not that it help 
 he ; before that confound mortality one hypothesis after another 
 falter and swoon away . Roderick 's passionate walk have carry he 
 far and high than he know ; he have outstay , supposably , the first 
 menace of the storm , and perhaps even find a defiant entertainment 
 in watch it . perhaps he have simply lose himself . the tempest have 
 overtake he , and when he try to return , it be too late . he 
 have attempt to descend the cliff in the darkness , he have make the 
 inevitable slip , and whether he have fall fifty foot or three hundred 
 little matter . the condition of his body indicate the short fall . 
 now that all be over , Rowland understand how exclusively , for two 
 year , Roderick have fill his life . his occupation be go . 

 Singleton come back with four man - one of they the landlord of the inn . 
 they have form a sort of rude bi of the frame of a chaise a porteur , 
 and by take a very round - about course homeward be able to follow a 
 tolerably level path and carry their burden with a certain decency . to 
 Rowland it seem as if the little procession would never reach the inn ; 
 but as they draw near it he would have give his right hand for a long 
 delay . the people of the inn come forward to meet they , in a little 
 silent , solemn convoy . in the doorway , cling together , appear the 
 two bereaved woman . Mrs. Hudson totter forward with outstretched hand 
 and the expression of a blind person ; but before she reach her son , 
 Mary Garland have rush past she , and , in the face of the staring , 
 pitying , awe - stricken crowd , have fling herself , with the magnificent 
 movement of one whose right be supreme , and with a loud , tremendous 
 cry , upon the senseless vestige of her love . 

 that cry still live in Rowland 's ear . it interpose , persistently , 
 against the reflection that when he sometimes - very rarely - see she , 
 she be unreservedly kind to he ; against the memory that during the 
 dreary journey back to America , make of course with his assistance , 
 there be a great frankness in her gratitude , a great gratitude in her 
 frankness . Miss Garland live with Mrs. Hudson , at Northampton , where 
 Rowland visit his cousin Cecilia more frequently than of old . when he 
 call upon Miss Garland he never see Mrs. Hudson . Cecilia , who , have 
 her shrewd impression that he come to see Miss Garland as much as to 
 see herself , do not feel obliged to seem unduly flattered , call he , 
 whenever he reappear , the most restless of mortal . but he always say 
 to she in answer , " no , I assure you I be the most patient ! " 
