the TRAGIC MUSE 
 BOOK first 




 I 


 the people of France have make it no secret that those of England , as a 
 general thing , be to their perception an inexpressive and speechless 
 race , perpendicular and unsociable , unaddicted to enrich any bareness 
 of contact with verbal or other embroidery . this view might have derive 
 encouragement , a few year ago , in Paris , from the manner in which four 
 person sit together in silence , one fine day about noon , in the garden , 
 as it be call , of the Palais de l'Industrie - the central court of the 
 great glaze bazaar where , among plant and parterre , gravelled walk 
 and thin fountain , be range the figure and group , the monument and 
 bust , which form in the annual exhibition of the Salon the department 
 of statuary . the spirit of observation be naturally high at the Salon , 
 quicken by a thousand artful or artless appeal , but it need have put 
 forth no great intensity to take in the character I mention . as a 
 solicitation of the eye on definite ground these visitor too 
 constitute a successful plastic fact ; and even the most superficial 
 observer would have mark they as product of an insular neighbourhood , 
 representative of that tweed - and - waterproof class with which , on the 
 recurrent occasion when the English turn out for a holiday - Christmas 
 and Easter , Whitsuntide and the autumn - Paris besprinkle itself at a 
 night 's notice . they have about they the indefinable professional look 
 of the british traveller abroad ; the air of preparation for exposure , 
 material and moral , which be so oddly combine with the serene 
 revelation of security and of persistence , and which excite , accord 
 to individual susceptibility , the ire or the admiration of foreign 
 community . they be the more unmistakable as they present mainly 
 the happy aspect of the energetic race to which they have the honour 
 to belong . the fresh diffused light of the Salon make they clear and 
 important ; they be finished creation , in their way , and , range there 
 motionless on their green bench , be almost as much on exhibition as if 
 they have be hang on the line . 

 three lady and a young man , they be obviously a family - a mother , 
 two daughter and a son ; a circumstance which have the effect at once of 
 make each member of the group doubly typical and of help to account 
 for their fine taciturnity . they be not , with each other , on term of 
 ceremony , and also be probably fatigue with their course among the 
 picture , the room on the upper floor . their attitude , on the part of 
 visitor who have superior feature even if they might appear to some 
 passer - by to have neglect a fine opportunity for complete these 
 feature with an expression , be after all a kind of tribute to the 
 state of exhaustion , of bewilderment , to which the genius of France be 
 still capable of reduce the proud . 

 " En v'la des abrutis ! " more than one of their fellow - gazer might have 
 be hear to exclaim ; and certain it be that there be something 
 depressed and discourage in this interesting group , who sit look 
 vaguely before they , not notice the life of the place , somewhat as if 
 each have a private anxiety . it might have be finely guess , however , 
 that though on many question they be closely unite this present 
 anxiety be not the same for each . if they look grave , moreover , this 
 be doubtless partly the result of their all be dress in such 
 mourning as tell of a recent bereavement . the eld of the three lady 
 have indeed a face of a fine austere mould which would have be move to 
 gaiety only by some force more insidious than any she be likely to 
 recognise in Paris . cold , still , and considerably wear , it be neither 
 stupid nor hard - it be firm , narrow and sharp . this competent matron , 
 acquaint evidently with grief but not weaken by it , have a high 
 forehead to which the quality of the skin give a singular polish - it 
 glitter even when see at a distance ; a nose which achieve a high 
 free curve ; and a tendency to throw back her head and carry it well 
 above she , as if to disengage it from the possible entanglement of the 
 rest of her person . if you have see her walk you would have feel she to 
 tread the earth after a fashion suggest that in a world where she have 
 long since discover that one could not   have one 's own way one could 
 never tell what annoying aggression might take place , so that it be 
 well , from hour to hour , to save what one could . Lady Agnes save she 
 head , her white triangular forehead , over which her close - crinkle 
 flaxen hair , reproduce in different shade in her child , make a 
 loop silken canopy like the marquee at a garden - party . her daughter 
 be as tall as herself - that be visible even as they sit there - and 
 one of they , the young evidently , altogether pretty ; a straight , 
 slender , grey - eyed english girl of the sort who show " good " figure and 
 fresh complexion . the sister , who be not pretty , be also straight and 
 slender and grey - eye . but the grey in this case be not so pure , nor 
 be the straightness and the slenderness so maidenly . the brother of 
 these young lady have take off his hat as if he feel the air of the 
 summer day heavy in the great pavilion . he be a lean , strong , 
 clear - face youth , with a form nose and thick light - brown hair which 
 lie continuously and profusely back from his forehead , so that to smooth 
 it from the brow to the neck but a single movement of the hand be 
 require . I can not describe he well than by say that he be the 
 sort of young Englishman who look particularly well in strange land 
 and whose general aspect - his inch , his limb , his friendly eye , the 
 modulation of his voice , the cleanness of his flesh - tint and the 
 fashion of his garment - excite on the part of those who encounter he 
 in far country on the ground of a common speech a delightful sympathy 
 of race . this sympathy may sometimes be qualified by the see limit of 
 his apprehension , but it almost revel as such horizon recede . we shall 
 see quickly enough how accurate a measure it might have take of 
 Nicholas Dormer . there be food for suspicion perhaps in the wandering 
 blankness that sit at moment in his eye , as if he have no attention at 
 all , not the least in the world , at his command ; but it be no more than 
 just to add without delay that this discourage symptom be know among 
 those who like he by the indulgent name of dreaminess . by his mother 
 and sister , for instance , his dreaminess be constantly note . he be 
 the more welcome to the benefit of such an interpretation as there be 
 always hold to be something engage in the combination of the muscular 
 and the musing , the mildness of strength . 

 after some time , an interval during which these good people might have 
 appear to have come , individually , to the Palais de l'Industrie much 
 less to see the work of art than to think over their domestic affair , 
 the young man , rouse himself from his reverie , address one of the 
 girl . 

 " I say , Biddy , why should we sit mop here all day ? come and take a 
 turn about with I . " 

 his young sister , while he get up , lean forward a little , look 
 round she , but she give for the moment no further sign of comply with 
 his invitation . 

 " where shall we find you , then , if Peter come ? " ask the other Miss 
 Dormer , make no movement at all . 

 " I daresay Peter will not   come . he will leave we here to cool our heel . " 

 " oh Nick dear ! " Biddy exclaim in a small sweet voice of protest . it 
 be plainly her theory that Peter would come , and even a little her fond 
 fear that she might miss he should she quit that spot . 

 " we shall come back in a quarter of an hour . really I must look at these 
 thing , " Nick declare , turn his face to a marble group which stand 
 near they on the right - a man with the skin of a beast round his loin , 
 tussle with a naked woman in some primitive effort of courtship or 
 capture . 

 Lady Agnes follow the direction of her son 's eye and then observe : 
 " everything seem very dreadful . I should think Biddy have well sit 
 still . have not   she see enough horror up above ? " 

 " I daresay that if Peter come Julia'll be with he , " the eld girl 
 remark irrelevantly . 

 " well then he can take Julia about . that will be more proper , " say Lady 
 Agnes . 

 " Mother dear , she do not   care a rap about art . it be a fearful bore 
 look at fine thing with Julia , " Nick return . 

 " will not   you go with he , grace ? " - and Biddy appeal to her sister . 

 " I think she have awfully good taste ! " Grace exclaim , not answer 
 this inquiry . 

 " do not   say nasty thing about she ! " Lady Agnes break out solemnly to 
 her son after rest her eye on he a moment with an air of reluctant 
 reprobation . 

 " I say nothing but what she would say herself , " the young man urge . " about 
 some thing she have very good taste , but about this kind of thing she 
 have no taste at all . " 

 " that be well , I think , " say Lady Agnes , turn her eye again to the 
 " kind of thing " her son appear to designate . 

 " she be awfully clever - awfully ! " grace go on with decision . 

 " awfully , awfully ! " her brother repeat , stand in front of she and 
 smile down at she . 

 " you be nasty , Nick . you know you be , " say the young lady , but more 
 in sorrow than in anger . 

 Biddy get up at this , as if the accusatory tone prompt she to place 
 herself generously at his side . " might not   you go and order lunch - in 
 that place , you know ? " she ask of her mother . " then we would come back 
 when it be ready . " 

 " my dear child , I can not   order lunch , " Lady Agnes reply with a cold 
 impatience which seem to intimate that she have problem far more 
 important than those of victual to contend with . 

 " then perhaps Peter will if he come . I be sure he be up in everything of 
 that sort . " 

 " oh hang Peter ! " Nick exclaim . " leave he out of account , and do 
 order lunch , mother ; but not cold beef and pickle . " 

 " I must say - about he - you be not nice , " Biddy venture to remark to 
 her brother , hesitate and even blush a little . 

 " you make up for it , my dear , " the young man answer , give she 
 chin - a very charming , rotund , little chin - a friendly whisk with his 
 forefinger . 

 " I can not   imagine what you have   get against he , " her ladyship say 
 gravely . 

 " dear mother , it be disappointed fondness , " Nick argue . " they will not 
 answer one 's note ; they will not   let one know where they be nor what to 
 expect . ' Hell have no fury like a woman scorn ' ; nor like a man 
 either . " 

 " Peter have such a tremendous lot to do - it be a very busy time at the 
 embassy ; there be sure to be reason , " Biddy explain with her pretty 
 eye . 

 " reason enough , no doubt ! " say Lady Agnes - who accompany these word 
 with an ambiguous sigh , however , as if in Paris even the good reason 
 would naturally be bad one . 

 " do not   Julia write to you , do not   she answer you the very day ? " Grace 
 ask , look at Nick as if she be the bold one . 

 he wait , return her glance with a certain severity . " what do you 
 know about my correspondence ? no doubt I ask too much , " he go on ; " I be 
 so attach to they . dear old Peter , dear old Julia ! " 

 " she be young than you , my dear ! " cry the eld girl , still resolute . 

 " yes , nineteen day . " 

 " I be glad you know her birthday . " 

 " she know your ; she always give you something , " Lady Agnes remind 
 her son . 

 " her taste be good then , be not   it , Nick ? " Grace Dormer continue . 

 " she make charming present ; but , dear mother , it be not   her taste . 
 it be her husband 's . " 

 " how her husband 's ? " 

 " the beautiful object of which she dispose so freely be the thing he 
 collect for year laboriously , devotedly , poor man ! " 

 " she dispose of they to you , but not to other , " say Lady Agnes . " but 
 that be all right , " she add , as if this might have be take for a 
 complaint of the limitation of Julia 's bounty . " she have to select among 
 so many , and that be a proof of taste , " her ladyship pursue . 

 " you can not   say she do not   choose lovely one , " Grace remark to her 
 brother in a tone of some triumph . 

 " my dear , they be all lovely . George Dallow 's judgement be so sure , he 
 be incapable of make a mistake , " Nicholas Dormer return . 

 " I do not   see how you can talk of he , he be dreadful , " say Lady Agnes . 

 " my dear , if he be good enough for Julia to marry he be good enough for 
 we to talk of . " 

 " she do he a very great honour . " 

 " I daresay , but he be not unworthy of it . no such enlighten 
 collection of beautiful object have be make in England in our time . " 

 " you think too much of beautiful object ! " Lady Agnes sigh . 

 " I think you be just now lament that I think too little . " 

 " it be very nice - his have leave Julia so well off , " Biddy interpose 
 soothingly , as if she foresaw a tangle . 

 " he treat she en grand seigneur , absolutely , " Nick go on . 

 " he use to look greasy , all the same " - grace bore on it with a dull 
 weight . " his name ought to have be Tallow . " 

 " you be not say what Julia would like , if that be what you be try 
 to say , " her brother observe . 

 " do not   be vulgar , Grace , " say Lady Agnes . 

 " I know Peter Sherringham 's birthday ! " Biddy break out innocently , as a 
 pacific diversion . she have pass her hand into Nick 's arm , to signify 
 her readiness to go with he , while she scan the remoter reach of 
 the garden as if it have occur to she that to direct their step in 
 some such sense might after all be the short way to get at Peter . 

 " he be too much old than you , my dear , " Grace answer without 
 encouragement . 

 " that be why I have   notice it - he be thirty - four . do you call that too 
 old ? I do not   care for slobber infant ! " Biddy cry . 

 " do not   be vulgar , " Lady Agnes enjoin again . 

 " come , Bid , we will go and be vulgar together ; for that be what we be , I be 
 afraid , " her brother say to she . " we will go and look at all these low 
 work of art . " 

 " do you really think it be necessary to the child 's development ? " Lady 
 Agnes demand as the pair turn away . and then while her son , strike 
 as by a challenge , pause , linger a moment with his little sister on 
 his arm : " what we have   be through this morning in this place , and what 
 you have   parade before our eye - the murder , the torture , all kind of 
 disease and indecency ! " 

 Nick look at his mother as if this sudden protest surprise he , but 
 as if also there be lurk explanation of it which he quickly 
 guess . her resentment have the effect not so much of animate her cold 
 face as of make it colder , less expressive , though visibly prouder . 
 " ah dear mother , do not   do the british matron ! " he reply 
 good - humouredly . 

 " british matron 's soon say ! I do not   know what they be come to . " 

 " how odd that you should have be strike only with the disagreeable 
 thing when , for myself , I have   feel it to be most interesting , the most 
 suggestive morning I have   pass for ever so many month ! " 

 " oh Nick , Nick ! " Lady Agnes cry with a strange depth of feeling . 

 " I like they well in London - they be much less unpleasant , " say Grace 
 Dormer . 

 " they be thing you can look at , " her ladyship go on . " we certainly 
 make the well show . " 

 " the subject do not   matter , it be the treatment , the treatment ! " Biddy 
 protest in a voice like the tinkle of a silver bell . 

 " poor little Bid ! " - her brother break into a laugh . 

 " how can I learn to model , mamma dear , if I do not   look at thing and if 
 I do not   study they ? " the girl continue . 

 this question pass unheeded , and Nicholas Dormer say to his mother , 
 more seriously , but with a certain kind explicitness , as if he could 
 make a particular allowance : " this place be an immense stimulus to I ; 
 it refresh I , excite I - it be such an exhibition of artistic life . 
 it be full of idea , full of refinement ; it give one such an impression 
 of artistic experience . they try everything , they feel everything . while 
 you be look at the murder , apparently , I observe an immense deal 
 of curious and interesting work . there be too many of they , poor 
 devil ; so many who must make their way , who must attract attention . 
 some of they can only taper fort , stand on their head , turn 
 somersault or commit deed of violence , to make people notice they . 
 after that , no doubt , a good many will be quieter . but I do not   know ; 
 to - day I be in an appreciative mood - I feel indulgent even to they : they 
 give I an impression of intelligence , of eager observation . all art be 
 one - remember that , Biddy dear , " the young man continue , smile down 
 from his height . " it be the same great many - headed effort , and any ground 
 that be gain by an individual , any spark that be strike in any province , 
 be of use and of suggestion to all the other . we be all in the same 
 boat . " 

 " ' we , ' do you say , my dear ? be you really set up for an artist ? " 
 Lady Agnes ask . 

 Nick just hesitate . " I be speak for Biddy . " 

 " but you be one , Nick - you be ! " the girl cry . 

 Lady Agnes look for an instant as if she be go to say once more 
 " do not   be vulgar ! " but she suppress these word , have she intend 
 they , and utter sound , few in number and not completely articulate , 
 to the effect that she hat talk about art . while her son speak she 
 have watch he as if fail to follow ; yet something in the tone of 
 her exclamation hint that she have understand he but too well . 

 " we be all in the same boat , " Biddy repeat with cheerful zeal . 

 " not I , if you please ! " Lady Agnes reply . " it be horrid messy work , 
 your modelling . " 

 " ah but look at the result ! " say the girl eagerly - glance about at 
 the monument in the garden as if in regard even to they she be , 
 through that unity of art her brother have just proclaim , in some 
 degree an effective cause . 

 " there be a great deal be do here - a real vitality , " Nicholas Dormer 
 go on to his mother in the same reasonable informing way . " some of 
 these fellow go very far . " 

 " they do indeed ! " say Lady Agnes . 

 " I be fond of young school - like this movement in sculpture , " Nick 
 insist with his slightly provoke serenity . 

 " they be old enough to know well ! " 

 " may not   I look , mamma ? it be necessary to my development , " Biddy 
 declare . 

 " you may do as you like , " say Lady Agnes with dignity . 

 " she ought to see good work , you know , " the young man go on . 

 " I leave it to your sense of responsibility . " this statement be 
 somewhat majestic , and for a moment evidently it tempt Nick , almost 
 provoke he , or at any rate suggest to he an occasion for some 
 pronouncement he have have on his mind . apparently , however , he judge the 
 time on the whole not quite right , and his sister Grace interpose with 
 the inquiry - 

 " please , mamma , be we never go to lunch ? " 

 " ah mother , mother ! " the young man murmur in a troubled way , look 
 down at she with a deep fold in his forehead . 

 for Lady Agnes also , as she return his look , it seem an occasion ; 
 but with this difference that she have no hesitation in take advantage 
 of it . she be encourage by his slight embarrassment , for ordinarily 
 Nick be not embarrassed . " you use to have so much sense of 
 responsibility , " she pursue ; " but sometimes I do not   know what have 
 become of it - it seem all , all go ! " 

 " ah mother , mother ! " he exclaim again - as if there be so many thing 
 to say that it be impossible to choose . but now he step close , bent 
 over she and in spite of the publicity of their situation give she a 
 quick expressive kiss . the foreign observer whom I take for grant in 
 begin to sketch this scene would have have to admit that the rigid 
 english family have after all a capacity for emotion . Grace Dormer indeed 
 look round she to see if at this moment they be notice . she judge 
 with satisfaction that they have escape . 




 II 


 Nick Dormer walk away with Biddy , but he have not go far before he 
 stop in front of a clever bust , where his mother , in the distance , 
 see he play in the air with his hand , carry out by this gesture , 
 which presumably be applausive , some critical remark he have make to his 
 sister . Lady Agnes raise her glass to her eye by the long handle to 
 which rather a clank chain be attach , perceive that the bust 
 represent an ugly old man with a bald head ; at which her ladyship 
 indefinitely sigh , though it be not apparent in what way such an 
 object could be detrimental to her daughter . Nick pass on and quickly 
 pause again ; this time , his mother discern , before the marble image 
 of a strange grimace woman . presently she lose sight of he ; he 
 wander behind thing , look at they all round . 

 " I ought to get plenty of idea for my modelling , ought not   I , Nick ? " his 
 sister put to he after a moment . 

 " ah my poor child , what shall I say ? " 

 " do not   you think I have   any capacity for idea ? " the girl continue 
 ruefully . 

 " lot of they , no doubt . but the capacity for apply they , for put 
 they into practice - how much of that have you ? " 

 " how can I tell till I try ? " 

 " what do you mean by try , Biddy dear ? " 

 " why you know - you have   see I . " 

 " do you call that try ? " her brother amusedly demand . 

 " ah Nick ! " she say with sensibility . but then with more spirit : " and 
 please what do you call it ? " 

 " well , this for instance be a good case . " and her companion point to 
 another bust - a head of a young man in terra - cotta , at which they have 
 just arrive ; a modern young man to whom , with his thick neck , his 
 little cap and his wide ring of dense curl , the artist have give the 
 air of some sturdy Florentine of the time of Lorenzo . 

 Biddy look at the image a moment . " ah that be not try ; that be 
 succeed . " 

 " not altogether ; it be only try seriously . " 

 " well , why should not   I be serious ? " 

 " mother would not   like it . she have inherit the fine old superstition 
 that art 's pardonable only so long as it be bad - so long as it be do at 
 odd hour , for a little distraction , like a game of tennis or of whist . 
 the only thing that can justify it , the effort to carry it as far as one 
 can   which you can not   do without time and singleness of purpose , she 
 regard as just the dangerous , the criminal element . it be the oddest 
 hind - part - before view , the droll immorality . " 

 " she do not   want one to be professional , " Biddy return as if she 
 could do justice to every system . 

 " well leave it alone then . there be always duffer enough . " 

 " I do not   want to be a duffer , " Biddy say . " but I think you encourage 
 I . " 

 " so I do , my poor child . it be only to encourage myself . " 

 " with your own work - your painting ? " 

 " with my futile , my ill - star endeavour . Union be strength - so that 
 we might present a wide front , a large surface of resistance . " 

 Biddy for a while say nothing and they continue their tour of 
 observation . she notice how he pass over some thing quickly , his 
 first glance sufficing to show he if they be worth another , and then 
 recognise in a moment the figure that make some appeal . his tone 
 puzzle but his certainty of eye impress she , and she feel what a 
 difference there be yet between they - how much long in every case she 
 would have take to discriminate . she be aware of how little she could 
 judge of the value of a thing till she have look at it ten minute ; 
 indeed modest little Biddy be compel privately to add " and often not 
 even then . " she be mystify , as I say - Nick be often mystify , it 
 be his only fault - but one thing be definite : her brother have high 
 ability . it be the consciousness of this that make she bring out at 
 last : " I do not   so much care whether or no I please mamma , if I please 
 you . " 

 " oh do not   lean on I . I be a wretched break reed - I be no use really ! " 
 he promptly admonish she . 

 " do you mean you be a duffer ? " Biddy ask in alarm . 

 " frightful , frightful ! " 

 " so that you intend to give up your work - to let it alone , as you advise 
  I ? " 

 " it have never be my work , all that business , Biddy . if it have it would 
 be different . I should stick to it . " 

 " and you will not   stick to it ? " the girl say , stand before he 
 open - eyed . 

 her brother look into her eye a moment , and she have a compunction ; 
 she fear she be indiscreet and be worry he . " your question be 
 much simple than the element out of which my answer should come . " 

 " a great talent - what be simple than that ? " 

 " one excellent thing , dear Biddy : no talent at all ! " 

 " well , yours be so real you can not   help it . " 

 " we shall see , we shall see , " say Nick Dormer . " let we go look at that 
 big group . " 

 " we shall see if your talent 's real ? " Biddy go on as she accompany 
 he . 

 " no ; we shall see if , as you say , I can not   help it . what nonsense Paris 
 make one talk ! " the young man add as they stop in front of the 
 composition . this be true perhaps , but not in a sense he could find 
 himself tempt to deplore . the present be far from his first visit to 
 the french capital : he have often quit England and usually make a 
 point of " put in , " as he call it , a few day there on the outward 
 journey to the continent or on the return ; but at present the feeling , 
 for the most part agreeable , attendant upon a change of air and of scene 
 have be more punctual and more acute than for a long time before , and 
 strong the sense of novelty , refreshment , amusement , of the hundred 
 appeal from that quarter of thought to which on the whole his attention 
 be apt most frequently , though not most confessedly , to stray . he be 
 fonder of Paris than most of his countryman , though not so fond perhaps 
 as some other captivate alien : the place have always have the virtue of 
 quicken in he sensibly the life of reflexion and observation . it be 
 a good while since his impression have be so favourable to the city by 
 the Seine ; a good while at all event since they have minister so to 
 excitement , to exhilaration , to ambition , even to a restlessness that 
 be not prevent from be agreeable by the excess of agitation in it . 
 Nick could have give the reason of this unwonted glow , but his 
 preference be very much to keep it to himself . certainly to person not 
 deeply know , or at any rate not deeply curious , in relation to the 
 young man 's history the explanation might have seem to beg the 
 question , consist as it do of the simple formula that he have at last 
 come to a crisis . why a crisis - what be it and why have he not come to 
 it before ? the reader shall learn these thing in time if he care 
 enough for they . 

 our young man have not in any recent year fail to see the Salon , which 
 the general voice this season pronounce not particularly good . none the 
 less it be the present exhibition that , for some cause connect with 
 his " crisis , " make he think fast , produce that effect he have speak of 
 to his mother as a sense of artistic life . the precinct of the marble 
 and bronze speak to he especially to - day ; the glaze garden , not 
 florally rich , with its new production alternate with perfunctory 
 plant and its queer , damp smell , partly the odour of plastic clay , of 
 the studio of sculptor , put forth the voice of old association , of 
 other visit , of companionship now end - an insinuating eloquence 
 which be at the same time somehow identical with the general sharp 
 contagion of Paris . there be youth in the air , and a multitudinous 
 newness , for ever revive , and the diffusion of a hundred talent , 
 ingenuity , experiment . the summer cloud make shadow on the roof of 
 the great building ; the white image , hard in their crudity , spot the 
 place with provocation ; the rattle of plate at the restaurant sound 
 sociable in the distance , and our young man congratulate himself more 
 than ever that he have not miss his chance . he feel how it would help 
 he to settle something . at the moment he make this reflexion his eye 
 fall upon a person who appear - just in the first glimpse - to carry out 
 the idea of help . he utter a lively ejaculation , which , however , in 
 its want of finish , Biddy fail to understand ; so pertinent , so 
 relevant and congruous , be the other party to this encounter . 

 the girl 's attention follow her brother 's , rest with it on a young 
 man who face they without see they , engage as he be in imparting 
 to two companion his idea about one of the work expose to view . what 
 Biddy remark be that this young man be fair and fat and of the 
 middle stature ; he have a round face and a short beard and on his crown a 
 mere reminiscence of hair , as the fact that he carry his hat in his 
 hand permit to be observe . Bridget Dormer , who be quick , place he 
 immediately as a gentleman , but as a gentleman unlike any other 
 gentleman she have ever see . she would have take he for very foreign 
 but that the word proceed from his mouth reach her ear and impose 
 themselves as a rare variety of English . it be not that a foreigner 
 might not have speak smoothly enough , nor yet that the speech of this 
 young man be not smooth . it have in truth a conspicuous and aggressive 
 perfection , and Biddy be sure no mere learner would have venture to 
 play such trick with the tongue . he seem to draw rich effect and 
 wander air from it - to modulate and manipulate it as he would have 
 do a musical instrument . her view of the gentleman 's companion be 
 less operative , save for she soon make the reflexion that they be 
 people whom in any country , from China to Peru , you would immediately 
 have take for native . one of they be an old lady with a shawl ; that 
 be the most salient way in which she present herself . the shawl be 
 an ancient much - use fabric of embroider cashmere , such as many lady 
 wear forty year ago in their walk abroad and such as no lady wear 
 to - day . it have fall half off the back of the wearer , but at the moment 
 Biddy permit herself to consider she she give it a violent jerk and 
 bring it up to her shoulder again , where she continue to arrange and 
 settle it , with a good deal of jauntiness and elegance , while she 
 listen to the talk of the gentleman . Biddy guess that this little 
 transaction take place very frequently , and be not unaware of its 
 give the old lady a droll , factitious , faded appearance , as if she 
 be singularly out of step with the age . the other person be very much 
 young - she might have be a daughter - and have a pale face , a low 
 forehead , and thick dark hair . what she chiefly have , however , Biddy 
 rapidly discover , be a pair of largely - gaze eye . our young friend 
 be help to the discovery by the accident of their resting at this 
 moment for a time - it strike Biddy as very long - on her own . both these 
 lady be clothe in light , thin , scant gown , give an impression of 
 flower figure and odd transparency , and in low shoe which show a 
 great deal of stocking and be ornament with large rosette . Biddy 's 
 slightly agitated perception travel directly to their shoe : they 
 suggest to she vaguely that the wearer be dancer - connect 
 possibly with the old - fashioned exhibition of the shawl - dance . by the 
 time she have take in so much as this the mellifluous young man have 
 perceive and address himself to her brother . he come on with an 
 offer hand . Nick greet he and say it be a happy chance - he be 
 uncommonly glad to see he . 

 " I never come across you - I do not   know why , " Nick add while the two , 
 smile , look each other up and down like man reunite after a long 
 interval . 

 " oh it seem to I there be reason enough : our path in life be so 
 different . " Nick 's friend have a great deal of manner , as be evince by 
 his fashion of salute Biddy without know she . 

 " different , yes , but not so different as that . do not   we both live in 
 London , after all , and in the nineteenth century ? " 

 " ah my dear Dormer , excuse I : I do not   live in the nineteenth century . 
  Jamais de la vie ! " the gentleman declare . 

 " nor in London either ? " 

 " yes - when I be not at Samarcand ! but surely we have   diverge since the old 
 day . I adore what you burn , you burn what I adore . " while the stranger 
 speak he look cheerfully , hospitably , at Biddy ; not because it be 
 she , she easily guess , but because it be in his nature to desire a 
 second auditor - a kind of sympathetic gallery . her life be somehow 
 fill with shy people , and she immediately know she have never 
 encounter any one who seem so to know his part and recognise his 
 cue . 

 " how do you know what I adore ? " Nicholas Dormer ask . 

 " I know well enough what you use to . " 

 " that be more than I do myself . there be so many thing . " 

 " yes , there be many thing - many , many : that be what make life so 
 amusing . " 

 " do you find it amusing ? " 

 " my dear fellow , c'est a se tordre . do not   you think so ? ah it be high 
 time I should meet you - I see . I have   an idea you need I . " 

 " upon my word I think I do ! " Nick say in a tone which strike his sister 
 and make her wonder still more why , if the gentleman be so important as 
 that , he do not   introduce he . 

 " there be many god and this be one of their temple , " the mysterious 
 personage go on . " it be a house of strange idol - be not   it ? - and of 
 some strange and unnatural sacrifice . " 

 to Biddy as much as to her brother this remark might have be offer ; 
 but the girl 's eye turn back to the lady who for the moment have 
 lose their companion . she feel irresponsive and fear she should pass 
 with this easy cosmopolite for a stiff , scared , english girl , which be 
 not the type she aim at ; but be not   even ocular commerce overbold so 
 long as she have not   a sign from Nick ? the elder of the strange woman have 
 turn she back and be look at some bronze figure , lose her shawl 
 again as she do so ; but the other stand where their escort have quit 
 she , give all her attention to his sudden sociability with other . her 
 arm hang at her side , her head be bent , her face lower , so that she 
 have an odd appearance of raise her eye from under her brow ; and in 
 this attitude she be strike , though her air be so unconciliatory as 
 almost to seem dangerous . do it express resentment at have be 
 abandon for another girl ? Biddy , who begin to be frighten - there be 
 a moment when the neglect creature resemble a tigress about to 
 spring - be tempt to cry out that she have no wish whatever to 
 appropriate the gentleman . then she make the discovery that the young 
 lady too have a manner , almost as much as her clever guide , and the rapid 
 induction that it perhaps mean no more than his . she only look at 
 Biddy from beneath her eyebrow , which be wonderfully arch , but 
 there be ever so much of a manner in the way she do it . Biddy have a 
 momentary sense of be a figure in a ballet , a dramatic ballet - a 
 subordinate motionless figure , to be dash at to music or strangely 
 caper up to . it would be a very dramatic ballet indeed if this young 
 person be the heroine . she have magnificent hair , the girl reflect ; 
 and at the same moment hear Nick say to his interlocutor : " you be not 
 in London - one can not   meet you there ? " 

 " I rove , drift , float , " be the answer ; " my feeling direct I - if such 
 a life as mine may be say to have a direction . where there be anything 
 to feel I try to be there ! " the young man continue with his confiding 
 laugh . 

 " I should like to get hold of you , " Nick return . 

 " well , in that case there would be no doubt the intellectual adventure . 
 those be the current - any sort of personal relation - that govern my 
 career . " 

 " I do not   want to lose you this time , " Nick continue in a tone that 
 excite Biddy 's surprise . a moment before , when his friend have say that 
 he try to be where there be anything to feel , she have wonder how he 
 could endure he . 

 " do not   lose I , do not   lose I ! " cry the stranger after a fashion which 
 affect the girl as the high expression of irresponsibility she have 
 ever see . " after all why should you ? let we remain together unless I 
 interfere " - and he look , smile and interrogative , at Biddy , who 
 still remain blank , only note again that Nick forbore to make they 
 acquaint . this be an anomaly , since he prize the gentleman so . 
 still , there could be no anomaly of Nick 's that would not   impose itself 
 on his young sister . 

 " certainly , I keep you , " he say , " unless on my side I deprive those 
 lady - ! " 

 " charming woman , but it be not an indissoluble union . we meet , we 
 communicate , we part ! they be go - I be see they to the door . I 
 shall come back . " with this Nick 's friend rejoin his companion , who 
 move away with he , the strange fine eye of the girl linger on 
 Biddy 's brother as well as on Biddy herself as they recede . 

 " who be he - who be they ? " Biddy instantly ask . 

 " he be a gentleman , " Nick make answer - insufficiently , she think , and 
 even with a shade of hesitation . he speak as if she might have suppose 
 he be not one , and if he be really one why do not   he introduce he ? 
 but Biddy would not   for the world have put this question , and he now 
 move to the near bench and drop upon it as to await the other 's 
 return . no soon , however , have his sister seat herself than he say : 
 " see here , my dear , do you think you have well stay ? " 

 " do you want I to go back to mother ? " the girl ask with a lengthen 
 visage . 

 " well , what do you think ? " he ask it indeed gaily enough . 

 " be your conversation to be about - about private affair ? " 

 " no , I can not   say that . but I doubt if mother would think it the sort of 
 thing that be ' necessary to your development . ' " 

 this assertion appear to inspire she with the eagerness with which she 
 again break out : " but who be they - who be they ? " 

 " I know nothing of the lady . I never see they before . the man 's a 
 fellow I know very well at Oxford . he be think immense fun there . 
 we have   diverge , as he say , and I have almost lose sight of he , but not 
 so much as he think , because I have   read he - read he with interest . he 
 have write a very clever book . " 

 " what kind of a book ? " 

 " a sort of novel . " 

 " what sort of novel ? " 

 " well , I do not   know - with a lot of good writing . " Biddy listen to this 
 so receptively that she think it perverse her brother should add : " I 
 daresay Peter will have come if you return to mother . " 

 " I do not   care if he have . Peter 's nothing to I . but I will go if you wish 
 it . " 

 Nick smile upon she again and then say : " it do not   signify . we will all 
 go . " 

 " All ? " she echo . 

 " he will not   hurt we . on the contrary he will do we good . " 

 this be possible , the girl reflect in silence , but none the less the 
 idea strike she as courageous , of their take the odd young man back to 
 breakfast with they and with the other , especially if Peter should be 
 there . if Peter be nothing to she it be singular she should have 
 attach such importance to this contingency . the odd young man 
 reappear , and now that she see he without his queer female appendage 
 he seem personally less weird . he strike she moreover , as generally a 
 good deal account for by the literary character , especially if it be 
 responsible for a lot of good writing . as he take his place on the bench 
 Nick say to he , indicate she , " my sister Bridget , " and then 
 mention his name , " Mr. Gabriel Nash . " 

 " you enjoy Paris - you be happy here ? " Mr. Nash inquire , lean over 
 his friend to speak to the girl . 

 though his word belong to the situation it strike she that his tone 
 do not , and this make she answer he more dryly than she usually speak . 
 " oh yes , it be very nice . " 

 " and french art interest you ? you find thing here that please ? " 

 " oh yes , I like some of they . " 

 Mr. Nash consider she kindly . " I hop you would say you like the Academy 
 well . " 

 " she would if she do not   think you expect it , " say Nicholas Dormer . 

 " oh Nick ! " Biddy protest . 

 " Miss Dormer 's herself an english picture , " their visitor pronounce in 
 the tone of a man whose urbanity be a general solvent . 

 " that be a compliment if you do not   like they ! " Biddy exclaim . 

 " ah some of they , some of they ; there be a certain sort of thing ! " Mr. 
 Nash continue . " we must feel everything , everything that we can . we be 
 here for that . " 

 " you do like english art then ? " Nick demand with a slight accent of 
 surprise . 

 Mr. Nash indulge his wonder . " my dear Dormer , do you remember the old 
 complaint I use to make of you ? you have formula that be like walk 
 in one 's hat . one may see something in a case and one may not . " 

 " upon my word , " say Nick , " I do not   know any one who be fonder of a 
 generalisation than you . you turn they off as the man at the 
 street - corner distribute hand - bill . " 

 " they be my wild oat . I have   sow they all . " 

 " we shall see that ! " 

 " oh there be nothing of they now : a tame , scanty , homely growth . my only 
 good generalisation be my action . " 

 " we shall see they then . " 

 " ah pardon I . you can not   see they with the naked eye . moreover , mine be 
 principally negative . People 's action , I know , be for the most part 
 the thing they do - but mine be all the thing I do not   do . there be 
 so many of those , so many , but they do not   produce any effect . and then 
 all the rest be shade - extremely fine shade . " 

 " Shades of behaviour ? " Nick inquire with an interest which surprise 
 his sister , Mr. Nash 's discourse strike she mainly as the twaddle of 
 the under - world . 

 " Shades of impression , of appreciation , " say the young man with his 
 explanatory smile . " all my behaviour consist of my feeling . " 

 " well , do not   you show your feeling ? you use to ! " 

 " be not   it mainly those of disgust ? " Nash ask . " those operate no 
 long . I have   close that window . " 

 " do you mean you like everything ? " 

 " Dear I , no ! but I look only at what I do like . " 

 " do you mean that you have   lose the noble faculty of disgust ? " 

 " I have not   the least idea . I never try it . my dear fellow , " say Gabriel 
 Nash , " we have   only one life that we know anything about : fancy take it 
 up with disagreeable impression ! when then shall we go in for the 
 agreeable ? " 

 " what do you mean by the agreeable ? " Nick demand . 

 " oh the happy moment of our consciousness - the multiplication of those 
 moment . we must save as many as possible from the dark gulf . " 

 Nick have excite surprise on the part of his sister , but it be now 
 Biddy 's turn to make he open his eye a little . she raise her sweet 
 voice in appeal to the stranger . 

 " do not   you think there be any wrong in the world - any abuse and 
 suffering ? " 

 " oh so many , so many ! that be why one must choose . " 

 " choose to stop they , to reform they - be not   that the choice ? " Biddy 
 ask . " that be Nick 's , " she add , blush and look at this 
 personage . 

 " ah our divergence - yes ! " Mr. Nash sigh . " there be all kind of 
 machinery for that - very complicated and ingenious . your formula , my 
 dear Dormer , your formula ! " 

 " hang them , I have not   get any ! " Nick now bravely declare . 

 " to I personally the simple way be those that appeal most , " Mr. 
 Nash go on . " we pay too much attention to the ugly ; we notice it , we 
 magnify it . the great thing be to leave it alone and encourage the 
 beautiful . " 

 " you must be very sure you get hold of the beautiful , " say Nick . 

 " ah precisely , and that be just the importance of the faculty of 
 appreciation . we must train our special sense . it be capable of 
 extraordinary extension . life 's none too long for that . " 

 " but what be the good of the extraordinary extension if there be no 
 affirmation of it , if it all go to the negative , as you say ? where be 
 the fine consequence ? " Dormer ask . 

 " in one 's own spirit . one be one 's self a fine consequence . that be the 
 most important one we have to do with . I be a fine consequence , " say 
 Gabriel Nash . 

 Biddy rise from the bench at this and step away a little as to look 
 at a piece of statuary . but she have not go far before , pausing and 
 turning , she bend her eye on the speaker with a heighten colour , an 
 air of desperation and the question , after a moment : " be you then an 
 asthete ? " 

 " ah there be one of the formula ! that be walk in one 's hat ! I have   no 
 profession , my dear young lady . I have   no Ă tat civil . these thing be a 
 part of the complicated ingenious machinery . as I say , I keep to the 
 simple way . I find that give one enough to do . merely to be be such a 
  mă tier ; to live such an art ; to feel such a career ! " 

 Bridget Dormer turn she back and examine her statue , and her brother 
 say to his old friend : " and to write ? " 

 " to write ? oh I shall never do it again ! " 

 " you have   do it almost well enough to be inconsistent . that book of 
 yours be anything but negative ; it be complicated and ingenious . " 

 " my dear fellow , I be extremely ashamed of that book , " say Gabriel Nash . 

 " ah call yourself a bloated Buddhist and have do with it ! " his 
 companion exclaim . 

 " have do with it ? I have not   the least desire to have do with it . and 
 why should one call one 's self anything ? one only deprive other people 
 of their dear occupation . let I add that you do not   begin to have 
 an insight into the art of life till it cease to be of the small 
 consequence to you what you may be call . that be rudimentary . " 

 " but if you go in for shade you must also go in for name . you must 
 distinguish , " Nick object . " the observer 's nothing without his 
 category , his type and variety . " 

 " ah trust he to distinguish ! " say Gabriel Nash sweetly . " that be for 
 his own convenience ; he have , privately , a terminology to meet it . that be 
 one 's style . but from the moment it be for the convenience of other the 
 sign have to be gross , the shade begin to go . that be a deplorable 
 hour ! literature , you see , be for the convenience of other . it require 
 the most abject concession . it play such mischief with one 's style 
 that really I have   have to give it up . " 

 " and politic ? " Nick ask . 

 " well , what about they ? " be Mr. Nash 's reply with a special cadence as 
 he watch his friend 's sister , who be still examine her statue . 
 Biddy be divide between irritation and curiosity . she have interpose 
 space , but she have not go beyond ear - shot . Nick 's question make she 
 curiosity throb as a rejoinder to his friend 's word . 

 " that , no doubt you will say , be still far more for the convenience of 
 other - be still bad for one 's style . " 

 Biddy turn round in time to hear Mr. Nash answer : " it have simply 
 nothing in life to do with shade ! I can not   say bad for it than that . " 

 Biddy step nearer at this and draw still far on her courage . 
 " will not   mamma be wait ? ought not   we to go to luncheon ? " 

 both the young man look up at she and Mr. Nash break out : " you ought 
 to protest ! you ought to save he ! " 

 " to save he ? " Biddy echo . 

 " he have a style , upon my word he have ! but I have   see it go . I have   read his 
 speech . " 

 " you be capable of that ? " Nick laugh . 

 " for you , yes . but it be like listen to a nightingale in a brass 
 band . " 

 " I think they be beautiful , " Biddy declare . 

 her brother get up at this tribute , and Mr. Nash , rise too , say with 
 his bright colloquial air : " but , Miss Dormer , he have eye . he be make 
 to see - to see all over , to see everything . there be so few like that . " 

 " I think he still see , " Biddy return , wonder a little why Nick 
 do not   defend himself . 

 " he see his ' side , ' his dreadful ' side , ' dear young lady . poor man , 
 fancy your have a ' side ' - you , you - and spend your day and your 
 night look at it ! I would as soon pass my life look at an 
 advertisement on a hoarding . " 

 " you do not   see I some day a great statesman ? " say Nick . 

 " my dear fellow , it be exactly what I have   a terror of . " 

 " mercy ! do not   you admire they ? " Biddy cry . 

 " it be a trade like another and a method of make one 's way which 
 society certainly condone . but when one can be something well - ! " 

 " why what in the world be well ? " Biddy ask . 

 the young man gasp and Nick , reply for he , say : " Gabriel Nash be 
 well ! you must come and lunch with we . I must keep you - I must ! " he 
 add . 

 " we shall save he yet , " Mr. Nash keep on easily to Biddy while they 
 go and the girl wonder still more what her mother would make of 
 he . 




 III 


 after her companion leave her Lady Agnes rest for five minute in 
 silence with her eld daughter , at the end of which time she observe : 
 " I suppose one must have food at any rate , " and , get up , quit the 
 place where they have be sit . " and where be we to go ? I hate 
 eat out of door , " she go on . 

 " dear I , when one come to Paris - ! " grace return in a tone 
 apparently imply that in so rash an adventure one must be prepare 
 for compromise and concession . the two lady wander to where they 
 see a large sign of " Buffet " suspend in the air , enter a precinct 
 reserve for little white - clothe table , straw - cover chair and 
 long - aprone waiter . one of these functionary approach they with 
 eagerness and with a " Mesdames sont seule ? " receive in return from 
 her ladyship the slightly snappish announcement " non ; nous somme 
 beaucoup ! " he introduce they to a table large than most of the 
 other , and under his protection they take their place at it and begin 
 rather languidly and vaguely to consider the question of the repast . the 
 waiter have place a carte in Lady Agnes 's hand and she study it , 
 through her eye - glass , with a failure of interest , while he enumerate 
 with professional fluency the resource of the establishment and Grace 
 watch the people at the other table . she be hungry and have already 
 break a morsel from a long glaze roll . 

 " not cold beef and pickle , you know , " she observe to her mother . Lady 
 Agnes give no heed to this profane remark , but drop her eye - glass and 
 lay down the greasy document . " what do it signify ? I daresay it be all 
 nasty , " grace continue ; and she add inconsequently : " if Peter come 
 he be sure to be particular . " 

 " let he first be particular to come ! " her ladyship exclaim , turn a 
 cold eye upon the waiter . 

  " Poulet chasseur , filet mignon sauce bearnaise , " the man suggest . 

 " you will give we what I tell you , " say Lady Agnes ; and she mention 
 with distinctness and authority the dish of which she desire that the 
 meal should be compose . he interject three or four more suggestion , 
 but as they produce absolutely no impression on she he become silent 
 and submissive , do justice apparently to her idea . for Lady Agnes 
 have idea , and , though it have suit her humour ten minute before to 
 profess herself helpless in such a case , the manner in which she impose 
 they on the waiter as original , practical , and economical , show the 
 high executive woman , the mother of child , the daughter of earl , the 
 consort of an official , the dispenser of hospitality , look back upon 
 a lifetime of luncheon . she carry many care , and the feeding of 
 multitude - she be honourably conscious of have feed they decently , as 
 she have always do everything - have ever be one of they . " Everything 's 
 absurdly dear , " she remark to her daughter as the waiter go away . to 
 this remark Grace make no answer . she have be use for a long time back 
 to hear that everything be very dear ; it be what one always 
 expect . so she find the case herself , but she be silent and 
 inventive about it , and nothing far pass , in the way of 
 conversation with her mother , while they wait for the latter 's order 
 to be execute , till Lady Agnes reflect audibly : " he make I unhappy , 
 the way he talk about Julia . " 

 " sometimes I think he do it to torment one . one can not   mention she ! " 
 Grace respond . 

 " it be well not to mention she , but to leave it alone . " 

 " yet he never mention she of himself . " 

 " in some case that be suppose to show that people like people - though 
 of course something more be require to prove it , " Lady Agnes continue 
 to meditate . " sometimes I think he be think of she , then at other I 
 can not   fancy what he be think of . " 

 " it would be awfully suitable , " say Grace , bite her roll . 

 her companion have a pause , as if look for some high ground to put 
 it upon . then she appear to find this lofty level in the 
 observation : " of course he must like she - he have know she always . " 

 " nothing can be plain than that she like he , " grace opine . 

 " Poor Julia ! " Lady Agnes almost wail ; and her tone suggest that she 
 know more about that than she be ready to state . 

 " it be not   as if she be not   clever and well read , " her daughter go on . 
 " if there be nothing else there would be a reason in her be so 
 interested in politic , in everything that he be . " 

 " ah what Nick be - that be what I sometimes wonder ! " 

 Grace eye her parent in some despair : " why , mother , be not   he go to 
 be like papa ? " she wait for an answer that do not   come ; after which 
 she pursue : " I think you think he so like he already . " 

 " well , I do not , " say Lady Agnes quietly . 

 " who be then ? certainly Percy be not . " 

 Lady Agnes be silent a space . " there be no one like your father . " 

 " dear papa ! " Grace handsomely concur . then with a rapid transition : 
 " it would be so jolly for all of we - she would be so nice to we . " 

 " she be that already - in her way , " say Lady Agnes conscientiously , 
 have follow the return , quick as it be . " much good do it do she ! " 
 and she reproduce the note of her bitterness of a moment before . 

 " it do she some good that one should look out for she . I do , and I 
 think she know it , " Grace declare . " one can at any rate keep other 
 woman off . " 

 " do not   meddle - you be very clumsy , " be her mother 's not particularly 
 sympathetic rejoinder . " there be other woman who be beautiful , and 
 there be other who be clever and rich . " 

 " yes , but not all in one : that be what be so nice in Julia . her fortune 
 would be throw in ; he would not   appear to have marry she for it . " 

 " if he do he will not , " say Lady Agnes a trifle obscurely . 

 " yes , that be what be so charming . and he could do anything then , could not 
 he ? " 

 " well , your father have no fortune to speak of . " 

 " yes , but do not   Uncle Percy help he ? " 

 " his wife help he , " say Lady Agnes . 

 " dear mamma ! " - the girl be prompt . " there be one thing , " she add : 
 " that Mr. Carteret will always help Nick . " 

 " what do you mean by ' always ' ? " 

 " why whether he marry Julia or not . " 

 " thing be not   so easy , " Lady Agnes judge . " it will all depend on 
 Nick 's behaviour . he can stop it to - morrow . " 

 Grace Dormer star ; she evidently think Mr. Carteret 's beneficence a 
 part of the scheme of nature . " how could he stop it ? " 

 " by not be serious . it be not   so hard to prevent people give you 
 money . " 

 " serious ? " Grace repeat . " do he want he to be a prig like Lord 
 Egbert ? " 

 " yes - that be exactly what he want . and what he will do for he he will do 
 for he only if he marry Julia . " 

 " have he tell you ? " Grace inquire . and then , before her mother could 
 answer , " I be delighted at that ! " she cry . 

 " he have not   tell I , but that be the way thing happen . " Lady Agnes be 
 less optimistic than her daughter , and such optimism as she cultivate 
 be a thin tissue with the sense of thing as they be show through . 
 " if Nick become rich Charles Carteret will make he more so . if he 
 do not   he will not   give he a shilling . " 

 " oh mamma ! " Grace demur . 

 " it be all very well to say that in public life money be not   as necessary 
 as it use to be , " her ladyship go on broodingly . " those who say so 
 do not   know anything about it . it be always intensely necessary . " 

 her daughter , visibly affect by the gloom of her manner , feel impel 
 to evoke as a corrective a more cheerful idea . " I daresay ; but there be 
 the fact - be not   there ? - that poor papa have so little . " 

 " yes , and there be the fact that it kill he ! " 

 these word come out with a strange , quick , little flare of passion . 
 they startle Grace Dormer , who jump in her place and gasp , " oh 
 mother ! " the next instant , however , she add in a different voice , " oh 
 Peter ! " for , with an air of eagerness , a gentleman be walk up to 
 they . 

 " how d'ye do , Cousin Agnes ? how d'ye do , little grace ? " Peter 
 Sherringham laugh and shake hand with they , and three minute later 
 be settle in his chair at their table , on which the first element of 
 the meal have be place . explanation , on one side and the other , be 
 demand and produce ; from which it appear that the two party have 
 be in some degree at cross - purpose . the day before Lady Agnes and her 
 companion travel to Paris Sherringham have go to London for 
 forty - eight hour on private business of the ambassador 's , arrive , on 
 his return by the night - train , only early that morning . there have 
 accordingly be a delay in his receive Nick Dormer 's two note . if 
 Nick have come to the embassy in person - he might have do he the 
 honour to call - he would have learn that the second secretary be 
 absent . Lady Agnes be not altogether successful in assign a motive 
 to her son 's neglect of this courteous form ; she could but say : " I 
 expect he , I want he to go ; and indeed , not hear from you , he 
 would have go immediately - an hour or two hence , on leave this 
 place . but we be here so quietly - not to go out , not to seem to appeal 
 to the ambassador . Nick put it so - ' oh mother , we will keep out of it ; a 
 friendly note will do . ' I do not   know definitely what he want to keep 
 out of , unless anything like gaiety . the embassy be not   gay , I know . but 
 I be sure his note be friendly , be not   it ? I daresay you will see for 
 yourself . he be different directly he get abroad ; he do not   seem to 
 care . " Lady Agnes pause a moment , not carry out this particular 
 elucidation ; then she resume : " he say you would have see Julia and that 
 you would understand everything from she . and when I ask how she would know he 
 say , ' oh she know everything ! ' " 

 " he never say a word to I about Julia , " Peter Sherringham return . 
 Lady Agnes and her daughter exchange a glance at this : the latter have 
 already ask three time where Julia be , and her ladyship drop that 
 they have be hop she would be able to come with Peter . the young man 
 set forth that she be at the moment at an hotel in the Rue de la Paix , 
 but have only be there since that morning ; he have see she before 
 proceed to the Champs ElysĂ es . she have come up to Paris by an early 
 train - - she have be stay at Versailles , of all place in the world . 
 she have be a week in Paris on her return from Cannes - her stay there 
 have be of nearly a month : fancy ! - and then have go out to Versailles 
 to see Mrs. Billinghurst . perhaps they would remember she , poor Dallow 's 
 sister . she be stay there to teach her daughter French - she have a 
 dozen or two ! - and Julia have spend three day with she . she be to 
 return to England about the twenty - fifth . it would make seven week she 
 must have be away from town - a rare thing for she ; she usually stick 
 to it so in summer . 

 " three day with Mrs. Billinghurst - how very good - natured of she ! " Lady 
 Agnes comment . 

 " oh they be very nice to she , " Sherringham say . 

 " well , I hope so ! " Grace Dormer exhale . " why do not   you make she come 
 here ? " 

 " I propose it , but she would not . " another eye - beam , at this , pass 
 between the two lady and Peter go on : " she say you must come and 
 see she at the HĂ tel de Hollande . " 

 " of course we will do that , " Lady Agnes declare . " Nick go to ask about 
 she at the Westminster . " 

 " she give that up ; they would not   give she the room she want , her 
 usual set . " 

 " she be delightfully particular ! " Grace say complacently . then she 
 add : " she do like picture , do not   she ? " 

 Peter Sherringham star . " oh I daresay . but that be not what she have in 
 her head this morning . she have some news from London - she be immensely 
 excited . " 

 " what have she in her head ? " Lady Agnes ask . 

 " what be her news from London ? " Grace add . 

 " she want Nick to stand . " 

 " Nick to stand ? " both lady cry . 

 " she undertake to bring he in for Harsh . Mr. Pinks be dead - the 
 fellow , you know , who get the seat at the general election . he drop 
 down in London - disease of the heart or something of that sort . Julia 
 have her telegram , but I see it be in last night 's paper . " 

 " Imagine - Nick never mention it ! " say Lady Agnes . 

 " do not   you know , mother ? - abroad he only read foreign paper . " 

 " oh I know . I have   no patience with he , " her ladyship continue . " dear 
 Julia ! " 

 " it be a nasty little place , and Pinks have a tight squeeze - 107 or 
 something of that sort ; but if it return a Liberal a year ago very 
 likely it will do so again . Julia at any rate believe it can be make 
 to - if the man 's Nick - and be ready to take the order to put he in . " 

 " I be sure if she can do it she will , " Grace pronounce . 

 " dear , dear Julia ! and Nick can do something for himself , " say the 
 mother of this candidate . 

 " I have   no doubt he can do anything , " Peter Sherringham return 
 good - naturedly . then , " do you mean in expense ? " he inquire . 

 " ah I be afraid he can not   do much in expense , poor dear boy ! and it be 
 dreadful how little we can look to Percy . " 

 " well , I daresay you may look to Julia . I think that be her idea . " 

 " Delightful Julia ! " Lady Agnes break out . " if poor Sir Nicholas could 
 have know ! of course he must go straight home , " she add . 

 " he will not   like that , " say Grace . 

 " then he will have to go without like it . " 

 " it will rather spoil your little excursion , if you have   only just 
 come , " Peter suggest ; " to say nothing of the great Biddy 's , if she be 
 enjoy Paris . " 

 " we may stay perhaps - with Julia to protect we , " say Lady Agnes . 

 " ah she will not   stay ; she will go over for her man . " 

 " her man - - ? " 

 " the fellow who stand , whoever he be - especially if he be Nick . " these 
 last word cause the eye of Peter Sherringham 's companion to meet 
 again , and he go on : " she will go straight down to Harsh . " 

 " wonderful Julia ! " Lady Agnes pant . " of course Nick must go straight 
 there too . " 

 " well , I suppose he must see first if they will have he . " 

 " if they will have he ? why how can he tell till he try ? " 

 " I mean the people at headquarters , the fellow who arrange it . " 

 Lady Agnes colour a little . " my dear Peter , do you suppose there will 
 be the least doubt of their ' have ' the son of his father ? " 

 " of course it be a great name , Cousin Agnes - a very great name . " 

 " one of the great , simply , " Lady Agnes smile . 

 " it be the good name in the world ! " say grace more emphatically . 

 " all the same it do not   prevent his lose his seat . " 

 " by half - a - dozen vote : it be too odious ! " her ladyship cry . 

 " I remember - I remember . and in such a case as that why do not   they 
 immediately put he in somewhere else ? " 

 " how one see you live abroad , dear Peter ! there happen to have be 
 the most extraordinary lack of opening - I never see anything like 
 it - for a year . they have   have their hand on he , keep he all ready . I 
 daresay they have   telegraph he . " 

 " and he have not   tell you ? " 

 Lady Agnes falter . " he be so very odd when he be abroad ! " 

 " at home too he let thing go , " Grace interpose . " he do so 
 little - take no trouble . " her mother suffer this statement to pass 
 unchallenged , and she pursue philosophically : " I suppose it be because 
 he know he be so clever . " 

 " so he be , dear old man . but what do he do , what have he be do , in 
 a positive way ? " 

 " he have be paint . " 

 " ah not seriously ! " Lady Agnes protest . 

 " that be the bad way , " say Peter Sherringham . " good thing ? " 

 neither of the lady make a direct response to this , but Lady Agnes 
 say : " he have speak repeatedly . they be always call on he . " 

 " he speak magnificently , " Grace attest . 

 " that be another of the thing I lose , live in far country . and he be 
 do the Salon now with the great Biddy ? " 

 " just the thing in this part . I can not   think what keep they so long , " 
 Lady Agnes groan . " do you ever see such a dreadful place ? " 

 Sherringham star . " be not   the thing good ? I have an idea - - ! " 

 " good ? " cry Lady Agnes . " they be too odious , too wicked . " 

 " ah , " laugh Peter , " that be what people fall into if they live abroad . 
 the French ought not   to live abroad ! " 

 " here they come , " Grace announce at this point ; " but they have   get a 
 strange man with they . " 

 " that be a bore when we want to talk ! " Lady Agnes sigh . 

 Peter get up in the spirit of welcome and stand a moment watch the 
 other approach . " there will be no difficulty in talk , to judge by 
 the gentleman , " he drop ; and while he remain so conspicuous our eye 
 may briefly rest on he . he be middle high and be visibly a 
 representative of the nervous rather than of the phlegmatic branch of 
 his race . he have an oval face , fine firm feature , and a complexion that 
 tend to the brown . Brown be his eye , and woman think they soft ; 
 dark brown his hair , in which the same critic sometimes regret the 
 absence of a little undulation . it be perhaps to conceal this plainness 
 that he wear it very short . his tooth be white , his moustache be 
 point , and so be the small beard that adorn the extremity of his 
 chin . his face express intelligence and be very much alive ; it have 
 the further distinction that it often strike superficial observer with 
 a certain foreignness of cast . the deep sort , however , usually feel it 
 latently english enough . there be an idea that , have take up the 
 diplomatic career and go to live in strange land , he cultivate the 
 mask of an alien , an italian or a Spaniard ; of an alien in time 
 even - one of the wonderful ubiquitous diplomatic agent of the sixteenth 
 century . in fact , none the less , it would have be impossible to be 
 more modern than Peter Sherringham - more of one 's class and one 's 
 country . but this do not   prevent several stray person - Bridget Dormer 
 for instance - from admire the hue of his cheek for its olive richness 
 and his moustache and beard for their resemblance to those of Charles I. 
 at the same time - she rather jumble her comparison - she think he 
 recall a Titian . 




 IV 


 Peter 's meeting with Nick be of the friendly on both side , 
 involve a great many " dear fellow " and " old boy , " and his salutation 
 to the young of the Miss Dormers consist of the frank " delight 
 to see you , my dear Bid ! " there be no kissing , but there be cousinship 
 in the air , of a conscious , living kind , as Gabriel Nash doubtless 
 quickly note , hover for a moment outside the group . Biddy say 
 nothing to Peter Sherringham , but there be no flatness in a silence 
 which heave , as it be , with the fair physiognomic portent . Nick 
 introduce Gabriel Nash to his mother and to the other two as " a 
 delightful old friend " whom he have just come across , and Sherringham 
 acknowledge the act by say to Mr. Nash , but as if rather less for 
 his sake than for that of the presenter : " I have   see you very often 
 before . " 

 " ah repetition - recurrence : we have not   yet , in the study of how to live , 
 abolish that clumsiness , have we ? " Mr. Nash genially inquire . " it be a 
 poverty in the supernumerary of our stage that we do not   pass once for 
 all , but come round and cross again like a procession or an army at the 
 theatre . it be a sordid economy that ought to have be manage well . 
 the right thing would be just one appearance , and the procession , 
 regardless of expense , for ever and for ever different . " the company be 
 occupy in place itself at table , so that the only disengaged 
 attention for the moment be Grace 's , to whom , as her eye rest on 
 he , the young man address these last word with a smile . " alas , it be 
 a very shabby idea , be not   it ? the world be not   get up regardless of 
 expense ! " 

 Grace look quickly away from he and say to her brother : " Nick , Mr. 
 Pinks be dead . " 

 " Mr. Pinks ? " ask Gabriel Nash , appear to wonder where he should 
 sit . 

 " the member for Harsh ; and Julia want you to stand , " the girl go on . 

 " Mr. Pinks , the member for Harsh ? what name to be sure ! " Gabriel muse 
 cheerfully , still unseat . 

 " Julia want I ? I be much oblige to she ! " Nick absently say . " Nash , 
 please sit by my mother , with Peter on her other side . " 

 " my dear , it be not   Julia " - Lady Agnes speak earnestly . " every one want 
 you . have not   you hear from your people ? do not   you know the seat be 
 vacant ? " 

 Nick be look round the table to see what be on it . " upon my word I 
 do not   remember . what else have you order , mother ? " 

 " there be some boeuf braisă   , my dear , and afterwards some galantine . 
 here be a dish of egg with asparagus - tip . " 

 " I advise you to go in for it , Nick , " say Peter Sherringham , to whom 
 the preparation in question be present . 

 " into the egg with asparagus - tip ? Donnez m'en s'il vous plaĂ t . my 
 dear fellow , how can I stand ? how can I sit ? where be the money to come 
 from ? " 

 " the money ? why from Jul - - ! " grace begin , but immediately catch she 
 mother 's eye . 

 " Poor Julia , how you do work she ! " Nick exclaim . " Nash , I recommend 
 you the asparagus - tip . mother , he be my good friend - do look after he . " 

 " I have   an impression I have   breakfast - I be not sure , " Nash smile . 

 " with those beautiful lady ? try again - you will find out . " 

 " the money can be manage ; the expense be very small and the seat 's 
 certain , " Lady Agnes pursue , not apparently heed her son 's 
 injunction in respect to Nash . 

 " rather - if Julia go down ! " her eld daughter exclaim . 

 " perhaps Julia will not   go down ! " Nick answer humorously . 

 Biddy be seat next to Mr. Nash , so that she could take occasion to 
 ask , " who be the beautiful lady ? " as if she fail to recognise her 
 brother 's allusion . in reality this be an innocent trick : she be more 
 curious than she could have give a suitable reason for about the odd 
 woman from whom her neighbour have lately separate . 

 " deluded , misguided , infatuated person ! " Mr. Nash reply , 
 understanding that she have ask for a description . " strange eccentric , 
 almost romantic , type . predestine victim , simple - minded sacrificial 
 lamb ! " 

 this be copious , yet it be vague , so that Biddy could only respond : 
 " oh all that ? " but meanwhile Peter Sherringham say to Nick : " Julia 's 
 here , you know . you must go and see she . " 

 Nick look at he an instant rather hard , as if to say : " you too ? " but 
 Peter 's eye appear to answer , " no , no , not I " ; upon which his cousin 
 rejoin : " of course I will go and see she . I will go immediately . please to 
 thank she for thinking of I . " 

 " think of you ? there be plenty to think of you ! " Lady Agnes say . 
 " there be sure to be telegram at home . we must go back - we must go 
 back ! " 

 " we must go back to England ? " Nick Dormer ask ; and as his mother make 
 no answer he continue : " do you mean I must go to Harsh ? " 

 her ladyship evade this question , inquire of Mr. Nash if he would 
 have a morsel of fish ; but her gain be small , for this gentleman , 
 strike again by the unhappy name of the bereaved constituency , only 
 break out : " ah what a place to represent ! how can you - how can you ? " 

 " it be an excellent place , " say Lady Agnes coldly . " I imagine you have 
 never be there . it be a very good place indeed . it belong very largely 
 to my cousin , Mrs. Dallow . " 

 Gabriel partook of the fish , listen with interest . " but I think we 
 have no more pocket - borough . " 

 " it be pocket we rather lack , so many of we . there be plenty of 
 harshe , " Nick Dormer observe . 

 " I do not   know what you mean , " Lady Agnes say to Nash with considerable 
 majesty . 

 Peter Sherringham also address he with an " oh it be all right ; they 
 come down on you like a shot ! " and the young man continue ingenuously : 

 " do you mean to say you have   to pay money to get into that awful 
 place - that it be not you who be pay ? " 

 " into that awful place ? " Lady Agnes repeat blankly . 

 " into the House of Commons . that you do not   get a high salary ? " 

 " my dear nash , you be delightful : do not   leave I - do not   leave I ! " Nick 
 cry ; while his mother look at he with an eye that demand : " who in 
 the world 's this extraordinary person ? " 

 " what then do you think pocket - borough be ? " Peter Sherringham ask . 

 Mr. Nash 's facial radiance rest on he . " why , borough that fill 
 your pocket . to do that sort of thing without a bribe - c'est trop 
 fort ! " 

 " he live at Samarcand , " Nick Dormer explain to his mother , who 
 flush perceptibly . " what do you advise I ? I will do whatever you say , " 
 he go on to his old acquaintance . 

 " my dear , my dear - - ! " Lady Agnes plead . 

 " see Julia first , with all respect to Mr. Nash . she be of excellent 
 counsel , " say Peter Sherringham . 

 Mr. Nash smile across the table at his host . " the lady first - the lady 
 first ! I have   not a word to suggest as against any idea of her . " 

 " we must not   sit here too long , there will be so much to do , " say Lady 
 Agnes anxiously , perceive a certain slowness in the service of the 
  boeuf braisĂ   . 

 Biddy have be up to this moment mainly occupy in look , covertly 
 and in snatch , at Peter Sherringham ; as be perfectly lawful in a 
 young lady with a handsome cousin whom she have not see for more than a 
 year . but her sweet voice now take license to throw in the word : " we 
 know what Mr. Nash think of politic : he tell we just now he think 
 they dreadful . " 

 " no , not dreadful - only inferior , " the personage impugn protest . 
 " everything 's relative . " 

 " inferior to what ? " Lady Agnes demand . 

 Mr. Nash appear to consider a moment . " to anything else that may be in 
 question . " 

 " nothing else be in question ! " say her ladyship in a tone that would 
 have be triumphant if it have not be so dry . 

 " ah then ! " and her neighbour shake his head sadly . he turn after this 
 to Biddy . " the lady whom I be with just now and in whom you be so 
 good as to express an interest ? " Biddy give a sign of assent and he go 
 on : " they be person theatrical . the young one be try to go upon the 
 stage . " 

 " and be you assist she ? " Biddy inquire , please she have guess so 
 nearly right . 

 " not in the least - I be rather choke she off . I consider it the low 
 of the art . " 

 " low than politic ? " ask Peter Sherringham , who be listen to 
 this . 

 " dear no , I will not   say that . I think the ThĂ Ă tre FranĂ ais a great 
 institution than the House of Commons . " 

 " I agree with you there ! " laugh Sherringham ; " all the more that I 
 do not   consider the dramatic art a low one . it seem to I on the 
 contrary to include all the other . " 

 " yes - that be a view . I think it be the view of my friend . " 

 " of your friend ? " 

 " two lady - old acquaintance - whom I meet in Paris a week ago and whom 
 I have   just be spend an hour with in this place . " 

 " you should have see they ; they strike I very much , " Biddy say to her 
 cousin . 

 " I should like to see they if they really have anything to say to the 
 theatre . " 

 " it can easily be manage . do you believe in the theatre ? " ask Gabriel 
 Nash . 

 " passionately , " Sherringham confess . " do not   you ? " 

 before Nash have have time to answer Biddy have interpose with a sigh . 
 " how I wish I could go - but in Paris I can not ! " 

 " I will take you , Biddy - I vow I will take you . " 

 " but the play , Peter , " the girl object . " Mamma say they be bad 
 than the picture . " 

 " oh , we will arrange that : they shall do one at the FranĂ ais on purpose 
 for a delightful little yearn english girl . " 

 " can you make they ? " 

 " I can make they do anything I choose . " 

 " ah then it be the theatre that believe in you , " say Mr. Nash . 

 " it would be ungrateful if it do not   after all I have   do for it ! " 
 Sherringham gaily opine . 

 Lady Agnes have withdraw herself from between he and her other guest 
 and , to signify that she at least have finish eating , have go to sit 
 by her son , whom she hold , with some importunity , in conversation . but 
 hear the theatre talk of she throw across an impersonal challenge 
 to the paradoxical young man . " pray should you think it well for a 
 gentleman to be an actor ? " 

 " well than be a politician ? ah , comedian for comedian , be not   the 
 actor more honest ? " 

 Lady Agnes turn to her son and bring forth with spirit : " think of 
 your great father , Nicholas ! " 

 " he be an honest man , " say Nicholas . " that be perhaps why he could not 
 stand it . " 

 Peter Sherringham judge the colloquy to have take an uncomfortable 
 twist , though not wholly , as it seem to he , by the act of Nick 's 
 queer comrade . to draw it back to safe ground he say to this 
 personage : " may I ask if the lady you just speak of be English - Mrs. 
 and Miss Rooth : be not   that the rather odd name ? " 

 " the very same . only the daughter , accord to her kind , desire to be 
 know by some nom de guerre before she have even be able to enlist . " 

 " and what do she call herself ? " Bridget Dormer ask . 

 " Maud Vavasour , or Edith Temple , or Gladys Vane - some rubbish of that 
 sort . " 

 " what then be her own name ? " 

 " Miriam - Miriam Rooth . it would do very well and would give she the 
 benefit of the prepossess fact that - to the good of my belief at 
 least - she be more than half a Jewess . " 

 " it be as good as Rachel Felix , " Sherringham say . 

 " the name 's as good , but not the talent . the girl 's splendidly stupid . " 

 " and more than half a jewess ? do not   you believe it ! " Sherringham 
 laugh . 

 " do not   believe she be a Jewess ? " Biddy ask , still more interested in 
 Miriam Rooth . 

 " no , no - that she be stupid , really . if she be she will be the first . " 

 " ah you may judge for yourself , " Nash rejoin , " if you will come 
 to - morrow afternoon to Madame CarrĂ , Rue de Constantinople , a 
 l'entresol . " 

 " Madame CarrĂ ? why , I have   already a note from she - I find it this 
 morning on my return to Paris - ask I to look in at five o'clock and 
 listen to a jeune Anglaise . " 

 " that be my arrangement - I obtain the favour . the lady want an 
 opinion , and dear old CarrĂ   have consent to see they and to give one . 
 Maud Vavasour will recite , and the venerable artist will pass 
 judgement . " 

 Sherringham remember he have his note in his pocket and take it out to 
 look it over . " she wish to make she a little audience - she say she will 
 do well with that - and she ask I because I be english . I shall make a 
 point of go . " 

 " and bring Dormer if you can : the audience will be well . will you 
 come , Dormer ? " Mr. Nash continue , appeal to his friend - " will you 
 come with I to hear an english amateur recite and an old french actress 
 pitch into she ? " 

 Nick look round from his talk with his mother and Grace . " I will go 
 anywhere with you so that , as I have   tell you , I may not   lose sight of 
 you - may keep hold of you . " 

 " poor Mr. Nash , why be he so useful ? " Lady Agnes take a cold freedom to 
 inquire . 

 " he steady I , mother . " 

 " oh I wish you would take I , Peter , " Biddy break out wistfully to her 
 cousin . 

 " to spend an hour with an old french actress ? do you want to go upon 
 the stage ? " the young man ask . 

 " no , but I want to see something - to know something . " 

 " Madame CarrĂ 's wonderful in her way , but she be hardly company for a 
 little english girl . " 

 " I be not little , I be only too big ; and she go , the person you speak 
 of . " 

 " for a professional purpose and with her good mother , " smile Mr. Nash . 
 " I think Lady Agnes would hardly venture - - ! " 

 " oh I have   see her good mother ! " say Biddy as if she have her impression 
 of what the worth of that protection might be . 

 " yes , but you have not   hear she . it be then that you measure she . " 

 Biddy be wistful still . " be it the famous Honorine CarrĂ , the great 
 celebrity ? " 

 " honorine in person : the incomparable , the perfect ! " say Peter 
 Sherringham . " the first artist of our time , take she altogether . she 
 and I be old pal ; she have be so good as to come and ' say ' 
 thing - which she do sometimes still dan le monde as no one else 
  can - - in my room . " 

 " make she come then . we can go there ! " 

 " one of these day ! " 

 " and the young lady - Miriam , Maud , Gladys - make she come too . " 

 Sherringham look at Nash and the latter be bland . " oh you will have no 
 difficulty . she will jump at it ! " 

 " very good . I will give a little artistic tea - with Julia too of course . 
 and you must come , Mr. Nash . " this gentleman promise with an 
 inclination , and Peter continue : " but if , as you say , you be not for 
 help the young lady , how come you to arrange this interview with the 
 great model ? " 

 " precisely to stop she short . the great model will find she very bad . 
 her judgement , as you probably know , be Rhadamanthine . " 

 " unfortunate creature ! " say Biddy . " I think you be cruel . " 

 " never mind - I will look after they , " Sherringham laugh . 

 " and how can Madame CarrĂ   judge if the girl recite English ? " 

 " she be so intelligent that she could judge if she recite Chinese , " 
 Peter declare . 

 " that be true , but the jeune Anglaise recite also in French , " say 
 Gabriel Nash . 

 " then she be not   stupid . " 

 " and in Italian , and in several more tongue , for aught I know . " 

 Sherringham be visibly interested . " very good - we will put she through 
 they all . " 

 " she must be most clever , " Biddy go on yearningly . 

 " she have spend her life on the continent ; she have wander about with 
 her mother ; she have pick up thing . " 

 " and be she a lady ? " Biddy ask . 

 " oh tremendous ! the great one of the earth on the mother 's side . on the 
 father 's , on the other hand , I imagine , only a Jew stockbroker in the 
 City . " 

 " then they be rich - or ought to be , " Sherringham suggest . 

 " ought to be - ah there be the bitterness ! the stockbroker have too short a 
 go - he be carry off in his flower . however , he leave his wife a 
 certain property , which she appear to have muddle away , not have the 
 safeguard of be herself a Hebrew . this be what she have live on till 
 to - day - this and another resource . her husband , as she have often tell 
 I , have the artistic temperament : that be common , as you know , among ce 
 monsieur . he make the most of his little opportunity and collect 
 various picture , tapestry , enamel , porcelain , and similar gewgaw . 
 he part with they also , I gather , at a profit ; in short he carry on 
 a neat little business as a brocanteur . it be nip in the bud , but 
 Mrs. Rooth be leave with a certain number of these article in her 
 hand ; indeed they must have form her only capital . she be not a 
 woman of business ; she turn they , no doubt , to indifferent account ; 
 but she sell they piece by piece , and they keep she go while her 
 daughter grow up . it be to this precarious traffic , conduct with 
 extraordinary mystery and delicacy , that , five year ago , in Florence , I 
 be indebted for my acquaintance with she . in those day I use to 
 collect - heaven help I ! - I use to pick up rubbish which I could ill 
 afford . it be a little phase - we have our little phase , have not   we ? " 
 Mr. Nash ask with childlike trust - " and I have   come out on the other 
 side . Mrs. Rooth have an old green pot and I hear of her old green pot . 
 to hear of it be to long for it , so that I go to see it under cover 
 of night . I buy it and a couple of year ago I overturn and smash 
 it . it be the last of the little phase . it be not , however , as you have 
 see , the last of Mrs. Rooth . I meet she afterwards in London , and I 
 find she a year or two ago in Venice . she appear to be a great 
 wanderer . she have other old pot , of other colour , red , yellow , black , 
 or blue - she could produce they of any complexion you like . I do not 
 know whether she carry they about with she or whether she have little 
 secret store in the principal city of Europe . to - day at any rate they 
 seem all go . on the other hand she have her daughter , who have grow up 
 and who be a precious vase of another kind - less fragile I hope than the 
 rest . may she not be overturn and smash ! " 

 Peter Sherringham and Biddy Dormer listen with attention to this 
 history , and the girl testify to the interest with which she have 
 follow it by say when Mr. Nash have cease speak : " a jewish 
 stockbroker , a dealer in curiosity : what an odd person to marry - for a 
 person who be well bear ! I daresay he be a German . " 

 " his name must have be simply Roth , and the poor lady , to smarten it 
 up , have put in another o , " Sherringham ingeniously suggest . 

 " you be both very clever , " say Gabriel , " and Rudolf Roth , as I happen 
 to know , be indeed the designation of Maud Vavasour 's papa . but so far 
 as the question of derogation go one might as well drown as 
 starve - for what connexion be not a misalliance when one happen to 
 have the unaccommodate , the crush honour of be a Neville - Nugent 
 of Castle Nugent ? that be the high lineage of Maud 's mamma . I seem to 
 have hear it mention that Rudolf Roth be very versatile and , like 
 most of his specie , not unacquainted with the practice of music . he have 
 be employ to teach the harmonium to Miss Neville - Nugent and she have 
 profit by his lesson . if his daughter be like he - and she be not like 
 her mother - he be darkly and dangerously handsome . so I venture rapidly 
 to reconstruct the situation . " 

 a silence , for the moment , have fall on Lady Agnes and her other two 
 child , so that Mr. Nash , with his universal urbanity , practically 
 address these last remark to they as well as to his other auditor . 
 Lady Agnes look as if she wonder whom he be talk about , and 
 have catch the name of a noble residence she inquire : " Castle 
 Nugent - where in the world 's that ? " 

 " it be a domain of immeasurable extent and almost inconceivable 
 splendour , but I fear not to be find in any prosaic earthly geography ! " 
 Lady Agnes rest her eye on the tablecloth as if she be not   sure a 
 liberty have not be take with she , or at least with her " order , " and 
 while Mr. Nash continue to abound in descriptive supposition - " it must 
 be on the bank of the Manzanares or the Guadalquivir " - Peter 
 Sherringham , whose imagination have seemingly be kindle by the sketch 
 of Miriam Rooth , take up the argument and remind he that he have a 
 short time before assign a low place to the dramatic art and have not 
 yet answer the question as to whether he believe in the theatre . 
 which give the speaker a further chance . " I do not   know that I understand 
 your question ; there be different way of take it . do I think it be 
 important ? be that what you mean ? important certainly to manager and 
 stage - carpenter who want to make money , to lady and gentleman who 
 want to produce themselves in public by limelight , and to other lady 
 and gentleman who be bored and stupid and do not   know what to do with 
 their evening . it be a commercial and social convenience which may be 
 infinitely work . but important artistically , intellectually ? how can 
 it be - so poor , so limit a form ? " 

 " upon my honour it strike I as rich and various ! do you think it be a 
 poor and limited form , Nick ? " Sherringham add , appeal to his 
 kinsman . 

 " I think whatever Nash think . I have   no opinion to - day but his . " 

 this answer of the hope of the Dormers draw the eye of his mother and 
 sister to he and cause his friend to exclaim that he be not   use to 
 such responsibility - so few people have ever test his presence of 
 mind by agree with he . " oh I use to be of your way of feeling , " 
 Nash go on to Sherringham . " I understand you perfectly . it be a phase 
 like another . I have   be through it - j'ai Ă tĂ   comme Ă a. " 

 " and you go then very often to the ThĂ Ă tre FranĂ ais , and it be there 
 I see you . I place you now . " 

 " I be afraid I notice none of the other spectator , " Nash explain . " I 
 have no attention but for the great CarrĂ   - she be still on the stage . 
 Judge of my infatuation , and how I can allow for your , when I tell you 
 that I seek her acquaintance , that I could not   rest till I have tell she 
 how I hang upon her lip . " 

 " that be just what I tell she , " Sherringham return . 

 " she be very kind to I . she say : ' vous I rendez des force . ' " 

 " that be just what she say to I ! " 

 " and we have   remain very good friend . " 

 " so have we ! " laugh Sherringham . " and such perfect art as hers - do you 
 mean to say you do not   consider that important , such a rare dramatic 
 intelligence ? " 

 " I be afraid you read the feuilleton . you catch their phrase " - Nash 
 speak with pity . " dramatic intelligence be never rare ; nothing be more 
 common . " 

 " then why have we so many shocking actor ? " 

 " have we ? I think they be mostly good ; succeed more easily and 
 more completely in that business than in anything else . what could they 
 do - those people generally - if they do not   do that poor thing ? and 
 reflect that the poor thing enable they to succeed ! of course , always , 
 there be number of people on the stage who be no actor at all , for 
 it be even easy to our poor humanity to be ineffectively stupid and 
 vulgar than to bring down the house . " 

 " it be not easy , by what I can see , to produce , completely , any artistic 
 effect , " Sherringham declare ; " and those the actor produce be among 
 the most momentous we know . you will not persuade I that to watch such an 
 actress as Madame CarrĂ   be not   an education of the taste , an enlargement 
 of one 's knowledge . " 

 " she do what she could , poor woman , but in what belittling , coarsen 
 condition ! she have to interpret a character in a play , and a character 
 in a play - not to say the whole piece : I speak more particularly of 
 modern piece - be such a wretchedly small peg to hang anything on ! the 
 dramatist show we so little , be so hamper by his audience , be 
 restrict to so poor an analysis . " 

 " I know the complaint . it be all the fashion now . the raffinĂ s despise 
 the theatre , " say Peter Sherringham in the manner of a man abreast with 
 the culture of his age and not to be capture by a surprise . " Connu , 
 connu ! " 

 " it will be know well yet , will not   it ? when the essentially brutal 
 nature of the modern audience be still more perceive , when it have be 
 properly analyse : the omnium gatherum of the population of a big 
 commercial city at the hour of the day when their taste be at its 
 low , flock out of hideous hotel and restaurant , gorge with 
 food , stultify with buying and selling and with all the other sordid 
 preoccupation of the age , squeeze together in a sweltering mass , 
 disappoint in their seat , time the author , time the actor , 
 wish to get their money back on the spot - all before eleven o'clock . 
 Fancy put the exquisite before such a tribunal as that ! there be not 
 even a question of it . the dramatist would not   if he could , and in nine 
 case out of ten he could not   if he would . he have to make the base 
 concession . one of his principal canon be that he must enable his 
 spectator to catch the suburban train , which stop at 11.30 . what would 
 you think of any other artist - the painter or the novelist - whose 
 govern force should be the dinner and the suburban train ? the old 
 dramatist do not   defer to they - not so much at least - and that be why 
 they be less and less actable . if they be touch - the large loose 
 man - it be only to be mutilate and trivialise . besides , they have a 
 simple civilisation to represent - society in which the life of man 
 be in action , in passion , in immediate and violent expression . those 
 thing could be put upon the playhouse board with comparatively little 
 sacrifice of their completeness and their truth . to - day we be so 
 infinitely more reflective and complicated and diffuse that it make all 
 the difference . what can you do with a character , with an idea , with a 
 feeling , between dinner and the suburban train ? you can give a gross , 
 rough sketch of they , but how little you touch they , how bald you leave 
 they ! what crudity compare with what the novelist do ! " 

 " do you write novel , Mr. Nash ? " Peter candidly ask . 

 " no , but I read they when they be extraordinarily good , and I do not   go 
 to play . I read Balzac for instance - I encounter the admirable portrait 
 of ValĂ rie Marneffe in La Cousine Bette . " 

 " and you contrast it with the poverty of Emile Augier 's să raphine in 
  Les Lionnes Pauvres ? I be await you there . that be the cheval de 
 bataille of you fellow . " 

 " what an extraordinary discussion ! what dreadful author ! " Lady Agnes 
 murmur to her son . but he be listen so attentively to the other 
 young man that he make no response , and Peter Sherringham go on : 

 " I have   see Madame CarrĂ   in thing of the modern repertory , which she have 
 make as vivid to I , cause to abide as ineffaceably in my memory , as 
 ValĂ rie Marneffe . she be the Balzac , as one may say , of actress . " 

 " the miniaturist , as it be , of whitewasher ! " Nash offer as a 
 substitute . 

 it might have be guess that Sherringham resent his damned freedom , 
 yet could but emulate his easy form . " you would be magnanimous if you 
 think the young lady you have   introduce to our old friend would be 
 important . " 

 Mr. Nash lightly weigh it . " she might be much more so than she ever 
 will be . " 

 Lady Agnes , however , get up to terminate the scene and even to signify 
 that enough have be say about people and question she have never so 
 much as hear of . every one else rise , the waiter bring Nicholas the 
 receipt of the bill , and Sherringham go on , to his interlocutor : 
 " perhaps she will be more so than you think . " 

 " perhaps - if you take an interest in she ! " 

 " a mystic voice seem to exhort I to do so , to whisper that though I have 
 never see she I shall find something in she . " on which Peter appeal . 
 " what do you say , Biddy - shall I take an interest in she ? " 

 the girl falter , colour a little , feel a certain embarrassment in 
 be publicly treat as an oracle . " if she be not nice I do not   advise 
 it . " 

 " and if she be nice ? " 

 " you advise it still less ! " her brother exclaim , laugh and put 
 his arm round she . 

 Lady Agnes look sombre - she might have be say to herself : " Heaven 
 help we , what chance have a girl of mine with a man who be so agog about 
 actress ? " she be disconcert and distressed ; a multitude of 
 incongruous thing , all the morning , have be force upon her 
 attention - displease picture and still more displeasing theory 
 about they , vague portent of perversity on Nick 's part and a strange 
 eagerness on Peter 's , learn apparently in Paris , to discuss , with a 
 person who have a tone she never have be expose to , topic irrelevant 
 and uninteresting , almost disgusting , the practical effect of which be 
 to make light of her presence . " let we leave this - let we leave this ! " 
 she grimly say . the party move together toward the door of departure , 
 and her ruffle spirit be not soothe by hear her son remark to his 
 terrible friend : " you know you do not   escape I ; I stick to you ! " 

 at this Lady Agnes break out and interpose . " pardon my reminding you 
 that you be go to call on Julia . " 

 " well , can not   Nash also come to call on Julia ? that be just what I 
 want - that she should see he . " 

 Peter Sherringham come humanely to his kinswoman 's assistance . " a well 
 way perhaps will be for they to meet under my auspex at my ' dramatic 
 tea . ' this will enable I to return one favour for another . if Mr. Nash 
 be so good as to introduce I to this aspirant for honour we estimate 
 so differently , I will introduce he to my sister , a much more positive 
 quantity . " 

 " it be easy to see who will have the good of it ! " Grace Dormer declare ; 
 while Nash stand there serenely , impartially , in a graceful detach way 
 which seem characteristic of he , assent to any decision that 
 relieve he of the grossness of choice and generally confident that 
 thing would turn out well for he . he be cheerfully helpless and 
 sociably indifferent ; ready to preside with a smile even at a 
 discussion of his own admissibility . 

 " Nick will bring you . I have   a little corner at the embassy , " Sherringham 
 continue . 

 " you be very kind . you must bring he then to - morrow - rue de 
 Constantinople . " 

 " at five o'clock - do not   be afraid . " 

 " oh dear ! " Biddy wail as they go on again and Lady Agnes , seize 
 his arm , march off more quickly with her son . when they come out into 
 the Champs ElysĂ es Nick Dormer , look round , see his friend have 
 disappear . Biddy have attach herself to Peter , and Grace could not 
 have encourage Mr. Nash . 




 V 


 Lady Agnes 's idea have be that her son should go straight from the 
 Palais de l'Industrie to the HĂ tel de Hollande , with or without his 
 mother and his sister as his humour should seem to recommend . much as 
 she desire to see their value Julia , and as she know her daughter 
 desire it , she be quite ready to put off their visit if this sacrifice 
 should contribute to a speedy confrontation for Nick . she be anxious he 
 should talk with Mrs. Dallow , and anxious he should be anxious himself ; 
 but it presently appear that he be conscious of no pressure of 
 eagerness . his view be that she and the girl should go to their cousin 
 without delay and should , if they like , spend the rest of the day in 
 her society . he would go later ; he would go in the evening . there be 
 lot of thing he want to do meanwhile . 

 this question be discuss with some intensity , though not at length , 
 while the little party stand on the edge of the Place de la Concorde , to 
 which they have proceed on foot ; and Lady Agnes notice that the " lot 
 of thing " to which he propose to give precedence over an urgent duty , 
 a conference with a person who hold out full hand to he , be imply 
 somehow in the friendly glance with which he cover the great square , 
 the opposite bank of the Seine , the steep blue roof of the quay , the 
 bright immensity of Paris . what in the world could be more important 
 than make sure of his seat ? - so quickly do the good lady 's 
 imagination travel . and now that idea appeal to he less than a ramble 
 in search of old book and print - since she be sure this be what he 
 have in his head . Julia would be flatter should she know it , but of 
 course she must not   know it . Lady Agnes be already think of the least 
 injurious account she could give of the young man 's want of 
 precipitation . she would have like to represent he as tremendously 
 occupy , in his room at their own hotel , in get off political 
 letter to every one it should concern , and particularly in draw up 
 his address to the elector of Harsh . fortunately she be a woman of 
 innumerable discretion , and a part of the worn look that sit in her 
 face come from she have school herself for year , in commerce with 
 her husband and her son , not to insist unduly . she would have like to 
 insist , nature have form she to insist , and the self - control have tell 
 in more way than one . even now it be powerless to prevent she 
 suggest that before do anything else Nick should at least repair 
 to the inn and see if there be not   some telegram . 

 he freely consent to do as much as this , and , have call a cab that 
 she might go her way with the girl , kiss she again as he have do at 
 the exhibition . this be an attention that could never displease she , 
 but somehow when he kiss she she be really the more worried : she have 
 come to recognise it as a sign that he be slip away from she , and 
 she wish she might frankly take it as his clutch at she to save he . 
 she drive off with a vague sense that at any rate she and the girl 
 might do something toward keep the place warm for he . she have be a 
 little vex that Peter have not administer more of a push toward the 
 HĂ tel de Hollande , clear as it have become to she now that there be a 
 foreignness in Peter which be not to be count on and which make he 
 speak of english affair and even of english domestic politic as local 
 and even " funny . " they be very grandly local , and if one recall , in 
 public life , an occasional droll incident be not   that , liberally view , 
 just the warm human comfort of they ? as she leave the two young man 
 stand together in the middle of the Place de la Concorde , the grand 
 composition of which Nick , as she look back , appear to have pause 
 to admire - as if he have not   see it a thousand time ! - she wish she 
 might have think of Peter 's influence with her son as exert a little 
 more in favour of localism . she have a fear he would not   abbreviate the 
 boy 's ill - timed flă nerie . however , he have be very nice : he have 
 invite they all to dine with he that evening at a convenient cafă , 
 promise to bring Julia and one of his colleague . so much as this he 
 have be willing to do to make sure Nick and his sister should meet . his 
 want of localism , moreover , be not so great as that if it should turn 
 out that there be anything beneath his manner toward Biddy - ! the 
 upshot of this reflexion might have be represent by the circumstance 
 of her ladyship 's remarking after a minute to her young daughter , who 
 sit opposite she in the voiture de place , that it would do no harm if 
 she should get a new hat and that the search might be institute that 
 afternoon . 

 " a french hat , mamma ? " say Grace . " oh do wait till she get home ! " 

 " I think they be really pretty here , you know , " Biddy opine ; and Lady 
 Agnes say simply : " I daresay they be cheap . " what be in her mind in 
 fact be : " I daresay Peter think they become . " it will be see she 
 have plenty of inward occupation , the sum of which be not lessen by 
 her learning when she reach the top of the Rue de la Paix that Mrs. 
 Dallow have go out half an hour before and have leave no message . she be 
 more disconcert by this incident than she could have explain or than 
 she think be right , as she have take for grant Julia would be in a 
 manner wait for they . how could she be sure Nick be not   come ? when 
 people be in Paris a few day they do not   mope in the house , but she 
 might have wait a little long or have leave an explanation . be she 
 then not so much in earnest about Nick 's standing ? do not   she recognise 
 the importance of be there to see he about it ? Lady Agnes wonder 
 if her behaviour be a sign of she be already tired of the way this 
 young gentleman treat she . perhaps she have go out because an 
 instinct tell she that the great propriety of their meeting early would 
 make no difference with he - tell she he would not   after all come . his 
 mother 's heart sink as she glance at this possibility that their 
 precious friend be already tired , she have on her side an intuition 
 that there be still hard thing in store . she have dislike have to 
 tell Mrs. Dallow that Nick would not   see she till the evening , but now 
 she dislike still more she not be there to hear it . she even 
 resent a little her kinswoman be not have reason that she and the 
 girl would come in any event , and not think they worth stay in 
 for . it come up indeed that she would perhaps have go to their hotel , 
 which be a good way up the Rue de Rivoli , near the Palais Royal - on 
 which the cabman be direct to drive to that establishment . 

 as he jog along she take in some degree the measure of what that 
 might mean , Julia 's seek a little to avoid they . be she grow to 
 dislike they ? do she think they keep too sharp an eye on she , so that 
 the idea of their standing in a still close relation would not   be 
 entice ? her conduct up to this time have not wear such an appearance , 
 unless perhaps a little , just a very little , in the matter of her way 
 with poor grace . Lady Agnes know she be not   particularly fond of poor 
 Grace , and could even sufficiently guess the reason - the manner in which 
 Grace betray most how they want to make sure of she . she remember 
 how long the girl have stay the last time she have be at Harsh - go 
 for an acceptable week and drag out her visit to a month . she take a 
 private heroic vow that Grace should not   go near the place again for a 
 year ; not , that is , unless Nick and Julia be marry within the time . 
 if that be to happen she should not   care . she recognise that it be not 
 absolutely everything Julia should be in love with Nick ; it be also 
 well she should dislike his mother and sister after a probable 
 pursuit of he than before . Lady Agnes do justice to the natural rule 
 in virtue of which it usually come to pass that a woman do not   get on 
 with her husband 's female belonging , and be even willing to be 
 sacrifice to it in her disciplined degree . but she desire not to be 
 sacrifice for nothing : if she be to be object to as a mother - in - law 
 she wish to be the mother - in - law first . 

 at the hotel in the Rue de Rivoli she have the disappointment of find 
 that Mrs. Dallow have not call , and also that no telegram have come . 
 she go in with the girl for half an hour and then straggle out with 
 they again . she be undetermined and dissatisfied and the afternoon be 
 rather a problem ; of the kind , moreover , that she dislike most and be 
 least accustomed to : not a choice between different thing to do - her 
 life have be full of that - but a want of anything to do at all . Nick 
 have say to she before they separate : " you can knock about with the 
 girl , you know ; everything be amusing here . " that be easily say while 
 he saunter and gossip with Peter Sherringham and perhaps go to 
 see more picture like those in the Salon . he be usually , on such 
 occasion , very good - natured about spend his time with they ; but this 
 episode have take altogether a perverse , profane form . she have no desire 
 whatever to knock about and be far from find everything in Paris 
 amusing . she have no aptitude for aimlessness , and moreover think it 
 vulgar . if she have find Julia 's card at the hotel - the sign of a hope 
 of catch they just as they come back from the Salon - she would have 
 make a second attempt to see she before the evening ; but now certainly 
 they would leave she alone . Lady Agnes wander joylessly with the girl 
 in the Palais Royal and the Rue de Richelieu , and emerge upon the 
 Boulevard , where they continue their frugal prowl , as Biddy rather 
 irritatingly call it . they go into five shop to buy a hat for 
 Biddy , and her ladyship 's presumption of cheapness be woefully 
 belie . 

 " who in the world 's your comic friend ? " Peter Sherringham be meanwhile 
 ask of his kinsman as they walk together . 

 " ah there be something else you lose by go to Cambridge - you lose 
 Gabriel Nash ! " 

 " he sound like an Elizabethan dramatist , " Sherringham say . " but I 
 have not   lose he , since it appear now I shall not   be able to have you 
 without he . " 

 " oh , as for that , wait a little . I be go to try he again , but I do not 
 know how he wear . what I mean be that you have   probably lose his 
 freshness , which be the great thing . I rather fear he be become 
 conventional , or at any rate serious . " 

 " bless I , do you call that serious ? " 

 " he use to be so gay . he have a real genius for play with idea . he 
 be a wonderful talker . " 

 " it seem to I he do very well now , " say Peter Sherringham . 

 " oh this be nothing . he have great flight of old , very great flight ; 
 one see he rise and rise and turn somersault in the blue - one wonder 
 how far he could go . he be very intelligent , and I should think it might 
 be interesting to find out what it be that prevent the whole man from 
 be as good as his part . I mean in case he be not   so good . " 

 " I see you more than suspect that . may not   it be simply that he be too 
 great an ass ? " 

 " that would be the whole - I shall see in time - but it certainly be not 
 one of the part . it may be the effect , but it be not   the cause , and it be 
 for the cause I claim an interest . do you think he an ass for what he 
 say about the theatre - his pronounce it a coarse art ? " 

 " to differ from you about he that reason would do , " say Sherringham . 
 " the only bad one would be one that should not   preserve our difference . 
 you need not   tell I you agree with he , for frankly I do not   care . " 

 " then your passion still burn ? " Nick Dormer ask . 

 " my passion - ? " 

 " I do not   mean for any individual exponent of the equivocal art : mark the 
 guilty conscience , mark the rise blush , mark the confusion of mind ! I 
 mean the old sign one know you well by ; your permanent stall at the 
 FranĂ ais , your inveterate attendance at premiere , the way you 
 ' follow ' the young talent and the old . " 

 " yes , it be still my little hobby , my little folly if you like , " 
 Sherringham say . " I do not   find I get tired of it . what will you have ? 
 strong predilection be rather a blessing ; they be simplify . I be 
 fond of representation - the representation of life : I like it well , I 
 think , than the real thing . you like it too , you would be ready in other 
 condition to go in for it , in your way - so you have   no right to cast the 
 stone . you like it well do by one vehicle and I by another ; and our 
 preference on either side have a deep root in we . there be a fascination 
 to I in the way the actor do it , when his talent - ah he must have 
 that ! - have be highly train . ah it must be that ! the thing he can 
 do in this effort at representation , with the dramatist to back he , 
 seem to I innumerable - he can carry it to a point ! - and I take great 
 pleasure in observe they , in recognise and compare they . it be an 
 amusement like another - I do not   pretend to call it by any exalt name , 
 but in this vale of friction it will serve . one can lose one 's self in 
 it , and it have the recommendation - in common , I suppose , with the study 
 of the other art - that the further you go in it the more you find . so I 
 go rather far , if you will . but be it the principal sign one know I 
 by ? " Peter abruptly ask . 

 " do not   be ashamed of it , " Nick return - " else it will be ashamed of 
 you . I ought to discriminate . you be distinguish among my friend and 
 relation by your character of rise young diplomatist ; but you know I 
 always want the final touch to the picture , the last fruit of analysis . 
 therefore I make out that you be conspicuous among rise young 
 diplomatist for the infatuation you describe in such pretty term . " 

 " you evidently believe it will prevent my ever rise very high . but 
 pastime for pastime be it any idler than your ? " 

 " than mine ? " 

 " why you have   half - a - dozen while I only allow myself the luxury of one . 
 for the theatre 's my sole vice , really . be this more wanton , say , than 
 to devote week to the consideration of the particular way in which your 
 friend Mr. Nash may be most intensely a twaddl and a bore ? that be not 
 my ideal of choice recreation , but I would undertake to satisfy you about 
 he soon . you be a young statesman - who happen to be an en 
 disponibilitĂ   for the moment - but you spend not a little of your time 
 in besmear canvas with bright - colour pigment . the idea of 
 representation fascinate you , but in your case it be representation in 
 oil - or do you practise water - colour and pastel too ? you even go much 
 far than I , for I study my art of predilection only in the work of 
 other . I do not   aspire to leave work of my own . you be a painter , 
 possibly a great one ; but I be not an actor . " Nick Dormer declare he 
 would certainly become one - he be so well on the way to it ; and 
 Sherringham , without heed this charge , go on : " let I add that , 
 consider you be a painter , your portrait of the complicated Nash 
 be lamentably dim . " 

 " he be not at all complicated ; he be only too simple to give an account 
 of . Most people have a lot of attribute and appendage that dress they 
 up and superscribe they , and what I like Gabriel for be that he have not 
 any at all . it make he , it keep he , so refreshingly cool . " 

 " by Jove , you match he there ! be not   it an appendage and an attribute to 
 escape kicking ? how do he manage that ? " Sherringham ask . 

 " I have not   the least idea - I do not   know that he do not   rouse the 
 kicking impulse . besides , he can kick back and I do not   think any one have 
 ever see he duck or dodge . his mean , his profession , his belonging 
 have never anything to do with the question . he do not   shade off into 
 other people ; he be as neat as an outline cut out of paper with scissor . 
 I like he , therefore , because in deal with he you know what you have 
 get hold of . with most man you do not : to pick the flower you must break 
 off the whole dusty , thorny , worldly branch ; you find you be take up 
 in your grasp all sort of other people and thing , dangle accident 
 and condition . poor Nash have none of those encumbrance : he be the 
 solitary - fragrant blossom . " 

 " my dear fellow , you would be well for a little of the same pruning ! " 
 Sherringham retort ; and the young man continue their walk and their 
 gossip , jerk each other this way and that , punch each other here 
 and there , with an amicable roughness consequent on their having , be 
 boy together . Intimacy have reign of old between the little 
 Sherringhams and the little Dormers , unite in the country by ease of 
 neighbouring and by the fact that there be first cousinship , not 
 neglect , among the parent , Lady Agnes stand in this plastic 
 relation to Lady Windrush , the mother of Peter and Julia as well as of 
 other daughter and of a mature youth who be to inherit , and who since 
 then have inherit , the ancient barony . many thing have alter later 
 on , but not the good reason for not explain . one of our young man 
 have go to Eton and the other to Harrow - the scatter school on the 
 hill be the tradition of the Dormers - and the divergence have rather 
 take its course in university year . Bricket , however , have remain 
 accessible to Windrush , and Windrush to Bricket , to which estate 
 Percival Dormer have now succeed , terminate the interchange a trifle 
 rudely by let out that pleasant white house in the midland - its 
 expropriate inhabitant , Lady Agnes and her daughter , adore it - to an 
 American repute rich , who in the first flush of his sense of contrast 
 consider that for twelve hundred a year he get it at a bargain . 
 Bricket have come to the late Sir Nicholas from his eld brother , die 
 wifeless and childless . the new baronet , so different from his 
 father - though recall at some point the uncle after whom he have 
 be name - that Nick have to make it up by cultivate conformity , 
 roam about the world , take shot which excite the enthusiasm of 
 society , when society hear of they , at the few legitimate creature of 
 the chase the british rifle have up to that time spar . Lady Agnes 
 meanwhile settle with her girl in a gable , latticed house in a 
 mentionable quarter , though it still require a little explaining , of 
 the temperate zone of London . it be not into her lap , poor woman , that 
 the revenue of Bricket be pour . there be no dower - house attach 
 to that moderate property , and the allowance with which the estate be 
 charge on her ladyship 's behalf be not an incitement to grandeur . 

 Nick have a room under his mother 's roof , which he mainly use to dress 
 for dinner when dining in Calcutta Gardens , and he have " keep on " his 
 chamber in the Temple ; for to a young man in public life an independent 
 address be indispensable . moreover , he be suspect of have a studio 
 in an out - of - the - way district , the indistinguishable part of South 
 Kensington , incongruous as such a retreat might seem in the case of a 
 member of Parliament . it be an absurd place to see his constituent 
 unless he want to paint their portrait , a kind of " representation " 
 with which they would scarce have be satisfy ; and in fact the only 
 question of portraiture have be when the wife and daughter of several 
 of they express a wish for the picture of their handsome young member . 
 Nick have not offer to paint it himself , and the studio be take for 
 grant rather than much look into by the lady in Calcutta Gardens . 
 too express a disposition to regard whim of this sort as extravagance 
 pure and simple be know by they to be open to correction ; for they 
 be not oblivious that Mr. Carteret have humour which weigh against 
 they in the shape of convenient cheque nestle between the inside 
 page of legible letter of advice . Mr. Carteret be Nick 's providence , 
 just as Nick be look to , in a general way , to be that of his mother 
 and sister , especially since it have become so plain that Percy , who be 
 not subtly selfish , would operate , mainly with a ' six - bore , " quite out 
 of that sphere . it be not for studio certainly that Mr. Carteret send 
 cheque ; but they be an expression of general confidence in Nick , and 
 a little expansion be natural to a young man enjoy such a luxury as 
 that . it be sufficiently feel in Calcutta Gardens that he could be 
 look to not to betray such confidence ; for Mr. Carteret 's behaviour 
 could have no name at all unless one be prepared to call it 
 encouraging . he have never promise anything , but he be one of the 
 delightful person with whom the redemption precede or dispense with 
 the vow . he have be an early and lifelong friend of the late right 
 honourable gentleman , a political follower , a devoted admirer , a stanch 
 supporter in difficult hour . he have never marry , espouse nothing 
 more reproductive than Sir Nicholas 's view - he use to write letter to 
 the Times in favour of they - and have , so far as be know , neither 
 chick nor child ; nothing but an amiable little family of eccentricity , 
 the flower of which be his odd taste for live in a small , steep , 
 clean country town , all green garden and red wall with a girdle of 
 hedge - row , all cluster about an immense brown old abbey . when Lady 
 Agnes 's imagination rest upon the future of her second son she like 
 to remember that Mr. Carteret have nothing to " keep up " : the inference 
 seem so direct that he would keep up Nick . 

 the most important event in the life of this young man have be 
 incomparably his success , under his father 's eye , more than two year 
 before , in the sharp contest for Crockhurst - a victory which his 
 consecrate name , his extreme youth , his ardour in the fray , the marked 
 personal sympathy of the party , and the attention excite by the fresh 
 cleverness of his speech , tint with young idealism and yet stick 
 sufficiently to the question - the burn question which have since 
 burn out - have make quite splendid . there have be leader in the 
 newspaper about it , half in compliment to her husband , who be know to 
 be fail so prematurely - he be almost as young to die , and to die 
 famous , for Lady Agnes regard it as famous , as his son have be to 
 stand - tribute the boy 's mother religiously preserve , cut out and tie 
 together with a ribbon , in the innermost drawer of a favourite cabinet . 
 but it have be a barren , or almost a barren triumph , for in the order 
 of importance in Nick 's history another incident have run it , as the 
 phrase be , very close : nothing less than the quick dissolution of the 
 Parliament in which he be so manifestly destine to give symptom of a 
 future . he have not recover his seat at the general election , for the 
 second contest be even sharp than the first and the Tories have put 
 forward a loud , vulgar , rattling , bullying , money - spend man . it be 
 to a certain extent a comfort that poor Sir Nicholas , who have be 
 witness of the bright hour , should have pass away before the darkness . 
 he die with all his hope on his second son 's head , unconscious of near 
 disappointment , hand on the torch and the tradition , after a long , 
 supreme interview with Nick at which Lady Agnes have not be present , 
 but which she know to have be a thorough paternal dedication , an 
 august communication of idea on the high national question   she have 
 reason to believe he have touch on those of external as well as of 
 domestic and of colonial policy   leave on the boy 's nature and manner 
 from that moment the most unmistakable trace . if his tendency to 
 reverie increase it be because he have so much to think over in what 
 his pale father have say to he in the hush dim chamber , lay on he 
 the great mission that death have cut short , breathe into he with 
 unforgettable solemnity the very accent - Sir Nicholas 's voice have be 
 wonderful for richness - that he be to sound again . it be work cut out 
 for a lifetime , and that " co - ordinating power in relation to detail " 
 which be one of the great characteristic of the lamented statesman 's 
 high distinction - the most analytic of the weekly paper be always 
 talk about it - have enable he to rescue the prospect from any shade 
 of vagueness or of ambiguity . 

 five year before Nick Dormer go up to be question by the elector 
 of Crockhurst Peter Sherringham have appear before a board of examiner 
 who let he off much less easily , though there be also some flattering 
 prejudice in his favour ; such influence be a part of the copious , 
 light , unembarrasse baggage with which each of the young man begin 
 life . Peter pass , however , pass high , and have his reward in prompt 
 assignment to small , subordinate , diplomatic duty in Germany . since 
 then he have have his professional adventure , which need not arrest we , 
 inasmuch as they have all pal in the light of his appointment , nearly 
 three year previous to the moment of our make his acquaintance , to a 
 secretaryship of embassy in Paris . he have do well and have go fast 
 and for the present could draw his breath at ease . it please he well 
 to remain in Paris as a subordinate than to go to Honduras as a 
 principal , and Nick Dormer have not put a false colour on the matter in 
 speak of his stall at the ThĂ Ă tre FranĂ ais as a sedative to his 
 ambition . Nick 's inferiority in age to his cousin sit on he more 
 lightly than when they have be in their teen ; and indeed no one can 
 very well be much old than a young man who have figure for a year , 
 however imperceptibly , in the House of Commons . separation and diversity 
 have make they reciprocally strange enough to give a price to what they 
 share ; they be friend without be particular friend ; that far 
 degree could always hang before they as a suitable but not oppressive 
 contingency , and they be both conscious that it be in their interest 
 to keep certain difference to " chaff " each other about - so possible be 
 it that they might have quarrel if they have have everything in common . 
 Peter , as be wide - minded , be a little irritated to find his cousin 
 always so intensely british , while Nick Dormer make he the object of 
 the same compassionate criticism , recognise in he a rare knack with 
 foreign tongue , but reflect , and even with extravagance declare , 
 that it be a pity to have go so far from home only to remain so 
 homely . moreover , Nick have his idea about the diplomatic mind , find 
 in it , for his own sympathy , always the wrong turn . Dry , narrow , barren , 
 poor he pronounce it in familiar conversation with the clever 
 secretary ; want in imagination , in generosity , in the fine 
 perception and the high courage . this serve as well as anything 
 else to keep the peace between they ; it be a necessity of their 
 friendly intercourse that they should scuffle a little , and it scarcely 
 matter what they scuffle about . Nick Dormer 's express enjoyment of 
 Paris , the shop - window on the quay , the old book on the parapet , the 
 gaiety of the river , the grandeur of the Louvre , every fine feature of 
 that prodigious face , strike his companion as a sign of insularity ; the 
 appreciation of such thing have become with Sherringham an 
 unconscious habit , a contented assimilation . if poor Nick , for the 
 hour , be demonstrative and lyrical , it be because he have no other way 
 of sound the note of farewell to the independent life of which the 
 term seem now definitely in sight - the sense so press upon he that 
 these be the last moment of his freedom . he would waste time till 
 half - past seven , because half - past seven meant dinner , and dinner mean 
 his mother solemnly attend by the strenuous shade of his father and 
 re - enforce by Julia . 




 VI 


 when he arrive with the three member of his family at the restaurant 
 of their choice Peter Sherringham be already seat there by one of the 
 immaculate table , but Mrs. Dallow be not yet on the scene , and they 
 have time for a sociable settlement - time to take their place and unfold 
 their napkin , crunch their roll , breathe the savoury air , and watch 
 the door , before the usual raising of head and suspension of fork , the 
 sort of stir that accompany most of this lady 's movement , announce 
 her entrance . the dame de comptoir duck and re - ducked , the people 
 look round , Peter and Nick get up , there be a shuffling of 
 chair - Julia have come . Peter be relate how he have stop at her 
 hotel to bring she with he and have find she , accord to her custom , 
 by no mean ready ; on which , fear his guest would arrive first at 
 the rendezvous and find no proper welcome , he have come off without she , 
 leave she to follow . he have not bring a friend , as he intend , 
 have divine that Julia would prefer a pure family party if she want 
 to talk about her candidate . now she stand look down at the table and 
 her expectant kinsfolk , draw off her glove , let her brother draw 
 off her jacket , lift her hand for some rearrangement of her hat . she 
 look at Nick last , smile , but only for a moment . she say to Peter : 
 " be we go to dine here ? oh dear , why do not   you have a private 
 room ? " 

 Nick have not see she at all for several week and have see she but 
 little for a year , but her off - hand cursory manner have not alter in 
 the interval . she speak remarkably fast , as if speech be not in itself 
 a pleasure - to have it over as soon as possible ; and her brusquerie 
 be of the dark shade friendly critic account for by plead shyness . 
 Shyness have never appear to he an ultimate quality or a real 
 explanation of anything ; it only explain an effect by another effect , 
 neither with a cause to boast of . what he suspect in Julia be that 
 her mind be less pleasing than her person ; an ugly , a really blight 
 idea , which as yet he have but half accept . it be a case in which she 
 be entitle to the benefit of every doubt and ought not   to be judge 
 without a complete trial . Nick meanwhile be afraid of the trial - this 
 be partly why he have be of late to see she so little - because he be 
 afraid of the sentence , afraid of anything that might work to lessen the 
 charm it be actually in the power of her beauty to shed . there be 
 people who think her rude , and he hat rude woman . if he should 
 fasten on that view , or rather if that view should fasten on he , what 
 could still please and what he admire in she would lose too much of its 
 sweetness . if it be think odd that he have not yet be able to read 
 the character of a woman he have know since childhood the answer be that 
 this character have grow fast than Nick 's observation . the growth be 
 constant , whereas the observation be but occasional , though it have 
 begin early . if he have attempt inwardly to phrase the matter , as he 
 probably have not , he might have pronounce the effect she produce upon 
 he too much a compulsion ; not the coercion of design , of importunity , 
 nor the vulgar pressure of family expectation , a betray desire he 
 should like she enough to marry she , but a mixture of diver urgent 
 thing ; of the sense that she be imperious and generous - probably more 
 the former than the latter - and of a certain prevision of doom , the 
 influence of the idea that he should come to it , that he be 
 predestine . 

 this have make he shrink from know the bad about she ; not the wish 
 to get use to it in time , but what be more characteristic of he , the 
 wish to interpose a temporary illusion . illusion and reality and 
 hope and fear , however , fall into confusion whenever he meet she after 
 a separation . the separation , so far as see she alone or as 
 continuous talk be concern , have now be tolerably long ; have last 
 really ever since his failure to regain his seat . an impression have come 
 to he that she judge that failure rather stiffly , have think , and have 
 somewhat sharply say , that he ought to have do well . this be a 
 part of her imperious way , and a part not all to be overlook on a 
 mere present basis . if he be to marry she he should come to an 
 understanding with she : he should give she his own measure as well as 
 take her . but the understanding might in the actual case suggest too 
 much that he be to marry she . you could quarrel with your wife 
 because there be compensation - for she ; but you might not   be prepare 
 to offer these compensation as prepayment for the luxury of 
 quarrel . 

 it be not that such a luxury would not   be considerable , our young man 
 none the less thought as Julia Dallow 's fine head poise itself before 
 he again ; a high spirit be of course well than a mawkish to be 
 mismate with , any day in the year . she have much the same colour as her 
 brother , but as nothing else in her face be the same the resemblance 
 be not strike . her hair be of so dark a brown that it be commonly 
 regard as black , and so abundant that a plain arrangement be require 
 to keep it in natural relation to the rest of her person . her eye be 
 of a grey sometimes pronounce too light , and be not sink in her 
 face , but place well on the surface . her nose be perfect , but her 
 mouth be too small ; and Nick Dormer , and doubtless other person as 
 well , have sometimes wonder how with such a mouth her face could have 
 express decision . her figure help it , for she appear tall - be 
 extremely slender - yet be not ; and her head take turn and position 
 which , though a matter of but half an inch out of the common this way or 
 that , somehow contribute to the air of resolution and temper . if it have 
 not be for her extreme delicacy of line and surface she might have 
 be call bold ; but as it be she look refined and quiet - refined by 
 tradition and quiet for a purpose . and altogether she be beautiful , 
 with the gravity of her elegant head , her hair like the depth of 
 darkness , her eye like its early clearing , her mouth like a rare pink 
 flower . 

 Peter say he have not take a private room because he know Biddy 's 
 taste ; she like to see the world - she have tell he so - the curious 
 people , the coming and going of Paris . " oh anything for Biddy ! " Julia 
 reply , smile at the girl and take her place . Lady Agnes and her 
 eld daughter exchange one of their look , and Nick exclaim jocosely 
 that he do not   see why the whole party should be sacrifice to a 
 presumptuous child . the presumptuous child blushingly protest she have 
 never express any such wish to Peter , upon which Nick , with broad 
 humour , reveal that Peter have serve they so out of stinginess : he have 
 pitchfork they together in the public room because he would not   go to 
 the expense of a cabinet . he have bring no guest , no foreigner of 
 distinction nor diplomatic swell , to honour they , and now they would see 
 what a paltry dinner he would give they . Peter stab he indignantly 
 with a long roll , and Lady Agnes , who seem to be wait for some 
 manifestation on Mrs. Dallow 's part which do not   come , conclude , with a 
 certain coldness , that they quite suffice to themselves for privacy as 
 well as for society . Nick call attention to this fine phrase of his 
 mother 's and say it be awfully neat , while Grace and Biddy look 
 harmoniously at Julia 's clothe . Nick feel nervous and joke a good deal 
 to carry it off - a levity that do not   prevent Julia 's say to he 
 after a moment : " you might have come to see I to - day , you know . do not 
 you get my message from Peter ? " 

 " scold he , Julia - scold he well . I beg he to go , " say Lady Agnes ; 
 and to this Grace add her voice with an " oh Julia , do give it to he ! " 
 these word , however , have not the effect they suggest , since Mrs. 
 Dallow only throw off for answer , in her quick curt way , that that would 
 be make far too much of he . it be one of the thing in she that Nick 
 mentally pronounce ungraceful , the perversity of pride or of shyness 
 that always make she disappoint you a little if she see you expect a 
 thing . she snub effusiveness in a way that yet give no interesting 
 hint of any wish to keep it herself in reserve . Effusiveness , however , 
 certainly , be the last thing of which Lady Agnes would have consent 
 to be accuse ; and Nick , while he reply to Julia that he be sure he 
 should not   have find she , be not unable to perceive the operation on 
 his mother of that shade of manner . " he ought to have go ; he owe you 
 that , " she go on ; " but it be very true he would have have the same luck 
 as we . I go with the girl directly after luncheon . I suppose you get 
 our card . " 

 " he might have come after I come in , " say Mrs. Dallow . 

 " Dear Julia , I be go to see you to - night . I have   be wait for that , " 
 Nick return . 

 " of course we have no idea when you would come in , " say Lady Agnes . 

 " I be so sorry . you must come to - morrow . I hate call at night , " Julia 
 serenely add . 

 " well then , will you roam with I ? will you wander through Paris on my 
 arm ? " Nick ask , smile . " will you take a drive with I ? " 

 " oh that would be perfection ! " cry Grace . 

 " I think we be all go somewhere - to the Hippodrome , Peter , " Biddy 
 say . 

 " oh not all ; just you and I ! " laugh Peter . 

 " I be go home to my bed . I have   earn my rest , " Lady Agnes sigh . 

 " can not   Peter take we ? " demand Grace . " Nick can take you home , mamma , 
 if Julia will not   receive he , and I can look perfectly after Peter and 
 Biddy . " 

 " take they to something amusing ; please take they , " Mrs. Dallow say to 
 her brother . her voice be kind , but have the expectation of assent in 
 it , and Nick observe both the good nature and the pressure . " you be 
 tired , poor dear , " she continue to Lady Agnes . " Fancy your being 
 drag about so ! what do you come over for ? " 

 " my mother come because I bring she , " Nick say . " it be I who have 
 drag she about . I bring she for a little change . I think it would 
 do she good . I want to see the Salon . " 

 " it be not   a bad time . I have   a carriage and you must use it ; you must use 
 nothing else . it shall take you everywhere . I will drive you about 
 to - morrow . " Julia drop these word with all her air of be able 
 rather than of want ; but Nick have already note , and he note now 
 afresh and with pleasure , that her lack of unction interfere not a bit 
 with she always act . it be quite sufficiently manifest to he that 
 for the rest of the time she might be near his mother she would do for 
 her numberless good turn . she would give thing to the girl - he have a 
 private adumbration of that ; expensive Parisian , perhaps not perfectly 
 useful , thing . 

 Lady Agnes be a woman who measure outlay and return , but she be 
 both too acute and too just not to recognise the scantest offer from 
 which an advantage could proceed . " Dear Julia ! " she exclaim 
 responsively ; and her tone make this brevity of acknowledgment adequate . 
 Julia 's own few word be all she want . " it be so interesting about 
 harsh , " she add . " we be immensely excited . " 

 " yes , Nick look it . merci , pas de vin . it be just the thing for you , 
 you know , " Julia say to he . 

 " to be sure he know it . he be immensely grateful . it be really very kind 
 of you . " 

 " you do I a very great honour , Julia , " Nick hasten to add . 

 " do not   be tiresome , please , " that lady return . 

 " we will talk about it later . of course there be lot of point , " Nick 
 pursue . " at present let us be purely convivial . somehow Harsh be such a 
 false note here . nous causeron de Ă a . " 

 " my dear fellow , you have   catch exactly the tone of Mr. Gabriel Nash , " 
 Peter Sherringham declare on this . 

 " who be Mr. Gabriel Nash ? " Mrs. Dallow ask . 

 " Nick , be he a gentleman ? Biddy say so , " Grace Dormer interpose before 
 this inquiry be answer . 

 " it be to be suppose that any one Nick bring to lunch with us - ! " Lady 
 Agnes rather coldly sigh . 

 " ah Grace , with your tremendous standard ! " her son say ; while Peter 
 Sherringham explain to his sister that Mr. Nash be Nick 's new mentor 
 or oracle - whom , moreover , she should see if she would come and have tea 
 with he . 

 " I have not   the least desire to see he , " Julia make answer , " any more 
 than I have to talk about harsh and bore poor Peter . " 

 " oh certainly , dear , you would bore I , " her brother ring out . 

 " one thing at a time then . let we by all mean be convivial . only you 
 must show I how , " Mrs. Dallow go on to Nick . " what do he mean , 
 Cousin Agnes ? do he want we to drain the wine - cup , to flash with 
 repartee ? " 

 " you will do very well , " say Nick . " you be thoroughly charming to - night . " 

 " do go to Peter 's , Julia , if you want something exciting . you will see a 
 wonderful girl , " Biddy break in with her smile on Peter . 

 " wonderful for what ? " 

 " for think she can act when she can not , " say the roguish Biddy . 

 " dear I , what people you all know ! I hate Peter 's theatrical people . " 

 " and be not   you go home , Julia ? " Lady Agnes inquire . 

 " home to the hotel ? " 

 " dear , no , to Harsh - to see about everything . " 

 " I be in the midst of telegram . I do not   know yet . " 

 " I suppose there be no doubt they will have he , " Lady Agnes decide to 
 pursue . 

 " who will have whom ? " 

 " why , the local people and the party manager . I be speak of the 
 question of my son 's standing . " 

 " they will have the person I want they to have , I daresay . there be so 
 many people in it , in one way or another - it be dreadful . I like the way 
 you sit there , " Julia go on to Nick . 

 " so do I , " he smile back at she ; and he think she be charming now , 
 because she be gay and easy and willing really , though she might plead 
 incompetence , to understand how jocose a dinner in a pothouse in a 
 foreign town might be . she be in good humour or be go to be , and 
 not grand nor stiff nor indifferent nor haughty nor any of the thing 
 people who dislike she usually find she and sometimes even a little 
 make he believe she . the spirit of mirth in some cold nature manifest 
 itself not altogether happily , their effort of recreation resemble too 
 much the bath of the hippopotamus ; but when Mrs. Dallow put her elbow 
 on the table one feel she could be trust to get they safely off again . 

 for a family in mourn the dinner be lively ; the more so that before 
 it be half over Julia have arrange that her brother , eschew the 
 inferior spectacle , should take the girl to the ThĂ Ă tre FranĂ ais . it 
 be her idea , and Nick have a chance to observe how an idea be apt to be 
 not successfully controvert when it be Julia 's . even the programme 
 appear to have be prearrange to suit it , just the thing for the 
 cheek of the young person - Il ne Faut Jurer de Rien and Mademoiselle 
 de la Seigliere . Peter be all willingness , but it be Julia who 
 settle it , even to send for the newspaper - he be by a rare accident 
 unconscious of the evening 's bill - and to reassure Biddy , who be 
 happy but anxious , on the article of their be too late for good 
 place . Peter could always get good place : a word from he and the good 
 box be at his disposal . she make he write the word on a card and see a 
 messenger despatch with it to the Rue de Richelieu ; and all this 
 without loudness or insistence , parenthetically and authoritatively . the 
 box be bespeak and the carriage , as soon as they have have their coffee , 
 find to be in attendance . Peter drive off in it with the girl , 
 understanding that he be to send it back , and Nick wait for it over 
 the finished repast with the two lady . after this his mother be 
 escort to it and convey to her apartment , and all the while it have 
 be Julia who govern the succession of event . " do be nice to she , " 
 Lady Agnes breathe to he as he place she in the vehicle at the door 
 of the cafă ; and he guess it give she a comfort to have leave he 
 sit there with Mrs. Dallow . 

 he have every disposition to be nice to his charming cousin ; if thing 
 go as she like they it be the proof of a certain fine force in 
 she - the force of assume they would . Julia have her difference - some 
 of they be much for the well ; and when she be in a mood like this 
 evening 's , liberally dominant , he be ready to encourage most of what 
 she take for grant . while they wait for the return of the carriage , 
 which have roll away with his mother , she sit opposite he with she 
 elbow on the table , play first with one and then with another of the 
 object that encumber it ; after five minute of which she exclaim , 
 " oh I say , well go ! " and get up abruptly , ask for her jacket . he say 
 something about the carriage and its order to come back for they , and 
 she reply , " well , it can go away again . I do not   want a carriage , " she 
 add : " I want to walk " - and in a moment she be out of the place , with 
 the people at the table turn round again and the caissiere sway 
 in her high seat . on the pavement of the boulevard she look up and 
 down ; there be people at little table by the door ; there be people 
 all over the broad expanse of the asphalt ; there be a profusion of 
 light and a pervasion of sound ; and everywhere , though the establishment 
 at which they have be din be not in the thick of the fray , the 
 token of a great traffic of pleasure , that night - aspect of Paris which 
 represent it as a huge market for sensation . beyond the Boulevard des 
 Capucines it flare through the warm evening like a vast bazaar , and 
 opposite the CafĂ   durand the Madeleine rise theatrical , a high artful 
  dĂ cor before the footlight of the Rue Royale . " where shall we go , 
 what shall we do ? " Mrs. Dallow ask , look at her companion and 
 somewhat to his surprise , as he have suppose she want but to go home . 

 " anywhere you like . it be so warm we might drive instead of go 
 indoor . we might go to the Bois . that would be agreeable . " 

 " yes , but it would not   be walk . however , that do not   matter . it be 
 mild enough for anything - for sit out like all these people . and 
 I have   never walk in Paris at night . it would amuse I . " 

 Nick hesitate . " so it might , but it be not   particularly recommend to 
 lady . " 

 " I do not   care for that if it happen to suit I . " 

 " very well then , we will walk to the Bastille if you like . " 

 Julia hesitate , on her side , still look about . " it be too far ; I be 
 tired ; we will sit here . " and she drop beside an empty table on the 
 " terrace " of M. Durand . " this will do ; it be amusing enough and we can 
 look at the Madeleine - that be respectable . if we must have something 
 we will have a madere - be that respectable ? not particularly ? so much 
 the well . what be those people have ? bock ? could not   we have 
  bock ? be they very low ? then I shall have one . I have   be so 
 wonderfully good - I have   be stay at Versailles : je I dois bien 
 cela . " 

 she insist , but pronounce the thin liquid in the tall glass very 
 disgusting when it be bring . Nick be amazed , reflect that it be 
 not for such a discussion as this that his mother have leave he with 
 hand in his pocket . he have be look out , but as his eloquence 
 flow fast he turn to his friend , who have drop upon a sofa with 
 her face to the window . she have give her jacket and glove to she maid , 
 but have keep on her hat ; and she lean forward a little as she sit , 
 clasp her hand together in her lap and keep her eye on he . the 
 lamp , in a corner , be so thickly veil that the room be in temper 
 obscurity , light almost equally from the street and the brilliant 
 shop - front opposite . " therefore why be sapient and solemn about it , 
 like an editorial in a newspaper ? " Nick add with a smile . 

 she continue to look at he after he have speak , then she say : " if you 
 do not   want to stand you have   only to say so . you need not   give your 
 reason . " 

 " it be too kind of you to let I off that ! and then I be a tremendous 
 fellow for reason ; that be my strong point , do not   you know ? I have   a lot 
 more besides those I have   mention , do up and ready for delivery . the 
 odd thing be that they do not   always govern my behaviour . I rather think 
 I do want to stand . " 

 " then what you say just now be a speech , " Julia declare . 

 " a speech ? " 

 " the ' rot , ' the humbug of the husting . " 

 " no , those great truth remain , and a good many other . but an inner 
 voice tell I I be in for it . and it will be much more graceful to 
 embrace this opportunity , accept your co - operation , than to wait for 
 some other and forfeit that advantage . " 

 " I shall be very glad to help you anywhere , " she go on . 

 " thank awfully , " he return , still stand there with his hand in 
 his pocket . " you would do it well in your own place , and I have   no right to 
 deny myself such a help . " 

 Julia calmly consider . " I do not   do it badly . " 

 " ah you be so political ! " 

 " of course I be ; it be the only decent thing to be . but I can only help 
 you if you will help yourself . I can do a good deal , but I can not   do 
 everything . if you will work I will work with you ; but if you be go into 
 it with your hand in your pocket I will have nothing to do with you . " 
 Nick instantly change the position of these member and sink into a 
 seat with his elbow on his knee . " you be very clever , but you must 
 really take a little trouble . thing do not   drop into people 's mouth . " 

 " I will try - I will try . I have   a great incentive , " he admit . 

 " of course you have . " 

 " my mother , my poor mother . " Julia breathe some vague sound and he go 
 on : " and of course always my father , dear good man . my mother 's even 
 more political than you . " 

 " I daresay she be , and quite right ! " say Mrs. Dallow . 

 " and she can not   tell I a bit more than you can what she think , what she 
 believe , what she want . " 

 " Pardon I , I can tell you perfectly . there be one thing I always 
 immensely want - to keep out a tory . " 

 " I see . that be a great philosophy . " 

 " it will do very well . and I desire the good of the country . I be not 
 ashamed of that . " 

 " and can you give I an idea of what it be - the good of the country ? " 

 " I know perfectly what it be not . it be not   what the Tories want to do . " 

 " what do they want to do ? " 

 " oh it would take I long to tell you . all sort of trash . " 

 " it would take you long , and it would take they long ! all they want 
 to do be to prevent we from do . on our side we want to prevent they 
 from prevent we . that be about as clearly as we all see it . so on both 
 side it be a beautiful , lucid , inspire programme . " 

 " I do not   believe in you , " Mrs. Dallow reply to this , lean back on 
 her sofa . 

 " I hope not , Julia , indeed ! " he pause a moment , still with his face 
 toward she and his elbow on his knee ; then he pursue : " you be a very 
 accomplished woman and a very zealous one ; but you have not   an idea , you 
 know - not to call an idea . what you mainly want be to be at the head of 
 a political salon ; to start one , to keep it up , to make it a success . " 

 " much you know I ! " Julia protest ; but he could see , through the 
 dimness , that her face speak differently . 

 " you will have it in time , but I will not   come to it , " Nick go on . 

 " you can not   come less than you do . " 

 " when I say you will have it I mean you have   already get it . that be why I 
 do not   come . " 

 " I do not   think you know what you mean , " say Mrs. Dallow . " I have   an idea 
 that be as good as any of your , any of those you have   treat I to this 
 evening , it seem to I - the simple idea that one ought to do something 
 or other for one 's country . " 

 " ' something or other ' certainly cover all the ground . there be one thing 
 one can always do for one 's country , which be not to be afraid . " 

 " Afraid of what ? " 

 Nick Dormer wait a little , as if his idea amuse he , but he presently 
 say , " I will tell you another time . it be very well to talk so glibly of 
 stand , " he add ; " but it be not   absolutely foreign to the question 
 that I have not   get the cash . " 

 " what do you do before ? " she ask . 

 " the first time my father pay . " 

 " and the other time ? " 

 " oh Mr. Carteret . " 

 " your expense will not   be at all large ; on the contrary , " say Julia . 

 " they shall not   be ; I shall look out sharp for that . I shall have the great 
 Hutchby . " 

 " of course ; but you know I want you to do it well . " she pause an 
 instant and then : " of course you can send the bill to I . " 

 " thank awfully ; you be tremendously kind . I should not   think of that . " 
 Nick Dormer get up as he speak , and walk to the window again , his 
 companion 's eye rest on he while he stand with his back to she . " I 
 shall manage it somehow , " he wind up . 

 " Mr. Carteret will be delighted , " say Julia . 

 " I daresay , but I hate take people 's money . " 

 " that be nonsense - when it be for the country . be not   it for they ? " 

 " when they get it back ! " Nick reply , turn round and look for his 
 hat . " it be startlingly late ; you must be tired . " Mrs. Dallow make no 
 response to this , and he pursue his quest , successful only when he 
 reach a dusky corner of the room , to which the hat have be 
 relegate by his cousin 's maid . " Mr. Carteret will expect so much if he 
 pay . and so would you . " 

 " yes , I be bind to say I should ! I should expect a great 
 deal - everything . " and Mrs. Dallow emphasise this assertion by the way 
 she rise erect . " if you be rid for a fall , if you be only go in to 
 miss it , you have well stay out . " 

 " how can I miss it with you ? " the young man smile . she utter a 
 word , impatiently but indistinguishably , and he continue : " and even if 
 I do it will have be immense fun . " 

 " it be immense fun , " say Julia . " but the good fun be to win . if you 
 do not   - - ! " 

 " if I do not ? " he repeat as she drop . 

 " I will never speak to you again . " 

 " how much you expect even when you do not   pay ! " 

 Mrs. Dallow 's rejoinder be a justification of this remark , express 
 as it do the fact that should they receive on the morrow information on 
 which she believe herself entitle to count , information tend to 
 show how hard the Conservatives mean to fight , she should look to he 
 to be in the field as early as herself . Sunday be a lost day ; she 
 should leave Paris on Monday . 

 " oh they will fight it hard ; they will put up Kingsbury , " say Nick , 
 smooth his hat . " they will all come down - all that can get away . and 
 Kingsbury have a very handsome wife . " 

 " she be not so handsome as your cousin , " Julia smile . 

 " oh dear , no - a cousin soon than a wife any day ! " Nick laugh as soon 
 as he have say this , as if the speech have an awkward side ; but the 
 reparation perhaps scarcely mend it , the exaggerated mock - meekness 
 with which he add : " I will do any blessed thing you tell I . " 

 " come here to - morrow then - as early as ten . " she turn round , move to 
 the door with he ; but before they reach it she bring out : " pray 
 be not   a gentleman to do anything , to be anything ? " 

 " to be anything - - ? " 

 " if he do not   aspire to serve the State . " 

 " aspire to make his political fortune , do you mean ? oh bless I , yes , 
 there be other thing . " 

 " what other thing that can compare with that ? " 

 " well , I for instance , I be very fond of the art . " 

 " of the art ? " she echo . 

 " do you never hear of they ? I be awfully fond of painting . " 

 at this Julia stop short , and her fine grey eye have for a moment the 
 air of be set far forward in her head . " do not   be odious ! 
 good - night , " she say , turn away and leave he to go . 




 BOOK SECOND 




 VII 


 Peter Sherringham remind Nick the next day that he have promise to be 
 present at Madame CarrĂ 's interview with the lady introduce to she by 
 Gabriel Nash ; and in the afternoon , conformably to this arrangement , the 
 two man take their way to the Rue de Constantinople . they find Mr. Nash 
 and his friend in the small beflounced drawing - room of the old actress , 
 who , as they learn , have send in a request for ten minute ' grace , 
 have be detain at a lesson - a rehearsal of the comă die de salon 
 about to be give for a charity by a fine lady , at which she have 
 consent to be present as an adviser . Mrs. Rooth sit on a black satin 
 sofa with her daughter beside she while Gabriel Nash , wander about 
 the room , look at the votive offering which convert the little 
 panel box , decorate in sallow white and gold , into a theatrical 
 museum : the present , the portrait , the wreath , the diadem , the 
 letter , frame and glaze , the trophy and tribute and relic 
 collect by Madame CarrĂ   during half a century of renown . the profusion 
 of this testimony be hardly more striking than the confession of 
 something miss , something hush , which seem to rise from it all and 
 make it melancholy , like a reference to clapping which , in the nature 
 of thing , could now only be present as a silence : so that if the place 
 be full of history it be the form without the fact , or at the most a 
 redundancy of the one to a pinch of the other - the history of a mask , 
 of a squeak , of a series of vain gesture . 

 some of the object exhibit by the distinguished artist , her early 
 portrait , in lithograph or miniature , represent the costume and 
 embody the manner of a period so remote that Nick Dormer , as he 
 glance at they , feel a quickened curiosity to look at the woman who 
 reconcile be alive to - day with have be alive so long ago . Peter 
 Sherringham already know how she manage this miracle , but every visit 
 he pay she add to his amuse , charmed sense that it be a miracle 
 and that his extraordinary old friend have see thing he should never , 
 never see . those be just the thing he want to see most , and her 
 duration , her survival , cheat he agreeably and help he a little to 
 guess they . his appreciation of the actor 's art be so systematic that 
 it have an antiquarian side , and at the risk of represent he as 
 attach to an absurd futility it must be say that he have as yet hardly 
 know a keener regret for anything than for the loss of that antecedent 
 world , and in particular for his have belatedly miss the great 
  comă dienne , the light of the french stage in the early year of the 
 century , of whose example and instruction Madame CarrĂ   have have the 
 inestimable benefit . she have often describe to he her rare 
 predecessor , straight from whose hand she have receive she most 
 celebrate part and of whom her own manner be often a religious 
 imitation ; but her description trouble he more than they console , 
 only confirm his theory , to which so much of his observation have 
 already minister , that the actor 's art in general be go down and 
 down , descend a slope with abyss of vulgarity at its foot , after 
 have reach its perfection , more than fifty year ago , in the talent 
 of the lady in question . he would have like to dwell for an hour 
 beneath the meridian . 

 Gabriel Nash introduce the new - comer to his companion ; but the 
 young of the two lady give no sign of lend herself to this 
 transaction . the girl be very white ; she huddle there , silent and 
 rigid , frighten to death , star , expressionless . if Bridget Dormer 
 have see she at this moment she might have feel avenge for the 
 discomfiture of her own spirit suffer at the Salon , the day before , 
 under the challenge eye of Maud Vavasour . it be plain at the present 
 hour that Miss Vavasour would have run away have she not regard the 
 person present as so many guard and keeper . her appearance make Nick 
 feel as if the little temple of art in which they be collect have 
 be the waiting - room of a dentist . Sherringham have see a great many 
 nervous girl tremble before the same ordeal , and he like to be kind to 
 they , to say thing that would help they to do themselves justice . the 
 probability in a give case be almost overwhelmingly in favour of their 
 have any other talent one could think of in a high degree than the 
 dramatic ; but he could rarely refrain from some care that the occasion 
 should not   be , even as against his conscience , too cruel . there be 
 occasion indeed that could scarce be too cruel to punish properly 
 certain example of presumptuous ineptitude . he remember what Mr. Nash 
 have say about this blighted maiden , and perceive that though she might 
 be inept she be now anything but presumptuous . Gabriel fall to talk 
 with Nick Dormer while Peter address himself to Mrs. Rooth . there be 
 no use as yet for any direct word to the girl , who be too scared even 
 to hear . Mrs. Rooth , with her shawl flutter about she , nestle 
 against her daughter , put out her hand to take one of Miriam 's 
 soothingly . she have pretty , silly , near - sighted eye , a long thin nose , 
 and an upper lip which project over the under as an ornamental cornice 
 rest on its support . " so much depend - really everything ! " she say in 
 answer to some sociable observation of Sherringham 's . " it be either 
 this , " and she roll her eye expressively about the room , " or it be - I 
 do not   know what ! " 

 " perhaps we be too many , " Peter hazard to her daughter . " but really 
 you will find , after you fairly begin , that you will do well with four or 
 five . " 

 before she answer she turn her head and lift her fine eye . the 
 next instant he see they be full of tear . the word she speak , 
 however , though utter as if she have tap a silver gong , have not the 
 note of sensibility : " oh , I do not   care for you ! " he laugh at this , 
 declare it be very well said and that if she could give Madame CarrĂ 
 such a speciman as that - - ! the actress come in before he have finish 
 his phrase , and he observe the way the girl ruefully rise to the 
 encounter , hang her head a little and look out from under her 
 brow . there be no sentiment in her face - only a vacancy of awe and 
 anguish which have not even the merit of be fine of its kind , for it 
 speak of no spring of reaction . yet the head be good , he note at the 
 same moment ; it be strong and salient and make to tell at a distance . 
 Madame CarrĂ   scarcely heed she at first , greet she only in her 
 order among the other and point to seat , compose the circle with 
 smile and gesture , as if they be all before the prompter 's box . the 
 old actress present herself to a casual glance as a red - faced , raddle 
 woman in a wig , with beady eye , a hooked nose , and pretty hand ; but 
 Nick Dormer , who have a sense for the over - score human surface , soon 
 observe that these comparatively gross mark include a great deal of 
 delicate detail - an eyebrow , a nostril , a flitting of expression , as if 
 a multitude of little facial wire be pull from within . this 
 accomplish artist have in particular a mouth which be visibly a rare 
 instrument , a pair of lip whose curve and fine corner speak of a 
 lifetime of " point " unerringly make and verse exquisitely speak , 
 help to explain the purity of the sound that issue from they . her 
 whole countenance have the look of long service - of a thing infinitely 
 wear and use , draw and stretch to excess , with its elasticity 
 overdone and its spring relax , yet religiously preserve and keep in 
 repair , even as some valuable old timepiece which might have quiver 
 and rumble but could be trust to strike the hour . at the first word 
 she speak Gabriel Nash exclaim endearingly : " ah la voix de 
 că limene ! " CĂ limene , who wear a big red flower on the summit of her 
 dense wig , have a very grand air , a toss of the head , and sundry little 
 majesty of manner ; in addition to which she be strange , almost 
 grotesque , and to some people would have be even terrifying , capable 
 of reappear , with her hard eye , as a queer vision of the darkness . 
 she excuse herself for have make the company wait , and mouth and 
 mimic in the droll way , with intonation as fine as a flute , the 
 performance and the pretension of the belle dam to whom she have 
 just be endeavour to communicate a few of the rudiment . " Mais 
 celle - la , c'est une plaisanterie , " she go on to Mrs. Rooth ; " whereas 
 you and your daughter , chere madame - I be sure you be quite another 
 matter . " 

 the girl have get rid of her tear , and be gaze at she , and Mrs. Rooth 
 lean forward and say portentously : " she know four language . " 

 Madame CarrĂ   give one of her histrionic stare , throw back her head . 
 " that be three too many . the thing be to do something proper with one . " 

 " we be very much in earnest , " continue Mrs. Rooth , who speak excellent 
 French . 

 " I be glad to hear it - il n'y a que Ă a. La tete est bien - the head 's 
 very good , " she say as she look at the girl . " but let we see , my dear 
 child , what you have   get in it ! " the young lady be still powerless to 
 speak ; she open her lip , but nothing come . with the failure of this 
 effort she turn her deep sombre eye to the three man . " Un beau 
 regard - it carry well . " Madame CarrĂ   far comment . but even as 
 she speak Miss Rooth 's fine gaze be suffuse again and the next moment 
 she have definitely begin to weep . Nick Dormer spring up ; he feel 
 embarrassed and intrusive - there be such an indelicacy in sit there 
 to watch a poor working - girl 's struggle with timidity . there be a 
 momentary confusion ; Mrs. Rooth 's tear be see also to flow ; Mr. Nash 
 take it gaily , address , however , at the same time , the friendly , 
 most familiar encouragement to his companion , and Peter Sherringham 
 offer to retire with Nick on the spot , should their presence incommode 
 the young lady . but the agitation be over in a minute ; Madame CarrĂ 
 motion Mrs. Rooth out of her seat and take her place beside the girl , 
 and Nash explain judiciously to the other man that she would be bad 
 should they leave she . her mother beg they to remain , ' so that there 
 should be at least some English " ; she speak as if the old actress be 
 an army of Frenchwomen . the young heroine of the occasion quickly come 
 round , and Madame CarrĂ , on the sofa beside she , hold her hand and 
 emit a perfect music of reassurance . " the nerve , the nerve - they be 
 half our affair . have as many as you like , if you have   get something else 
 too . voyon - do you know anything ? " 

 " I know some piece . " 

 " some piece of the rĂ pertoire ? " 

 Miriam Rooth star as if she do not   understand . " I know some poetry . " 

 " English , french , italian , german , " say her mother . 

 Madame CarrĂ   give Mrs. Rooth a look which express irritation at the 
 recurrence of this announcement . " do she wish to act in all those 
 tongue ? the phrase - book be not   the comedy ! " 

 " it be only to show you how she have be educate . " 

 " ah , chere madame , there be no education that matter ! I mean save the 
 right one . your daughter must have a particular form of speech , like I , 
 like ce monsieur . " 

 " you see if I can speak French , " say the girl , smile dimly at her 
 hostess . she appear now almost to have collect herself . 

 " you speak it in perfection . " 

 " and English just as well , " say Miss Rooth . 

 " you ought not   to be an actress - you ought to be a governess . " 

 " oh do not   tell we that : it be to escape from that ! " plead Mrs. Rooth . 

 " I be very sure your daughter will escape from that , " Peter Sherringham 
 be move to interpose . 

 " oh if you could help she ! " say the lady with a world of longing . 

 " she have certainly all the quality that strike the eye , " Peter 
 return . 

 " you be most kind , sir ! " Mrs. Rooth declare , elegantly drape 
 herself . 

 " she know CĂ limene ; I have   hear she do că limene , " Gabriel Nash say to 
 Madame CarrĂ " . 

 " and she know Juliet , she know Lady Macbeth and Cleopatra , " add Mrs. 
 Rooth . 

 " Voyons , my dear child , do you wish to work for the french stage or 
 for the English ? " the old actress demand . 

 " ours would have sore need of you , Miss Rooth , " Sherringham gallantly 
 throw off . 

 " could you speak to any one in London - could you introduce she ? " her 
 mother eagerly ask . 

 " dear madam , I must hear she first , and hear what Madame CarrĂ   say . " 

 " she have a voice of rare beauty , and I understand voice , " say Mrs. 
 Rooth . 

 " ah then if she have intelligence she have every gift . " 

 " she have a most poetic mind , " the old lady go on . 

 " I should like to paint her portrait ; she be make for that , " Nick Dormer 
 venture to observe to Mrs. Rooth ; partly because strike with the girl 's 
 suitability for sit , partly to mitigate the crudity of inexpressive 
 spectatorship . 

 " so all the artist say . I have   have three or four head of she , if you 
 would like to see they : she have be do in several style . if you be 
 to do she I be sure it would make she celebrate . " 

 " and I too , " Nick easily laugh . 

 " it would indeed - a member of Parliament ! " Nash declare . 

 " ah , I have the honour - - ? " murmur Mrs. Rooth , look gratified and 
 mystify . 

 Nick explain that she have no honour at all , and meanwhile Madame CarrĂ 
 have be question the girl " Chere madame , I can do nothing with 
 your daughter : she know too much ! " she break out . " it be a pity , because 
 I like to catch they wild . " 

 " oh she be wild enough , if that be all ! and that be the very point , the 
 question of where to try , " Mrs. Rooth go on . " into what do I launch 
 she - upon what dangerous stormy sea ? I have   think of it so anxiously . " 

 " try here - try the french public : they be so much the most serious , " 
 say Gabriel Nash . 

 " ah no , try the English : there be such a rare opening ! " Sherringham urge 
 in quick opposition . 

 " oh it be not   the public , dear gentleman . it be the private side , the 
 other people - it be the life , it be the moral atmosphere . " 

 " Je ne connais qu'une scene , - la nĂ tre , " Madame CarrĂ   declare . " I be 
 assure by every one who know that there be no other . " 

 " very correctly assure , " say Mr. Nash . " the theatre in our country 
 be puerile and barbarous . " 

 " there be something to be do for it , and perhaps mademoiselle 's the 
 person to do it , " Sherringham contentiously suggest . 

 " ah but , en attendant , what can it do for she ? " Madame CarrĂ   ask . 

 " well , anything I can help to bring about , " say Peter Sherringham , more 
 and more strike with the girl 's rich type . Miriam Rooth sit in silence 
 while this discussion go on , look from one speaker to the other 
 with a strange dependent candour . 

 " ah , if your part 's mark out I congratulate you , mademoiselle ! " - and 
 the old actress underline the word as she have often underline other 
 on the stage . she smile with large permissiveness on the young 
 aspirant , who appear not to understand she . her tone penetrate , 
 however , to certain depth in the mother 's nature , add another stir 
 to agitated water . 

 " I feel the responsibility of what she shall find in the life , the 
 standard , of the theatre , " Mrs. Rooth explain . " where be the pure 
 tone - where be the high standard ? that be what I ask , " the good lady 
 continue with a misguided intensity which elicit a peal of 
 unceremonious but sociable laughter from Gabriel Nash . 

 " the pure tone - qu'est - ce que c'est que Ă a ? " Madame CarrĂ   demand 
 in the fine manner of modern comedy . 

 " we be very , very respectable , " Mrs. Rooth go on , but now smile 
 and achieve lightness too . 

 " what I want be to place my daughter where the conduct - and the picture 
 of conduct in which she should take part - would not   be quite absolutely 
 dreadful . now , chere madame , how about all that ; how about conduct 
 in the french theatre - all the thing she should see , the thing she 
 should hear , the thing she should learn ? " 

 her hostess take it , as Sherringham feel , de tre - haut . " I do not   think 
 I know what you be talk about . they be the thing she may see and 
 hear and learn everywhere ; only they be well do , they be well 
 say , above all they be well teach . the only conduct that concern 
 an , actress , it seem to I , be her own , and the only way for she to 
 behave herself be not to be a helpless stick . I know no other conduct . " 

 " but there be character , there be situation , which I do not   think I 
 should like to see her undertake . " 

 " there be many , no doubt , which she would do well to leave alone ! " 
 laugh the Frenchwoman . 

 " I should not   like to see she represent a very bad woman - a really bad 
 one , " Mrs. Rooth serenely pursue . 

 " ah in England then , and in your theatre , every one be immaculately good ? 
 your play must be even more ingenious than I suppose ! " 

 " we have not   any play , " say Gabriel Nash . 

 " People will write they for Miss Rooth - it will be a new era , " 
 Sherringham throw in with wanton , or at least with combative , optimism . 

 " will you , sir - will you do something ? a sketch of one of our grand 
 English ideal ? " the old lady ask engagingly . 

 " oh I know what you do with our piece - to show your superior virtue ! " 
 Madame CarrĂ   cry before he have time to reply that he write nothing 
 but diplomatic memoranda . " bad woman ? Je n'ai jouĂ   que Ă a , madame . 
 ' really ' bad ? I try to make they real ! " 

 " I can say ' L'Aventuriere , ' " Miriam interrupt in a cold voice which 
 seem to hint at a want of participation in the maternal solicitude . 

 " allow we the pleasure of hear you then . Madame CarrĂ   will give you 
 the rĂ plique , " say Peter Sherringham . 

 " certainly , my child ; I can say it without the book , " Madame CarrĂ 
 respond . " put yourself there - move that chair a little away . " she 
 pat her young visitor , encourage she to rise , settle with her the 
 scene they should take , while the three man spring up to arrange a place 
 for the performance . Miriam leave her seat and look vaguely about she ; 
 then have take off her hat and give it to her mother she stand on 
 the designate spot with her eye to the ground . abruptly , however , 
 instead of begin the scene , Madame CarrĂ   turn to the eld lady 
 with an air which show that a rejoinder to this visitor 's remark of a 
 moment before have be gather force in her breast . 

 " you mix thing up , chere madame , and I have it on my heart to tell 
 you so . I believe it be rather the case with you other English , and I have 
 never be able to learn that either your morality or your talent be the 
 gainer by it . to be too respectable to go where thing be do well be 
 in my opinion to be very vicious indeed ; and to do they badly in order 
 to preserve your virtue be to fall into a grossness more shocking than 
 any other . to do they well be virtue enough , and not to make a mess of 
 it the only respectability . that be hard enough to merit Paradise . 
 everything else be base humbug ! Voila , chere madame , the answer I have 
 for your scruple ! " 

 " it be admirable - admirable ; and I be glad my friend Dormer here have have 
 the great advantage of hear you utter it ! " Nash exclaim with a free 
 designation of Nick . 

 that young man think it in effect a speech denote an intelligence of 
 the question , yet he rather resent the idea that Gabriel should assume 
 it would strike he as a revelation ; and to show his familiarity with 
 the line of thought it indicate , as well as to play his part 
 appreciatively in the little circle , he observe to Mrs. Rooth , as if 
 they might take many thing for grant : " in other word , your daughter 
 must find her safeguard in the artistic conscience . " but he have no 
 soon speak than he be strike with the oddity of their discuss so 
 publicly , and under the poor girl 's handsome nose , the condition which 
 Miss Rooth might find the good for the preservation of her personal 
 integrity . however , the anomaly be light and unoppressive - the echo 
 of a public discussion of delicate question seem to linger so 
 familiarly in the egotistical little room . moreover , the heroine of the 
 occasion evidently be lose her embarrassment ; she be the priestess 
 on the tripod , await the afflatus and think only of that . her 
 bared head , of which she have change the position , hold it erect , 
 while her arm hang at her side , be admirable ; her eye gaze straight 
 out of the window and at the house on the opposite side of the Rue de 
 Constantinople . 

 Mrs. Rooth have listen to Madame CarrĂ   with startled , respectful 
 attention , but Nick , consider she , be very sure she have not   at all 
 take in the great artist 's little lesson . yet this do not   prevent she 
 from exclaim in answer to himself : " oh a fine artistic life - what 
 indeed be more beautiful ? " 

 Peter Sherringham have say nothing ; he be watch Miriam and her 
 attitude . she wear a black dress which fall in straight fold ; her face , 
 under her level brow , be pale and regular - it have a strange , strong , 
 tragic beauty . " I do not   know what be in she , " he say to himself ; 
 " nothing , it would seem , from her persistent vacancy . but such a face as 
 that , such a head , be a fortune ! " Madame CarrĂ   bring she to book , 
 give she the first line of the speech of Clorinde : " Vous ne me fuyez 
 pas , mon enfant , aujourd'hui . " but still the girl hesitate , and for an 
 instant appear to make a vain , convulsive effort . in this convulsion 
 she frown portentously ; her low forehead overhang her eye ; the eye 
 themselves , in shadow , star , splendid and cold , and her hand clinch 
 themselves at her side . she look austere and terrible and be during 
 this moment an incarnation the vividness of which draw from Sherringham 
 a stifle cry . " elle est bien belle - ah Ă a , " murmur the old 
 actress ; and in the pause which still precede the issue of sound from 
 the girl 's lip Peter turn to his kinsman and say in a low tone : " you 
 must paint she just like that . " 

 " like that ? " 

 " as the Tragic Muse . " 

 she begin to speak ; a long , strong , colourless voice quaver in her 
 young throat . she deliver the line of Clorinde in the admired 
 interview with CĂ lie , the gem of the third act , with a rude monotony , 
 and then , gain confidence , with an effort at modulation which be not 
 altogether successful and which evidently she feel not to be so . Madame 
 CarrĂ   send back the ball without raise her hand , repeat the 
 speech of CĂ lie , which her memory possess from their have so often 
 be address to she , and utter the verse with soft , communicative 
 art . so they go on through the scene , which , when it be over , have not 
 precisely be a triumph for Miriam Rooth . Sherringham forbore to look 
 at Gabriel Nash , and Madame CarrĂ   say : " I think you have   a voice , ma 
 fille , somewhere or other . we must try and put our hand on it . " then 
 she ask she what instruction she have have , and the girl , lift her 
 eyebrow , look at her mother while her mother prompt she . 

 " Mrs. Delamere in London ; she be once an ornament of the english stage . 
 she give lesson just to a very few ; it be a great favour . such a very 
 nice person ! but above all , Signor Ruggieri - I think he teach we most . " 
 Mrs. Rooth explain that this gentleman be an italian tragedian , in 
 Rome , who instruct Miriam in the proper manner of pronounce his 
 language and also in the art of declaim and gesticulate . 

 " gesticulate I will warrant ! " declare their hostess . " they mimic as for 
 the deaf , they emphasise as for the blind . Mrs. Delamere be doubtless an 
 epitome of all the virtue , but I never hear of she . you travel too 
 much , " Madame CarrĂ   go on ; " that be very amusing , but the way to study 
 be to stay at home , to shut yourself up and hammer at your scale . " Mrs. 
 Rooth complain that they have no home to stay at ; in reply to which the 
 old actress exclaim : " oh you English , you be d'une lĂ geretă   a faire 
 fră mir . if you have not   a home you must make , or at least for decency 
 pretend to , one . in our profession it be the first requisite . " 

 " but where ? that be what I ask ! " say Mrs. Rooth . 

 " why not here ? " Sherringham throw out . 

 " oh here ! " and the good lady shake her head with a world of sad 
 significance . 

 " come and live in London and then I shall be able to paint your 
 daughter , " Nick Dormer interpose . 

 " be that all it will take , my dear fellow ? " ask Gabriel Nash . 

 " ah , London 's full of memory , " Mrs. Rooth go on . " my father have a 
 great house there - we always come up . but all that be over . " 

 " study here and then go to London to appear , " say Peter , feel 
 frivolous even as he speak . 

 " to appear in French ? " 

 " no , in the language of Shakespeare . " 

 " but we can not   study that here . " 

 " Mr. Sherringham mean that he will give you lesson , " Madame CarrĂ 
 explain . " let I not fail to say it - he be an excellent critic . " 

 " how do you know that - you who be beyond criticism and perfect ? " ask 
 Sherringham : an inquiry to which the answer be forestall by the 
 girl 's rouse herself to make it public that she could recite the 
 " night " of Alfred de Musset . 

 " Diable ! " say the actress : " that be more than I can ! by all mean give 
 we a speciman . " 

 the girl again place herself in position and roll out a fragment of 
 one of the splendid conversation of Musset 's poet with his muse - roll 
 it loudly and proudly , toss it and tumble it about the room . Madame 
 CarrĂ   watch she at first , but after a few moment she shut her eye , 
 though the good part of the business be to take in her young 
 candidate 's beauty . Sherringham have suppose Miriam rather abash by 
 the flatness of her first performance , but he now see how little she 
 could have be aware of this : she be rather uplifted and embolden . 
 she make a mush of the divine verse , which in spite of certain 
 sonority and cadence , an evident effort to imitate a celebrated 
 actress , a comrade of Madame CarrĂ , whom she have hear declaim they , she 
 produce as if she have be dash blindfold at some playfellow she be 
 to " catch . " when she have finish Madame CarrĂ   pass no judgement , only 
 dropping : " perhaps you have well say something english . " she suggest 
 some little piece of verse - some fable if there be fable in English . 
 she appear but scantily surprised to hear that there be not - it be 
 a language of which one expect so little . Mrs. Rooth say : " she know 
 her Tennyson by heart . I think he be much deep than La Fontaine " ; and 
 after some deliberation and delay Miriam break into " the Lotus - Eaters , " 
 from which she pass directly , almost breathlessly , to " Edward Gray . " 
 Sherringham have by this time hear she make four different attempt , and 
 the only generalisation very present to he be that she utter these 
 dissimilar composition in exactly the same tone - a solemn , droning , 
 drag measure suggestive of an exhortation from the pulpit and 
 adopt evidently with the " affect " intention and from a crude idea 
 of ' style . " it be all funereal , yet be artlessly rough . Sherringham 
 think her english performance less futile than her French , but he 
 could see that Madame CarrĂ   listen to it even with less pleasure . in 
 the way the girl wail forth some of her tennysonian line he detect 
 a faint gleam as of something pearly in deep water . but the further she 
 go the more violently she act on the nerve of Mr. Gabriel Nash : 
 that also he could discover from the way this gentleman end by 
 slip discreetly to the window and lean there with his head out 
 and his back to the exhibition . he have the art of mute expression ; his 
 attitude say as clearly as possible : " no , no , you can not   call I either 
 ill - mannered or ill - natured . I be the showman of the occasion , moreover , 
 and I avert myself , leave you to judge . if there be a thing in life I 
 hate it be this idiotic new fashion of the drawing - room recitation and of 
 the insufferable creature who practise it , who prevent conversation , 
 and whom , as they be beneath it , you can not   punish by criticism . 
 therefore what I be do 's only too magnanimous - bring these 
 benighted woman here , pay with my person , stifle my just 
 repugnance . " 

 while Sherringham judge privately that the manner in which Miss Rooth 
 have acquit herself offer no element of interest , he yet remain 
 aware that something surmount and survive her failure , something that 
 would perhaps be worth his curiosity . it be the element of outline and 
 attitude , the way she stand , the way she turn her eye , her head , and 
 move her limb . these thing hold the attention ; they have a natural 
 authority and , in spite of their suggest too much the school - girl in 
 the tableau - vivant , a " plastic " grandeur . her face , moreover , grow as 
 he watch it ; something delicate dawn in it , a dim promise of variety 
 and a touching plea for patience , as if it be conscious of be able 
 to show in time more shade than the simple and striking gloom which have 
 as yet mainly grace it . these rather rude physical felicity form in 
 short her only mark of a vocation . he almost hat to have to recognise 
 they ; he have see they so often when they mean nothing at all that he 
 have come at last to regard they as almost a guarantee of incompetence . 
 he know Madame CarrĂ   value they singly so little that she count they 
 out in measure an histrionic nature ; when deprive of the escort of 
 other property which help and complete they she almost hold they a 
 positive hindrance to success - success of the only kind she esteem . 
 far oftener than himself she have sit in judgement on young woman for 
 whom hair and eyebrow and a disposition for the statuesque would have 
 work the miracle of sanctify their stupidity if the miracle be 
 workable . but that particular miracle never be . the quality she rat 
 high be not the gift but the conquest , the effect the actor have 
 work hard for , have dig out of the mine by unwearied study . 
 Sherringham remember to have have in the early part of their 
 acquaintance a friendly dispute with she on this subject , he have be 
 move at that time to defend doubtless to excess the cause of the gift . 
 she have go so far as to say that a serious comedian ought to be 
 ashamed of they - ashamed of rest his case on they ; and when 
 Sherringham have cite the great Rachel as a player whose natural 
 endowment be rich and who have owe her high triumph to it , she have 
 declare that Rachel be the very instance that prove her point ; - a 
 talent assist by one or two primary aid , a voice and a portentous 
 brow , but essentially form by work , unremitting and ferocious work . " I 
 do not   care a straw for your handsome girl , " she say ; " but bring I one 
 who be ready to drudge the tenth part of the way Rachel drudge , and I will 
 forgive she her beauty . of course , notez bien , Rachel be not   a grosse 
 bete : that be a gift if you like ! " 

 Mrs. Rooth , who be evidently very proud of the figure her daughter have 
 make - her daughter who for all one could tell affect their hostess 
 precisely as a grosse bete - appeal to Madame CarrĂ   rashly and 
 serenely for a verdict ; but fortunately this lady 's voluble bonne come 
 rattle in at the same moment with the tea - tray . the old actress busy 
 herself in dispense this refreshment , an hospitable attention to her 
 english visitor , and under cover of the diversion thus obtain , while 
 the other talk together , Sherringham put she the question : " well , be 
 there anything in my young friend ? " 

 " nothing I can see . she be loud and coarse . " 

 " she be very much afraid . you must allow for that . " 

 " Afraid of I , immensely , but not a bit afraid of her author - nor of 
 you ! " Madame CarrĂ   smile . 

 " be not   you prejudice by what that fellow Nash have tell you ? " 

 " why prejudiced ? he only tell I she be very handsome . " 

 " and do not   you think she so ? " 

 " Admirable . but I be not a photographer nor a dressmaker nor a coiffeur . 
 I can not   do anything with ' back hair ' nor with a mere big stare . " 

 " the head 's very noble , " say Peter Sherringham . " and the voice , when 
 she speak English , have some sweet tone . " 

 " ah your English - possibly ! all I can say be that I listen to she 
 conscientiously , and I do not   perceive in what she do a single 
  nuance , a single inflexion or intention . but not one , mon cher . I 
 do not   think she be intelligent . " 

 " but do not   they often seem stupid at first ? " 

 " say always ! " 

 " then do not   some succeed - even when they be handsome ? " 

 " when they be handsome they always succeed - in one way or another . " 

 " you do not   understand we English , " say Peter Sherringham . 

 Madame CarrĂ   drink her tea ; then she reply : " marry she , my son , and 
 give her diamond . make she an ambassadress ; she will look very well . " 

 " she interest you so little that you do not   care to do anything for 
 she ? " 

 " to do anything ? " 

 " to give she a few lesson . " 

 the old actress look at he a moment ; after which , rise from her 
 place near the table on which the tea have be serve , she say to 
 Miriam Rooth : " my dear child , I give my voice for the scene anglaise . 
 you do the english thing well . " 

 " do I do they well ? " ask the girl . 

 " you have   a great deal to learn ; but you have   rude force . the main thing 
  sont encore a dĂ gager , but they will come . you must work . " 

 " I think she have idea , " say Mrs. Rooth . 

 " she get they from you , " Madame CarrĂ   reply . 

 " I must say that if it be to be our theatre I be relieve . I do think 
 our safe , " the good lady continue . 

 " Ours be dangerous , no doubt . " 

 " you mean you be more severe , " say the girl . 

 " your mother 's right , " the actress smile ; " you have idea . " 

 " but what shall we do then - how shall we proceed ? " Mrs. Rooth make this 
 appeal , plaintively and vaguely , to the three gentleman ; but they have 
 collect a few step off and be so occupy in talk that it fail to 
 reach they . 

 " work - work - work ! " exclaim the actress . 

 " in English I can play Shakespeare . I want to play Shakespeare , " Miriam 
 make known . 

 " that be fortunate , as in English you have not   any one else to play . " 

 " but he be so great - and he be so pure ! " say Mrs. Rooth . 

 " that indeed seem the saving of you , " Madame CarrĂ   return . 

 " you think I actually pretty bad , do not   you ? " the girl demand with 
 her serious face . 

 " Mon Dieu , que vous dirai - je ? of course you be rough ; but so be I at 
 your age . and if you find your voice it may carry you far . besides , what 
 do it matter what I think ? how can I judge for your english public ? " 

 " how shall I find my voice ? " ask Miriam Rooth . 

 " by try . Il n'y a que Ă a . work like a horse , night and day . 
 besides , Mr. Sherringham , as he say , will help you . " 

 that gentleman , hear his name , turn round and the girl appeal to 
 he . " will you help I really ? " 

 " to find her voice , " say Madame CarrĂ . 

 " the voice , when it be worth anything , come from the heart ; so I suppose 
 that be where to look for it , " Gabriel Nash suggest . 

 " much you know ; you have not   get any ! " Miriam retort with the first 
 scintillation of gaiety she have show on this occasion . 

 " any voice , my child ? " Mr. Nash inquire . 

 " any heart - or any manner ! " 

 Peter Sherringham make the secret reflexion that he like she well 
 lugubrious , as the note of pertness be not totally absent from her mode 
 of emit these few word . he be irritated , moreover , for in the 
 brief conference he have just have with the young lady 's introducer he have 
 have to meet the rather difficult call of speaking of she hopefully . Mr. 
 Nash have say with his bland smile , " and what impression do my young 
 friend make ? " - in respect to which Peter 's optimism feel engage by an 
 awkward logic . he answer that he recognise promise , though he do 
 nothing of the sort ; - at the same time that the poor girl , both with the 
 exaggerated " point " of her person and the vanity of her attempt at 
 expression , constitute a kind of challenge , strike he as a subject for 
 inquiry , a problem , an explorable tract . she be too bad to jump at and 
 yet too " take " - perhaps after all only vulgarly - to overlook , 
 especially when rest her tragic eye on he with the trust of she 
 deep " really ? " this note affect he as address directly to his 
 honour , give he a chance to brave verisimilitude , to brave ridicule 
 even a little , in order to show in a special case what he have always 
 maintain in general , that the direction of a young person 's study 
 for the stage may be an interest of as high an order as any other 
 artistic appeal . 

 " Mr. Nash have render we the great service of introduce we to Madame 
 CarrĂ , and I be sure we be immensely indebted to he , " Mrs. Rooth say to 
 her daughter with an air affectionately corrective . 

 " but what good do that do we ? " the girl ask , smile at the actress 
 and gently lay her finger - tip upon her hand . " Madame CarrĂ   listen 
 to I with adorable patience , and then send I about my business - ah in 
 the prettiest way in the world . " 

 " Mademoiselle , you be not so rough ; the tone of that be very juste . a la 
 bonne heure ; work - work ! " the actress cry . " there be an inflexion 
 there - or very nearly . practise it till you have   get it . " 

 " come and practise it to I , if your mother will be so kind as to 
 bring you , " say Peter Sherringham . 

 " do you give lesson - do you understand ? " Miriam ask . 

 " I be an old play - goer and I have   an unbounded belief in my own judgement . " 

 " ' old , ' sir , be too much to say , " Mrs. Rooth remonstrate . " my daughter 
 know your high position , but she be very direct . you will always find she 
 so . perhaps you will say there be less honourable fault . we will come to 
 see you with pleasure . oh I have   be at the embassy when I be her age . 
 therefore why should not   she go to - day ? that be in Lord Davenant 's 
 time . " 

 " a few people be come to tea with I to - morrow . perhaps you will come 
 then at five o'clock . " 

 " it will remind I of the dear old time , " say Mrs. Rooth . 

 " thank you ; I will try and do well to - morrow , " Miriam profess very 
 sweetly . 

 " you do well every minute ! " Sherringham return - and he look at 
 their hostess in support of this declaration . 

 " she be find her voice , " Madame CarrĂ   acknowledge . 

 " she be find a friend ! " Mrs. Rooth throw in . 

 " and do not   forget , when you come to London , my hope that you will come and 
 see I , " Nick Dormer say to the girl . " to try and paint you - that 
 would do I good ! " 

 " she be find even two , " say Madame CarrĂ . 

 " it be to make up for one I have   lose ! " and Miriam look with very good 
 stage - scorn at Gabriel Nash . " it be he who think I be bad . " 

 " you say that to make I drive you home ; you know it will , " Nash 
 return . 

 " we will all take you home ; why not ? " Sherringham ask . 

 Madame CarrĂ   look at the handsome girl , handsomer than ever at this 
 moment , and at the three young man who have take their hat and stand 
 ready to accompany she . a deep expression come for an instant into her 
 hard , bright eye . " ah la jeunesse ! " she sigh . " you would always have 
 that , my child , if you be the great goose on earth ! " 




 VIII 


 at Peter Sherringham 's the next day Miriam have so evidently come with 
 the expectation of ' say " something that it be impossible such a 
 patron of the drama should forbear to invite she , little as the 
 exhibition at Madame CarrĂ 's could have contribute to render the 
 invitation prompt . his curiosity have be more appeased than stimulate , 
 but he feel none the less that he have " take up " the dark - browed girl 
 and her reminiscential mother and must face the immediate consequence 
 of the act . this responsibility weigh upon he during the twenty - four 
 hour that follow the ultimate dispersal of the little party at the 
 door of the HĂ tel de la Garonne . 

 on quit Madame CarrĂ   the two lady have definitely decline Mr. 
 Nash 's offer cab and have take their way homeward on foot and with the 
 gentleman in attendance . the street of Paris at that hour be bright 
 and episodical , and Sherringham trod they good - humouredly enough and not 
 too fast , lean a little to talk with Miriam as he go . their pace 
 be regulate by her mother 's , who advance on the arm of Gabriel Nash 
  Nick Dormer be on her other side   in refined deprecation . her sloping 
 back be before they , exempt from retentive stillness in spite of her 
 rigid principle , with the little drama of she lose and recover shawl 
 perpetually go on . 

 Sherringham say nothing to the girl about her performance or her 
 power ; their talk be only of her manner of life with her mother - their 
 travel , their pension , their economy , their want of a home , the 
 many city she know well , the foreign tongue and the wide view of the 
 world she have acquire . he guess easily enough the dolorous type of 
 exile of the two lady , wanderer in search of continental cheapness , 
 inure to queer contact and compromise , " remarkably well connect " in 
 England , but go out for their meal . the girl be but indirectly 
 communicative ; though seemingly less from any plan of secrecy than from 
 the habit of associate with people whom she do not   honour with her 
 confidence . she be fragmentary and abrupt , as well as not in the least 
 shy , subdue to dread of Madame CarrĂ   as she have be for the time . she 
 give Sherringham a reason for this fear , and he think her reason 
 innocently pretentious . " she admire a great artist more than anything 
 in the world ; and in the presence of art , of great art , her heart beat 
 so fast . " her manner be not perfect , and the friction of a varied 
 experience have rather roughen than smooth she . she say nothing that 
 prove her intelligent , even though he guess this to be the design of 
 two or three of her remark ; but he part from she with the suspicion 
 that she be , accord to the contemporary french phrase , a " nature . " 

 the HĂ tel de la Garonne be in a small unrenovated street in which the 
 cobble - stone of old Paris still flourish , lie between the Avenue de 
 l'opă ra and the Place de la Bourse . Sherringham have occasionally 
 traverse the high dimness , but have never notice the tall , stale 
  maison meublĂ e , the aspect of which , that of a third - rate provincial 
 inn , be an illustration of Mrs. Rooth 's shrunken standard . " we would 
 ask you to come up , but it be quite at the top and we have not   a 
 sitting - room , " the poor lady bravely explain . " we have to receive Mr. 
 Nash at a cafă . " 

 Nick Dormer declare that he like cafĂ s , and Miriam , look at his 
 cousin , drop with a flash of passion the demand : " do you wonder I 
 should want to do something - so that we can stop live like pig ? " 

 Peter recognise the next day that though it might be boring to listen 
 to she it be well to make her recite than to let she do nothing , so 
 effectually do the presence of his sister and that of Lady Agnes , and 
 even of Grace and Biddy , appear , by a strange tacit opposition , to 
 deprive her , ornamental as it be , of a reason . he have only to see they 
 all together to perceive that she could not   pass for have come to 
 " meet " they - even her mother 's insinuate gentility fail to put the 
 occasion on that footing - and that she must therefore be assume to have 
 be bring to show they something . she be not subdue , not colourless 
 enough to sit there for nothing , or even for conversation - the sort of 
 conversation that be likely to come off - so that it be inevitable to 
 treat her position as connect with the principal place on the carpet , 
 with silence and attention and the pull together of chair . even when 
 so establish it strike he at first as precarious , in the light , or 
 the darkness , of the inexpressive face of the other lady , seat in 
 couple and row on sofas - there be several in addition to Julia and 
 the Dormers ; mainly the wife , with their husband , of Sherringham 's 
 fellow - secretary - scarcely one of whom he feel he might count upon for 
 a modicum of gush when the girl should have finish . 

 Miss Rooth give a representation of Juliet drink the potion , 
 accord to the system , as her mother explain , of the famous Signor 
 Ruggieri - a scene of high fierce sound , of many cry and contortion : 
 she shake her hair   which prove magnificent   half - down before the 
 performance be over . then she declaim several short poem by Victor 
 Hugo , select among many hundred by Mrs. Rooth , as the good lady be 
 careful to make known . after this she jump to the american lyre , 
 regale the company with specimen , both familiar and fresh , of 
 Longfellow , Lowell , Whittier , Holmes , and of two or three poetess now 
 reveal to Sherringham for the first time . she flow so copiously , 
 keep the floor and rejoice visibly in her luck , that her host be 
 mainly occupy with wonder how he could make she leave off . he be 
 surprised at the extent of her repertory , which , in view of the 
 circumstance that she could never have receive much encouragement - it 
 must have come mainly from her mother , and he do not   believe in Signor 
 Ruggieri - denote a very stiff ambition and a blunder energy . it be 
 her mother who check she at last , and he find himself suspect that 
 Gabriel Nash have intimate to the old woman that interference be 
 necessary . for himself he be chiefly glad Madame CarrĂ   have not   come . it 
 be present to he that she would have judge the exhibition , with its 
 badness , its impudence , the absence of criticism , wholly indecent . 

 his only new impression of the heroine of the scene be that of this 
 same high assurance - her coolness , her complacency , her eagerness to go 
 on . she have be deadly afraid of the old actress but be not a bit 
 afraid of a cluster of femme du monde , of Julia , of Lady Agnes , of 
 the smart woman of the embassy . it be positively these personage who 
 be rather in fear ; there be certainly a moment when even Julia be 
 scared for the first time he have ever remark it . the space be too 
 small , the cry , the convulsion and rush of the dishevel girl 
 be too near . Lady Agnes wear much of the time the countenance she 
 might have show at the theatre during a play in which pistol be 
 fire ; and indeed the manner of the young reciter have become more 
 spasmodic and more explosive . it appear , however , that the company in 
 general think she very clever and successful ; which show , to 
 Sherringham 's sense , how little they understand the matter . poor Biddy 
 be immensely strike ; she grow flushed and absorb in proportion as 
 Miriam , at her good moment , become pale and fatal . it be she who speak 
 to her first , after it be agree that they have well not fatigue she 
 any more ; she advance a few step , happen to be near - she 
 murmur : " oh thank you so much . I never see anything so beautiful , so 
 grand . " 

 she look very red and very pretty as she say this , and Peter 
 Sherringham like she enough to notice she more and like she well when 
 she look pretty than usual . as he turn away he hear Miriam make 
 answer with no great air of appreciation of her tribute : " I have   see you 
 before - two day ago at the Salon with Mr. Dormer . yes , I know he be your 
 brother . I have   make his acquaintance since . he want to paint my 
 portrait . do you think he will do it well ? " he be afraid the girl be 
 something of a brute - also somewhat grossly vain . this impression would 
 perhaps have be confirm if a part of the rest of the short 
 conversation of the two young woman have reach his ear . Biddy venture 
 to observe that she herself have study modelling a little and that she 
 could understand how any artist would think Miss Rooth a splendid 
 subject . if indeed she could attempt her head , that would be a chance 
 indeed . 

 " thank you , " say Miriam with a laugh as of high comedy . " I think I have 
 rather not passer par toute la famille ! " then she add : " if your 
 brother 's an artist I do not   understand how he be in Parliament . " 

 " oh he be not   in Parliament now - we only hope he will be . " 

 " ah I see . " 

 " and he be not   an artist either , " Biddy feel herself conscientiously 
 bind to state . 

 " then he be not   anything , " say Miss Rooth . 

 " well - he be immensely clever . " 

 " ah I see , " Miss Rooth again reply . " Mr. Nash have puff he up so . " 

 " I do not   know Mr. Nash , " say Biddy , guilty of a little dryness as well 
 as of a little misrepresentation , and feel rather snubbed . 

 " well , you need not   wish to . " 

 Biddy stand with she a moment long , still look at she and not 
 know what to say next , but not find she any less handsome because 
 she have such odd manner . Biddy have an ingenious little mind , which 
 always try as much as possible to keep different thing separate . it 
 be pervade now by the reflexion , attend with some relief , that if 
 the girl speak to she with such unexpected familiarity of Nick she say 
 nothing at all about Peter . two gentleman come up , two of Peter 's 
 friend , and make speech to Miss Rooth of the kind Biddy suppose 
 people learn to make in Paris . it be also doubtless in Paris , the 
 girl privately reason , that they learn to listen to they as this 
 striking performer listen . she receive their advance very 
 differently from the way she have receive Biddy 's . Sherringham notice 
 his young kinswoman turn away , still very red , to go and sit near her 
 mother again , leave Miriam engage with the two man . it appear to 
 have come over she that for a moment she have be strangely spontaneous 
 and bold , and that she have pay a little of the penalty . the seat next 
 her mother be occupy by Mrs. Rooth , toward whom Lady Agnes 's head have 
 incline itself with a preoccupied tolerance . he have the conviction 
 Mrs. Rooth be tell she about the Neville - Nugents of Castle Nugent 
 and that Lady Agnes be think it odd she never have hear of they . he 
 say to himself that Biddy be generous . she have urge Julia to come in 
 order that they might see how bad the strange young woman would be , but 
 now that the event have prove dazzle she forget this calculation and 
 rejoice in what she innocently suppose to be the performer 's triumph . 
 she keep away from Julia , however ; she do not   even look at she to invite 
 she also to confess that , in vulgar parlance , they have be sell . he 
 himself speak to his sister , who be lean back with a detached air in 
 the corner of a sofa , say something which lead she to remark in reply : 
 " ah I daresay it be extremely fine , but I do not   care for tragedy when it 
 tread on one 's toe . she be like a cow who have kick over the 
 milking - pail . she ought to be tie up . " 

 " my poor Julia , it be not   extremely fine ; it be not   fine at all , " 
 Sherringham return with some irritation . 

 " pardon I then . I think that be why you invite we . " 

 " I imagine she be different , " Peter say a little foolishly . 

 " ah if you do not   care for she so much the well . it have always seem 
 to I you make too awfully much of those people . " 

 " oh I do care for her too - rather . she be interesting . " his sister give 
 he a momentary , mystified glance and he add : " and she be dreadful . " he 
 feel stupidly annoyed and be ashamed of his annoyance , as he could have 
 assign no reason for it . it do not   grow less for the moment from his 
 see Gabriel Nash approach Julia , introduce by Nick Dormer . he give 
 place to the two young man with some alacrity , for he have a sense of 
 be put in the wrong in respect to their speciman by Nash 's very 
 presence . he remember how it have be a part of their bargain , as it 
 be , that he should present that gentleman to his sister . he be not 
 sorry to be relieve of the office by Nick , and he even tacitly and 
 ironically wish his kinsman 's friend joy of a colloquy with Mrs. 
 Dallow . Sherringham 's life be spend with people , he be use to people , 
 and both as host and as guest he carry the social burden in general 
 lightly . he could observe , especially in the former capacity , without 
 uneasiness and take the temperature without anxiety . but at present his 
 company oppress he ; he feel worried and that he show it - which be 
 the thing in the world he have ever hold least an honour to a gentleman 
 dedicate to diplomacy . he be vex with the levity that have make he 
 call his roomful together on so poor a pretext , and yet be vex with 
 the stupidity that make the witness so evidently find the pretext 
 sufficient . he inwardly groan at the delusion under which he have 
 saddle himself with the Tragic Muse - a tragic muse who be strident and 
 pert - and yet wish his visitor would go away and leave he alone with 
 she . 

 Nick Dormer say to Mrs. Dallow that he want she to know an old friend 
 of his , one of the clever man he know ; and he add the hope that she 
 would be gentle and encouraging with he ; he be so timid and so easily 
 disconcert . Mr. Nash hereupon drop into a chair by the arm of her 
 sofa , their companion go away , and Mrs. Dallow turn her glance upon 
 her new acquaintance without a perceptible change of position . then she 
 emit with rapidity the remark : " it be very awkward when people be 
 tell one 's clever . " 

 " it be only awkward if one be not , " Gabriel smile . 

 " yes , but so few people be - enough to be talk about . " 

 " be not   that just the reason why such a matter , such an exception , ought 
 to be mention to they ? " he ask . " they might not   find it out for 
 themselves . of course , however , as you say , there ought to be a 
 certainty ; then they be surer to know it . Dormer 's a dear fellow , but 
 he be rash and superficial . " 

 Mrs. Dallow , at this incitement , turn her glance a second time on her 
 visitor ; but during the rest of the conversation she rarely repeat the 
 movement . if she like Nick Dormer extremely - and it may without more 
 delay be communicate to the reader that she do - her liking be of a 
 kind that oppose no difficulty whatever to she not like , in case of 
 such a complication , a person attach or otherwise belong to he . it 
 be not in her nature to " put up " with other for the sake of an 
 individual she love : the putting up be usually consume in the loving , 
 and with nothing leave over . if the affection that isolate and 
 simplifie its object may be distinguish from the affection that seek 
 communication and contract for it , Julia Dallow 's be quite of the 
 encircling , not to say the narrowing sort . she be not so much jealous 
 as essentially exclusive . she desire no experience for the familiar and 
 yet partly unsounded kinsman in whom she take an interest that she 
 would not   have desire for herself ; and indeed the cause of her interest 
 in he be partly the vision of his help she to the particular 
 extension she do desire - the taste and thrill of great affair and of 
 public action . to have such ambition for he appear to her the 
 high honour she could do he ; her conscience be in it as well as her 
 inclination , and her scheme , to her sense , be noble enough to varnish 
 over any disdain she might feel for force draw he another way . she 
 have a prejudice , in general , against his exist connexion , a 
 suspicion of they , and a supply of off - hand contempt in waiting . it be 
 a singular circumstance that she be sceptical even when , know she as 
 well as he do , he think they worth recommend to she : the 
 recommendation indeed mostly confirm the suspicion . 

 this be a law from which Gabriel Nash be condemn to suffer , if 
 suffering could on any occasion be predicate of Gabriel Nash . his 
 pretension be in truth that he have purge his life of such 
 possibility of waste , though probably he would have admit that if 
 that fair vessel should spring a leak the wound in its side would have 
 be deal by a woman 's hand . in din two evening before with her 
 brother and with the Dormers Mrs. Dallow have be move to exclaim that 
 Peter and Nick know the most extraordinary people . as regard Peter the 
 attitudinising girl and her mother now point that moral with 
 sufficient vividness ; so that there be little arrogance in take a 
 similar quality for grant of the conceited man at her elbow , who sit 
 there as if he might be capable from one moment to another of lean 
 over the arm of her sofa . she have not the slight wish to talk with 
 he about himself , and be afraid for an instant that he be on the 
 point of pass from the chapter of his cleverness to that of his 
 timidity . it be a false alarm , however , for he only animadvert on the 
 pleasure of the elegant extract hurl - literally hurlă   in 
 general - from the centre of the room at one 's defenceless head . he 
 intimate that in his opinion these pleasure be all for the 
 performer . the auditor have at any rate give Miss Rooth a charming 
 afternoon ; that of course be what Mrs. Dallow 's kind brother have mainly 
 intend in arrange the little party .   Julia hat to hear he call 
 her brother " kind " : the term seem offensively patronise .   but he 
 himself , he relate , be now constantly employ in the same 
 beneficence , listen two - third of his time to " intonation " and 
 shriek . she have doubtless observe it herself , how the great current of 
 the age , the adoration of the mime , be almost too strong for any 
 individual ; how it sweep one along and dash one against the rock . as 
 she make no response to this proposition Gabriel Nash ask she if she 
 have not   be strike with the main sign of the time , the preponderance of 
 the mountebank , the glory and renown , the personal favour , he enjoy . 
 had not   she notice what an immense part of the public attention he hold 
 in London at least ? for in Paris society be not so pervaded with he , 
 and the woman of the profession , in particular , be not in every 
 drawing - room . 

 " I do not   know what you mean , " Mrs. Dallow say . " I know nothing of any 
 such people . " 

 " be not   they under your foot wherever you turn - their performance , 
 their portrait , their speech , their autobiography , their name , 
 their manner , their ugly mug , as the people say , and their idiotic 
 pretension ? " 

 " I daresay it depend on the place one go to . if they be 
 everywhere " - and she pause a moment - " I do not   go everywhere . " 

 " I do not   go anywhere , but they mount on my back at home like the Old Man 
 of the Sea . just observe a little when you return to London , " Mr. Nash 
 go on with friendly instructiveness . Julia get up at this - she do not 
 like receive direction ; but no other corner of the room appear to 
 offer she any particular reason for cross to it : she never do such a 
 thing without a great inducement . so she remain stand there as if 
 she be quit the place in a moment , which indeed she now 
 determine to do ; and her interlocutor , rise also , linger beside 
 her unencouraged but unperturbed . he proceed to remark that Mr. 
 Sherringham be quite right to offer Miss Rooth an afternoon 's sport ; 
 she deserve it as a fine , brave , amiable girl . she be highly educate , 
 know a dozen language , be of illustrious lineage , and be immensely 
 particular . 

 " immensely particular ? " Mrs. Dallow repeat . 

 " perhaps I should say rather that her mother 's so on her behalf . 
 Particular about the sort of people they meet - the tone , the standard . 
 I be bind to say they be like you : they do not   go everywhere . that 
 spirit 's not so common in the mob call itself good society as not to 
 deserve mention . " 

 she say nothing for a moment ; she look vaguely round the room , but 
 not at Miriam Rooth . nevertheless she presently drop as in forced 
 reference to she an impatient shake . " she be dreadfully vulgar . " 

 " ah do not   say that to my friend Dormer ! " Mr. Nash laugh . 

 " be you and he such great friend ? " Mrs. Dallow ask , meet his 
 eye . 

 " great enough to make I hope we shall be great . " 

 again for a little she say nothing , but then go on : " why should not   I 
 say to he that she be vulgar ? " 

 " because he admire she so much . he want to paint she . " 

 " to paint she ? " 

 " to paint her portrait . " 

 " oh I see . I daresay she would do for that . " 

 Mr. Nash show further amusement . " if that be your opinion of she you be 
 not very complimentary to the art he aspire to practise . " 

 " he aspire to practise ? " she echo afresh . 

 " have not   you talk with he about it ? ah you must keep he up to it ! " 

 Julia Dallow be conscious for a moment of look uncomfortable ; but it 
 relieve she to be able to demand of her neighbour with a certain 
 manner : " be you an artist ? " 

 " I try to be , " Nash smile , " but I work in such difficult material . " 

 he speak this with such a clever suggestion of mysterious thing that 
 she be to hear herself once more pay he the attention of take he 
 up . " difficult material ? " 

 " I work in life ! " 

 at this she turn away , leave he the impression that she probably 
 misunderstood his speech , think he mean that he draw from the living 
 model or some such platitude : as if there could have be any likelihood 
 he would have dealing with the dead . this indeed would not fully have 
 explain the abruptness with which she drop their conversation . 
 Gabriel , however , be use to sudden collapse and even to sudden 
 rupture on the part of those address by he , and no man have more the 
 secret of remain gracefully with his conversational ware on his 
 hand . he see Mrs. Dallow approach Nick Dormer , who be talk with one 
 of the lady of the embassy , and apparently signify that she wish to 
 speak to he . he get up and they have a minute 's talk , after which he 
 turn and take leave of his fellow - visitor . she say a word to her 
 brother , Nick join she , and they then come together to the door . in 
 this movement they have to pass near Nash , and it give she an opportunity 
 to nod good - bye to he , which he be by no mean sure she would have 
 do if Nick have not   be with she . the young man just stop ; he say 
 to nash : " I should like to see you this evening late . you must meet I 
 somewhere . " 

 " well take a walk - I should like that , " Nash reply . " I shall smoke a 
 cigar at the cafă   on the corner of the Place de l'OpĂ ra - you will find I 
 there . " he prepare to compass his own departure , but before do so he 
 address himself to the duty of a few civil word to Lady Agnes . this 
 effort prove vain , for on one side she be defend by the wall of the 
 room and on the other render inaccessible by Miriam 's mother , who 
 cling to she with a quickly - rooted fidelity , show no symptom of 
 desistance . Nash decline perforce upon her daughter Grace , who say to 
 he : " you be talk with my cousin Mrs. Dallow . " 

 " to she rather than with she , " he smile . 

 " ah she be very charming , " Grace say . 

 " she be very beautiful . " 

 " and very clever , " the girl continue . 

 " very , very intelligent . " his conversation with Miss Dormer go little 
 beyond this , and he presently take leave of Peter Sherringham , remark 
 to he as they shake hand that he be very sorry for he . but he have 
 court his fate . 

 " what do you mean by my fate ? " Sherringham ask . 

 " you have   get they for life . " 

 " why for life , when I now clearly and courageously recognise that she 
 be not   good ? " 

 " ah but she will become so , " say Gabriel Nash . 

 " do you think that ? " Sherringham bring out with a candour that make 
 his visitor laugh . 

 " you will - that be more to the purpose ! " the latter declare as he go 
 away . 

 ten minute later Lady Agnes substitute a general , vague assent for all 
 further particular one , draw off from Mrs. Rooth and from the rest 
 of the company with her daughter . Peter have have very little talk with 
 Biddy , but the girl keep she disappointment out of her pretty eye and 
 say to he : " you tell we she do not   know how - but she do ! " there be 
 no suggestion of disappointment in this . 

 Sherringham hold her hand a moment . " ah it be you who know how , dear 
 Biddy ! " he answer ; and he be conscious that if the occasion have be 
 more private he would have all lawfully kiss she . 

 presently three more of his guest take leave , and Mr. Nash 's assurance 
 that he have they for life recur to he as he observe that Mrs. Rooth 
 and her damsel quite fail to profit by so many example . the lovick 
 remain - a colleague and his sociable wife - and Peter give they a hint 
 that they be not to plant he there only with the two lady . Miriam 
 quit Mrs. Lovick , who have attempt , with no great subtlety , to 
 engage she , and come up to her host as if she suspect he of a design 
 of steal from the room and have the idea of prevent it . 

 " I want some more tea : will you give I some more ? I feel quite faint . 
 you do not   seem to suspect how this sort of thing take it out of one . " 

 Peter apologise extravagantly for not have see to it that she have 
 proper refreshment , and take she to the round table , in a corner , on 
 which the little collation have be serve . he pour out tea for she 
 and press bread and butter on she and petit four , of all which she 
 profusely and methodically partook . it be late ; the afternoon have fade 
 and a lamp be bring in , the wide shade of which shed a fair glow on 
 the tea - service and the plate of pretty food . the Lovicks sit with Mrs. 
 Rooth at the other end of the room , and the girl stand at the table , 
 drink her tea and eat her bread and butter . she consume these 
 article so freely that he wonder if she have be truly in want of a 
 meal - if they be so poor as to have to count with that sort of 
 privation . this supposition be soften , but still not so much so as 
 to make he ask she to sit down . she appear indeed to prefer to stand : 
 she look well so , as if the freedom , the conspicuity of be on her 
 foot and tread a stage be agreeable to she . while Sherringham 
 linger near she all vaguely , his hand in his pocket and his mind now 
 void of everything but a planned evasion of the theatrical 
 question - there be moment when he be so plentifully tired of it - she 
 break out abruptly : " Confess you think I intolerably bad ! " 

 " intolerably - no . " 

 " only tolerably ! I find that bad . " 

 " every now and then you do something very right , " Sherringham say . 

 " how many such thing do I do to - day ? " 

 " oh three or four . I do not   know that I count very carefully . " 

 she raise her cup to her lip , look at he over the rim of it - a 
 proceeding that give her eye a strange expression . " it bore you and 
 you think it disagreeable , " she then say - " I mean a girl always talk 
 about herself . " he protest she could never bore he and she add : " oh 
 I do not   want compliment - I want the hard , the precious truth . an 
 actress have to talk about herself . what else can she talk about , poor 
 vain thing ? " 

 " she can talk sometimes about other actress . " 

 " that come to the same thing . you will not   be serious . I be awfully 
 serious . " there be something that catch his attention in the note of 
 this - a longing half hopeless , half argumentative to be believe in . " if 
 one really want to do anything one must worry it out ; of course 
 everything do not   come the first day , " she keep on . " I can not   see 
 everything at once ; but I can see a little more - step by step - as I go ; 
 can not   I ? " 

 " that be the way - that be the way , " he gently enough return . " when you 
 see the thing to do the art of do they will come - if you hammer 
 away . the great point 's to see they . " 

 " yes ; and you do not   think I clever enough for that . " 

 " why do you say so when I have   ask you to come here on purpose ? " 

 " you have   ask I to come , but I have   have no success . " 

 " on the contrary ; every one think you wonderful . " 

 " oh but they do not   know ! " say Miriam Rooth . " you have   not say a word to 
 I . I do not   mind your not have praise I ; that would be too banal . 
 but if I be bad - and I know I be dreadful - I wish you would talk to I about 
 it . " 

 " it be delightful to talk to you , " Peter find himself say . 

 " no , it be not , but it be kind " ; and she look away from he . 

 her voice have with this a quality which make he exclaim : " every now and 
 then you ' say ' something - ! " 

 she turn her eye back to he and her face have a light . " I do not   want 
 it to come by accident . " then she add : " if there be any good to be get 
 from try , from show one 's self , how can it come unless one hear 
 the simple truth , the truth that turn one inside out ? it be all for 
 that - to know what one be , if one be a stick ! " 

 " you have   great courage , you have   rare quality , " Sherringham risk . she 
 have begin to touch he , to seem different : he be glad she have not go . 

 but for a little she make no answer , put down her empty cup and 
 yearn over the table as for something more to eat . suddenly she 
 raise her head and break out with vehemence : " I will , I will , I will ! " 

 " you will do what you want , evidently . " 

 " I will succeed - I will be great . of course I know too little , I have 
 see too little . but I have   always like it ; I have   never like anything 
 else . I use to learn thing and do scene and rant about the room when 
 I be but five year old . " she go on , communicative , persuasive , 
 familiar , egotistical   as be necessary , and slightly common , or 
 perhaps only natural ; with reminiscence , reason , and anecdote , an 
 unexpected profusion , and with an air of comradeship , of freedom in any 
 relation , which seem to plead that she be capable at least of 
 embrace that side of the profession she desire to adopt . he note 
 that if she have see very little , as she say , she have also see a great 
 deal ; but both her experience and her innocence have be accidental and 
 irregular . she have see very little act - the theatre be always too 
 expensive . if she could only go often - in Paris for instance every night 
 for six month - to see the good , the bad , everything , she would make 
 thing out , would observe and learn what to do , what not to do : it would 
 be a school of school . but she could not   without sell the clothe off 
 she back . it be vile and disgusting to be poor , and if ever she be to 
 know the bliss of have a few franc in her pocket she would make up 
 for it - that she could promise ! she have never be acquaint with any 
 one who could tell she anything - if it be good or bad or right or 
 wrong - except Mrs. Delamere and poor Ruggieri . she suppose they have 
 tell she a great deal , but perhaps they have not , and she be perfectly 
 willing to give it up if it be bad . evidently Madame CarrĂ   think so ; 
 she think it be horrid . be not   it perfectly divine , the way the old 
 woman have say those verse , those speech of CĂ lie ? if she would only 
 let she come and listen to she once in a while like that it be all she 
 would ask . she have get lot of idea just from that half - hour ; she have 
 practise they over , over , and over again , the moment she get home . he 
 might ask her mother - he might ask the people next door . if Madame CarrĂ 
 do not   think she could work , she might have hear , could she have 
 listen at the door , something that would show she . but she do not 
 think she even good enough to criticise - since that be not   criticism , 
 tell she her head be good . of course her head be good - she need not 
 travel up to the quartier excentrique to find that out . it be her 
 mother , the way she talk , who give the idea that she want to be 
 elegant and moral and a femme du monde and all that sort of trash . of 
 course that put people off , when they be only think of the real 
 right way . do not   she know , Miriam herself , that this be the one thing 
 to think of ? but any one would be kind to her mother who know what a 
 dear she be . " she do not   know when any thing be right or wrong , but 
 she be a perfect saint , " say the girl , obscure considerably her 
 vindication . " she do not   mind when I say thing over by the hour , 
 din they into her ear while she sit there and read . she be a 
 tremendous reader ; she be awfully up in literature . she teach I 
 everything herself . I mean all that sort of thing . of course I be not so 
 fond of reading ; I go in for the book of life . " Sherringham wonder if 
 her mother have not at any rate teach she that phrase - he think it 
 highly probable . " it would give on my nerve , the life I lead she , " 
 Miriam continue ; " but she be really a delicious woman . " 

 the oddity of this epithet make Peter laugh , and altogether , in a few 
 minute , which be perhaps a sign that he abuse his right to be a man of 
 mood , the young lady have produce in he a revolution of curiosity , set 
 his sympathy in motion . her mixture , as it spread itself before he , be 
 an appeal and a challenge : she be sensitive and dense , she be 
 underbred and fine . certainly she be very various , and that be rare ; 
 quite not at this moment the heavy - eye , frightened creature who have 
 pull herself together with such an effort at Madame CarrĂ 's , nor the 
 elated " phenomenon " who have just be declaiming , nor the rather 
 affected and contradictious young person with whom he have walk home 
 from the Rue de Constantinople . be this succession of phase a sign she 
 be really a case of the celebrated artistic temperament , the nature 
 that make people provoke and interesting ? that Sherringham himself be 
 of this shift complexion be perhaps prove by his odd capacity for 
 being of two different mind very nearly at the same time . Miriam be 
 pretty now , with felicity and grace , with charming , unusual eye . 
 yes , there be thing he could do for she ; he have already forget the 
 chill of Mr. Nash 's irony , of his prophecy . he be even scarce conscious 
 how little in general he like hint , insinuation , favour ask 
 obliquely and plaintively : that be doubtless also because the girl be 
 suddenly so take and so fraternise . perhaps indeed it be unjust to 
 qualify as roundabout the manner in which Miss Rooth convey that it 
 be open to he not only to pay for her lesson , but to meet the expense 
 of her nightly attendance with her mother at instructive exhibition of 
 theatrical art . it be a large order , send the pair to all the play ; 
 but what Peter now find himself think of be not so much its 
 largeness as the possible interest of go with they sometimes and 
 point the moral - the technical one - of show she the thing he 
 like , the thing he disapprove . she repeat her declaration that she 
 recognise the fallacy of her mother 's view of heroine impossibly 
 virtuous and of the importance of she look out for such tremendously 
 proper people . " one must let she talk , but of course it create a 
 prejudice , " she say with her eye on Mr. and Mrs. Lovick , who have get 
 up , terminate their communion with Mrs. Rooth . " it be a great muddle , I 
 know , but she can not   bear anything coarse or nasty - and quite right too . 
 I should not   either if I do not   have to . but I do not   care a sou where I 
 go if I can get to act , or who they be if they will help I . I want to 
 act - that be what I want to do ; I do not   want to meddle in people 's 
 affair . I can look out for myself - I be all right ! " the girl exclaim 
 roundly , frankly , with a ring of honesty which make her crude and pure . 
 " as for do the bad one I be not afraid of that . " 

 " the bad one ? " 

 " the bad woman in the play - like Madame CarrĂ . I will do any vile 
 creature . " 

 " I think you will do well what you be " - and Sherringham laugh for the 
 interest of it . " you be a strange girl . " 

 " Je crois bien ! do not   one have to be , to want to go and exhibit 
 one 's self to a loathsome crowd , on a platform , with trumpet and a big 
 drum , for money - to parade one 's body and one 's soul ? " 

 he look at she a moment : her face change constantly ; now it have a 
 fine flush and a noble delicacy . " give it up . you be too good for it , " 
 he find himself plead . " I doubt if you have   an idea of what girl have 
 to go through . " 

 " never , never - never till I be pelt ! " she cry . 

 " then stay on here a bit . I will take you to the theatre . " 

 " oh you dear ! " Miriam delightedly exclaim . Mr. and Mrs. Lovick , 
 accompany by Mrs. Rooth , now cross the room to they , and the girl 
 go on in the same tone : " Mamma dear , he be the good friend we have   ever 
 have - he be a great deal nicer than I think . " 

 " so be you , mademoiselle , " say Peter Sherringham . 

 " oh , I trust Mr. Sherringham - I trust he infinitely , " Mrs. Rooth 
 return , cover he with her mild , respectable , wheedle eye . " the 
 kindness of every one have be beyond everything . Mr. and Mrs. Lovick 
 can not   say enough . they make the most obliging offer . they want you to 
 know their brother . " 

 " oh I say , he be no brother of mine , " Mr. Lovick protest 
 good - naturedly . 

 " they think he will be so suggestive , he will put we up to the right 
 thing , " Mrs. Rooth go on . 

 " it be just a little brother of mine - such a dear , amusing , clever boy , " 
 Mrs. Lovick explain . 

 " do you know she have get nine ? upon my honour she have ! " say she 
 husband . " this one be the sixth . Fancy if I have to take they all over ! " 

 " yes , it make it rather awkward , " Mrs. Lovick amiably concede . " he have 
 go on the stage , poor darling - but he act rather well . " 

 " he try for the diplomatic service , but he do not   precisely dazzle his 
 examiner , " Mr. Lovick far mention . 

 " Edmund 's very nasty about he . there be lot of gentleman on the 
 stage - he be not the first . " 

 " it be such a comfort to hear that , " say Mrs. Rooth . 

 " I be much oblige to you . have he get a theatre ? " Miriam ask . 

 " my dear young lady , he have not   even get an engagement , " reply the 
 young man 's terrible brother - in - law . 

 " he have not   be at it very long , but I be sure he will get on . he be 
 immensely in earnest and very good - look . I just say that if he 
 should come over to see we you might rather like to meet he . he might 
 give you some tip , as my husband say . " 

 " I do not   care for his look , but I should like his tip , " Miriam 
 liberally smile . 

 " and be he come over to see you ? " ask Sherringham , to whom , while 
 this exchange of remark , which he have not lose , be go on , Mrs. 
 Rooth have in lower accent address herself . 

 " not if I can help it I think ! " but Mr. Lovick be so gaily rude that it 
 be not   embarrassing . 

 " oh sir , I be sure you be fond of he , " Mrs. Rooth remonstrate as the 
 party pass together into the antechamber . 

 " no , really , I like some of the other - four or five of they ; but I 
 do not   like Arty . " 

 " we will make it up to he , then ; we will like he , " Miriam answer with 
 spirit ; and her voice ring in the staircase - Sherringham attend they a 
 little way - with a charm which her host have rather miss in her 
 loudness of the day before . 




 IX 


 Nick Dormer find his friend Nash that evening at the place of their 
 tryst - smoke a cigar , in the warm bright night , on the terrace of the 
 cafă   form one of the angle of the Place de l'OpĂ ra . he sit down with 
 he , but at the end of five minute utter a protest against the crush 
 and confusion , the publicity and vulgarity of the place , the shuffle 
 procession of the crowd , the jostle of fellow - customer , the perpetual 
 brush of waiter . " come away ; I want to talk to you and I can not   talk 
 here . I do not   care where we go . it will be pleasant to walk ; well stroll 
 away to the quartier să rieux . each time I come to Paris I at the end 
 of three day take the Boulevard , with its conventional grimace , into 
 great aversion . I hate even to cross it - I go half a mile round to 
 avoid it . " 

 the young man take their course together down the Rue de la Paix to the 
 Rue de Rivoli , which they cross , pass beside the gild rail of 
 the Tuileries . the beauty of the night - the only defect of which be 
 that the immense illumination of Paris keep it from be quite night 
 enough , make it a sort of bedizened , rejuvenate day - give a charm to 
 the quieter street , draw our friend away to the right , to the river 
 and the bridge , the old , dusky city . the pale ghost of the palace 
 that have perish by fire hang over they a while , and , by the passage 
 now open at all time across the garden of the Tuileries , they come out 
 upon the Seine . they keep on and on , move slowly , smoking , talk , 
 pausing , stop to look , to emphasise , to compare . they fall into 
 discussion , into confidence , into inquiry , sympathetic or satiric , and 
 into explanation which need in turn to be explain . the balmy night , 
 the time for talk , the amusement of Paris , the memory of young 
 passage , give a lift to the occasion . Nick have already forget his 
 little brush with Julia on his leave Peter 's tea - party at her side , 
 and that he have be almost disconcert by the asperity with which she 
 denounce the odious man he have take it into his head to force upon 
 she . Impertinent and fatuous she have call he ; and when Nick begin to 
 plead that he be really neither of these thing , though he could 
 imagine his manner might sometimes suggest they , she have declare that 
 she do not   wish to argue about he or ever to hear of he again . Nick 
 have not   count on she like Gabriel Nash , but have think she not 
 like he would not   perceptibly matter . he have give himself the 
 diversion , not cruel surely to any one concern , of see what she 
 would make of a type she have never before meet . she have make even less 
 than he expect , and her intimation that he have play she a trick have 
 be irritate enough to prevent his reflecting that the offence might 
 have be in some degree with Nash . but he have recover from his 
 resentment sufficiently to ask this personage , with every possible 
 circumstance of imply consideration for the lady , what have be the 
 impression make by his charming cousin . 

 " upon my word , my dear fellow , I do not   regard that as a fair question , " 
 Gabriel say . " besides , if you think Mrs. Dallow charm what on earth 
 need it matter to you what I think ? the superiority of one man 's 
 opinion over another 's be never so great as when the opinion be about a 
 woman . " 

 " it be to help I to find out what I think of yourself , " Nick return . 

 " oh , that you will never do . I shall bewilder you to the end . the lady 
 with whom you be so good as to make I acquainted be a beautiful 
 speciman of the english garden - flower , the product of high cultivation 
 and much tending ; a tall , delicate stem with the head set upon it in a 
 manner which , as a thing see and remember , should doubtless count for 
 we as a gift of the god . she be the perfect type of the object raise 
 or breed , and everything about her hang together and conduce to the 
 effect , from the angle of her elbow to the way she drop that vague , 
 conventional , dry little ' oh ! ' which dispense with all further 
 performance . that degree of completeness be always satisfy . but I 
 do not   satisfy she , and she do not   understand I . I do not   think they 
 usually understand . " 

 " she be no bad than I then . " 

 " ah she do not   try . " 

 " no , she do not   try . but she probably think you a monster of conceit , 
 and she would think so still more if she be to hear you talk about she 
 try . " 

 " very likely - very likely , " say Gabriel Nash . " I have   an idea a good many 
 people think that . it strike I as comic . I suppose it be a result of my 
 little system . " 

 " what little system ? " 

 " oh nothing more wonderful than the idea of be just the same to every 
 one . People have so bemuddle themselves that the last thing they can 
 conceive be that one should be simple . " 

 " Lord , do you call yourself simple ? " Nick ejaculate . 

 " absolutely ; in the sense of have no interest of my own to push , no 
 nostrum to advertise , no power to conciliate , no axe to grind . I be not a 
 savage - ah far from it ! - but I really think I be perfectly independent . " 

 " well , that be always provoke ! " Nick knowingly return . 

 " so it would appear , to the great majority of one 's fellow - mortal ; and 
 I well remember the pang with which I originally make that discovery . it 
 darken my spirit at a time when I have no thought of evil . what we 
 like , when we be unregenerate , be that a new - comer should give we a 
 password , come over to our side , join our little camp or religion , get 
 into our little boat , in short , whatever it be , and help we to row it . 
 it be natural enough ; we be mostly in different tub and cockle , 
 paddle for life . our opinion , our conviction and doctrine and 
 standard , be simply the particular thing that will make the boat 
 go - our boat , naturally , for they may very often be just the thing 
 that will sink another . if you will not   get in people generally hate you . " 

 " your metaphor 's very lame , " say Nick . " it be the overcrowded boat that 
 go to the bottom . " 

 " oh I will give it another leg or two ! boat can be big , in the infinite 
 of space , and a doctrine be a raft that float the well the more 
 passenger it carry . a passenger jump over from time to time , not so 
 much from fear of sink as from a want of interest in the course or 
 the company . he swim , he plunge , he dive , he dip down and visit the 
 fish and the mermaid and the submarine cave ; he go from craft to 
 craft and splash about , on his own account , in the blue , cool water . 
 the regenerate , as I call they , be the passenger who jump over in 
 search of well fun . I jump over long ago . " 

 " and now of course you be at the head of the regenerate ; for , in your 
 turn " - Nick find the figure delightful - " you all form a select school 
 of porpoise . " 

 " not a bit , and I know nothing about head - in the sense you mean . I have 
 grow a tail if you will ; I be the merman wander free . it be the 
 jolliest of trade ! " 

 before they have go many step far Nick Dormer stop short with a 
 question . " I say , my dear fellow , do you mind mention to I whether 
 you be the great humbug and charlatan on earth , or a genuine 
 intelligence , one that have sift thing for itself ? " 

 " I do lead your poor british wit a dance - I be so sorry , " Nash reply 
 benignly . " but I be very sincere . and I have try to straighten out 
 thing a bit for myself . " 

 " then why do you give people such a handle ? " 

 " such a handle ? " 

 " for think you be an - for think you be a mere farceur . " 

 " I daresay it be my manner : they be so unused to any sort of candour . " 

 " well then why do not   you try another ? " Nick ask . 

 " one have the manner that one can , and mine moreover be a part of my 
 little system . " 

 " ah if you make so much of your little system you be no well than any 
 one else , " Nick return as they go on . 

 " I do not   pretend to be well , for we be all miserable sinner ; I only 
 pretend to be bad in a pleasanter , bright way - by what I can see . it be 
 the simple thing in the world ; just take for grant our right to be 
 happy and brave . what be essentially kind and more helpful than that , 
 what be more beneficent ? but the tradition of dreariness , of stodginess , 
 of dull , dense , literal prose , have so seal people 's eye that they have 
 end by think the most natural of all thing the most perverse . why 
 so keep up the dreariness , in our poor little day ? no one can tell I 
 why , and almost every one call I name for simply ask the question . 
 but I go on , for I believe one can do a little good by it . I want so 
 much to do a little good , " Gabriel Nash continue , take his 
 companion 's arm . " my persistence be systematic : do not   you see what I 
 mean ? I will not   be dreary - no , no , no ; and I will not   recognise the 
 necessity , or even , if there be any way out of it , the accident , of 
 dreariness in the life that surround I . that be enough to make people 
 stare : they be so damned stupid ! " 

 " they think you so damned impudent , " Nick freely explain . 

 at this Nash stop he short with a small cry , and , turn his eye , 
 Nick see under the lamp of the quay that he have bring a flush of pain 
 into his friend 's face . " I do not   strike you that way ? " 

 " oh ' I ! ' be not   it just admit that I do not   in the least make you 
 out ? " 

 " that be the last thing ! " Nash declare , as if he be think the idea 
 over , with an air of genuine distress . " but with a little patience we will 
 clear it up together - if you care enough about it , " he add more 
 cheerfully . let his companion proceed again he continue : " Heaven 
 help we all , what do people mean by impudence ? there be many , I think , 
 who do not   understand its nature or its limit ; and upon my word I have 
 literally see mere quickness of intelligence or of perception , the jump 
 of a step or two , a little whirr of the wing of talk , mistaken for it . 
 yes , I have   encounter man and woman who think you impudent if you 
 be not   simply so stupid as they . the only impudence be unprovoked , or 
 even mere dull , aggression , and I indignantly protest that I be never 
 guilty of that clumsiness . ah for what do they take one , with their 
 beastly presumption ? even to defend myself sometimes I have   to make 
 believe to myself that I care . I always feel as if I do not   successfully 
 make other think so . perhaps they see impudence in that . but I daresay 
 the offence be in the thing that I take , as I say , for grant ; for if 
 one try to be pleased one pass perhaps inevitably for be please 
 above all with one 's self . that be really not my case - I find my capacity 
 for pleasure deplorably below the mark I have   set . this be why , as I have 
 tell you , I cultivate it , I try to bring it up . and I be actuate by 
 positive benevolence ; I have   that impudent pretension . that be what I mean 
 by be the same to every one , by have only one manner . if one 's 
 conscious and ingenious to that end what be the harm - when one 's motif 
 be so pure ? by never , never make the concession , one may end by 
 become a perceptible force for good . " 

 " what concession be you talk about , in God 's name ? " Nick demand . 

 " why , that we be here all for dreariness . it be impossible to grant it 
 sometimes if you wish to deny it ever . " 

 " and what do you mean then by dreariness ? that be modern slang and 
 terribly vague . many good thing be dreary - virtue and decency and 
 charity , and perseverance and courage and honour . " 

 " say at once that life 's dreary , my dear fellow ! " Gabriel Nash 
 exclaim . 

 " that be on the whole my besetting impression . " 

 " Cest la que je vous attend ! I be precisely engage in try what can 
 be do in take it the other way . it be my little personal experiment . 
 life consist of the personal experiment of each of we , and the point 
 of an experiment be that it shall succeed . what we contribute be our 
 treatment of the material , our rendering of the text , our style . a sense 
 of the quality of a style be so rare that many person should 
 doubtless be forgive for not be able to read , or at all event to 
 enjoy , we ; but be that a reason for give it up - for not be , in this 
 other sphere , if one possibly can , an Addison , a Ruskin , a Renan ? ah we 
 must write our good ; it be the great thing we can do in the world , on the 
 right side . one have one 's form , que diable , and a mighty good thing 
 that one have . I be not afraid of put all life into mine , and without 
 unduly squeeze it . I be not afraid of put in honour and courage and 
 charity - without spoil they : on the contrary I shall only do they 
 good . People may not read you at sight , may not like you , but there be a 
 chance they will come round ; and the only way to court the chance be to 
 keep it up - always to keep it up . that be what I do , my dear man - if you 
 do not   think I have   perseverance . if some one 's touch here and there , if 
 you give a little impression of truth and charm , that be your reward ; 
 besides of course the pleasure for yourself . " 

 " do not   you think your style 's a trifle affect ? " Nick ask for further 
 amusement . 

 " that be always the charge against a personal manner : if you have   any at 
 all people think you have   too much . perhaps , perhaps - who can say ? the 
 lurking unexpresse be infinite , and affectation must have begin , long 
 ago , with the first act of reflective expression - the substitution of 
 the few place articulate word for the cry or the thump or the hug . of 
 course one be not   perfect ; but that be the delightful thing about art , 
 that there be always more to learn and more to do ; it grow big the 
 more one use it and meet more question the more they come up . no 
 doubt I be rough still , but I be in the right direction : I make it my 
 business to testify for the fine . " 

 " ah the fine - there it stand , over there ! " say Nick Dormer . " I be not 
 so sure about yours - I do not   know what I have   get hold of . but Notre Dame 
  be truth ; Notre Dame be charm ; on Notre Dame the distracted mind can 
 rest . come over with I and look at she ! " 

 they have come abreast of the low island from which the great cathedral , 
 disengage to - day from her old contact and adhesion , rise high and 
 fair , with her front of beauty and her majestic mass , darken at that 
 hour , or at least simplify , under the star , but only more serene and 
 sublime for her happy union far aloft with the cool distance and the 
 night . our young man , fantasticate as freely as I leave the reader to 
 estimate , cross the wide , short bridge which make they face toward the 
 monument of old Paris - the Palais de Justice , the Conciergerie , the 
 holy chapel of Saint Louis . they come out before the church , which look 
 down on a square where the past , once so thick in the very heart of 
 Paris , have be make rather a blank , pervade however by the everlasting 
 freshness of the vast cathedral - face . it greet Nick Dormer and Gabriel 
 Nash with a kindness the long century have do nothing to dim . the 
 lamplight of the old city wash its foundation , but the tower and 
 buttress , the arch , the gallery , the statue , the vast 
 rose - window , the large full composition , seem to grow clear while 
 they climb higher , as if they have a conscious benevolent answer for 
 the upward gaze of man . 

 " how it straighten thing out and blow away one 's vapour - anything 
 that be do ! " say Nick ; while his companion exclaim blandly and 
 affectionately : 

 " the dear old thing ! " 

 " the great point 's to do something , instead of muddle and questioning ; 
 and , by Jove , it make I want to ! " 

 " want to build a cathedral ? " Nash inquire . 

 " yes , just that . " 

 " it be you who puzzle I then , my dear fellow . you can not   build they out 
 of word . " 

 " what be it the great poet do ? " ask Nick . 

 " their word be idea - their word be image , enchant 
 collocation and unforgettable sign . but the verbiage of parliamentary 
 speech - ! " 

 " well , " say Nick with a candid , reflective sigh , " you can rear a great 
 structure of many thing - not only of stone and timber and paint 
 glass . " they walk round this example of one , pausing , criticise , 
 admiring , and discuss ; mingle the grave with the gay and paradox 
 with contemplation . behind and at the side the huge , dusky vessel of 
 the church seem to dip into the Seine or rise out of it , float 
 expansively - a ship of stone with its fly buttress throw forth 
 like an array of mighty oar . Nick Dormer linger near it in joy , in 
 soothe content , as if it have be the temple of a faith so dear to he 
 that there be peace and security in its precinct . and there be comfort 
 too and consolation of the same sort in the company at this moment of 
 Nash 's equal appreciation , of his response , by his own sign , to the 
 great effect . he take it all in so and then so give it all out that Nick 
 be remind of the radiance his boyish admiration have find in he of 
 old , the easy grasp of everything of that kind . " everything of that 
 kind " be to Nick 's sense the description of a wide and bright domain . 

 they cross to the farth side of the river , where the influence of 
 the Gothic monument throw a distinction even over the parisian 
 smartness - the municipal rule and measure , the importunate 
 symmetry , the " handsomeness " of everything , the extravagance of 
 gaslight , the perpetual click on the neat bridge . in front of a quiet 
 little cafă   on the left bank Gabriel Nash say , " let us sit down " - he be 
 always ready to sit down . it be a friendly establishment and an 
 unfashionable quarter , far away from the caravan - series ; there be the 
 usual little table and chair on the quay , the muslin curtain behind 
 the glaze front , the general sense of sawdust and of dripping of 
 watery beer . the place be subdue to stillness , but not extinguish , 
 by the lateness of the hour ; no vehicle pass , only now and then a 
 light parisian foot . beyond the parapet they could hear the flow of the 
 Seine . Nick Dormer say it make he think of the old Paris , of the great 
 Revolution , of Madame Roland , quoi ! Gabriel say they could have 
 watery beer but be not oblige to drink it . they sit a long time ; they 
 talk a great deal , and the more they say the more the unsaid come up . 
 presently Nash find occasion to throw out : " I go about my business like 
 any good citizen - that be all . " 

 " and what be your business ? " 

 " the spectacle of the world . " 

 Nick laugh out . " and what do you do with that ? " 

 " what do any one do with spectacle ? I look at it . I see . " 

 " you be full of contradiction and inconsistency , " Nick however 
 object . " you describe yourself to I half an hour ago as an apostle 
 of beauty . " 

 " where be the inconsistency ? I do it in the broad light of day , whatever 
 I do : that be virtually what I mean . if I look at the spectacle of the 
 world I look in preference at what be charming in it . sometimes I have   to 
 go far to find it - very likely ; but that be just what I do . I go far - as 
 far as my means permit I . last year I hear of such a delightful little 
 spot ; a place where a wild fig - tree grow in the south wall , the outer 
 side , of an old spanish city . I be tell it be a deliciously brown 
 corner - the sun make it warm in winter . as soon as I could I go 
 there . " 

 " and what do you do ? " 

 " I lay on the first green grass - I like it . " 

 " if that sort of thing be all you accomplish you be not encouraging . " 

 " I accomplish my happiness - it seem to I that be something . I have 
 feeling , I have sensation : let I tell you that be not so common . it be 
 rare to have they , and if you chance to have they it be rare not to be 
 ashamed of they . I go after they - when I judge they will not   hurt any one . " 

 " you be lucky to have money for your travel expense , " say Nick . 

 " no doubt , no doubt ; but I do it very cheap . I take my stand on my 
 nature , on my fortunate character . I be not ashamed of it , I do not   think 
 it be so horrible , my character . but we have   so befogged and befoul the 
 whole question of liberty , of spontaneity , of good humour and 
 inclination and enjoyment , that there be nothing that make people stare 
 so as to see one natural . " 

 " you be always think too much of ' people . ' " 

 " they say I think too little , " Gabriel smile . 

 " well , I have   agree to stand for Harsh , " say Nick with a roundabout 
 transition . 

 " it be you then who be lucky to have money . " 

 " I have not , " Nick explain . " my expense be to be pay . " 

 " then you too must think of ' people . ' " 

 Nick make no answer to this , but after a moment say : " I wish very much 
 you have more to show for it . " 

 " to show for what ? " 

 " your little system - the asthetic life . " 

 Nash hesitate , tolerantly , gaily , as he often do , with an air of be 
 embarrassed to choose between several answer , any one of which would be 
 so right . " oh have something to show 's such a poor business . it be a 
 kind of confession of failure . " 

 " yes , you be more affected than anything else , " say Nick impatiently . 

 " no , my dear boy , I be more good - natured : do not   I prove it ? I be rather 
 disappointed to find you not more accessible to esoteric doctrine . but 
 there be , I confess , another plane of intelligence , honourable , and very 
 honourable , in its way , from which it may legitimately appear important 
 to have something to show . if you must confine yourself to that plane I 
 will not   refuse you my sympathy . after all that be what I have to show ! but 
 the degree of my sympathy must of course depend on the nature of the 
 demonstration you wish to make . " 

 " you know it very well - you have   guess it , " Nick return , look 
 before he in a conscious , modest way which would have be call 
 sheepish have he be a few year young . 

 " ah you have   break the scent with tell I you be go back to the 
 House of Commons , " say Nash . 

 " no wonder you do not   make it out ! my situation 's certainly absurd 
 enough . what I really hanker for be to be a painter ; and of portrait , 
 on the whole , I think . that be the abject , crude , ridiculous fact . in 
 this out - of - the - way corner , at the dead of night , in lowered tone , I 
 venture to disclose it to you . be not   that the asthetic life ? " 

 " do you know how to paint ? " ask Nash . 

 " not in the least . no element of burlesque be therefore want to my 
 position . " 

 " that make no difference . I be so glad . " 

 " so glad I do not   know how ? " 

 " so glad of it all . yes , that only make it well . you be a delightful 
 case , and I like delightful case . we must see it through . I rejoice I 
 meet you again . " 

 " do you think I can do anything ? " Nick inquire . 

 " paint good picture ? how can I tell without see some of your work ? 
 do not   it come back to I that at Oxford you use to sketch very 
 prettily ? but that be the last thing that matter . " 

 " what do matter then ? " Nick ask with his eye on his companion . 

 " to be on the right side - on the side of the ' fine . ' " 

 " there will be precious little of the ' fine ' if I produce nothing but 
 daub . " 

 " ah you cling to the old false measure of success ! I must cure you of 
 that . there will be the beauty of have be disintereste and 
 independent ; of have take the world in the free , brave , personal 
 way . " 

 " I shall nevertheless paint decently if I can , " Nick presently say . 

 " I be almost sorry ! it will make your case less clear , your example less 
 grand . " 

 " my example will be grand enough , with the fight I shall have to make . " 

 " the fight ? with whom ? " 

 " with myself first of all . I be awfully against it . " 

 " ah but you will have I on the other side , " Nash smile . 

 " well , you will have more than a handful to meet - everything , every one 
 that belong to I , that touch I near or far ; my family , my blood , my 
 heredity , my tradition , my promise , my circumstance , my prejudice ; 
 my little past - such as it be ; my great future - such as it have be 
 suppose it may be . " 

 " I see , I see . it be splendid ! " Nash exclaim . " and Mrs. Dallow into the 
 bargain , " he add . 

 " yes , Mrs. Dallow if you like . " 

 " be you in love with she ? " 

 " not in the least . " 

 " well , she be with you - so I understand . " 

 " do not   say that , " say Nick Dormer with sudden sternness . 

 " ah you be , you be ! " his companion pronounce , judge apparently from 
 this accent . 

 " I do not   know what I be - heaven help I ! " Nick break out , toss his 
 hat down on his little tin table with vehemence . " I be a freak of nature 
 and a sport of the mocking god . why should they go out of their way to 
 worry I ? why should they do everything so inconsequent , so improbable , 
 so preposterous ? it be the vulgar practical joke . there have never be 
 anything of the sort among we ; we be all Philistines to the core , with 
 about as much esthetic sense as that hat . it be excellent soil - I do not 
 complain of it - but not a soil to grow that flower . from where the devil 
 then have the seed be drop ? I look back from generation to 
 generation ; I scour our annal without find the least little 
 sketch grandmother , any sign of a building or versifying or 
 collect or even tulip - raise ancestor . they be all as blind as 
 bat , and none the less happy for that . I be a wanton variation , an 
 unaccountable monster . my dear father , rest his soul , go through life 
 without a suspicion that there be anything in it that can not   be boil 
 into blue - book , and become in that conviction a very distinguished 
 person . he bring I up in the same simplicity and in the hope of the 
 same eminence . it would have be well if I have remain so . I think 
 it be partly your fault that I have not , " Nick go on . " at Oxford you 
 be very bad company for I - my evil genius : you open my eye , you 
 communicate the poison . since then , little by little , it have be 
 work within I ; vaguely , covertly , insensibly at first , but during 
 the last year or two with violence , pertinacity , cruelty . I have   resort 
 to every antidote in life ; but it be no use - I be stricken . C'est VĂ nus 
 toute entiere a sa proie attachĂ e - put Venus for ' art . ' it tear I 
 to piece as I may say . " 

 " I see , I follow you , " say Nash , who have listen to this recital with 
 radiant interest and curiosity . " and that be why you be go to stand . " 

 " precisely - it be an antidote . and at present you be another . " 

 " Another ? " 

 " that be why I jump at you . a big dose of you may disagree with I 
 to that extent that I shall either die or get well . " 

 " I shall control the dilution , " say Nash . " poor fellow - if you be 
 elect ! " he add . 

 " poor fellow either way . you do not   know the atmosphere in which I live , 
 the horror , the scandal my apostasy would provoke , the injury and 
 suffering it would inflict . I believe it would really kill my mother . 
 she think my father 's watch I from the sky . " 

 " jolly to make he jump ! " Nash suggest . 

 " he would jump indeed - come straight down on top of I . and then the 
 grotesqueness of it - to begin all of a sudden at my age . " 

 " it be perfect indeed , it be too lovely a case , " Nash rave . 

 " think how it sound - a paragraph in the London paper : ' Mr. Nicholas 
 Dormer , M. P. for Harsh and son of the late right honourable and so 
 forth and so forth , be about to give up his seat and withdraw from 
 public life in order to devote himself to the practice of 
 portrait - painting - and with the more commendable perseverance by reason 
 of all the dreadful time he have lose . order , in view of this , 
 respectfully solicit . ' " 

 " the nineteenth century 's a sweet time than I think , " say Nash . 
 " it be the portrait then that haunt your dream ? " 

 " I wish you could see . you must of course come immediately to my place 
 in London . " 

 " perfidious wretch , you be capable of have talent - which of course 
 will spoil everything ! " Gabriel wail . 

 " no , I be too old and be too early pervert . it be too late to go 
 through the mill . " 

 " you make I young ! do not   miss your election at your peril . think of 
 the edification . " 

 " the edification - ? " 

 " of your throw it all up the next moment . " 

 " that would be pleasant for Mr. Carteret , " Nick brood . 

 " Mr. Carteret - ? " 

 " a dear old family friend who will wish to pay my agent 's bill . " 

 " serve he right for such depraved taste . " 

 " you do I good , " say Nick as he rise and turn away . 

 " do not   call I useless then . " 

 " ah but not in the way you mean . it be only if I do not   get in that I 
 shall perhaps console myself with the brush , " Nick return with 
 humorous , edify elegance while they retrace their step . 

 " for the sake of all the mus then do not   stand . for you will get in . " 

 " very likely . at any rate I have   promise . " 

 " you have   promise Mrs. Dallow ? " 

 " it be her place - she will put I in , " Nick say . 

 " baleful woman ! but I will pull you out ! " cry Gabriel Nash . 




 X 


 for several day Peter Sherringham have business in hand which leave he 
 neither time nor freedom of mind to occupy himself actively with the 
 lady of the HĂ tel de la Garonne . there be moment when they brush 
 across his memory , but their passage be rapid and not light with 
 complacent attention ; for he shrink from bring to the proof the 
 question of whether Miriam would be an interest or only a bore . she have 
 leave he after their second meeting with a quickened sympathy , but in 
 the course of a few hour that flame have burn dim . like most other man 
 he be a mixture of impulse and reflexion , but be peculiar in this , 
 that think thing over almost always make he think less 
 conveniently . he find illusion necessary , so that in order to keep an 
 adequate number go he often forbid himself any excess of that 
 exercise . Mrs. Rooth and her daughter be there and could certainly be 
 trust to make themselves feel . he be conscious of their anxiety and 
 their calculation as of a frequent oppression , and know that whatever 
 result might ensue he should have to do the costly thing for they . an 
 idea of tenacity , of worry feminine duration , associate itself with 
 their presence ; he would have assent with a silent nod to the 
 proposition - enunciate by Gabriel Nash - that he be saddle with they . 
 remedy hover before he , but these figure also at the same time as 
 complication ; range vaguely from the expenditure of money to the 
 discovery that he be in love . this latter accident would be 
 particularly tedious ; he have a full perception of the art by which the 
 girl 's mother might succeed in make it so . it would not   be a 
 compensation for trouble , but a trouble which in itself would require 
 compensation . would that balm spring from the spectacle of the young 
 lady 's genius ? the genius would have to be very great to justify a 
 rise young diplomatist in make a fool of himself . 

 with the excuse of press work he put off Miss Rooth from day to day , 
 and from day to day he expect to hear her knock at his door . it would 
 be time enough when they run he to earth again ; and he be unable to 
 see how after all he could serve they even then . he have propose 
 impetuously a course of the theatre ; but that would be a considerable 
 personal effort now that the summer be about to begin - a free bid for 
 bad air , stale piece , and tired actor . when , however , more than a week 
 have elapse without a reminder of his neglect promise it come over he 
 that he must himself in honour give a sign . there be a delicacy in such 
 unexpected and such difficult discretion - he be touch by be let 
 alone . the flurry of work at the embassy be over and he have time to ask 
 himself what in especial he should do . he want something definite to 
 suggest before communicate with the HĂ tel de la Garonne . 

 as a consequence of this speculation he go back to Madame CarrĂ   to ask 
 she to reconsider her stern judgement and give the young English 
 lady - to oblige he - a dozen lesson of the sort she know so well how to 
 give . he be aware that this request scarcely stand on its foot ; for in 
 the first place Madame CarrĂ   never reconsider when once she have get 
 her impression , and in the second never waste herself on subject whom 
 nature have not form to do her honour . he know his ask she to strain 
 a point to please he would give she a false idea - save that for that 
 matter she have it already - of his relation , actual or prospective , with 
 the girl ; but he decide he need not   care for this , since Miriam herself 
 probably would not   care . what he have mainly in mind be to say to the old 
 actress that she have be mistake - the jeune Anglaise be not   such a 
  grue . this would take some courage , but it would also add to the 
 amusement of his visit . 

 he find she at home , but as soon as he have express his conviction she 
 begin : " oh , your jeune Anglaise , I know a great deal more about she 
 than you ! she have be back to see I twice ; she do not   go the long 
 way round . she charge I like a grenadi and ask I to give 
 she - guess a little what ! - private recitation all to herself . if she 
 do not   succeed it will not   be for want of know how to thump at door . 
 the other day when I come in she be wait for I ; she have be there 
 two hour . my private recitation - have you an idea what people pay for 
 they ? " 

 " between artist , you know , there be easy condition , " Sherringham 
 laugh . 

 " how do I know if she be an artist ? she will not   open her mouth to I ; what 
 she want be to make I say thing to she . she do make I - I do not 
 know how - and she sit there gap at I with her big eye . they look 
 like open pocket ! " 

 " I daresay she will profit by it , " say Sherringham . 

 " I daresay you will ! her face be stupid while she watch I , and when 
 she have tire I out she simply walk away . however , as she come 
 back - ! " 

 Madame CarrĂ   pause a moment , listen and then cry : " do not   I tell 
 you ? " 

 Sherringham hear a parley of voice in the little antechamber , and the 
 next moment the door be push open and Miriam Rooth bound into the 
 room . she be flushed and breathless , without a smile , very direct . 

 " will you hear I to - day ? I know four thing , " she immediately break 
 out . then see Sherringham she add in the same brisk , earnest tone , 
 as if the matter be of the high importance : " oh how d'ye do ? I be 
 very glad you be here . " she say nothing else to he than this , appeal 
 to he in no way , make no allusion to his have neglect she , but 
 address herself to Madame CarrĂ   as if he have not be there ; make no 
 excuse and use no flattery ; take rather a tone of equal 
 authority - all as if the famous artist have an obvious duty toward she . 
 this be another variation Peter think ; it differ from each of the 
 attitude in which he have previously see she . it come over he suddenly 
 that so far from there be any question of she have the histrionic 
 nature she simply have it in such perfection that she be always act ; 
 that her existence be a series of part assume for the moment , each 
 change for the next , before the perpetual mirror of some curiosity or 
 admiration or wonder - some spectatorship that she perceive or imagine 
 in the people about she . interested as he have ever be in the 
 profession of which she be potentially an ornament , this idea startle 
 he by its novelty and even lend , on the spot , a formidable , a really 
 appal character to Miriam Rooth . it strike he abruptly that a woman 
 whose only be be to " make believe , " to make believe she have any and 
 every be you might like and that would serve a purpose and produce a 
 certain effect , and whose identity reside in the continuity of her 
 personation , so that she have no moral privacy , as he phrase it to 
 himself , but live in a high wind of exhibition , of figuration - such a 
 woman be a kind of monster in whom of necessity there would be nothing 
 to " be fond " of , because there would be nothing to take hold of . he feel 
 for a moment how simple he have be not to have achieve before this 
 analysis of the actress . the girl 's very face make it vivid to he 
 now - the discovery that she positively have no countenance of her own , 
 but only the countenance of the occasion , a sequence , a variety - capable 
 possibly of become immense - of representative movement . she be 
 always try they , practise they , for her amusement or profit , 
 jump from one to the other and extend her range ; and this would 
 doubtless be her occupation more and more as she acquire ease and 
 confidence . the expression that come near belong to she , as it 
 be , be the one that come near be a blank - an air of inanity 
 when she forget herself in some act of sincere attention . then her eye 
 be heavy and her mouth betray a commonness ; though it be perhaps 
 just at such a moment that the fine line of her head tell most . she have 
 look slightly bete even when Sherringham , on their first meeting at 
 Madame CarrĂ 's , say to Nick Dormer that she be the image of the Tragic 
 Muse . 

 now , at any rate , he seem to see that she might do what she like with 
 her face . it be an elastic substance , an element of gutta - percha , like 
 the flexibility of the gymnast , the lady at the music - hall who be shoot 
 from the mouth of a cannon . he wince a little at this coarser view of 
 the actress ; he have somehow always look more poetically at that 
 priestess of art . yet what be she , the priestess , when one come to 
 think of it , but a female gymnast , a mountebank at high wage ? she 
 do not   literally hang by her heel from a trapeze and hold a fat man in 
 her tooth , but she make the same use of her tongue , of her eye , of the 
 imitative trick , that her muscular sister make of leg and jaw . it be an 
 odd circumstance that Miss Rooth 's face seem to he to - day a fine 
 instrument than old Madame CarrĂ ' s. it be doubtless that the girl 's be 
 fresh and strong and have a future in it , while poor Madame CarrĂ 's be 
 worn and weary and have only a past . 

 the old woman say something , half in jest , half in real resentment , 
 about the brutality of youth while Miriam go to a mirror and quickly 
 take off her hat , pat and arrange her hair as a preliminary to 
 make herself hear . Sherringham see with surprise and amusement that 
 the keen Frenchwoman , who have in her long life exhaust every 
 adroitness , be in a manner helpless and coerce , oblige all in spite 
 of herself . her young friend have take but a few day and a couple of 
 visit to become a successful force ; she have impose herself , and Madame 
 CarrĂ , while she laugh - yet look terrible too , with such high 
 artifice of eye and gesture - be reduce to the last line of defence ; 
 that of pronounce her coarse and clumsy , say she might knock she 
 down , but that this prove nothing . she speak jestingly enough not to 
 offend , but her manner betray the irritation of an intelligent woman 
 who at an advanced age find herself for the first time fail to 
 understand . what she do not   understand be the kind of social product 
 thus present to she by Gabriel Nash ; and this suggest to Sherringham 
 that the jeune Anglaise be perhaps indeed rare , a new type , as Madame 
 CarrĂ   must have see innumerable variety . he see the girl be 
 perfectly prepared to be abuse and that her indifference to what might 
 be think of her discretion be a proof of life , health , and spirit , 
 the insolence of conscious resource . 

 when she have give herself a touch at the glass she turn round , with a 
 rapid " Ecoutez maintenant ! " and stand lean a moment - slightly 
 lower and incline backward , her hand behind she and support 
 she - on the console before the mirror . she wait an instant , turn 
 her eye from one of her companion to the other as to take possession 
 of they - an eminently conscious , intentional proceeding , which make 
 Sherringham ask himself what have become of her former terror and if that 
 and her tear have all be a comedy : after which , abruptly straighten 
 herself , she begin to repeat a short french poem , an ingenious thing of 
 the day , that she have induce Madame CarrĂ   to say over to she . she have 
 learn it , practise it , rehearse it to her mother , and have now be 
 childishly eager to show what she could do with it . what she mainly do 
 be to reproduce with a crude fidelity , but in extraordinary detail , the 
 intonation , the personal quaver and cadence of her model . 

 " how bad you make I seem to myself and if I be you how much well I 
 should say it ! " be Madame CarrĂ 's first criticism . 

 Miriam allow she , however , little time to develop it , for she break 
 out , at the short interval , with the several other specimen of 
 verse to which the old actress have hand she the key . they be all 
 fine lyric , of tender or ironic intention , by contemporary poet , but 
 depend for effect on taste and art , a mastery of the rare shade and 
 the right touch , in the interpreter . Miriam have gobble they up , and she 
 give they forth in the same way as the first , with close , rude , 
 audacious mimicry . there be a moment for Sherringham when it might have 
 be fear their hostess would see in the performance a design 
 burlesque of her manner , her air and grace , her celebrate simper and 
 grimace , so extravagant do it all cause these refinement to appear . 
 when it be over the old woman say , " should you like now to hear how 
  you do ? " and , without wait for an answer , phrased and trill the 
 last of the piece , from begin to end , exactly as her visitor have 
 do , make this imitation of an imitation the droll thing 
 conceivable . if she have suffer from the sound of the girl 's echo it 
 be a perfect revenge . Miriam have drop on a sofa , exhaust , and she 
 star at first , flushed and wild ; then she frankly give way to 
 pleasure , to interest and large laughter . she say afterwards , to defend 
 herself , that the verse in question , and indeed all those she have 
 recite , be of the most difficult sort : you have to do they ; they 
 do not   do themselves - they be thing in which the gro moyen be 
 of no avail . 

 " ah my poor child , your mean be all gros moyen ; you appear to have 
 no other , " Madame CarrĂ   reply . " you do what you can , but there be 
 people like that ; it be the way they be make . they can never come nearer 
 to fine truth , to the just indication ; shade do not   exist for they , they 
 do not   see certain difference . it be to show you a difference that I 
 repeat that thing as you repeat it , as you represent my do it . if 
 you be strike with the little the two way have in common so much the 
 well . but you seem to I terribly to alourdir everything you touch . " 

 Peter read into this judgement a deep irritation - Miriam clearly set the 
 tooth of her instructress on edge . she act on her nerve , be make up 
 of roughness and thicknesse unknown hitherto to her fine , 
 free - play finger - tip . this exasperation , however , be a degree of 
 flattery ; it be neither indifference nor simple contempt ; it 
 acknowledge a mystify reality in the jeune Anglaise and even a 
 shade of importance . the latter remark , serenely enough , that the 
 thing she want most to do be just those that be not for the 
  gros moyen , the vulgar obvious dodge , the start and shout that any 
 one could think of and that the gro public like . she want to do 
 what be most difficult , and to plunge into it from the first ; and she 
 explain as if it be a discovery of her own that there be two kind 
 of scene and speech : those which act themselves , of which the 
 treatment be plain , the only way , so that you have just to take it ; and 
 those open to interpretation , with which you have to fight every step , 
 rendering , arrange , do the thing accord to your idea . some of 
 the most effective passage and the most celebrated and admire , like 
 the frenzy of Juliet with her potion , be of the former sort ; but it 
 be the other she like well . 

 Madame CarrĂ   receive this revelation good - naturedly enough , consider 
 its want of freshness , and only laugh at the young lady for look so 
 nobly patronising while she give it . her laughter appear partly 
 address to the good faith with which Miriam describe herself as 
 preponderantly interested in the subtler problem of her art . 
 Sherringham be charm with the girl 's pluck - if it be pluck and not 
 mere density ; the stout patience with which she submit , for a 
 purpose , to the old woman 's rough usage . he want to take she away , to 
 give she a friendly caution , to advise she not to become a bore , not to 
 expose herself . but she hold up her beautiful head as to show how little 
 she care at present for any exposure , and that   it be half 
 coarseness - Madame CarrĂ   be so far right - and half fortitude   she have 
 no intention of come away so long as ; there be anything to be pick 
 up . she sit and still she sit , challenge her hostess with every sort 
 of question - some reasonable , some ingenious , some strangely futile and 
 some highly indiscreet ; but all with the effect that , contrary to 
 Peter 's expectation , their distinguished friend warm to the work of 
 answer and explain , become interested , be content to keep she and 
 to talk . yes , she take her ease ; she relieve herself , with the rare 
 cynicism of the artist - all the crudity , the irony and intensity of a 
 discussion of esoteric thing - of personal mystery , of method and 
 secret . it be the oddest hour our young man have ever spend , even in 
 the course of investigation which have often lead he into the cuisine , 
 the distillery or back shop , of the admired profession . he get up 
 several time to come away ; then he remain , partly in order not to 
 leave Miriam alone with her terrible initiatress , partly because he be 
 both amuse and edify , and partly because Madame CarrĂ   hold he by the 
 appeal of her sharp , confidential , old eye , address her talk to 
 himself , with Miriam but a pretext and subject , a vile illustration . she 
 undress this young lady , as it be , from head to foot , turn she 
 inside out , weigh and measure and sound she : it be all , for 
 Sherringham , a new revelation of the point to which , in her profession 
 and nation , an intelligence of the business , a ferocious analysis , have 
 be carry and a special vocabulary develop . what strike he above 
 all be the way she know her ground and reason , so that everything be 
 sharp and clear in her mind and lie under her hand . if she have rare 
 perception she have trace they to their source ; she could give an 
 account of what she do ; she know perfectly why , could explain it , 
 defend it , amplify it , fight for it : all of which be an intellectual 
 joy to she , allow she a chance to abound and insist and discriminate . 
 there be a kind of cruelty or at least of hardness in it all , to poor 
 Peter 's shy english sense , that sense which can never really reconcile 
 itself to any question of method and form , and have extraneous sentiment 
 to ' square , " to pacify with compromise and superficiality , the 
 general plea for innocence in everything and often the flagrant proof of 
 it . in theory there be nothing he value more than just such a logical 
 passion as Madame CarrĂ 's , but it be apt in fact , when he find himself 
 at close quarter with it , to appear an ado about nothing . 

 if the old woman be hard it be not that many of her present 
 conclusion about the jeune Anglaise be not indulgent , but that she 
 have a vision of the great manner , of right and wrong , of the just and 
 the false , so high and religious that the individual be nothing before 
 it - a prompt and easy sacrifice . it make our friend uncomfortable , as he 
 have be make uncomfortable by certain feuilleton , review of the 
 theatre in the Paris newspaper , which he be commit to think 
 important but of which , when they be very good , he be rather ashamed . 
 when they be very good , that be when they be very thorough , they 
 be very personal , as be inevitable in deal with the most personal 
 of the art : they go into detail ; they put the dot on the I be ; 
 they discuss impartially the quality of appearance , the physical 
 gift of the poor aspirant , find they in some case reprehensibly 
 inadequate Peter could never rid himself of a dislike to these 
 pronouncement ; in the case of the actress especially they strike he 
 as brutal and offensive - unmanly as launch by an ensconce , 
 moustachioed critic over a cigar . at the same time he be aware of the 
 dilemma   he hat it ; it make he blush still more   in which his 
 objection lodge he . if one be right in care for the actor 's art one 
 ought to have be interested in every honest judgement of it , which , 
 give the peculiar condition , would be useful in proportion as it 
 should be free . if the criticism that recognise frankly these 
 condition seem an inferior or an unholy thing , then what be to be 
 say for the art itself ? what an implication , if the criticism be 
 tolerable only so long as it be worthless - so long as it remain vague 
 and timid ! this be a knot Peter have never straighten out : he 
 content himself with feeling that there be no reason a theatrical 
 critic should not   be a gentleman , at the same time that he often dub 
 it an odious trade , which no gentleman could possibly follow . the good 
 of the fraternity , so conspicuous in Paris , be those who do not   follow 
 it - those who , while pretend to write about the stage , write about 
 everything else . 

 it be as if Madame CarrĂ , in pursuance of her inflame sense that the 
 art be everything and the individual nothing save as he happen to 
 serve it , have say : " well , if she will have it she shall ; she shall 
 know what she be in for , what I go through , batter and break in as 
 we all have be - all who be worthy , who have have the honour . she shall 
 know the real point of view . " it be as if she be still beset with 
 Mrs. Rooth 's twaddle and muddle , her hypocrisy , her idiotic 
 scruple - something she feel all need to belabour , to trample on . Miriam 
 take it all as a bath , a baptism , with shudder joy and gleeful 
 splash ; star , wonder , sometimes blush and fail to follow , 
 but not shrink nor wound ; laugh , when convict , at her own 
 expense and feel evidently that this at last be the high cold air of 
 art , an initiation , a discipline that nothing could undo . Sherringham 
 say he would see her home - he want to talk to she and she must walk 
 away with he . " and it be understand then she may come back , " he add to 
 Madame CarrĂ . " it be my affair of course . you will take an interest in 
 she for a month or two ; she will sit at your foot . " 

 the old actress have an admirable shrug . " oh I will knock she about - she 
 seem stout enough ! " 




 XI 


 when they have descend to the street Miriam mention to Peter that she 
 be thirsty , die to drink something : upon which he ask she if she 
 should have an objection to go with he to a cafă . 

 " Objection ? I have   spend my life in cafĂ s ! they be warm in winter and you 
 get your lamplight for nothing , " she explain . " Mamma and I have sit in 
 they for hour , many a time , with a consommation of three sous , to 
 save fire and candle at home . we have   live in place we could not   sit in , 
 if you want to know - where there be only really room if we be in bed . 
 Mamma 's money 's send out from England and sometimes it usedn't   to come . 
 once it do not   come for month - for month and month . I do not   know how 
 we live . there be not   any to come ; there be not   any to get home . that 
 be not   amusing when you be away in a foreign town without any friend . 
 Mamma use to borrow , but people would not   always lend . you need not   be 
 afraid - she will not   borrow of you . we be rather well now - something 
 have be do in England ; I do not   understand what . it be only fivepence a 
 year , but it have be settle ; it come regularly ; it use to come only 
 when we have write and beg and wait . but it make no 
 difference - mamma be always up to her ear in book . they serve she 
 for food and drink . when she have nothing to eat she begin a novel in 
 ten volume - the old - fashioned one ; they last long . she know 
 every cabinet de lecture in every town ; the little , cheap , shabby 
 one , I mean , in the back street , where they have odd volume and only 
 ask a sou and the book be so old that they smell like close room . she 
 take they to the cafă s - the little , cheap , shabby cafĂ s too - and she 
 read there all the evening . that be very well for she , but it do not 
 feed I . I do not   like a diet of dirty old novel . I sit there beside she 
 with nothing to do , not even a stocking to mend ; she do not   think that 
  comme il faut . I do not   know what the people take I for . however , 
 we have   never be speak to : any one can see mamma 's a great lady . as for 
 I I daresay I might be anything dreadful . if you be go to be an 
 actress you must get use to be look at . there be people in 
 England who use to ask we to stay ; some of they be our cousin - or 
 mamma say they be . I have   never be very clear about our cousin and I 
 do not   think they be at all clear about we . some of they be dead ; the 
 other do not   ask we any more . you should hear mamma on the subject of 
 our visit in England . it be very convenient when your cousin be 
 dead - that explain everything . Mamma have delightful phrase : ' my family 
 be almost extinct . ' then your family may have be anything you like . 
 our of course be magnificent . we do stay in a place once where there 
 be a deer - park , and also private theatrical . I play in they ; I be 
 only fifteen year old , but I be very big and I think I be in 
 heaven . I will go anywhere you like ; you need not   be afraid ; we have   be in 
 place ! I have   learn a great deal that way - sit beside mamma and 
 watch people , their face , their type , their movement . there be a 
 great deal go on in cafă s : people come to they to talk thing over , 
 their private affair , their complication ; they have important 
 meeting . oh I have   observe scene between man and woman - very quiet , 
 terribly quiet , but awful , pathetic , tragic ! once I see a woman do 
 something that I be go to do some day when I be great - if I can get the 
 situation . I will tell you what it be sometime - I will do it for you . oh it 
 be the book of life ! " 

 so Miriam discourse , familiarly , disconnectedly , as the pair go their 
 way down the Rue de Constantinople ; and she continue to abound in 
 anecdote and remark after they be seat face to face at a little 
 marble table in an establishment Peter have select carefully and where 
 he have cause she , at her request , to be accommodate with sirop 
 d'orgeat . " I know what it will come to : Madame CarrĂ   will want to keep 
 I . " this be one of the felicity she presently throw off . 

 " to keep you ? " 

 " for the french stage . she will not   want to let you have I . " she say 
 thing of that kind , astounding in self - complacency , the assumption of 
 quick success . she be in earnest , evidently prepared to work , but her 
 imagination fly over preliminary and probation , take no account of 
 the step in the process , especially the first tiresome one , the hard 
 test of honesty . he have do nothing for she as yet , give no 
 substantial pledge of interest ; yet she be already talk as if his 
 protection be assure and jealous . certainly , however , she seem to 
 belong to he very much indeed as she sit face he at the Paris cafă 
 in her youth , her beauty , and her talkative confidence . this degree of 
 possession be highly agreeable to he and he ask nothing more than to 
 make it last and go far . the impulse to draw she out be 
 irresistible , to encourage she to show herself all the way ; for if he 
 be really destine to take her career in hand he count on some good 
 equivalent - such for instance as that she should at least amuse he . 

 " it be very singular ; I know nothing like it , " he say - " your equal 
 mastery of two language . " 

 " say of half - a - dozen , " Miriam smile . 

 " oh I do not   believe in the other to the same degree . I do not   imagine 
 that , with all deference to your undeniable facility , you would be judge 
 fit to address a german or an italian audience in their own tongue . but 
 you might a french , perfectly , and they be the most particular of all ; 
 for their idiom 's supersensitive and they be incapable of endure the 
  baragouinage of foreigner , to which we listen with such complacency . 
 in fact your French be well than your English - it be more conventional ; 
 there be little queerness and impurity in your English , as if you 
 have live abroad too much . ah you must work that . " 

 " I will work it with you . I like the way you speak . " 

 " you must speak beautifully ; you must do something for the standard . " 

 " for the standard ? " 

 " well , there be not   any after all . " Peter have a drop . " it have go to the 
 dog . " 

 " oh I will bring it back . I know what you mean . " 

 " no one know , no one care ; the sense be go - it be not   in the public , " 
 he continue , ventilate a grievance he be rarely able to forget , the 
 vision of which now suddenly make a mission full of possible sanctity 
 for his companion . " Purity of speech , on our stage , do not   exist . every 
 one speak as he like and audience never notice ; it be the last thing 
 they think of . the place be give up to abominable dialect and 
 individual trick , any vulgarity flourish , and on top of it all the 
 Americans , with every conceivable crudity , come in to make confusion 
 bad confound . and when one lament it people stare ; they do not   know 
 what one mean . " 

 " do you mean the grand manner , certain pompous pronunciation , the style 
 of the Kembles ? " 

 " I mean any style that be a style , that be a system , a consistency , an 
 art , that contribute a positive beauty to utterance . when I pay ten 
 shilling to hear you speak I want you to know how , que diable ! say 
 that to people and they be mostly lose in stupor ; only a few , the very 
 intelligent , exclaim : ' then you want actor to be affect ? ' " 

 " and do you ? " ask Miriam full of interest . 

 " my poor child , what else under the sun should they be ? be not   their 
 whole art the affectation par excellence ? the public will not   stand that 
 to - day , so one hear it say . if that be true it simply mean that the 
 theatre , as I care for it , that be as a personal art , be at an end . " 

 " never , never , never ! " the girl cry in a voice that make a dozen 
 people look round . 

 " I sometimes think it - that the personal art be at an end and that 
 henceforth we shall have only the art , capable no doubt of immense 
 development in their way - indeed they have   already reach it - of the 
 stage - carpenter and the costumer . in London the drama be already 
 smother in scenery ; the interpretation scramble off as it can . to get 
 the old personal impression , which use to be everything , you must go to 
 the poor country , and most of all to Italy . " 

 " oh I have   have it ; it be very personal ! " say Miriam knowingly . 

 " you have   see the nudity of the stage , the poor , paint , tattered screen 
 behind , and before that void the histrionic figure , do everything it 
 know how , in complete possession . the personality be not   our english 
 personality and it may not always carry we with it ; but the direction 's 
 right , and it have the superiority that it be a human exhibition , not a 
 mechanical one . " 

 " I can act just like an italian , " Miriam eagerly proclaim . 

 " I would rather you act like an Englishwoman if an Englishwoman would only 
 act . " 

 " oh , I will show you ! " 

 " but you be not english , " say Peter sociably , his arm on the table . 

 " I beg your pardon . you should hear mamma about our ' race . ' " 

 " you be a Jewess - I be sure of that , " he go on . 

 she jump at this , as he be destine to see later she would ever jump 
 at anything that might make she more interesting or striking ; even at 
 thing that grotesquely contradict or exclude each other . " that be 
 always possible if one 's clever . I be very willing , because I want to be 
 the English Rachel . " 

 " then you must leave Madame CarrĂ   as soon as you have   get from she what 
 she can give . " 

 " oh , you need not   fear ; you shall not   lose I , " the girl reply with 
 charming gross fatuity . " my name 's jewish , " she go on , " but it be 
 that of my grandmother , my father 's mother . she be a baroness in 
 Germany . that is , she be the daughter of a baron . " 

 Peter accept this statement with reservation , but he reply : " put 
 all that together and it make you very sufficiently of Rachel 's tribe . " 

 " I do not   care if I be of her tribe artistically . I be of the family of the 
 artist - je me fiche of any other ! I be in the same style as that 
 woman - I know it . " 

 " you speak as if you have see she , " he say , amuse at the way she 
 talk of " that woman . " " oh I know all about she - I know all about all 
 the great actor . but that will not   prevent I from speak divine 
 English . " 

 " you must learn lot of verse ; you must repeat it to I , " Sherringham 
 go on . " you must break yourself in till you can say anything . you must 
 learn passage of Milton , passage of Wordsworth . " 

 " do they write play ? " 

 " oh it be not   only a matter of play ! you can not   speak a part properly 
 till you can speak everything else , anything that come up , especially 
 in proportion as it be difficult . that give you authority . " 

 " oh yes , I be go in for authority . there be more chance in English , " 
 the girl add in the next breath . " there be not so many other - the 
 terrible competition . there be so many here - not that I be afraid , " she 
 chatter on . " but we have   get America and they have not . America be a great 
 place . " 

 " you talk like a theatrical agent . they be lucky not to have it as we 
 have it . some of they do go , and it ruin they . " 

 " why , it fill their pocket ! " Miriam cry . 

 " yes , but see what they pay . it be the death of an actor to play to big 
 population that do not   understand his language . it be nothing then but 
 the gro moyen ; all his delicacy perishe . however , they will 
 understand you . " 

 " perhaps I shall be too affected , " she say . 

 " you will not   be more so than Garrick or Mrs. Siddons or John Kemble or 
 Edmund Kean . they understand Edmund Kean . all reflexion be affectation , 
 and all acting 's reflexion . " 

 " I do not   know - mine 's instinct , " Miriam contend . 

 " my dear young lady , you talk of ' your ' ; but do not   be offend if I 
 tell you that yours do not   exist . some day it will - if the thing come 
 off . Madame CarrĂ 's doe , because she have reflect . the talent , the 
 desire , the energy be an instinct ; but by the time these thing become 
 a performance they be an instinct put in its place . " 

 " Madame CarrĂ 's very philosophic . I shall never be like she . " 

 " of course you will not   - you will be original . but you will have your own 
 idea . " 

 " I daresay I shall have a good many of your " - and she smile at he 
 across the table . 

 they sit a moment look at each other . " do not   go in for coquetry , " 
 Peter then say . " it be a waste of time . " 

 " well , that be civil ! " the girl cry . 

 " oh I do not   mean for I , I mean for yourself I want you to be such good 
 faith . I be bind to give you stiff advice . you do not   strike I as 
 flirtatious and that sort of thing , and it be much in your favour . " 

 " in my favour ? " 

 " it do save time . " 

 " perhaps it save too much . do not   you think the artist ought to have 
 passion ? " 

 Peter have a pause ; he think an examination of this issue premature . 
 " flirtation be not passion , " he reply . " no , you be simple - at least 
 I suspect you be ; for of course with a woman one would be clever to 
 know . " 

 she ask why he pronounce her simple , but he judge it good and more 
 consonant with fair play to defer even a treatment of this branch of the 
 question ; so that to change the subject he say : " be sure you do not 
 betray I to your friend Mr. Nash . " 

 " betray you ? do you mean about your recommend affectation ? " 

 " Dear I , no ; he recommend it himself . that is , he practise it , and on 
 a scale ! " 

 " but he make one hate it . " 

 " he prove what I mean , " say Sherringham : " that the great comedian 's 
 the one who raise it to a science . if we pay ten shilling to listen 
 to Mr. Nash we should think he very fine . but we want to know what it be 
 suppose to be . " 

 " it be too odious , the way he talk about we ! " Miriam cry assentingly . 

 " about ' we ' ? " 

 " Us poor actor . " 

 " it be the competition he dislike , " Peter laugh . 

 " however , he be very good - natured ; he lend mamma thirty pound , " the girl 
 add honestly . our young man , at this information , be not able to 
 repress a certain small twinge note by his companion and of which she 
 appear to mistake the meaning . " of course he will get it back , " she go 
 on while he look at she in silence a little . Fortune have not supply 
 he profusely with money , but his emotion be cause by no foresight of 
 his probably have also to put his hand in his pocket for Mrs. Rooth . 
 it be simply the instinctive recoil of a fastidious nature from the 
 idea of familiar intimacy with people who live from hand to mouth , 
 together with a sense that this intimacy would have to be define if it 
 be to go much far . he would wish to know what it be suppose to 
 be , like Nash 's histrionic . Miriam after a moment mistook his thought 
 still more completely , and in do so flash a portent of the way it 
 be in she to strike from time to time a note exasperatingly , almost 
 consciously vulgar , which one would hate for the reason , along with 
 other , that by that time one would be in love with she . " well then , he 
 will not   - if you do not   believe it ! " she easily laugh . he be say to 
 himself that the only possible form be that they should borrow only 
 from he . " you be a funny man . I make you blush , " she persist . 

 " I must reply with the tu quoque , though I have   not that effect on you . " 

 " I do not   understand , " say the girl . 

 " you be an extraordinary young lady . " 

 " you mean I be horrid . well , I daresay I be . but I be well when you know 
 I . " 

 he make no direct rejoinder to this , but after a moment go on : " your 
 mother must repay that money . I will give it she . " 

 " you have well give it he ! " cry Miriam . " if once mamma have it - ! " 
 she interrupt herself and with another and a soft tone , one of her 
 professional transition , remark : " I suppose you have   never know any 
 one that be poor . " 

 " I be poor myself . that is , I be very far from rich . but why receive 
 favour - ? " and here he in turn check himself with the sense that he 
 be indeed take a great deal on his back if he pretend already - he 
 have not see the pair three time - to regulate their intercourse with 
 the rest of the world . but the girl instantly carry out his thought 
 and more than his thought . 

 " favour from Mr. Nash ? oh he do not   count ! " 

 the way she drop these word - they would have be admirable on the 
 stage - make he reply with prompt ease : " what I mean just now be that 
 you be not to tell he , after all my swagger , that I consider that you 
 and I be really require to save our theatre . " 

 " oh if we can save it he shall know it ! " she add that she must 
 positively get home ; her mother would be in a state : she have really 
 scarce ever be out alone . he might not   think it , but so it be . her 
 mother 's idea , those awfully proper one , be not all talk . she do 
 keep she ! Sherringham accept this - he have an adequate and indeed an 
 analytic vision of Mrs. Rooth 's conservatism ; but he observe at the 
 same time that his companion make no motion to rise . he make none 
 either ; he only say : 

 " we be very frivolous , the way we chatter . what you want to do to get 
 your foot in the stirrup be supremely difficult . there be everything to 
 overcome . you have   neither an engagement nor the prospect of an 
 engagement . " 

 " oh you will get I one ! " her manner present this as so certain that it 
 be not   worth dilate on ; so instead of dilate she inquire abruptly a 
 second time : " why do you think I be so simple ? " 

 " I do not   then . do not   I tell you just now that you be extraordinary ? 
 that be the term , moreover , that you apply to yourself when you come to 
 see I - when you say a girl have to be a kind of monster to wish to go 
 on the stage . it remain the right term and your simplicity do not 
 mitigate it . what be rare in you be that you have - as I suspect at 
 least - no nature of your own . " Miriam listen to this as if prepare 
 to argue with it or not , only as it should strike she as a sufficiently 
 brave picture ; but as yet , naturally , she fail to understand . " you be 
 always at concert pitch or on your horse ; there be no interval . it be 
 the absence of interval , of a fond or background , that I do not 
 comprehend . you be an embroidery without a canvas . " 

 " yes - perhaps , " the girl reply , her head on one side as if she be 
 look at the pattern of this rarity . " but I be very honest . " 

 " you can not   be everything , both a consummate actress and a flower of the 
 field . you have   get to choose . " 

 she look at he a moment . " I be glad you think I be so wonderful . " 

 " your feigning may be honest in the sense that your only feeling be your 
 feign one , " Peter pursue . " that be what I mean by the absence of a 
 ground or of interval . it be a kind of thing that be a labyrinth ! " 

 " I know what I be , " she say sententiously . 

 but her companion continue , follow his own train . " be you really 
 so frighten the first day you go to Madame CarrĂ 's ? " 

 she star , then with a flush threw back her head . " do you think I be 
 pretend ? " 

 " I think you always be . however , your vanity - if you have any ! - would be 
 natural . " 

 " I have   plenty of that . I be not a bit ashamed to own it . " 

 " you would be capable of try to ' do ' the human peacock . but excuse the 
 audacity and the crudity of my speculation - it only prove my interest . 
 what be it that you know you be ? " 

 " why , an artist . be not   that a canvas ? " 

 " yes , an intellectual , but not a moral . " 

 " ah it be everything ! and I be a good girl too - will not   that do ? " 

 " it remain to be see , " Sherringham laugh . " a creature who be 
 absolutely all an artist - I be curious to see that . " 

 " surely it have be see - in lot of painter , lot of musician . " 

 " yes , but those art be not personal like your . I mean not so much so . 
 there be something leave for - what shall I call it ? - for character . " 

 she star again with her tragic light . " and do you think I have not   a 
 character ? " as he hesitate she push back her chair , rise rapidly . 

 he look up at she an instant - she seem so " plastic " ; and then rise 
 too answer : " delightful being , you have   a hundred ! " 




 XII 


 the summer arrive and the dense air of the Paris theatre become in 
 fact a still more complicated mixture ; yet the occasion be not few on 
 which Sherringham , have place a box near the stage   most often a 
 stuffy , dusky baignoire    at the disposal of Mrs. Rooth and her 
 daughter , find time just to look in , as he say , to spend a part of the 
 evening with they and point the moral of the performance . the piece , 
 the success of the winter , have enter the automatic phase : they go 
 on by the force of the impetus acquire , derive little fresh life from 
 the interpretation , and in ordinary condition their strong point , as 
 render by the actor , would have be as wearisome to this student as 
 an importunate repetition of a good story . but it be not long before he 
 become aware that the condition could not   be take for ordinary . there 
 be a new infusion in his consciousness - an element in his life which 
 alter the relation of thing . he be not easy till he have find the 
 right name for it - a name the more satisfactory that it be simple , 
 comprehensive , and plausible . a new " distraction , " in the french sense , 
 be what he flatter himself he have discover ; he could recognise that 
 as freely as possible without be oblige to classify the agreeable 
 resource as a new entanglement . he be neither too much nor too little 
 divert ; he have all his usual attention to give to his work : he have 
 only an employment for his odd hour which , without be imperative , 
 have over various other the advantage of a certain continuity . 

 and yet , I hasten to add , he be not so well pleased with it but that 
 among his friend he maintain for the present a rich reserve about it . 
 he have no irresistible impulse to describe generally how he have 
 disinter a strange , handsome girl whom he be bring up for the 
 theatre . she have be see by several of his associate at his room , 
 but be not soon to be see there again . his reserve might by the 
 ill - natured have be term dissimulation , inasmuch as when ask by 
 the lady of the embassy what have become of the young person who have 
 amuse they that day so cleverly he give it out that her whereabouts be 
 uncertain and her destiny probably obscure ; he let it be suppose in a 
 word that his benevolence have scarcely survive an accidental , a 
 charitable occasion . as he go about his customary business , and 
 perhaps even put a little more conscience into the transaction of it , 
 there be nothing to suggest to other that he be engage in a private 
 speculation of an absorbing kind . it be perhaps his weakness that he 
 carry the apprehension of ridicule too far ; but his excuse may have 
 dwelt in his hold it unpardonable for a man publicly enrol in the 
 service of his country to be markedly ridiculous . it be of course not 
 out of all order that such functionary , their private situation 
 permitting , should enjoy a personal acquaintance with star of the 
 dramatic , the lyric , or even the choregraphic stage : high diplomatist 
 have indeed not rarely , and not invisibly , cultivate this privilege 
 without its prove the sepulchre of their reputation . that a gentleman 
 who be not a fool should consent a little to become one for the sake of 
 a celebrated actress or singer - cela s'Ă tait vu , though it be not 
 perhaps to be recommend . it be not a tendency that be encourage at 
 headquarters , where even the most rise young man be not incite to 
 believe they could never fall . still , it might pass if keep in its 
 place ; and there be ancient worthy yet in the profession - though not 
 those whom the tradition have help to go furthest - who hold that 
 something of the sort be a graceful ornament of the diplomatic 
 character . Sherringham be aware he be very " rise " ; but Miriam Rooth 
 be not yet a celebrated actress . she be only a young artist in 
 conscientious process of formation and encumber with a mother still 
 more conscientious than herself . she be a jeune Anglaise - a " lady " 
 withal - very earnest about artistic , about remunerative problem . he have 
 accept the office of a formative influence ; and that be precisely 
 what might provoke derision . he be a minister angel - his patience 
 and good nature really entitle he to the epithet and his reward would 
 doubtless some day define themselves ; but meanwhile other promotion 
 be in precarious prospect , for the failure of which these would not 
 even in their abundance , be a compensation . he keep an unembarrassed eye 
 on Downing Street , and while it may frankly be say for he that he be 
 neither a pedant nor a prig he remember that the last impression he 
 ought to wish to produce there be that of a futile estheticism . 

 he feel the case sufficiently important , however , when he sit behind 
 Miriam at the play and look over her shoulder at the stage ; her 
 observation be so keen and her comment so unexpected in their 
 vivacity that his curiosity be refresh and his attention stretch 
 beyond its wo not . if the exhibition before the footlight have now lose 
 much of its annual brilliancy the fashion in which she follow it be 
 perhaps exhibition enough . the attendance of the little party be , 
 moreover , in most case at the ThĂ Ă tre FranĂ ais ; and it have be 
 sufficiently indicate that our friend , though the child of a sceptical 
 age and the votary of a cynical science , be still candid enough to take 
 the serious , the religious view of that establishment the view of M. 
 Sarcey and of the unregenerate provincial mind . " in the trade I follow 
 we see thing too much in the hard light of reason , of calculation , " he 
 once remark to his young charge ; " but it be good for the mind to keep 
 up a superstition or two ; it leave a margin - like have a second horse 
 to your brougham for night - work . the art , the amusement , the esthetic 
 part of life , be night - work , if I may say so without suggest that 
 they be illicit . at any rate you want your second horse - your 
 superstition that stay at home when the sun 's high - to go your round 
 with . the FranĂ ais be my second horse . " 

 Miriam 's appetite for this interest show he vividly enough how rarely 
 in the past it have be within her reach ; and she please he at first 
 by like everything , see almost no difference and take her deep 
 draught undiluted . she lean on the edge of the box with bright 
 voracity ; taste to the core , yet relish the surface , watch each 
 movement of each actor , attend to the way each thing be say or do 
 as if it be the most important thing , and emit from time to time 
 applausive or restrictive sound . it be a charming show of the critical 
 spirit in ecstasy . Sherringham have his wonder about it , as a part of the 
 attraction exert by this young lady be that she cause he to have 
 his wonder about everything she do . be it in fact a conscious show , a 
 line take for effect , so that at the comă die her own display should be 
 the most successful of all ? that question dance attendance on the 
 liberal intercourse of these young people and fortunately as yet do 
 little to embitter Sherringham 's share of it . his general sense that she 
 be personate have its especial moment of suspense and perplexity , and 
 add variety and even occasionally a degree of excitement to their 
 commerce . at the theatre , for the most part , she be really flush with 
 eagerness ; and with the spectator who turn an admiring eye into the 
 dim compartment of which she pervade the front she might have pass 
 for a romantic or at least an insatiable young woman from the country . 

 Mrs. Rooth take a more general view , but attend immensely to the 
 story , in respect to which she manifest a patient good faith which have 
 its surprise and its comicality for her daughter 's patron . she find 
 no play too tedious , no entr'acte too long , no baignoire too hot , no 
 tissue of incident too complicated , no situation too unnatural and no 
 sentiment too sublime . she give he the measure of her power to sit and 
 sit - an accomplishment to which she owe in the struggle for existence 
 such superiority as she might be say to have achieve . she could 
 out - sit everybody and everything ; look as if she have acquire the 
 practice in repeat year of small frugality combine with large 
 leisure - period when she have nothing but hour and day and year to 
 spend and have learn to calculate in any situation how long she could 
 stay . " stay " be so often a saving - a saving of candle , of fire and 
 even   as it sometimes imply a scheme for stray refection   of food . 
 Peter see soon enough how bravely she shred and patch of gentility 
 and equanimity hang together , with the aid of whatever casual pin and 
 other makeshift , and if he have be addict to study the human 
 mixture in its different combination would have find in her an 
 interesting compendium of some of the infatuation that survive a hard 
 discipline . he make indeed without difficulty the reflexion that her 
 life might have teach she something of the real , at the same time that 
 he could scarce help think it clever of she to have so persistently 
 decline the lesson . she appear to have put it by with a deprecating , 
 ladylike smile - a plea of be too soft and bland for experience . 

 she take the refined , sentimental , tender view of the universe , 
 begin with her own history and feeling . she believe in everything 
 high and pure , disinterested and orthodox , and even at the HĂ tel de la 
 Garonne be unconscious of the shabby or the ugly side of the world . she 
 never despair : otherwise what would have be the use of be a 
 Neville - Nugent ? only not to have be one - that would have be 
 discourage . she delight in novel , poem , perversion , 
 misrepresentation , and evasion , and have a capacity for smooth , 
 superfluous falsification which make our young man think she sometimes 
 an amusing and sometimes a tedious inventor . but she be not   dangerous 
 even if you believe she ; she be not   even a warning if you do not . it 
 be harsh to call she a hypocrite , since you never could have resolve 
 she back into her character , there be no reverse at all to her 
 blazonry . she build in the air and be not less amiable than she 
 pretend , only that be a pretension too . she move altogether in a 
 world of elegant fable and fancy , and Sherringham have to live there with 
 she for Miriam 's sake , live there in sociable , vulgar assent and despite 
 his feeling it rather a low neighbourhood . he be at a loss how to take 
 what she say - she talk sweetly and discursively of so many 
 thing - till he simply note that he could only take it always for 
 untrue . when Miriam laugh at she he be rather disagreeably affect : 
 " dear mamma 's fine story " be a sufficiently cynical reference to the 
 immemorial infirmity of a parent . but when the girl back she up , as 
 he phrase it to himself , he like that even less . 

 Mrs. Rooth be very fond of a moral and have never lose her taste for 
 edification . she delight in a beautiful character and be gratify to 
 find so many more than she have suppose represent in the contemporary 
 french drama . she never fail to direct Miriam 's attention to they and 
 to remind she that there be nothing in life so grand as a sublime act , 
 above all when sublimely explain . Peter make much of the difference 
 between the mother and the daughter , think it singularly mark - the 
 way one take everything for the sense , or behave as if she do , care 
 only for the plot and the romance , the triumph or defeat of virtue and 
 the moral comfort of it all , and the way the other be alive but to the 
 manner and the art of it , the intensity of truth to appearance . Mrs. 
 Rooth abound in impressive evocation , and yet he see no link between 
 her facile genius and that of which Miriam give symptom . the poor lady 
 never could have be accuse of successful deceit , whereas the triumph 
 of fraud be exactly what her clever child achieve . she make even the 
 true seem fictive , while Miriam 's effort be to make the fictive true . 
 Sherringham think it an odd unpromising stock   that of the 
 Neville - Nugents   for a dramatic talent to have spring from , till he 
 reflect that the evolution be after all natural : the figurative 
 impulse in the mother have become conscious , and therefore high , 
 through find an aim , which be beauty , in the daughter . likely enough 
 the Hebraic Mr. Rooth , with his love of old pot and Christian 
 altar - cloth , have supply in the girl 's composition the esthetic 
 element , the sense of colour and form . in their visit to the theatre 
 there be nothing Mrs. Rooth more insist on than the unprofitableness 
 of deceit , as show by the most distinguished author - the folly and 
 degradation , the corrosive effect on the spirit , of tortuous way . their 
 companion soon give up the futile task of piece together her 
 incongruous reference to her early life and her family in England . he 
 renounce even the doctrine that there be a residuum of truth in her 
 claim of great relationship , since , existent or not , he care equally 
 little for her ramification . the principle of this indifference be at 
 bottom a certain desire to disconnect and isolate Miriam ; for it be 
 disagreeable not to be independent in deal with she , and he could be 
 fully so only if she herself be . 

 the early week of that summer - they go on indeed into August - be 
 destine to establish themselves in his memory as a season of pleasant 
 thing . the ambassador go away and Peter have to wait for his own 
 holiday , which he do during the hot day contentedly enough - wait in 
 spacious hall and a vast , dim , bird - haunt garden . the official world 
 and most other world withdraw from Paris , and the Place de la Concorde , 
 a large , whiter desert than ever , become by a reversal of custom 
 explorable with safety . the Champs ElysĂ es be dusty and rural , with 
 little creak booth and exhibition that make a noise like 
 grasshopper ; the Arc de Triomphe throw its cool , thick shadow for a 
 mile ; the Palais de l'Industrie glitter in the light of the long day ; 
 the cabman , in their red waistcoat , doze inside their box , while 
 Sherringham permit himself a " pot " hat and rarely meet a friend . thus 
 be Miriam as islande as the chain Andromeda , and thus be it 
 possible to deal with she , even Perseus - like , in deep detachment . the 
 theatre on the boulevard close for the most part , but the great temple 
 of the Rue de Richelieu , with an esthetic responsibility , continue 
 imperturbably to dispense example of style . Madame CarrĂ   be go to 
 Vichy , but have not yet take flight , which be a great advantage for 
 Miriam , who could now solicit her attention with the consciousness that 
 she have no engagement en ville . 

 " I make she listen to I - I make she tell I , " say the ardent girl , who 
 be always climb the slope of the Rue de Constantinople on the shady 
 side , where of July morning a smell of violet come from the moist 
 flower - stand of fat , white - cap bouquetiere in the angle of 
 doorway . Miriam like the Paris of the summer morning , the clever 
 freshness of all the little trade and the open - air life , the cry , the 
 talk from door to door , which remind she of the south , where , in the 
 multiplicity of her habitation , she have live ; and most of all , the 
 great amusement , or nearly , of her walk , the enviable basket of the 
 laundress pile up with frille and flute whiteness - the certain 
 luxury , she feel while she pass with quick prevision , of her own dawn 
 of glory . the great amusement perhaps be to recognise the pretty 
 sentiment of earliness , the particular congruity with the hour , in the 
 study , select dress of the little trip woman who be take the 
 day , for important advantage , while it be tender . at any rate she 
 mostly bring with she from her passage through the town good humour 
 enough - with the penny bunch of violet she always stick in the front of 
 her dress - for whatever await she at Madame CarrĂ ' s. she declare to 
 her friend that her dear mistress be terribly severe , give she the 
 most difficult , the most exhausting exercise , show a kind of rage 
 for break she in . 

 " so much the well , " Sherringham duly answer ; but he ask no 
 question and be glad to let the preceptress and the pupil fight it out 
 together . he want for the moment to know as little as possible about 
 their way together : he have be over - dosed with that knowledge while 
 attend at their second interview . he would send Madame CarrĂ   her 
 money - she be really most oblige - and in the meantime be certain 
 Miriam could take care of herself . sometimes he remark to she that she 
 need not   always talk ' shop " to he : there be time when he be mortally 
 tired of shop - of her . moreover , he frankly admit that he be tired 
 of his own , so that the restriction be not brutal . when she reply , 
 star , " why , I think you consider it as such a beautiful , 
 interesting art ! " he have no rejoinder more philosophic than " well , I do ; 
 but there be moment when I be quite sick of it all the same , " at other 
 time he put it : " oh yes , the result , the finished thing , the dish 
 perfectly seasoned and serve : not the mess of preparation - at least not 
 always - not the experiment that spoil the material . " 

 " I suppose you to feel just these question of study , of the artistic 
 education , as you have   call it to I , so fascinating , " the girl 
 persist . she be sometimes so flatly lucid . 

 " well , after all , I be not an actor myself , " he could but impatiently 
 sigh . 

 " you might be one if you be serious , " she would imperturbably say . to 
 this her friend reply that Mr. Gabriel Nash ought to hear this ; which 
 make her promise with a certain grimness that she would settle he and 
 his theory some day . not to seem too inconsistent - for it be cruel to 
 bewilder she when he have take she up to enlighten - Peter repeat over 
 that for a man like himself the interest of the whole thing depend on 
 its be consider in a large , liberal way and with an intelligence 
 that lift it out of the question of the little trick of the trade , 
 give it beauty and elevation . but she hereupon let he know that Madame 
 CarrĂ   hold there be no little trick , that everything have its 
 importance as a means to a great end , and that if you be not willing 
 to try to approfondir the reason why , in a give situation , you should 
 scratch your nose with your left hand rather than with your right , you 
 be not worthy to tread any stage that respect itself . 

 " that be very well , but if I must go into detail read I a little 
 Shelley , " groan the young man in the spirit of a high raffină   . 

 " you be bad than Madame CarrĂ ; you do not   know what to invent ; between 
 you you will kill I ! " the girl declare . " I think there be a secret league 
 between you to spoil my voice , or at least to weaken my souffle , 
 before I get it . but a la guerre comme a la guerre ! how can I read 
 Shelley , however , when I do not   understand he ? " 

 " that be just what I want to make you do . it be a part of your general 
 training . you may do without that of course - without culture and taste 
 and perception ; but in that case you will be nothing but a vulgar 
  cabotine , and nothing will be of any consequence . " he have a theory 
 that the great lyric poet - he induce she to read , and recite as well , 
 long passage of Wordsworth and Swinburne - would teach she many of the 
 secret of the large utterance , the mystery of rhythm , the 
 communicableness of style , the latent music of the language and the art 
 of " compose " copious speech and of retain her store of free 
 breath . he hold in perfect sincerity that there be a general sense of 
 thing , thing of the mind , which would be of the high importance to 
 she and to which it be by good fortune just in his power to contribute . 
 she would do well in proportion as she have more knowledge - even 
 knowledge that might superficially show but a remote connexion with her 
 business . the actor 's talent be essentially a gift , a thing by itself , 
 implant , instinctive , accidental , equally unconnected with intellect 
 and with virtue - Sherringham be completely of that opinion ; but it 
 strike he as no betise to believe at the same time that 
 intellect - leave virtue for the moment out of the question - might be 
 bring into fruitful relation with it . it would be a big thing if a 
 well mind be project upon it - project without sacrifice the 
 mind . so he lend his young friend book she never read - she be on 
 almost irreconcilable term with the print page save for spout 
 it - and in the long summer day , when he have leisure , take she to the 
 Louvre to admire the great work of painting and sculpture . here , as on 
 all occasion , he be strike with the queer jumble of her taste , her 
 mixture of intelligence and puerility . he see she never read what he 
 give she , though she sometimes would shamelessly have like he to 
 suppose so ; but in the presence of famous picture and statue she have 
 remarkable flash of perception . she feel these thing , she like they , 
 though it be always because she have an idea she could use they . the 
 belief be often presumptuous , but it show what an eye she have to her 
 business . " I could look just like that if I try . " " that be the dress I 
 mean to wear when I do Portia . " such be the observation apt to drop 
 from she under the suggestion of antique marble or when she stand 
 before a Titian or a Bronzino . 

 when she utter they , and many other besides , the effect be sometimes 
 irritate to her adviser , who have to bethink himself a little that she 
 be no more egotistical than the histrionic conscience require . he 
 wonder if there be necessarily something vulgar in the histrionic 
 conscience - something condemn only to feel the tricky , personal 
 question . be not   it well to be perfectly stupid than to have only one 
 eye open and wear for ever in the great face of the world the expression 
 of a knowing wink ? at the theatre , on the numerous July evening when 
 the comă die FranĂ aise exhibit the repertory by the aid of exponent 
 determine the more sparse and provincial audience should have a taste 
 of the tradition , her appreciation be tremendously technical and show 
 it be not for nothing she be now in and out of Madame CarrĂ 's 
 innermost counsel . but there be moment when even her very acuteness 
 seem to he to drag the matter down , to see it in a small and 
 superficial sense . what he flatter himself he be try to do for 
 she - and through she for the stage of his time , since she be the 
 instrument , and incontestably a fine one , that have come to his hand - be 
 precisely to lift it up , make it rare , keep it in the region of 
 distinction and breadth . however , she be doubtless right and he be 
 wrong , he eventually reason : you could afford to be vague only if you 
 have not   a responsibility . he have fine idea , but she be to act they out , 
 that be to apply they , and not he ; and application be of necessity a 
 vulgarisation , a small thing than theory . if she should some day put 
 forth the great art it be not   purely fanciful to forecast for she , the 
 matter would doubtless be by that fact sufficiently transfigure and it 
 would not   signify that some of the onward step should have be lame . 

 this be clear to he on several occasion when she recite or motion 
 or even merely look something for he well than usual ; then she 
 quite carry he away , make he wish to ask no more question , but 
 only let she disembroil herself in her own strong fashion . in these 
 hour she give he forcibly if fitfully that impression of beauty which 
 be to be her justification . it be too soon for any general estimate of 
 her progress ; Madame CarrĂ   have at last give she a fine understanding as 
 well as a sore , personal , an almost physical , sense of how bad she be . 
 she have therefore begin on a new basis , have return to the alphabet and 
 the drill . it be a phase of awkwardness , the splashing of a young 
 swimmer , but buoyancy would certainly come out of it . for the present 
 there be mainly no great alteration of the fact that when she do 
 thing accord to her own idea they be not , as yet and seriously 
 judge , worth the devil , as Madame CarrĂ   say , and when she do they 
 accord to that of her instructress be too apt to be a gross parody 
 of that lady 's intention . none the less she give glimpse , and her 
 glimpse make he feel not only that she be not a fool - this be small 
 relief - but that he himself be not . 

 he make her stick to her English and read Shakespeare aloud to he . Mrs. 
 Rooth have recognise the importance of apartment in which they should 
 be able to receive so beneficent a visitor , and be now mistress of a 
 small salon with a balcony and a rickety flower - stand - to say nothing of 
 a view of many roof and chimney - a very uneven waxed floor , an empire 
 clock , an armoire a glace , highly convenient for Miriam 's posturing , 
 and several cupboard door cover over , allow for treacherous gap , 
 with the faded magenta paper of the wall . the thing have be easily 
 do , for Sherringham have say : " oh we must have a sitting - room for our 
 study , you know , and I will settle it with the landlady , " Mrs. Rooth have 
 like his " we " - indeed she like everything about he - and he see in 
 this way that she heave with no violence under pecuniary obligation so 
 long as they be distinctly understand to be temporary . that he should 
 have his money back with interest as soon as Miriam be launch be a 
 comfort so deeply imply that it only add to intimacy . the window 
 stand open on the little balcony , and when the sun have leave it Peter and 
 Miriam could linger there , lean on the rail and talk above the 
 great hum of Paris , with nothing but the neighbouring tile and tall 
 tube to take account of . Mrs. Rooth , in limp garment much ungirdle , 
 be on the sofa with a novel , make good her frequent assertion that 
 she could put up with any life that would yield she these two 
 convenience . there be romantic work Peter have never read and as to 
 which he have vaguely wonder to what class they be address - the 
 early production of M. Eugene Sue , the once - fashionable composition 
 of Madame Sophie Gay - with which Mrs. Rooth be familiar and which she 
 be ready to enjoy once more if she could get nothing fresher . she have 
 always a greasy volume tuck under she while her nose be bent upon the 
 page in hand . she scarcely look up even when Miriam lift her voice 
 to show their benefactor what she could do . these tragic or pathetic 
 note all go out of the window and mingle with the undecipherable 
 concert of Paris , so that no neighbour be disturb by they . the girl 
 shriek and wail when the occasion require it , and Mrs. Rooth only 
 turn her page , show in this way a great esthetic as well as a great 
 personal trust . 

 she rather annoy their visitor by the serenity of her confidence - for 
 a reason he fully understand only later - save when Miriam catch an 
 effect or a tone so well that she make he in the pleasure of it forget 
 her parent 's contiguity . he continue to object to the girl 's English , 
 with its foreign patch that might pass in prose but be offensive in 
 the recitation of verse , and he want to know why she could not   speak 
 like her mother . he have justly to acknowledge the charm of Mrs. Rooth 's 
 voice and tone , which give a richness even to the foolish thing she 
 say . they be of an excellent insular tradition , full both of natural 
 and of cultivate sweetness , and they puzzle he when other indication 
 seem to betray she - to refer she to more common air . they be like 
 the reverberation of some far - off tutored circle . 

 the connexion between the development of Miriam 's genius and the 
 necessity of an occasional excursion to the country - the charming 
 country that lie in so many direction beyond the parisian 
  banlieue - would not have be immediately apparent to a superficial 
 observer ; but a day , and then another , at Versailles , a day at 
 Fontainebleau and a trip , particularly harmonious and happy , to 
 Rambouillet , take their place in our young man 's plan as a part of the 
 indirect but contributive culture , an agency in the formation of taste . 
 intimation of the grand manner for instance would proceed in abundance 
 from the symmetrical palace and garden of Louis XIV . Peter " adore " 
 Versailles and wander there more than once with the lady of the 
 HĂ tel de la Garonne . they choose quiet hour , when the fountain be 
 dry ; and Mrs. Rooth take an armful of novel and sit on a bench in the 
 park , flank by clipped hedge and old statue , while her young 
 companion stroll away , walk to the Trianon , explore the long , 
 straight vista of the wood . Rambouillet be vague and vivid and sweet ; 
 they feel that they find a hundred wise voice there ; and indeed there 
 be an old white chateau which contain nothing but ghostly sound . 
 they find at any rate a long luncheon , and in the landscape the very 
 spirit of silvery summer and of the french pictorial brush . 

 I have say that in these day Sherringham wonder about many thing , 
 and by the time his leave of absence come this practice have produce a 
 particular speculation . he be surprised that he should not   be in love 
 with Miriam Rooth and consider at moment of leisure the cause of his 
 exemption . he have feel from the first that she be a " nature , " and each 
 time she meet his eye it seem to come to he straighter that her 
 beauty be rare . you have to get the good view of her face , but when 
 you do so it be a splendid mobile mask . and the wearer of this 
 high ornament have frankness and courage and variety - no end of the 
 unusual and the unexpected . she have quality that seldom go 
 together - impulse and shyness , audacity and lapse , something 
 coarse , popular , and strong all intermingle with disdain and languor 
 and nerve . and then above all she be there , be accessible , almost 
 belong to he . he reflect ingeniously that he owe his escape to a 
 peculiar cause - to the fact that they have together a positive outside 
 object . objective , as it be , be all their communion ; not personal and 
 selfish , but a matter of art and business and discussion . Discussion have 
 save he and would save he far , for they would always have 
 something to quarrel about . Sherringham , who be not a diplomatist for 
 nothing , who have his reason for steer straight and wish neither to 
 deprive the british public of a rise star nor to exchange his actual 
 situation for that of a yoked impresario , bless the beneficence , the 
 salubrity , the pure exorcism of art . at the same time , rather 
 inconsistently and feel that he have a completer vision than before of 
 that oddest of animal the artist who happen to have be bear a woman , 
 he feel warn against a serious connexion - he make a great point of the 
 ' serious " - with so slippery and ticklish a creature . the two lady have 
 only to stay in Paris , save their candle - end and , as Madame CarrĂ   have 
 enjoin , practise their scale : there be apparently no autumn visit 
 to english country - house in prospect for Mrs. Rooth . Peter part with 
 they on the understanding that in London he would look as thoroughly as 
 possible into the question of an engagement . the day before he begin his 
 holiday he go to see Madame CarrĂ , who say to he , " vous devriez 
 bien nous la laisser . " 

 " she have something then - - ? " 

 " she have most thing . she will go far . it be the first time in my life of 
 my beginning with a mistake . but do not   tell she so . I do not   flatter she . 
 she will be too puff up . " 

 " be she very conceited ? " Sherringham ask . 

 " Mauvais sujet ! " say Madame CarrĂ . 

 it be on the journey to London that he indulge in some of those 
 questioning of his state that I have mention ; but I must add that by 
 the time he reach Charing Cross - he smoke a cigar defer till after 
 the Channel in a compartment by himself - it have suddenly come over he 
 that they be futile . now that he have leave the girl a subversive , 
 unpremeditated heart - beat tell he - it make he hold his breath a minute 
 in the carriage - that he have after all not escape . he be in love 
 with she : he have be in love with she from the first hour . 




 BOOK THIRD 




 XIII 


 the drive from Harsh to the Place , as it be call thereabout , could 
 be achieve by swift horse in less than ten minute ; and if Mrs. 
 Dallow 's pony be capital trotter the general high pitch of the 
 occasion make it all congruous they should show their speed . the 
 occasion be the polling - day an hour after the battle . the pony have 
 keep pace with other drive force for the week before , pass and 
 repasse the neat window of the flat little town - Mrs. Dallow have the 
 complacent belief that there be none in the kingdom in which the 
 flower - stand look more respectable between the stiff muslin 
 curtain - with their mistress behind they on her all but silver wheel . 
 very often she be accompany by the liberal candidate , but even when 
 she be not the equipage seem scarce less to represent his easy , 
 friendly confidence . it move in a radiance of ribbon and hand - bill 
 and hand - shake and smile ; of quicken commerce and sudden intimacy ; 
 of sympathy which assume without presume and gratitude which promise 
 without solicit . but under Julia 's guidance the pony patter now , 
 with no indication of a loss of freshness , along the firm , wide avenue 
 which wound and curve , to make up in large effect for not undulating , 
 from the gate open straight on the town to the palladian mansion , 
 high , square , grey , and clean , which stand among terrace and fountain 
 in the centre of the park . a generous steed have be sacrifice to bring 
 the good news from Ghent to Aix , but no such extravagance be after all 
 necessary for communicate with Lady Agnes . 

 she have remain at the house , not go to the Wheatsheaf , the Liberal 
 inn , with the other ; prefer to await in privacy and indeed in 
 solitude the momentous result of the poll . she have come down to Harsh 
 with the two girl in the course of the proceeding . Julia have not 
 think they would do much good , but she be expansive and indulgent now 
 and have generously ask they . Lady Agnes have not a nice canvassing 
 manner , effective as she might have be in the character of the high , 
 benignant , affable mother - look sweet participation but not 
 interfere - of the young and handsome , the shin , convincing , 
 wonderfully clever and certainly irresistible aspirant . Grace Dormer have 
 zeal without art , and Lady Agnes , who during her husband 's lifetime have 
 see their affair follow the satisfactory principle of a tendency to 
 defer to supreme merit , have never really learn the lesson that voting 
 go by favour . however , she could pray God if , she could not   make love 
 to the cheesemonger , and Nick feel she have stay at home to pray for 
 he . I must add that Julia Dallow be too happy now , flick her whip 
 in the bright summer air , to say anything so ungracious even to herself 
 as that her companion have be return in spite of his near female 
 relative . besides , Biddy have be a rosy help : she have look 
 persuasively pretty , in white and blue , on platform and in recurrent 
 carriage , out of which she have toss , blush and make people feel 
 they would remember her eye , several word that be tell for their 
 very simplicity . 

 Mrs. Dallow be really too glad for any definite reflexion , even for 
 personal exultation , the vanity of recognise her own large share of 
 the work . Nick be in and be now beside she , tired , silent , vague , 
 beflowere and beribbone , and he have be splendid from begin to 
 end , beautifully good - humour and at the same time beautifully 
 clever - still cleverer than she have suppose he could be . the sense of 
 she have quicken his cleverness and be repay by it or by his 
 gratitude - it come to the same thing - in a way she appreciate be not 
 assertive and jealous : it be lose for the present in the general happy 
 break of the long tension . so nothing pass between they in their 
 progress to the house ; there be no sound in the park but the pleasant 
 rustle of summer - it seem an applausive murmur - and the swift roll of 
 the vehicle . 

 Lady Agnes already know , for as soon as the result be declare Nick have 
 despatch a mount man to she , carry the figure on a scrawl 
 card . he himself have be far from get away at once , have to 
 respond to the hubbub of acclamation , to speak yet again , to thank his 
 elector individually and collectively , to chaff the Tories without 
 cheap elation , to be carry hither and yon , and above all to pretend 
 that the interest of the business be now great for he than ever . if 
 he have say never a word after put himself in Julia 's hand to go 
 home it be partly perhaps because the consciousness have begin to 
 glimmer within he , on the contrary , of some sudden shrinkage of that 
 interest . he want to see his mother because he know she want to fold 
 he close in her arm . they have be open there for this purpose the 
 last half - hour , and her expectancy , now no long an ache of suspense , 
 be the reason of Julia 's round pace . yet this very impatience in she 
 somehow make Nick wince a little . meet his mother be like be 
 elect over again . 

 the other have not yet come back , and Lady Agnes be alone in the 
 large , bright drawing - room . when Nick go in with Julia he see she at 
 the further end ; she have evidently be walk up and down the whole 
 length of it , and her tall , upright , black figure seem in possession 
 of the fair vastness after the manner of an exclamation - point at the 
 bottom of a blank page . the room , rich and simple , be a place of 
 perfection as well as of splendour in delicate tint , with precious 
 specimen of french furniture of the last century range against wall 
 of pale brocade , and here and there a small , almost priceless picture . 
 George Dallow have make it , care for these thing and like to talk 
 about they - scarce ever about anything else ; so that it appear to 
 represent he still , what be good in his kindly , limited nature , his 
 friendly , competent , tiresome insistence on harmony - on identity of 
 " period . " Nick could hear he yet , and could see he , too fat and with a 
 congenital thickness in his speech , lounge there in loose clothe with 
 his eternal cigarette . " now my dear fellow , that be what I call form : I 
 do not   know what you call it " - that be the way he use to begin . all 
 round be flower in rare vas , but it look a place of which the 
 beauty would have smell sweet even without they . 

 Lady Agnes have take a white rise from one of the cluster and be 
 hold it to her face , which be turn to the door as Nick cross the 
 threshold . the expression of her figure instantly tell he - he see the 
 creased card he have send she lying on one of the beautiful bare 
 table - how she have be sail up and down in a majesty of 
 satisfaction . the inflation of her long plain dress and the brighten 
 dimness of her proud face be still in the air . in a moment he have 
 kiss she and be be kiss , not in quick repetition , but in tender 
 prolongation , with which the perfume of the white rise be mixed . but 
 there be something else too - her sweet smother word in his ear : " oh 
 my boy , my boy - oh your father , your father ! " neither the sense of 
 pleasure nor that of pain , with Lady Agnes - as indeed with most of the 
 person with whom this history be concern - be a liberation of 
 chatter ; so that for a minute all she say again be , " I think of Sir 
 Nicholas and wish he be here " ; address the word to Julia , who have 
 wander forward without look at the mother and son . 

 " Poor Sir Nicholas ! " say Mrs. Dallow vaguely . 

 " do you make another speech ? " Lady Agnes ask . 

 " I do not   know . do I ? " Nick appeal . 

 " I do not   know ! " - and Julia speak with her back turn , do something 
 to her hat before the glass . 

 " oh of course the confusion , the bewilderment ! " say Lady Agnes in a 
 tone rich in political reminiscence . 

 " it be really immense fun , " Mrs. Dallow go so far as to drop . 

 " Dearest Julia ! " Lady Agnes deeply breathe . then she add : " it be you 
 who make it sure . " 

 " there be a lot of people come to dinner , " say Julia . 

 " perhaps you will have to speak again , " Lady Agnes smile at her son . 

 " thank you ; I like the way you talk about it ! " cry Nick . " I be like 
 Iago : ' from this time forth I never will speak word ! ' " 

 " do not   say that , Nick , " say his mother gravely . 

 " do not   be afraid - he will jabber like a magpie ! " and Julia go out of the 
 room . 

 Nick have fling himself on a sofa with an air of weariness , though not of 
 completely extinct cheer ; and Lady Agnes stand finger she rise and 
 look down at he . his eye keep away from she ; they seem fix on 
 something she could not   see . " I hope you have   thank Julia handsomely , " 
 she presently remark . 

 " why of course , mother . " 

 " she have do as much as if you have not   be sure . " 

 " I be not   in the least sure - and she have do everything . " 

 " she have be too good - but we ' ve   do something . I hope you do not 
 leave out your father , " Lady Agnes amplify as Nick 's glance appear 
 for a moment to question she " we . " 

 " never , never ! " Nick utter these word perhaps a little mechanically , 
 but the next minute he add as if suddenly move to think what he could 
 say that would give his mother most pleasure : " of course his name have 
 work for I . go as he be he be still a live force . " he feel a good 
 deal of a hypocrite , but one do not   win such a seat every day in the 
 year . probably indeed he should never win another . 

 " he hear you , he watch you , he rejoice in you , " Lady Agnes opine . 

 this idea be oppressive to Nick - that of the rejoicing almost as much 
 as of the watching . he have make his concession , but , with a certain 
 impulse to divert his mother from follow up her advantage , he break 
 out : " Julia be a tremendously effective woman . " 

 " of course she be ! " say Lady Agnes knowingly . 

 " her charming appearance be half the battle " - Nick explain a little 
 coldly what he mean . but he feel his coldness an inadequate protection 
 to he when he hear his companion observe with something of the same 
 sapience : 

 " a woman be always effective when she like a person so much . " 

 it discompose he to be describe as a person like , and so much , and 
 by a woman ; and he simply say abruptly : " when be you go away ? " 

 " the first moment that be civil - to - morrow morning . you will stay on I 
 hope . " 

 " stay on ? what shall I stay on for ? " 

 " why you might stay to express your appreciation . " 

 Nick consider . " I have   everything to do . " 

 " I think everything be do , " say Lady Agnes . 

 " well , that be just why , " her son reply , not very lucidly . " I want to 
 do other thing - quite other thing . I should like to take the next 
 train , " and he look at his watch . 

 " when there be people come to dinner to meet you ? " 

 " they will meet you - that be well . " 

 " I be sorry any one 's come , " Lady Agnes say in a tone unencourage to 
 a deviation from the reality of thing . " I wish we be alone - just as a 
 family . it would please Julia to - day to feel that we be one . do stay 
 with she to - morrow . " 

 " how will that do - when she be alone ? " 

 " she will not   be alone , with Mrs. Gresham . " 

 " Mrs. Gresham do not   count . " 

 " that be precisely why I want you to stop . and her cousin , almost her 
 brother : what an idea that it will not   do ! have not   you stay here before 
 when there have be no one ? " 

 " I have   never stay much , and there have always be people . at any rate 
 it be now different . " 

 " it be just because it be different . besides , it be not   different and it 
 never be , " say Lady Agnes , more incoherent in her earnestness than it 
 often happen to she to be . " she always like you and she like you now 
 more than ever - if you call that different ! " Nick get up at this and , 
 without meet her eye , walk to one of the window , where he stand 
 with his back turn and look out on the great greenness . she watch 
 he a moment and she might well have be wish , while he appear to 
 gaze with intentness , that it would come to he with the same force as 
 it have come to herself - very often before , but during these last day 
 more than ever - that the level land of Harsh , stretch away before 
 the window , the french garden with its symmetry , its screen and its 
 statue , and a great many more thing of which these be the 
 superficial token , be Julia 's very own to do with exactly as she 
 like . no word of appreciation or envy , however , drop from the young 
 man 's lip , and his mother presently go on : " what could be more 
 natural than that after your triumphant contest you and she should have 
 lot to settle and to talk about - no end of practical question , no end 
 of urgent business ? be not   you her member , and can not   her member pass a 
 day with she , and she a great proprietor ? " 

 Nick turn round at this with an odd expression . " her member - be I 
 her ? " 

 Lady Agnes have a pause - she have need of all her tact . " well , if the 
 place be hers and you represent the place - ! " she begin . but she go no 
 far , for Nick have interrupt she with a laugh . 

 " what a droll thing to ' represent , ' when one think of it ! and what do 
  it represent , poor stupid little borough with its strong , though I 
 admit clean , smell of meal and its curiously fat - face inhabitant ? do 
 you ever see such a collection of fat face turn up at the husting ? 
 they look like an enormous sofa , with the cheek for the gather and 
 the eye for the button . " 

 " oh well , the next time you shall have a great town , " Lady Agnes 
 return , smile and feeling that she be tactful . 

 " it will only be a big sofa ! I be joke , of course ? " Nick pursue , 
 " and I ought to be ashamed of myself . they have   do I the honour to 
 elect I and I shall never say a word that be not civil about they , poor 
 dear . but even a new member may blaspheme to his mother . " 

 " I wish you would be serious to your mother " - and she go near he . 

 " the difficulty be that I be two man ; it be the strange thing that ever 
 be , " Nick profess with his bright face on she . " I be two quite 
 distinct human being , who have scarcely a point in common ; not even the 
 memory , on the part of one , of the achievement or the adventure of the 
 other . one man win the seat but it be the other fellow who sit in it . " 

 " oh Nick , do not   spoil your victory by your perversity ! " she cry as she 
 clasp her hand to he . 

 " I go through it with great glee - I will not   deny that : it excite I , 
 interested I , amuse I . when once I be in it I like it . but now that 
 I be out of it again - - ! " 

 " out of it ? " his mother star . " be not   the whole point that you be in ? " 

 " ah now I be only in the House of Commons . " 

 for an instant she seem not to understand and to be on the point of 
 lay her finger quickly to her lip with a " Hush ! " - as if the late Sir 
 Nicholas might have hear the " only . " then while a comprehension of the 
 young man 's word promptly supersede that impulse she reply with 
 force : " you will be in the Lords the day you determine to get there . " 

 this futile remark make Nick laugh afresh , and not only laugh , but kiss 
 she , which be always an intenser form of mystification for poor Lady 
 Agnes and apparently the one he like well to inflict ; after which he 
 say : " the odd thing be , you know , that Harsh have no want . at least 
 it be not sharply , not articulately conscious of they . we all pretend 
 to talk they over together , and I promise to carry they in my heart of 
 heart . but upon my honour I can not   remember one of they . Julia say the 
 want of Harsh be simply the national want - rather a pretty phrase for 
 Julia . she mean she do everything for the place ; she be really 
 their member and this house in which we stand their legislative chamber . 
 therefore the lacunae I have   undertake to fill out be the national 
 want . it will be rather a job to rectify some of they , will not   it ? I 
 do not   represent the appetite of Harsh - Harsh be gorge . I represent the 
 idea of my party . that be what Julia say . " 

 " oh never mind what Julia say ! " Lady Agnes break out impatiently . this 
 impatience make it singular that the very next word she utter should 
 be : " my dear son , I wish to heaven you would marry she . it would be so 
 fitting now ! " she add . 

 " why now ? " Nick frown . 

 " she have show you such sympathy , such devotion . " 

 " be it for that she have show it ? " 

 " ah you might feel - I can not   tell you ! " say Lady Agnes reproachfully . 

 he blush at this , as if what he do feel be the reproach . " must I 
 marry she because you like she ? " 

 " I ? why we be all as fond of she as we can be . " 

 " dear mother , I hope that any woman I ever may marry will be a person 
 agreeable not only to you , but also , since you make a point of it , to 
 Grace and Biddy . but I must tell you this - that I shall marry no woman 
 I be not unmistakably in love with . " 

 " and why be you not in love with Julia - charming , clever , generous as 
 she be ? " Lady Agnes lay her hand on he - she hold he tight . " Dearest 
 Nick , if you care anything in the world to make I happy you will stay 
 over here to - morrow and be nice to she . " 

 he wait an instant . " do you mean propose to she ? " 

 " with a single word , with the glance of an eye , the movement of your 
 little finger " - and she pause , look intensely , imploringly up into 
 his face - " in less time than it take I to say what I say now , you may 
 have it all . " as he make no answer , only meet her eye , she add 
 insistently : " you know she be a fine creature - you know she be ! " 

 " Dearest mother , what I seem to know well than anything else in the 
 world be that I love my freedom . I set it far above everything . " 

 " your freedom ? what freedom be there in be poor ? " Lady Agnes fiercely 
 demand . " talk of that when Julia put everything she possess at your 
 foot ! " 

 " I can not   talk of it , mother - it be too terrible an idea . and I can not   talk 
 of she , nor of what I think of she . you must leave that to I . I do 
 her perfect justice . " 

 " you do not   or you would marry she to - morrow , " she passionately argue . 
 " you would feel the opportunity so beautifully rare , with everything in the 
 world to make it perfect . your father would have value it for you 
 beyond everything . think a little what would have give he pleasure . 
 that be what I mean when I speak just now of we all . it be not   of Grace 
 and Biddy I be think - fancy ! - it be of he . he be with you always ; 
 he take with you , at your side , every step you take yourself . he would 
 bless devoutly your marriage to Julia ; he would feel what it would be for 
 you and for we all . I ask for no sacrifice and he would ask for none . we 
 only ask that you do not   commit the crime - - ! " 

 Nick Dormer stop she with another kiss ; he murmur " Mother , mother , 
 mother ! " as he bend over she . he wish she not to go on , to let he 
 off ; but the deep deprecation in his voice do not   prevent her say : 

 " you know it - you know it perfectly . all and more than all that I can 
 tell you you know . " he draw she close , kiss she again , hold she as he 
 would have hold a child in a paroxysm , soothe she silently till it 
 could abate . her vehemence have bring with it tear ; she dry they as 
 she disengage herself . the next moment , however , she resume , attack 
 he again : " for a public man she would be the perfect companion . she be make 
 for public life - she be make to shine , to be concern in great thing , 
 to occupy a high position and to help he on . she would back you up in 
 everything as she have back you in this . together there be nothing you 
 could not   do . you can have the first house in England - yes , the very 
 first ! what freedom be there in be poor ? how can you do anything 
 without money , and what money can you make for yourself - what money will 
 ever come to you ? that be the crime - to throw away such an instrument of 
 power , such a blessed instrument of good . " 

 " it be not   everything to be rich , mother , " say Nick , look at the 
 floor with a particular patience - that be with a provisional docility 
 and his hand in his pocket . " and it be not   so fearful to be poor . " 

 " it be vile - it be abject . do not   I know ? " 

 " be you in such acute want ? " he smile . 

 " ah do not   make I explain what you have   only to look at to see ! " his 
 mother return as if with a richness of allusion to dark element in 
 her fate . 

 " besides , " he easily go on , " there be other money in the world than 
 Julia 's . I might come by some of that . " 

 " do you mean Mr. Carteret 's ? " the question make he laugh as her feeble 
 reference five minute before to the House of Lords have do . but she 
 pursue , too full of her idea to take account of such a poor substitute 
 for an answer : " let I tell you one thing , for I have   know Charles 
 Carteret much long than you and I understand he well . there be 
 nothing you could do that would do you more good with he than to marry 
 Julia . I know the way he look at thing and I know exactly how that 
 would strike he . it would please he , it would charm he ; it would be 
 the thing that would most prove to he that you be in earnest . you need , 
 you know , to do something of that sort , " she say as for plain speak . 

 " have not   I come in for Harsh ? " ask Nick . 

 " oh he be very canny . he like to see people rich . then he believe in 
 they - then he be likely to believe more . he be kind to you because you be 
 your father 's son ; but I be sure your be poor take just so much off . " 

 " he can remedy that so easily , " say Nick , smile still . " be my be 
 keep by Julia what you call my making an effort for myself ? " 

 Lady Agnes hesitate ; then " you need not   insult Julia ! " she reply . 

 " moreover , if I have   her money I shall not   want his , " Nick unheedingly 
 remark . 

 again his mother wait before answer ; after which she produce : " and 
 pray would not   you wish to be independent ? " 

 " you be delightful , dear mother - you be very delightful ! I particularly 
 like your conception of independence . do not   it occur to you that at a 
 pinch I might improve my fortune by some other mean than by make a 
 mercenary marriage or by curry favour with a rich old gentleman ? 
 do not   it occur to you that I might work ? " 

 " work at politic ? how do that make money , honourably ? " 

 " I do not   mean at politic . " 

 " what do you mean then ? " - and she seem to challenge he to phrase it 
 if he dare . this demonstration of her face and voice might have 
 affect he , for he remain silent and she continue : " be you elect 
 or not ? " 

 " it seem a dream , " he rather flatly return . 

 " if you be , act accordingly and do not   mix up thing that be as wide 
 asunder as the pole ! " she speak with sternness and his silence appear 
 again to represent an admission that her sternness count for he . 
 possibly she be touch by it ; after a few moment , at any rate , during 
 which nothing more pass between they , she appeal to he in a gentler 
 and more anxious key , which have this virtue to touch he that he know it 
 be absolutely the first time in her life she have really beg for 
 anything . she have never be oblige to beg ; she have get on without it 
 and most thing have come to she . he might judge therefore in what a 
 light she regard this boon for which in her bereft old age she humble 
 herself to be a suitor . there be such a pride in she that he could feel 
 what it cost she to go on her knee even to her son . he do judge how it 
 be in his power to gratify she ; and as he be generous and imaginative 
 he be stir and shake as it come over he in a wave of figurative 
 suggestion that he might make up to she for many thing . he scarcely 
 need to hear she ask with a pleading wail that be almost tragic : 
 " do not   you see how thing have turn out for we ? do not   you know how 
 unhappy I be , do not   you know what a bitterness - - ? " she stop with a 
 sob in her voice and he recognise vividly this last tribulation , the 
 unhealed wound of her change of life and her lapse from eminence to 
 flatness . " you know what Percival be and the comfort I have of he . you 
 know the property and what he be do with it and what comfort I get 
 from that ! everything 's dreary but what you can do for we . 
 everything be odious , down to live in a hole with one 's girl who do not 
 marry . grace be impossible - I do not   know what be the matter with she ; no 
 one will look at she , and she be so conceited with it - sometimes I feel 
 as if I could beat she ! and Biddy will never marry , and we be three 
 dismal woman in a filthy house , and what be three dismal woman , more or 
 less , in London ? " 

 so with an unexpected rage of self - exposure she pour out her 
 disappointment and trouble , tear away the veil from her sadness and 
 soreness . it almost scar he to see how she hat her life , though at 
 another time it might have be amusing to note how she despise she 
 gardenless house . of course it be not   a country - house , and she could not 
 get use to that . well than he could do - for it be the sort of thing 
 into which in any case a woman enter more than a man - she feel what a 
 lift into bright air , what a regilding of his sister ' possibility , 
 his marriage to Julia would effect for they . he could not   trace the 
 difference , but his mother see it all as a shin picture . she hang the 
 bright vision before he now - she stand there like a poor woman cry 
 for a kindness . what be filial in he , all the piety he owe , 
 especially to the revive spirit of his father , more than ever present 
 on a day of such public pledge , become from one moment to the other as 
 the very handle to the door of the chamber of concession . he have the 
 impulse , so embarrassing when it be a question of consistent action , to 
 see in a touching , an interesting light any forcibly present side of 
 the life of another : such thing effect a union with something in 
  his life , and in the recognition of they be no soreness of sacrifice 
 and no consciousness of merit . 

 rapidly , at present , this change of scene take place before his 
 spiritual eye . he find himself believe , because his mother 
 communicate the belief , that it depend but on his own conduct richly 
 to alter the social outlook of the three woman who cling to he and who 
 declare themselves forlorn . this be not the high kind of motive , 
 but it contain a spring , it touch into life again old injunction 
 and appeal . Julia 's wide kingdom open out round he and seem 
 somehow to wear the face of his own possible future . his mother and 
 sister float in the rosy element as if he have breathe it about they . 
 " the first house in England " she have call it ; but it might be the 
 first house in Europe , the first in the world , by the fine air and the 
 high humanity that should fill it . everything beautiful in his actual , 
 his material view seem to proclaim its value as never before ; the 
 house rise over his head as a museum of exquisite reward , and the image 
 of poor George Dallow hover there obsequious , express that he have 
 only be the modest , tasteful organiser , or even upholsterer , appoint 
 to set it all in order and punctually retire . Lady Agnes 's tone in fine 
 penetrate far than it have do yet when she bring out with 
 intensity : " do not   desert we - do not   desert we . " 

 " do not   desert you - - ? " 

 " be great - be great . I be old , I have   live , I have   see . go in for a great 
 material position . that will simplify everything else . " 

 " I will do what I can for you - anything , everything I can . trust I - leave 
 I alone , " Nick go on . 

 " and you will stay over - you will spend the day with she ? " 

 " I will stay till she turn I out ! " 

 his mother have hold of his hand again now : she raise it to her lip 
 and kiss it . " my dear son , my only joy ! " then : " I do not   see how you 
 can resist she , " she add . 

 " no more do I ! " 

 she look about - there be so much to look at - with a deep exhalation . 
 " if you be so fond of art , what art be equal to all this ? the joy of 
 live in the midst of it - of see the fine work every day ! you will 
 have everything the world can give . " 

 " that be exactly what be just pass in my own mind . it be too much , " 
 Nick reason . 

 " do not   be selfish ! " 

 " selfish ? " he echo . 

 " Unselfish then . you will share it with we . " 

 " and with Julia a little , I hope , " he say . 

 " God bless you ! " cry his mother , look up at he . her eye be 
 detain by the sudden sense of something in his own that be not clear 
 to she ; but before she could challenge it he ask abruptly : 

 " why do you talk so of poor Biddy ? why will not   she marry ? " 

 " you have well ask Peter Sherringham , " say Lady Agnes . 

 " what have he to do with it ? " 

 " how odd of you not to know - when it be so plain how she think of he 
 that it be a matter of common gossip . " 

 " yes , if you will - we have   make it so , and she take it as an angel . but 
 Peter like she . " 

 " do he ? then it be the more shame to he to behave as he do . he have 
 well leave his wretched actress alone . that be the love of art too ! " 
 mock Lady Agnes . 

 but Nick gloss it all over . " Biddy 's so charming she will easily marry 
 some one else . " 

 " never , if she love he . however , Julia will bring it about - Julia 
 will help she , " his mother pursue more cheerfully . " that be what you will 
 do for we - that she will do everything ! " 

 " why then more than now ? " he ask . 

 " because we shall be yours . " 

 " you be mine already . " 

 " yes , but she be not . however , she be as good ! " Lady Agnes exult . 

 " she will turn I out of the house , " say Nick . 

 " come and tell I when she do ! but there she be - go to she ! " and she 
 give he a push toward one of the window that stand open to the 
 terrace . their hostess have become visible outside ; she pass slowly 
 along the terrace with her long shadow . " go to she , " his mother 
 repeat - ' she be wait for you . " 

 Nick go out with the air of a man as ready to pass that way as 
 another , and at the same moment his two sister , still flush with 
 participation , appear in a different quarter . 

 " we go home to - morrow , but Nick will stay a day or two , " Lady Agnes say 
 to they . 

 " dear old Nick ! " grace ejaculate look at she with intensity . 

 " he be go to speak , " she go on . " but do not   mention it . " 

 " do not   mention it ? " Biddy ask with a milder stare . " have not   he speak 
 enough , poor fellow ? " 

 " I mean to Julia , " Lady Agnes reply . 

 " do not   you understand , you goose ? " - and Grace turn on her sister . 




 XIV 


 the next morning bring the young man many letter and telegram , and 
 his coffee be place beside he in his room , where he remain until 
 noon answer these communication . when he come out he learn that 
 his mother and sister have leave the house . this information be give 
 he by Mrs. Gresham , whom he find deal with her own voluminous 
 budget at one of the table in the library . she be a lady who receive 
 thirty letter a day , the subject - matter of which , as well as of her 
 punctual answer in a hand that would have be " ladylike " in a 
 manageress , be a puzzle to those who observe she . 

 she tell Nick that Lady Agnes have not be willing to disturb he at his 
 work to say good - bye , know she should see he in a day or two in 
 town . he be amuse at the way his mother have steal off - as if she 
 fear further conversation might weaken the spell she believe herself 
 to have work . the place be clear , moreover , of its other visitor , 
 so that , as Mrs. Gresham say , the fun be at an end . this lady 
 express the idea that the fun be after all rather a bore . at any rate 
 now they could rest , Mrs. Dallow and Nick and she , and she be glad Nick 
 be go to stay for a little quiet . she like Harsh well when it be 
 not en fete : then one could see what a sympathetic old place it be . 
 she hop Nick be not dreadfully fag - she fear Julia be 
 completely do up . Julia , however , have transport her exhaustion to 
 the ground - she be wander about somewhere . she think more people 
 would be come to the house , people from the town , people from the 
 country , and have go out so as not to have to see they . she have not 
 go far - Nick could easily find she . Nick intimate that he himself be 
 not eager for more people , whereupon Mrs. Gresham rather archly smile . 
 " and of course you hate I for be here . " he make some protest and 
 she add : " but I be almost part of the house , you know - I be one of the 
 chair or table . " Nick declare that he have never see a house so well 
 furnish , and Mrs. Gresham say : " I believe there be to be some 
 people to dinner ; rather an interference , be not   it ? Julia live so in 
 public . but it be all for you . " and after a moment she add : " it be a 
 wonderful constitution . " Nick at first fail to seize her allusion - he 
 think it a retarded political reference , a sudden tribute to the great 
 unwritten instrument by which they be all govern and under the happy 
 operation of which his fight have be so successful . he be on the point 
 of say , " the british ? wonderful ! " when he gather that the intention 
 of his companion have be simply to praise Mrs. Dallow 's fine 
 robustness . " the surface so delicate , the action so easy , yet the frame 
 of steel . " 

 he leave Mrs. Gresham to her correspondence and go out of the house ; 
 wonder as he walk if she want he to do the same thing his mother 
 want , so that her word have be intend for a prick - whether even 
 the two lady have talk over their desire together . Mrs. Gresham be a 
 married woman who be usually take for a widow , mainly because she be 
 perpetually ' send for " by her friend , who in no event send for Mr. 
 Gresham . she come in every case , with her air of be rĂ pandue at 
 the expense of dingy belonging . her figure be admire - that be it 
 be sometimes mention - and she dress as if it be expect of she to 
 be smart , like a young woman in a shop or a servant much in view . she 
 slip in and out , accompany at the piano , talk to the neglect 
 visitor , walk in the rain , and after the arrival of the post usually 
 have conference with her hostess , during which she stroke her chin and 
 look familiarly responsible . it be her peculiarity that people be 
 always say thing to she in a lowered voice . she have all sort of 
 acquaintance and in small establishment sometimes write the menu . 
 great one , on the other hand , have no terror for she - she have see too 
 many . no one have ever discover whether any one else pay she . People 
 only know what they do . 

 if Lady Agnes have in the minor key discuss with she the propriety of a 
 union between the mistress of Harsh and the hope of the Dormers this 
 last personage could take the circumstance for grant without 
 irritation and even with cursory indulgence ; for he be get unhappy now 
 and his spirit be light and clear . the summer day be splendid and the 
 world , as he look at it from the terrace , offer no more worrying 
 ambiguity than a vault of airy blue arching over a lap of solid green . 
 the wide , still tree in the park appear to be wait for some daily 
 inspection , and the rich field , with their official frill of hedge , to 
 rejoice in the light that smile upon they as name and numbered acre . 
 Nick feel himself catch the smile and all the reason of it : they make 
 up a charm to which he have perhaps not hitherto do justice - something 
 of the impression he have receive when young from showy " view " of 
 fine country - seat that have press and patted nature , as by the fat 
 hand of " bench " of magistrate and landlord , into supreme 
 respectability and comfort . there be a couple of peacock on the 
 terrace , and his eye be catch by the gleam of the swan on a distant 
 lake , where be also a little temple on an island ; and these object 
 fall in with his humour , which at another time might have be ruffle 
 by they as aggressive triumph of the conventional . 

 it be certainly a proof of youth and health on his part that his 
 spirit have rise as the plot thicken and that after he have take his 
 jump into the turbid water of a contested election he have be able to 
 tumble and splash not only without a sense of awkwardness but with a 
 considerable capacity for the frolic . Tepid as we see he in Paris he 
 have find his relation to his opportunity surprisingly alter by his 
 little journey across the Channel , have see thing in a new perspective 
 and breathe an air that set he and keep he in motion . there have be 
 something in it that go to his head - an element that his mother and 
 his sister , his father from beyond the grave , Julia Dallow , the Liberal 
 party and a hundred friend , be both secretly and overtly occupy in 
 pumping into it . if he but half - believe in victory he at least like 
 the wind of the onset in his ear , and he have a general sense that when 
 one be ' stuck " there be always the near thing at which one must 
 pull . the embarrassment , that be the revival of scepticism , which might 
 produce an inconsistency shameful to exhibit and yet difficult to 
 conceal , be safe enough to come later . indeed at the risk of present 
 our young man as too whimsical a personage I may hint that some such 
 sickly glow have even now begin to tinge one quarter of his inward 
 horizon . 

 I be afraid , moreover , that I have no well excuse for he than the one 
 he have touch on in that momentous conversation with his mother which 
 I have think it useful to reproduce in full . he be conscious of a 
 double nature ; there be two man in he , quite separate , whose lead 
 feature have little in common and each of whom insist on have an 
 independent turn at life . meanwhile then , if he be adequately aware 
 that the bed of his moral existence would need a good deal of make 
 over if he be to lie upon it without unseemly tossing , he be also 
 alive to the propriety of not parade his inconsistency , not let 
 his unregulated passion become a spectacle to the vulgar . he have none 
 of that wish to appear deep which be at the bottom of most form of 
 fatuity ; he be perfectly willing to pass for decently superficial ; he 
 only aspire to be decently continuous . when you be not suitably 
 shallow this present difficulty ; but he would have assent to the 
 proposition that you must be as subtle as you can and that a high use of 
 subtlety be in consume the smoke of your inner fire . the fire be the 
 great thing , not the chimney . he have no view of life that count out 
 the need of learn ; it be teach rather as to which he be 
 conscious of no particular mission . he enjoy life , enjoy it 
 immensely , and be ready to pursue it with patience through as many 
 channel as possible . he be on his guard , however , against make an 
 ass of himself , that be against not think out his experiment before 
 try they in public . it be because , as yet , he like life in general 
 well than it be clear to he he like particular possibility that , 
 on the occasion of a constituency 's hold out a cordial hand to he 
 while it extend another in a different direction , a certain bloom of 
 boyhood that be on he have not pal at the idea of a match . 

 he have rise to the fray as he have rise to match at school , for his 
 boyishness could still take a pleasure in an inconsiderate show of 
 agility . he could meet elector and conciliate bore and compliment 
 woman and answer question and roll off speech and chaff 
 adversary - he could do these thing because it be amusing and 
 slightly dangerous , like play football or ascend an Alp , pastime 
 for which nature have confer on he an aptitude not so very different 
 in kind from a due volubility on platform . there be two voice to 
 admonish he that all this be not really action at all , but only a 
 pusillanimous imitation of it : one of they fitfully audible in the 
 depth of his own spirit and the other speak , in the equivocal 
 accent of a very crab hand , from a letter of four page by Gabriel 
 Nash . however , Nick carry the imitation as far as possible , and the 
 flood of sound float he . what more could a work faith have do ? 
 he have not break with the axiom that in a case of doubt one should hold 
 off , for this apply to choice , and he have not at present the slight 
 pretension to choose . he know he be lift along , that what he be 
 do be not first - rate , that nothing be settle by it and that if 
 there be a hard knot in his life it would only grow hard with 
 keeping . do one 's sum to - morrow instead of to - day do not   make the 
 sum easy , but at least make to - day so . 

 sometimes in the course of the following fortnight it seem to he he 
 have go in for Harsh because he be sure he should lose ; sometimes he 
 foresaw that he should win precisely to punish he for have try and 
 for his want of candour ; and when presently he do win he be almost 
 scared at his success . then it appear to he he have do something 
 even bad than not choose - he have let other choose for he . the beauty 
 of it be that they have choose with only their own object in their eye , 
 for what do they know about his strange alternative ? he be rattle 
 about so for a fortnight - Julia take care of this - that he have no time 
 to think save when he try to remember a quotation or an american 
 story , and all his life become an overflow of verbiage . thought could not 
 hear itself for the noise , which have to be pleasant and persuasive , have 
 to hang more or less together , without its aid . Nick be surprised at 
 the air he could play , and often when , the last thing at night , he shut 
 the door of his room , find himself privately exclaim that he have have 
 no idea he be such a mountebank . 

 I must add that if this reflexion do not   occupy he long , and if no 
 meditation , after his return from Paris , hold he for many moment , 
 there be a reason well even than that he be tired , that he be busy , 
 that he appreciate the coincidence of the hit and the hurrah , the 
 hurrah and the hit . that reason be simply Mrs. Dallow , who have suddenly 
 become a still large fact in his consciousness than his have turn 
 actively political . she be indeed his be so - in the sense that if 
 the politic be his , how little soever , the activity be her . she have 
 well way of show she be clever than merely say clever 
 thing - which in general only prove at the most that one would be clever 
 if one could . the accomplished fact itself be almost always the 
 demonstration that Mrs. Dallow could ; and when Nick come to his sens 
 after the proclamation of the victor and the drop of the uproar her 
 figure be , of the whole violent dance of shadow , the only thing that 
 come back , that stay . she have be there at each of the moment , 
 pass , repasse , return , before he , beside he , behind he . she 
 have make the business infinitely pretty than it would have be 
 without she , add music and flower and ice , a fine charm , convert 
 it into a kind of heroic " function , " the form of sport most dangerous . 
 it have be a garden - party , say , with one 's life at stake from pressure 
 of the crowd . the conclude affair have bequeath he thus not only a 
 seat in the House of Commons , but a perception of what may come of woman 
 in high embodiment and an abyss of intimacy with one woman in 
 particular . 

 she have wrap he up in something , he do not   know what - a sense of 
 facility , an overpower fragrance - and they have move together in an 
 immense fraternity . there have be no love - making , no contact that be 
 only personal , no vulgarity of flirtation : the hurry of the day and the 
 sharpness with which they both tend to an outside object have make all 
 that irrelevant . it be as if she have be too near for he to see she 
 separate from himself ; but none the less , when he now draw breath and 
 look back , what have happen meet his eye as a compose picture - a 
 picture of which the subject be inveterately Julia and her pony : 
 Julia wonderfully fair and fine , wave her whip , cleave the crowd , 
 hold her head as if it have be a banner , smile up into 
 second - storey window , carry he beside she , carry he to his 
 doom . he have not reckon at the time , in the few day , how much he have 
 drive about with she ; but the image of it be there , in his consult 
 conscience , as well as in a personal glow not yet chill : it look 
 large as it rise before he . the thing his mother have say to he make 
 a rich enough frame for it all , and the whole impression have that night 
 keep he much awake . 




 XV 


 while , after leave Mrs. Gresham , he be hesitate which way to go and 
 be on the point of hail a gardener to ask if Mrs. Dallow have be 
 see , he notice , as a spot of colour in an expanse of shrubbery , a 
 far - away parasol move in the direction of the lake . he take his course 
 toward it across the park , and as the bearer of the parasol stroll 
 slowly it be not five minute before he have join she . he go to she 
 soundlessly , on the grass - he have be whistle at first , but as he get 
 nearer stop - and it be not till he be at hand that she look 
 round . he have watch she go as if she be turn thing over in her 
 mind , while she brush the smooth walk and the clean turf with her 
 dress , slowly make her parasol revolve on her shoulder and carry in 
 the other hand a book which he perceive to be a monthly review . 

 " I come out to get away , " she say when he have begin to walk with she . 

 " away from I ? " 

 " ah that be impossible . " then she add : " the day 's so very nice . " 

 " lovely weather , " Nick drop . " you want to get away from Mrs. Gresham , 
 I suppose . " 

 she have a pause . " from everything ! " 

 " well , I want to get away too . " 

 " it have be such a racket . listen to the dear bird . " 

 " yes , our noise be not   so good as theirs , " say Nick . " I feel as if I have 
 be marry and have shoe and rice throw after I , " he go on . " but 
 not to you , Julia - nothing so good as that . " 

 Julia make no reply ; she only turn her eye on the ornamental water 
 stretch away at their right . in a moment she exclaim , " how nasty 
 the lake look ! " and Nick recognise in her tone a sign of that odd 
 shyness - a perverse stiffness at a moment when she probably but want 
 to be soft - which , take in combination with her other quality , be so 
 far from be displease to he that it represent her near 
 approach to extreme charm . he be not shy now , for he consider this 
 morning that he see thing very straight and in a sense altogether 
 superior and delightful . this enable he to be generously sorry for his 
 companion - if he be the reason of she be in any degree 
 uncomfortable , and yet leave he to enjoy some of the motion , not in 
 themselves without grace , by which her discomfort be reveal . he 
 would not   insist on anything yet : so he observe that her standard in 
 lake be too high , and then talk a little about his mother and the 
 girl , their have go home , his not have see they that morning , 
 Lady Agnes 's deep satisfaction in his victory , and the fact that she 
 would be oblige to " do something " for the autumn - take a house or 
 something or other . 

 " I will lend she a house , " say Mrs. Dallow . 

 " oh Julia , Julia ! " Nick half groan . 

 but she pay no attention to his sound ; she only hold up her review and 
 say : " see what I have   bring with I to read - Mr. Hoppus 's article . " 

 " that be right ; then I shall not   have to . you will tell I about it . " he 
 utter this without believe she have mean or wish to read the 
 article , which be entitle " the revision of the British Constitution , " 
 in spite of she have encumber herself with the stiff , fresh 
 magazine . he be deeply aware she be not in want of such inward 
 occupation as periodical literature could supply . they walk along and 
 he add : " but be that what we be in for , read Mr. Hoppus ? be it the 
 sort of thing constituent expect ? or , even bad , pretend to have 
 read he when one have not ? oh what a tangled web we weave ! " 

 " People be talk about it . one have to know . it be the article of the 
 month . " 

 Nick look at her askance . " you say thing every now and then for which 
 I could really kill you . ' the article of the month , ' for instance : I 
 could kill you for that . " 

 " well , kill I ! " Mrs. Dallow return . 

 " let I carry your book , " he go on irrelevantly . the hand in which she 
 hold it be on the side of she on which he be walk , and he put out 
 his own hand to take it . but for a couple of minute she forbear to give 
 it up , so that they hold it together , swing it a little . before she 
 surrender it he ask where she be go . 

 " to the island , " she answer . 

 " well , I will go with you - and I will kill you there . " 

 " the thing I say be the right thing , " Julia declare . 

 " it be just the right thing that be wrong . it be because you be so 
 political , " Nick too lightly explain . " it be your horrible ambition . 
 the woman who have a salon should have read the article of the month . see 
 how one dreadful thing lead to another . " 

 " there be some thing that lead to nothing , " say Mrs. Dallow . 

 " no doubt - no doubt . and how be you go to get over to your island ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " be not   there a boat ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 Nick have pause to look round for the boat , but his hostess walk on 
 without turn her head . " can you row ? " he then ask . 

 " do not   you know I can do everything ? " 

 " yes , to be sure . that be why I want to kill you . there be the boat . " 

 " shall you drown I ? " she ask . 

 " oh let I perish with you ! " Nick answer with a sigh . the boat have 
 be hide from they by the bole of a great tree which rise from the 
 grass at the water 's edge . it be moor to a small place of embarkation 
 and be large enough to hold as many person as be likely to wish to 
 visit at once the little temple in the middle of the lake , which Nick 
 like because it be absurd and which Mrs. Dallow have never have a 
 particular esteem for . the lake , feed by a natural spring , be a liberal 
 sheet of water , measure by the scale of park scenery ; and though its 
 principal merit be that , take at a distance , it give a gleam of 
 abstraction to the concrete verdure , do the office of an open eye in 
 a dull face , it could also be approach without derision on a sweet 
 summer morning when it make a lap sound and reflect candidly 
 various thing that be probably fine than itself - the sky , the great 
 tree , the flight of bird . a man of taste , come back from Rome a 
 hundred year before , have cause a small ornamental structure to be 
 raise , from artificial foundation , on its bosom , and have endeavour 
 to make this architectural pleasantry as nearly as possible a 
 reminiscence of the small ruin rotunda which stand on the bank of the 
 Tiber and be pronounce by ciceroni once sacred to Vesta . it be 
 circular , roof with old tile , surround by white column and 
 considerably dilapidate . George Dallow have take an interest in it - it 
 remind he not in the least of Rome , but of other thing he like - and 
 have amuse himself with restore it . " give I your hand - sit there and 
 I will ferry you , " Nick say . 

 Julia comply , place herself opposite he in the boat ; but as he take 
 up the paddle she declare that she prefer to remain on the 
 water - there be too much malice prepense in the temple . he ask she 
 what she mean by that , and she say it be ridiculous to withdraw to an 
 island a few foot square on purpose to meditate . she have nothing to 
 meditate about that require so much scenery and attitude . 

 " on the contrary , it would be just to change the scene and the pose . 
 it be what we have be do for a week that be attitude ; and to be for 
 half an hour where nobody be look and one have not   to keep it up be just 
 what I want to put in an idle irresponsible day for . I be not keep 
 it up now - I suppose you have   notice , " Nick go on as they float and 
 he scarcely dip the oar . 

 " I do not   understand you " - and Julia lean back in the boat . 

 he give no further explanation than to ask in a minute : " have you people 
 to dinner to - night ? " 

 " I believe there be three or four , but I will put they off if you like . " 

 " must you always live in public , Julia ? " he continue . 

 she look at he a moment and he could see how she colour . " we will go 
 home - I will put they off . " 

 " ah no , do not   go home ; it be too jolly here . let they come , let they 
 come , poor wretch ! " 

 " how little you know I , " Julia presently break out , " when , ever so 
 many time , I have   live here for month without a creature ! " 

 " except Mrs. Gresham , I suppose . " 

 " I have have to have the house go , I admit . " 

 " you be perfect , you be admirable , and I do not   criticise you . " 

 " I do not   understand you ! " she toss back . 

 " that only add to the generosity of what you have   do for I , " Nick 
 return , begin to pull fast . he bend over the oar and send the 
 boat forward , keep this up for a succession of minute during which 
 they both remain silent . his companion , in her place , motionless , 
 recline - the seat in the stern be most comfortable - look only at 
 the water , the sky , the tree . at last he head for the little temple , 
 say first , however , " shall not   we visit the ruin ? " 

 " if you like . I do not   mind see how they keep it . " 

 they reach the white step lead up to it . he hold the boat and his 
 companion get out ; then , when he have make it fast , they mount together 
 to the open door . " they keep the place very well , " Nick say , look 
 round . " it be a capital place to give up everything in . " 

 " it might do at least for you to explain what you mean . " and Julia sit 
 down . 

 " I mean to pretend for half an hour that I do not   represent the burgess 
 of Harsh . it be charming - it be very delicate work . surely it have be 
 retouch . " 

 the interior of the pavilion , light by window which the circle of 
 column be suppose outside and at a distance to conceal , have a vaulted 
 ceiling and be occupy by a few piece of last - century furniture , 
 spare and fade , of which the colour match with the decoration of the 
 wall . these and the ceiling , tint and not exempt from indication of 
 damp , be cover with fine moulding and medallion . it all make a 
 very elegant little tea - house , the mistress of which sit on the edge of 
 a sofa roll her parasol and remark , " you ought to read Mr. 
 Hoppus 's article to I . " 

 " why , be this your salon ? " Nick smile . 

 " what make you always talk of that ? my salon 's an invention of your 
 own . " 

 " but be not   it the idea you be most work for ? " 

 suddenly , nervously , she put up her parasol and sit under it as if not 
 quite sensible of what she be do . " how much you know I ! I be not 
 ' work ' for anything - that you will ever guess . " 

 Nick wander about the room and look at various thing it 
 contain - the odd volume on the table , the bit of quaint china on 
 the shelf . " they do keep it very well . you have   get charming thing . " 

 " they be suppose to come over every day and look after they . " 

 " they must come over in force . " 

 " oh no one know . " 

 " it be spick and span . how well you have everything do ! " 

 " I think you have   some reason to say so , " say Mrs. Dallow . her parasol 
 be now down and she be again roll it tight . 

 " but you be right about my not know you . why be you so ready to do 
 so much for I ? " 

 he stop in front of she and she look up at he . her eye rest 
 long on his own ; then she break out : " why do you hate I so ? " 

 " be it because you like I personally ? " Nick pursue as if he have not 
 hear she . " you may think that an odd or positively an odious question ; 
 but be not   it natural , my wanting to know ? " 

 " oh if you do not   know ! " Julia quite desperately sigh . 

 " it be a question of be sure . " 

 " well then if you be not sure - - ! " 

 " be it do for I as a friend , as a man ? " 

 " you be not a man - you be a child , " his hostess declare with a face 
 that be cold , though she have be smile the moment before . 

 " after all I be a good candidate , " Nick go on . 

 " what do I care for candidate ? " 

 " you be the most delightful woman , Julia , " he say as he sit down beside 
 she , " and I can not   imagine what you mean by my hat you . " 

 " if you have not   discover that I like you , you might as well . " 

 " might as well discover it ? " 

 she be grave - he have never see she so pale and never so beautiful . she 
 have stop roll her parasol ; her hand be fold in her lap and 
 her eye bent on they . Nick sit look at they as well - a trifle 
 awkwardly . " might as well have hat I , " she say . 

 " we have   get on so beautifully together all these day : why should not   we 
 get on as well for ever and ever ? " he bring out . she make no answer , 
 and suddenly he say : " ah Julia , I do not   know what you have   do to I , 
 but you have   do it . you have   do it by strange way , but it will serve . 
 yes , I hate you , " he add in a different tone and with his face all 
 nearer . 

 " Dear Nick , dear Nick - - ! " she begin . but she stop , feel his 
 nearness and its intensity , a nearness now so great that his arm be 
 round she , that he be really in possession of she . she close her eye 
 but hear he ask again , " why should not   it be for ever , for ever ? " in a 
 voice that have for her ear a vibration none have ever have . 

 " you have   do it , you have   do it , " Nick repeat . 

 " what do you want of I ? " she appeal . 

 " to stay with I - this way - always . " 

 " ah not this way , " she answer softly , but as if in pain and make an 
 effort , with a certain force , to detach herself . 

 " this way then - or this ! " he take such press advantage of she that he 
 have kiss she with repetition . she rise while he insist , but he hold 
 she yet , and as he do so his tenderness turn to beautiful word . " if 
 you will marry I , why should not   it be so simple , so right and good ? " he 
 draw she close again , too close for she to answer . but her struggle 
 cease and she rest on he a minute ; she bury her face in his 
 breast . 

 " you be hard , and it be cruel ! " she then exclaim , shake herself free . 

 " hard - cruel ? " 

 " you do it with so little ! " and with this , unexpectedly to Nick , Julia 
 burst straight into tear . before he could stop she she be at the door 
 of the pavilion as if she wish to get immediately away . there , 
 however , he stay she , bend over she while she sob , unspeakably 
 gentle with she . 

 " so little ? it be with everything - with everything I have . " 

 " I have   do it , you say ? what do you accuse I of do ? " her tear be 
 already over . 

 " of make I your ; of be so precious , Julia , so exactly what a man 
 want , as it seem to I . I do not   know you could , " he go on , smile 
 down at she . " I do not   - no , I do not . " 

 " it be what I say - that you have   always hat I . " 

 " I will make it up to you ! " he laugh . 

 she lean on the doorway with her forehead against the lintel . " you 
 do not   even deny it . " 

 " contradict you now ? I will admit it , though it be rubbish , on purpose to 
 live it down . " 

 " it do not   matter , " she say slowly ; " for however much you might have 
 like I you would never have do so half as much as I have   care for you . " 

 " oh I be so poor ! " Nick murmur cheerfully . 

 with her eye look at he as in a new light she slowly shake she 
 head . then she declare : " you never can live it down . " 

 " I like that ! have not   I ask you to marry I ? when do you ever ask 
 I ? " 

 " every day of my life ! as I say , it be hard - for a proud woman . " 

 " yes , you be too proud even to answer I . " 

 " we must think of it , we must talk of it . " 

 " think of it ? I have   think of it ever so much . " 

 " I mean together . there be many thing in such a question . " 

 " the principal thing be beautifully to give I your word . " 

 she look at he afresh all strangely ; then she throw off : " I wish I 
 do not   adore you ! " she go straight down the step . 

 " you do not   adore I at all , you know , if you leave I now . why do you 
 go ? it be so charming here and we be so delightfully alone . " 

 " untie the boat ; we will go on the water , " Julia say . 

 Nick be at the top of the step , look down at she . " ah stay a 
 little - do stay ! " he plead . 

 " I will get in myself , I will pull off , " she simply answer . 

 at this he come down and bent a little to undo the rope . he be close to 
 she and as he raise his head he feel it catch ; she have seize it in 
 her hand and she press her lip , as he have never feel lip press , 
 to the first place they encounter . the next instant she be in the 
 boat . 

 this time he dip the oar very slowly indeed ; and , while for a period 
 that be long than it seem to they they float vaguely , they mainly 
 sit and glow at each other as if everything have be settle . there 
 be reason enough why Nick should be happy ; but it be a singular fact 
 that the lead one be the sense of his have escape a great and 
 ugly mistake . the final result of his mother 's appeal to he the day 
 before have be the idea that he must act with unimpeachable honour . he 
 be capable of take it as an assurance that Julia have place he under 
 an obligation a gentleman could regard but in one way . if she herself 
 have understand it so , put the vision , or at any rate the 
 appreciation , of a close tie into everything she have do for he , the 
 case be conspicuously simple and his course unmistakably plain . that be 
 why he have be gay when he come out of the house to look for she : he 
 could be gay when his course be plain . he could be all the gayer , 
 naturally , I must add , that , in turn thing over as he have do half 
 the night , what he have turn up oftenest be the recognition that Julia 
 now have a new personal power with he . it be not for nothing that she 
 have throw herself personally into his life . she have by her act make he 
 live twice as intensely , and such an office , such a service , if a man 
 have accept and deeply taste it , be certainly a thing to put he on 
 his honour . he take it as distinct that there be nothing he could do in 
 preference that would not   be spoil for he by any deflexion from that 
 point . his mother have make he uncomfortable by bring it so heavily 
 up that Julia be in love with he - he do not   like in general to be tell 
 such thing ; but the responsibility seem easy to carry and he be 
 less shy about it when once he be away from other eye , with only 
 Julia 's own to express that truth and with indifferent nature all 
 about . besides , what discovery have he make this morning but that he also 
 be in love ? 

 " you have   get to be a very great man , you know , " she say to he in the 
 middle of the lake . " I do not   know what you mean about my salon , but I 
  be ambitious . " 

 " we must look at life in a large , bold way , " he concur while he 
 rest his oar . 

 " that be what I mean . if I do not   think you could I would not   look at 
 you . " 

 " I could what ? " 

 " do everything you ought - everything I imagine , I dream of . you be 
 clever : you can never make I believe the contrary after your speech on 
 Tuesday , do not   speak to I ! I have   see , I have   hear , and I know what be in 
 you . I shall hold you to it . you be everything you pretend not to be . " 

 Nick look at the water while she talk . " will it always be so 
 amusing ? " he ask . 

 " will what always be ? " 

 " why my career . " 

 " shall not   I make it so ? " 

 " then it will be yours - it will not   be mine , " say Nick . 

 " ah do not   say that - do not   make I out that sort of woman ! if they should 
 say it be I I would drown myself . " 

 " if they should say what be you ? " 

 " why your get on . if they should say I push you and do thing for 
 you . thing I mean that you can not   do yourself . " 

 " well , will not   you do they ? it be just what I count on . " 

 " do not   be dreadful , " Julia say . " it would be loathsome if I be 
 think the cleverest . that be not the sort of man I want to marry . " 

 " oh I shall make you work , my dear ! " 

 " ah that - - ! " she sound in a tone that might come back to a man 
 after year . 

 " you will do the great thing , you will make my life the good life , " Nick 
 bring out as if he have be touch to deep conviction . " I daresay 
 that will keep I in heart . " 

 " in heart ? why should not   you be in heart ? " and her eye , linger on 
 he , search he , seem to question he still more than her lip . 

 " oh it will be all right ! " he make answer . 

 " you will like success as well as any one else . do not   tell I - you be not 
 so ethereal ! " 

 " yes , I shall like success . " 

 " so shall I ! and of course I be glad you will now be able to do thing , " 
 Julia go on . " I be glad you will have thing . I be glad I be not poor . " 

 " ah do not   speak of that , " Nick murmur . " only be nice to my mother . we 
 shall make she supremely happy . " 

 " it would not   be for your mother I would do it - yet I be glad I like your 
 people , " Mrs. Dallow rectify . " leave they to I ! " 

 " you be generous - you be noble , " he stammer . 

 " your mother must live at Broadwood ; she must have it for life . it be not 
 at all bad . " 

 " ah Julia , " her companion reply , " it be well I love you ! " 

 " why should not   you ? " she laugh ; and after this no more be say 
 between they till the boat touch shore . when she have get out she 
 recall that it be time for luncheon ; but they take no action in 
 consequence , stroll in a direction which be not that of the house . 
 there be a vista that draw they on , a grassy path skirt the 
 foundation of scatter beech and lead to a stile from which the 
 charm wanderer might drop into another division of Mrs. Dallow 's 
 property . she say something about their go as far as the stile , then 
 the next instant exclaim : " how stupid of you - you have   forget Mr. 
 Hoppus ! " 

 Nick wonder . " we leave he in the temple of Vesta . darling , I have other 
 thing to think of there . " 

 " I will send for he , " say Julia . 

 " Lord , can you think of he now ? " he ask . 

 " of course I can - more than ever . " 

 " shall we go back for he ? " - and he pull up . 

 she make no direct answer , but continue to walk , say they would go 
 as far as the stile . " of course I know you be fearfully vague , " she 
 presently resume . 

 " I be not   vague at all . but you be in such a hurry to get away . " 

 " it do not   signify . I have   another at home . " 

 " another summer - house ? " he more lightly suggest . 

 " a copy of Mr. Hoppus . " 

 " Mercy , how you go in for he ! Fancy have two ! " 

 " he send I the number of the magazine , and the other be the one that 
 come every month . " 

 " every month ; I see " - but his manner justify considerably her charge 
 of vagueness . they have reach the stile and he lean over it , look 
 at a great mild meadow and at the browse beast in the distance . 

 " do you suppose they come every day ? " Julia go on . 

 " dear no , thank God ! " they remain there a little ; he continue to look 
 at the animal and before long add : " delightful english pastoral 
 scene . why do they say it will not   paint ? " 

 " who say it will not ? " 

 " I do not   know - some of they . it will in France ; but somehow it will not 
 here . " 

 " what be you talk about ? " Mrs. Dallow demand . 

 he appear unable to satisfy she on this point ; instead of answer 
 she directly he at any rate say : " be Broadwood very charming ? " 

 " have you never be there ? it show how you have   treat I . we use to 
 go there in August . George have idea about it , " she add . she have never 
 affect not to speak of her late husband , especially with Nick , whose 
 kinsman he have in a manner be and who have like he well than some 
 other do . 

 " George have idea about a great many thing . " 

 yet she appear conscious it would be rather odd on such an occasion to 
 take this up . it be even odd in Nick to have say it . " Broadwood 's just 
 right , " she return at last . " it be neither too small nor too big , and 
 it take care of itself . there be nothing to be do : you can not   spend a 
 penny . " 

 " and do not   you want to use it ? " 

 " we can go and stay with they , " say Julia . 

 " they will think I bring they an angel . " and Nick cover her white hand , 
 which be rest on the stile , with his own large one . 

 " as they regard you yourself as an angel they will take it as natural of 
 you to associate with your kind . " 

 " oh my kind ! " he quite wail , look at the cow . 

 but his very extravagance perhaps save it , and she turn away from he 
 as if start homeward , while he begin to retrace his step with she . 
 suddenly she say : " what do you mean that night in Paris ? " 

 " that night - - ? " 

 " when you come to the hotel with I after we have all din at that place 
 with Peter . " 

 " what do I mean - - ? " 

 " about your care so much for the fine art . you seem to want to 
 frighten I . " 

 " why should you have be frighten ? I can not   imagine what I have in my 
 head : not now . " 

 " you be vague , " say Julia with a little flush . 

 " not about the great thing . " 

 " the great thing ? " 

 " that I owe you everything an honest man have to offer . how can I care 
 about the fine art now ? " 

 she stop with lighted eye on he . " be it because you think you owe 
 it - " and she pause , still with the heightened colour in her cheek , 
 then go on - " that you have   speak to I as you do there ? " she toss 
 her head toward the lake . 

 " I think I speak to you because I could not   help it . " 

 " you be vague ! " and she walk on again . 

 " you affect I differently from any other woman . " 

 " oh other woman - - ! why should not   you care about the fine art now ? " 
 she add . 

 " there will be no time . all my day and my year will be none too much for 
 what you expect of I . " 

 " I do not   expect you to give up anything . I only expect you to do more . " 

 " to do more I must do less . I have   no talent . " 

 " no talent ? " 

 " I mean for paint . " 

 Julia pull up again . " that be odious ! you have - you must . " 

 he burst out laugh . " you be altogether delightful . but how little you 
 know about it - about the honourable practice of any art ! " 

 " what do you call practice ? you will have all our thing - you will live in 
 the midst of they . " 

 " certainly I shall enjoy look at they , be so near they . " 

 " do not   say I have   take you away then . " 

 " take I away - - ? " 

 " from the love of art . I like they myself now , poor George 's treasure . 
 I do not   of old so much , because it seem to I he make too much of 
 they - he be always talk . " 

 " well , I will not   always talk , " say Nick . 

 " you may do as you like - they be your . " 

 " give they to the nation , " Nick go on . 

 " I like that ! when we have   do with they . " 

 " we shall have do with they when your Vandykes and Moronis have cure 
 I of the delusion that I may be of their family . surely that will not 
 take long . " 

 " you shall paint I , " say Julia . 

 " never , never , never ! " he speak in a tone that make his companion 
 stare - then seem slightly embarrassed at this result of his emphasis . 
 to relieve himself he say , as they have come back to the place beside 
 the lake where the boat be moor , " shall not   we really go and fetch Mr. 
 Hoppus ? " 

 she hesitate . " you may go ; I will not , please . " 

 " that be not what I want . " 

 " Oblige I by go . I will wait here . " with which she sit down on the 
 bench attach to the little landing . 

 Nick , at this , get into the boat and put off ; he smile at she as she 
 sit there watch he . he make his short journey , disembark and go 
 into the pavilion ; but when he come out with the object of his errand he 
 see she have quit her station , have return to the house without he . 
 he row back quickly , spring ashore and follow she with long step . 
 apparently she have go fast ; she have almost reach the door when he 
 overtake she . 

 " why do you basely desert I ? " he ask , tenderly stop she there . 

 " I do not   know . because I be so happy . " 

 " may I tell mother then ? " 

 " you may tell she she shall have Broadwood . " 




 XVI 


 he lose no time in go down to see Mr. Carteret , to whom he have 
 write immediately after the election and who have answer he in 
 twelve revise page of historical parallel . he use often to envy Mr. 
 Carteret 's leisure , a sense of which come to he now afresh , in the 
 summer evening , as he walk up the hill toward the quiet house where 
 enjoyment have ever be mingle for he with a vague oppression . he be 
 a little boy again , under Mr. Carteret 's roof - a little boy on whom it 
 have be duly impress that in the wide , plain , peaceful room he be 
 not to " touch . " when he pay a visit to his father 's old friend there 
 be in fact many thing - many topic - from which he instinctively keep 
 his hand . even Mr. Chayter , the immemorial blank butler , who be so 
 like his master that he might have be a twin brother , help to remind 
 he that he must be good . Mr. Carteret seem to Nick a very grave 
 person , but he have the sense that Chayter think he rather frivolous . 

 our young man always come on foot from the station , leave his 
 portmanteau to be carry : the direct way be steep and he like the 
 slow approach , which give he a chance to look about the place and smell 
 the new - mow hay . at this season the air be full of it - the field be 
 so near that it be in the clean , still street . Nick would never have 
 thought of rattle up to Mr. Carteret 's door , which have on an old 
 brass plate the proprietor 's name , as if he have be the principal 
 surgeon . the house be in the high part , and the neat roof of other 
 house , low down the hill , make an immediate prospect for it , scarcely 
 counting , however , since the green country be just below these , 
 familiar and interpenetrating , in the shape of small but thick - tufte 
 garden . free garden - growth flourish in all the interval , but the 
 only disorder of the place be that there be sometimes oat on the 
 pavement . a crooked lane , with postern door and cobble - stone , open 
 near Mr. Carteret 's house and wander toward the old abbey ; for the 
 abbey be the secondary fact of Beauclere - it come after Mr. Carteret . 
 Mr. Carteret sometimes go away and the abbey never do ; yet somehow 
 what be most of the essence of the place be that it could boast of the 
 resident in the squarest of the square red house , the one with the 
 fine of the arch hall - window , in three division , over the wide 
 of the last - century doorway . you see the great church from the 
 doorstep , beyond garden of course , and in the stillness you could hear 
 the flutter of the bird that circle round its huge short tower . the 
 tower have be finish only as time finish thing , by lend 
 assurance to their lapse . there be something right in old monument 
 that have be wrong for century : some such moral as that be usually 
 in Nick 's mind as an emanation of beauclere when he see the grand line 
 of the roof ride the sky and draw out its length . 

 when the door with the brass plate be open and Mr. Chayter appear 
 in the middle distance - he always advance just to the same spot , as a 
 prime minister receive an ambassador - Nick feel anew that he would be 
 wonderfully like Mr. Carteret if he have have an expression . he deny 
 himself this freedom , never give a sign of recognition , often as the 
 young man have be at the house . he be most attentive to the visitor 's 
 want , but apparently fear that if he allow a familiarity it might 
 go too far . there be always the same question to be ask - have Mr. 
 Carteret finish his nap ? he usually have not finish it , and this left 
 Nick what he like - time to smoke a cigarette in the garden or even to 
 take before dinner a turn about the place . he observe now , every time 
 he come , that Mr. Carteret 's nap last a little long . there be each 
 year a little more strength to be gather for the ceremony of dinner : 
 this be the principal symptom - almost the only one - that the 
 clear - cheek old gentleman give of not be so fresh as of yore . he 
 be still wonderful for his age . to - day he be particularly careful : 
 Chayter go so far as to mention to Nick that four gentleman be 
 expect to dinner - an exuberance perhaps partly explain by the 
 circumstance that Lord Bottomley be one of they . 

 the prospect of Lord Bottomley be somehow not stir ; it only make 
 the young man say to himself with a quick , thin sigh , " this time I be 
 in for it ! " and he immediately have the unpolitical sense again that 
 there be nothing so pleasant as the way the quiet bachelor house have 
 its good room on the big garden , which seem to advance into they 
 through their wide window and ruralise their dulness . 

 " I expect it will be a lateish eight , sir , " say Mr. Chayter , 
 superintend in the library the production of tea on a large scale . 
 everything at Mr. Carteret 's seem to Nick on a large scale than 
 anywhere else - the tea - cup , the knife and fork , the door - handle , the 
 chair - back , the leg of mutton , the candle , and the lump of coal : 
 they represent and apparently exhaust the master 's sense of pleasing 
 effect , for the house be not otherwise decorate . Nick think it 
 really hideous , but he be capable at any time of extract a degree of 
 amusement from anything strongly characteristic , and Mr. Carteret 's 
 interior express a whole view of life . our young man be generous 
 enough to find in it a hundred instructive intimation even while it 
 come over he - as it always do at beauclere - that this be the view he 
 himself be expect to take . nowhere be the boil egg at breakfast 
 so big or in such big receptacle ; his own shoe , arrange in his room , 
 look to he vaster there than at home . he go out into the garden and 
 remember what enormous strawberry they should have for dinner . in 
 the house be a great deal of Landseer , of oilcloth , of woodwork paint 
 and " grain . " 

 find there would be time before the evening meal or before Mr. 
 Carteret be likely to see he he quit the house and take a stroll 
 toward the abbey . it cover acre of ground on the summit of the hill , 
 and there be aspect in which its vast bulk remind he of the ark 
 leave high and dry upon Ararat . it be the image at least of a great 
 wreck , of the indestructible vessel of a faith , wash up there by a 
 storm century before . the injury of time add to this appearance - the 
 infirmity round which , as he know , the battle of restoration have begin 
 to be fight . the cry have be raise to save the splendid pile , and the 
 counter - cry by the purist , the sentimentalist , whatever they be , to 
 save it from be save . they be all exchange compliment in the 
 morning paper . 

 Nick saunter about the church - it take a good while ; he lean against 
 low thing and look up at it while he smoke another cigarette . it 
 strike he as a great pity such a pile should be touch : so much of the 
 past be bury there that it be like desecrate , like dig up a 
 grave . since the year be let it down so gently why jostle the 
 elbow of slow - fingering time ? the fading afternoon be exquisitely pure ; 
 the place be empty ; he hear nothing but the cry of several child , 
 which sound sweet , who be play on the flatness of the very old 
 tomb . he know this would inevitably be one of the topic at dinner , the 
 restoration of the abbey ; it would give rise to a considerable deal of 
 orderly debate . Lord Bottomley , oddly enough , would probably oppose the 
 expensive project , but on ground that would be characteristic of he 
 even if the attitude be not . Nick 's nerve always know on this spot 
 what it be to be soothe ; but he shift his position with a slight 
 impatience as the vision come over he of Lord Bottomley 's treat a 
 question of esthetic . it be enough to make one want to take the other 
 side , the idea of have the same taste as his lordship : one would have 
 it for such different reason . 

 dear Mr. Carteret would be deliberate and fair all round and would , like 
 his noble friend , exhibit much more architectural knowledge than he , 
 Nick , possess : which would not make it a whit less droll to our young 
 man that an artistic idea , so little really assimilate , should be 
 broach at that table and in that air . it would remain so outside of 
 their mind and their mind would remain so outside of it . it would be 
 drop at last , however , after half an hour 's gentle worrying , and the 
 conversation would incline itself to public affair . Mr. Carteret would 
 find his natural level - the production of anecdote in regard to the 
 formation of early ministry . he know more than any one else about the 
 personage of whom certain cabinet would have consist if they have not 
 consist of other . his favourite exercise be to illustrate how 
 different everything might have be from what it be , and how the 
 reason of the difference have always be somebody 's inability to ' see 
 his way " to accept the view of somebody else - a view usually at the time 
 discuss in strict confidence with Mr. Carteret , who surround his 
 actual violation of that confidence thirty year later with many 
 precaution against scandal . in this retrospective vein , at the head of 
 his table , the old gentleman enjoy a hearing , or at any rate command 
 a silence , often intense . every one leave it to some one else to ask 
 another question ; and when by chance some one else do so every one be 
 strike with admiration at any one 's be able to say anything . Nick 
 know the moment when he himself would take a glass of a particular port 
 and , surreptitiously look at his watch , perceive it be ten o'clock . 
 that timepiece might as well mark 1830 . 

 all this would be a part of the suggestion of leisure that invariably 
 descend upon he at Beauclere - the image of a slop shore where the 
 tide of time break with a ripple too faint to be a warning . but there 
 be another admonition almost equally sure to descend upon his spirit 
 during a stroll in a summer hour about the grand abbey ; to sink into it 
 as the light linger on the rough red wall and the local accent of the 
 child sound soft in the churchyard . it be simply the sense of 
 England - a sort of apprehend revelation of his country . the dim annal 
 of the place be sensibly , heavily in the air - foundation bafflingly 
 early , a great monastic life , war of the Roses , with battle and blood 
 in the street , and then the long quietude of the respectable century , 
 all corn - field and magistrate and vicar - and these thing be 
 connect with an emotion that arise from the green country , the rich 
 land so infinitely live in , and lay on he a hand that be too ghostly 
 to press and yet somehow too urgent to be light . it produce a throb he 
 could not   have speak of , it be so deep , and that be half imagination 
 and half responsibility . these impression melt together and make a 
 general appeal , of which , with his new honour as a legislator , he be 
 the sentient subject . if he have a love for that particular scene of life 
 might not   it have a love for he and expect something of he ? what fate 
 could be so high as to grow old in a national affection ? what a fine 
 sort of reciprocity , make mere soreness of all the balm of 
 indifference ! 

 the great church be still open and he turn into it and wander a 
 little in the twilight that have gather early there . the whole 
 structure , with its immensity of height and distance , seem to rest on 
 tremendous fact - fact of achievement and endurance - and the huge 
 Norman pillar to loom through the dimness like the ghost of hero . 
 Nick be more strike with its thick earthly than with its fine spiritual 
 reference , and he feel the oppression of his conscience as he walk 
 slowly about . it be in his mind that nothing in life be really clear , 
 all thing be mingle and charge , and that patriotism might be an 
 uplift passion even if it have to allow for Lord Bottomley and for Mr. 
 Carteret 's blindness on certain side . he presently notice that 
 half - past seven be about to strike , and as he go back to his old 
 friend 's he could not   have say if he walk in gladness or in gloom . 

 " Mr. Carteret will be in the drawing - room at a quarter to eight , sir , " 
 Chayter mention , and Nick as he go to dress ask himself what be 
 the use of be a member of Parliament if one be still sensitive to an 
 intimation on the part of such a functionary that one ought already to 
 have begin that business . Chayter 's word but mean that Mr. Carteret 
 would expect to have a little comfortable conversation with he before 
 dinner . Nick 's usual rapidity in dress be , however , quite adequate 
 to the occasion , so that his host have not appear when he go down . 
 there be flower in the unfeminine saloon , which contain several 
 painting in addition to the engraving of picture of animal ; but 
 nothing could prevent its reminding Nick of a comfortable 
 committee - room . 

 Mr. Carteret presently come in with his gold - head stick , a laugh like 
 a series of little warning cough and the air of embarrassment that our 
 young man always perceive in he at first . he be almost eighty but be 
 still shy - he laugh a great deal , faintly and vaguely , at nothing , as 
 if to make up for the seriousness with which he take some joke . he 
 always begin by look away from his interlocutor , and it be only 
 little by little that his eye come round ; after which their limpid and 
 benevolent blue make you wonder why they should ever be circumspect . he 
 be clean - shaven and have a long upper lip . when he have seat himself he 
 talk of " majority " and show a disposition to converse on the 
 general subject of the fluctuation of liberal gain . he have an 
 extraordinary memory for fact of this sort , and could mention the 
 figure relate to the return from innumerable place in particular 
 year . to many of these fact he attach great importance , in his 
 simple , kindly , presuppose way ; correct himself five minute later 
 if he have say that in 1857 some one have have 6014 instead of 6004 . 

 Nick always feel a great hypocrite as he listen to he , in spite of 
 the old man 's courtesy - a thing so charming in itself that it would have 
 be grossness to speak of he as a bore . the difficulty be that he 
 take for grant all kind of positive assent , and Nick , in such 
 company , find himself steep in an element of tacit pledge which 
 constitute the very medium of intercourse and yet make he draw his 
 breath a little in pain when for a moment he measure they . there would 
 have be no hypocrisy at all if he could have regard Mr. Carteret as 
 a mere sweet spectacle , the last or almost the last illustration of a 
 depart tradition of manner . but he represent something more than 
 manner ; he represent what he believe to be moral and idea , idea 
 as regard which he take your personal deference - not discover how 
 natural that be - for participation . Nick like to think that his 
 father , though ten year young , have find it congruous to make his 
 good friend of the owner of so nice a nature : it give a softness to his 
 feeling for that memory to be remind that Sir Nicholas have be of the 
 same general type - a type so pure , so disinterested , so concerned for 
 the public good . just so it endear Mr. Carteret to he to perceive 
 that he consider his father have do a definite work , prematurely 
 interrupt , which have be an absolute benefit to the people of 
 England . the oddity be , however , that though both Mr. Carteret 's aspect 
 and his appreciation be still so fresh this relation of his to his 
 late distinguished friend make the latter appear to Nick even more 
 irrecoverably dead . the good old man have almost a vocabulary of his own , 
 make up of old - fashioned political phrase and quite untainted with the 
 new term , mostly borrow from America ; indeed his language and his 
 tone make those of almost any one who might be talk with he sound by 
 contrast rather american . he be , at least nowadays , never severe nor 
 denunciatory ; but sometimes in tell an anecdote he drop such an 
 expression as " the rascal say to I " or such an epithet as " the vulgar 
 dog . " 

 Nick be always strike with the rare simplicity - it come out in his 
 countenance - of one who have live so long and see so much of affair 
 that draw forth the passion and perversity of man . it often make he 
 say to himself that Mr. Carteret must have have many odd part to have 
 be able to achieve with his mean so many thing require cleverness . 
 it be as if experience , though come to he in abundance , have deal 
 with he so clean - handedly as to leave no stain , and have moreover never 
 provoke he to any general reflexion . he have never proceed in any 
 ironic way from the particular to the general ; certainly he have never 
 make a reflexion upon anything so unparliamentary as life . he would have 
 question the taste of such an extravagance and if he have encounter 
 it on the part of another have regard it as an import foreign toy 
 with the us of which he be unacquainted . life , for he , be a purely 
 practical function , not a question of more or less showy phrasing . it 
 must be add that he have to Nick 's perception his variation - his back 
 window opening into ground more private . that be visible from the way 
 his eye grow cold and his whole polite face rather austere when he 
 listen to something he do not   agree with or perhaps even understand ; 
 as if his modesty do not   in strictness forbid the suspicion that a thing 
 he do not   understand would have a probability against it . at such time 
 there be something rather deadly in the silence in which he simply 
 wait with a lapse in his face , not help his interlocutor out . Nick 
 would have be very sorry to attempt to communicate to he a matter he 
 would not   be likely to understand . this cut off of course a multitude of 
 subject . 

 the evening pass exactly as he have foresee , even to the markedly 
 prompt dispersal of the guest , two of whom be " local " man , earnest 
 and distinct , though not particularly distinguish . the third be a 
 young , slim , uninitiated gentleman whom Lord Bottomley bring with he 
 and concern whom Nick be inform beforehand that he be engage to 
 be married to the Honourable Jane , his lordship 's second daughter . there 
 be recurrent allusion to Nick 's victory , as to which he have the fear 
 that he might appear to exhibit less interest in it than the company 
 do . he take energetic precaution against this and feel repeatedly a 
 little spend with they , for the subject always come up once more . yet it 
 be not as his but as theirs that they like the triumph . Mr. Carteret 
 take leave of he for the night directly after the other guest have 
 go , use at this moment the word he have often use before : 

 " you may sit up to any hour you like . I only ask that you do not   read in 
 bed . " 




 XVII 


 Nick 's little visit be to terminate immediately after luncheon the 
 follow day : much as the old man enjoy his be there he would not 
 have dream of ask for more of his time now that it have such great 
 public us . he like infinitely well that his young friend should be 
 occupy with parliamentary work than only occupy in talk it over 
 with he . talk it over , however , be the next good thing , as on the 
 morrow , after breakfast , Mr. Carteret show Nick he consider . they 
 sit in the garden , the morning be warm , and the old man have a table 
 beside he cover with the letter and newspaper the post have pour 
 forth . he be proud of his correspondence , which be altogether on 
 public affair , and proud in a manner of the fact that he now dictate 
 almost everything . that have more in it of the statesman in retirement , a 
 character indeed not consciously assume by Mr. Carteret , but always 
 tacitly attribute to he by Nick , who take it rather from the pictorial 
 point of view - remember on each occasion only afterwards that though 
 he be in retirement he have not exactly be a statesman . a young man , a 
 very sharp , handy young man , come every morning at ten o'clock and write 
 for he till luncheon . the young man have a holiday to - day in honour of 
 Nick 's visit - a fact the mention of which lead Nick to make some not 
 particularly sincere speech about his be ready to write anything 
 if Mr. Carteret be at all press . 

 " ah but your own budget - what will become of that ? " the old gentleman 
 object , glance at Nick 's pocket as if rather surprised not to see 
 they stuff out with document in split envelope . his visitor have to 
 confess that he have not direct his letter to meet he at beauclere : 
 he should find they in town that afternoon . this lead to a little homily 
 from Mr. Carteret which make he feel quite guilty ; there be such an 
 implication of neglect duty in the way the old man say , " you will not   do 
 they justice - you will not   do they justice . " he talk for ten minute , in 
 his rich , simple , urbane way , about the fatal consequence of get 
 behind . it be his favourite doctrine that one should always be a little 
 before , and his own eminently regular respiration seem to illustrate 
 the idea . a man be certainly before who have so much in his rear . 

 this lead to the bestowal of a good deal of general advice on the 
 mistake to avoid at the beginning of a parliamentary career - as to 
 which Mr. Carteret speak with the experience of one who have sit for 
 fifty year in the House of Commons . Nick be amuse , but also mystify 
 and even a little irritated , by his talk : it be found on the idea of 
 observation and yet our young man could not   at all regard he as an 
 observer . " he do not   observe I , " he say to himself ; " if he do he 
 would see , he would not   think - - ! " the end of this private cogitation 
 be a vague impatience of all the thing his venerable host take for 
 grant . he do not   see any of the thing Nick see . some of these latter 
 be the light touch the summer morning scatter through the sweet 
 old garden . the time pass there a good deal as if it be sit 
 still with a plaid under its foot while Mr. Carteret distil a little 
 more of the wisdom he have lay up in his fifty year . this immense term 
 have something fabulous and monstrous for Nick , who wonder whether it 
 be the sort of thing his companion suppose he have go in for . it 
 be not strange Mr. Carteret should be different ; he might originally 
 have be more - well , to himself Nick be not oblige to phrase it : what 
 our young man mean be more of what it be perceptible to he that his 
 old friend be not . should even he , Nick , be like that at the end of 
 fifty year ? what Mr. Carteret be so good as to expect for he be that 
 he should be much more distinguished ; and would not   this exactly mean 
 much more like that ? of course Nick hear some thing he have hear 
 before ; as for instance the circumstance that have originally lead the 
 old man to settle at Beauclere . he have be return for that 
 borough - it be his second seat - in year far remote , and have come to 
 live there because he then have a conscientious conviction , modify 
 indeed by later experience , that a member should be constantly resident . 
 he speak of this now , smile rosily , as he might have speak of some 
 wild aberration of his youth ; yet he call Nick 's attention to the fact 
 that he still so far clung to his conviction as to hold - though of what 
 might be urge on the other side he be perfectly aware - that a 
 representative should at least be as resident as possible . this give 
 Nick an opening for something that have be on and off his lip all the 
 morning . 

 " accord to that I ought to take up my abode at Harsh . " 

 " in the measure of the convenient I should not   be sorry to see you do 
 it . " 

 " it ought to be rather convenient , " Nick largely smile . " I have   get a 
 piece of news for you which I have   keep , as one keep that sort of 
 thing - for it be very good - till the last . " he wait a little to see if 
 Mr. Carteret would guess , and at first thought nothing would come of 
 this . but after rest his young - look eye on he for a moment the 
 old man say : 

 " I should indeed be very happy to hear that you have   arrange to take a 
 wife . " 

 " Mrs. Dallow have be so good as to say she will marry I , " Nick return . 

 " that be very suitable . I should think it would answer . " 

 " it be very jolly , " say Nick . it be well Mr. Carteret be not what his 
 guest call observant , or he might have find a low pitch in the 
 sound of this sentence than in the sense . 

 " your dear father would have like it . " 

 " so my mother say . " 

 " and she must be delighted . " 

 " Mrs. Dallow , do you mean ? " Nick ask . 

 " I be think of your mother . but I do not   exclude the charming lady . I 
 remember she as a little girl . I must have see she at Windrush . now I 
 understand the fine spirit with which she throw herself into your 
 canvass . " 

 " it be she they elect , " say Nick . 

 " I do not   know , " his host go on , " that I have   ever be an enthusiast for 
 political woman , but there be no doubt that in approach the mass of 
 elector a graceful , affable manner , the manner of the real English 
 lady , be a force not to be despise . " 

 " Julia be a real english lady and at the same time a very political 
 woman , " Nick remark . 

 " be not   it rather in the family ? I remember once go to see her mother 
 in town and find the leader of both party sit with she . " 

 " my principal friend , of the other , be her brother Peter . I do not   think 
 he trouble himself much about that sort of thing , " say Nick . 

 " what do he trouble himself about ? " Mr. Carteret ask with a certain 
 gravity . 

 " he be in the diplomatic service ; he be a secretary in Paris . " 

 " that may be serious , " say the old man . 

 " he take a great interest in the theatre . I suppose you will say that may 
 be serious too , " Nick laugh . 

 " oh ! " - and Mr. Carteret look as if he scarcely understand . then he 
 continue ; " well , it can not   hurt you . " 

 " it can not   hurt I ? " 

 " if Mrs. Dallow take an interest in your interest . " 

 " when a man be in my situation he feel as if nothing could hurt he . " 

 " I be very glad you be happy , " say Mr. Carteret . he rest his mild eye 
 on our young man , who have a sense of see in they for a moment the 
 faint ghost of an old story , the last strange flicker , as from cold 
 ash , of a flame that have become the memory of a memory . this glimmer 
 of wonder and envy , the revelation of a life intensely celibate , be for 
 an instant infinitely touching . Nick have harbour a theory , suggest 
 by a vague allusion from his father , who have be discreet , that their 
 benevolent friend have have in his youth an unhappy love - affair which have 
 lead he to forswear for ever the commerce of woman . what remain in he 
 of conscious renunciation give a throb as he look at his bright 
 companion , who propose to take the matter so much the other way . " it be 
 good to marry and I think it be right . I have   not do right , I know that . 
 if she be a good woman it be the good thing , " Mr. Carteret go on . " it be 
 what I have   be hop for you . sometimes I have   think of speak to 
 you . " 

 " she be a very good woman , " say Nick . 

 " and I hope she be not poor . " Mr. Carteret speak exactly with the same 
 blandness . 

 " no indeed , she be rich . her husband , whom I know and like , leave she a 
 large fortune . " 

 " and on what term do she enjoy it ? " 

 " I have not   the least idea , " say Nick . 

 Mr. Carteret consider . " I see . it do not   concern you . it need not 
 concern you , " he add in a moment . 

 Nick think of his mother at this , but he return : " I daresay she can 
 do what she like with her money . " 

 " so can I , my dear young friend , " say Mr. Carteret . 

 Nick try not to look conscious , for he feel a significance in the old 
 man 's face . he turn his own everywhere but toward it , think again 
 of his mother . " that must be very pleasant , if one have any . " 

 " I wish you have a little more . " 

 " I do not   particularly care , " say Nick . 

 " your marriage will assist you ; you can not   help that , " Mr. Carteret 
 declare . " but I should like you to be under obligation not quite so 
 heavy . " 

 " oh I be so obliged to she for care for I - - ! " 

 " that the rest do not   count ? certainly it be nice of she to like you . 
 but why should not   she ? other people do . " 

 " some of they make I feel as if I abuse it , " say Nick , look at his 
 host . " that is , they do not   make I , but I feel it , " he correct . 

 " I have   no son " - and Mr. Carteret speak as if his companion might not   have 
 be sure . " shall not   you be very kind to she ? " he pursue . " you will gratify 
 her ambition . " 

 " oh she think I cleverer than I be . " 

 " that be because she be in love , " the old gentleman hint as if this be 
 very subtle . " however , you must be as clever as we think you . if you 
 do not   prove so - - ! " and he pause with his fold hand . 

 " well , if I do not ? " ask Nick . 

 " oh it will not   do - it will not   do , " say Mr. Carteret in a tone his companion 
 be destine to remember afterwards . " I say I have   no son , " he continue ; 
 " but if I have have one he should have rise high . " 

 " it be well for I such a person do not   exist . I should not   easily have 
 find a wife . " 

 " he would have go to the altar with a little money in his pocket . " 

 " that would have be the least of his advantage , sir , " Nick declare . 

 " when be you to be marry ? " Mr. Carteret ask . 

 " ah that be the question . Julia will not   yet say . " 

 " well , " say the old man without the least flourish , " you may consider 
 that when it come off I will make you a settlement . " 

 " I feel your kindness more than I can express , " Nick reply ; " but that 
 will probably be the moment when I shall be least conscious of want 
 anything . " 

 " you will appreciate it later - you will appreciate it very soon . I shall 
 like you to appreciate it , " Mr. Carteret go on as if he have a just 
 vision of the way a young man of a proper spirit should feel . then he 
 add ; " your father would have like you to appreciate it . " 

 " poor father ! " Nick exclaim vaguely , rather embarrassed , reflect on 
 the oddity of a position in which the ground for hold up his head as 
 the husband of a rich woman would be that he have accept a present of 
 money from another source . it be plain he be not fat to go in for 
 independence ; the most that he could treat himself to would be 
 dependence that be duly grateful " how much do you expect of I ? " he 
 inquire with a grave face . 

 " well , Nicholas , only what your father do . he so often speak of you , I 
 remember , at the last , just after you have be with he alone - you know 
 I see he then . he be greatly move by his interview with you , and so 
 be I by what he tell I of it . he say he should live on in you - he 
 should work in you . it have always give I a special feeling , if I may 
 use the expression , about you . " 

 " the feeling be indeed not usual , dear Mr. Carteret , which take so 
 munificent a form . but you do - oh you do - expect too much , " Nick bring 
 himself to say . 

 " I expect you to repay I ! " the old man return gaily . " as for the 
 form , I have it in my mind . " 

 " the form of repayment ? " 

 " the form of repayment ! " 

 " ah do not   talk of that now , " say Nick , " for , you see , nothing else be 
 settle . no one have be tell except my mother . she have only consent 
 to my tell you . " 

 " Lady Agnes , do you mean ? " 

 " ah no ; dear mother would like to publish it on the house - top . she be so 
 glad - she want we to have it over to - morrow . but Julia herself , " Nick 
 explain , " wish to wait . therefore kindly mention it for the present 
 to no one . " 

 " my dear boy , there be at this rate nothing to mention ! what do Julia 
 want to wait for ? " 

 " till I like her well - that be what she say . " 

 " it be the way to make you like her bad , " Mr. Carteret knowingly 
 declare . " have not   she your affection ? " 

 " so much so that her delay make I exceedingly unhappy . " 

 Mr. Carteret look at his young friend as if he do not   strike he as 
 quite wretched ; but he put the question : " then what more do she want ? " 
 Nick laugh out at this , though perceive his host have not   mean it as 
 an epigram ; while the latter resume : " I do not   understand . you be 
 engaged or you be not engage . " 

 " she be , but I be not . that be what she say about it . the trouble be she 
 do not   believe in I . " 

 Mr. Carteret shine with his candour . " do not   she love you then ? " 

 " that be what I ask she . her answer be that she love I only too well . 
 she be so afraid of be a burden to I that she give I my freedom 
 till I have   take another year to think . " 

 " I like the way you talk about other year ! " Mr. Carteret cry . " you 
 have well do it while I be here to bless you . " 

 " she think I propose to she because she get I in for Harsh , " say 
 Nick . 

 " well , I be sure it would be a very pretty return . " 

 " ah she do not   believe in I , " the young man repeat . 

 " then I do not   believe in she . " 

 " do not   say that - do not   say that . she be a very rare creature . but she be 
 proud , shy , suspicious . " 

 " suspicious of what ? " 

 " of everything . she think I be not persistent . " 

 " oh , oh ! " - Nick 's host deprecate such freedom . 

 " she can not   believe I shall arrive at true eminence . " 

 " a good wife should believe what her husband believe , " say Mr. 
 Carteret . 

 " ah unfortunately " - and Nick take the word at a run - " I do not   believe 
 it either . " 

 Mr. Carteret , who might have be watch an odd physical rush , speak 
 with a certain dryness . " your dear father do . " 

 " I think of that - I think of that , " Nick reply . 

 " certainly it will help I . if I say we be engage , " he go on , " it be 
 because I consider it so . she give I my liberty , but I do not   take it . " 

 " do she expect you to take back your word ? " 

 " that be what I ask she . she never will . therefore we be as good as 
 tie . " 

 " I do not   like it , " say Mr. Carteret after a moment . " I do not   like 
 ambiguous , uncertain situation . they please I much well when they be 
 definite and clear . " the retreat of expression have be sound in his 
 face - the aspect it wear when he wish not to be encouraging . but after 
 an instant he add in a tone more personal : " do not   disappoint I , dear 
 boy . " 

 " ah not willingly ! " his visitor protest . 

 " I have   tell you what I should like to do for you . see that the condition 
 come about promptly in which I may , do it . be you sure you do 
 everything to satisfy Mrs. Dallow ? " Mr. Carteret continue . 

 " I think I be very nice to she , " Nick declare . " but she be so ambitious . 
 frankly speak , it be a pity for she that she like I . " 

 " she can not   help that ! " the old man charmingly say . 

 " possibly . but be not   it a reason for take I as I be ? what she want 
 to do be to take I as I may be a year hence . " 

 " I do not   understand - since you tell I that even then she will not   take 
 back her word , " say Mr. Carteret . 

 " if she do not   marry I I think she will never marry again at all . " 

 " what then do she gain by delay ? " 

 " simply this , as I make it out , " say Nick - " that she will feel she have 
 be very magnanimous . she will not   have to reproach herself with not 
 have give I a chance to change . " 

 " to change ? what do she think you liable to do ? " 

 Nick have a pause . " I do not   know ! " he then say - not at all candidly . 

 " everything have alter : young people in my day look at these 
 question more naturally , " Mr. Carteret observe . " a woman in love have 
 no need to be magnanimous . if she play too fair she be not   in love , " he 
 add shrewdly . 

 " oh , Julia 's safe - she be safe , " Nick smile . 

 " if it be a question between you and another gentleman one might 
 comprehend . but what do it mean , between you and nothing ? " 

 " I be much oblige to you , sir , " Nick return . " the trouble be that she 
 do not   know what she have get hold of . " 

 " ah , if you can not   make it clear to she ! " - and his friend show the note 
 of impatience . 

 " I be such a humbug , " say the young man . and while his companion star 
 he continue : " I deceive people without in the least intend it . " 

 " what on earth do you mean ? be you deceive I ? " 

 " I do not   know - it depend on what you think . " 

 " I think you be flighty , " say Mr. Carteret , with the near approach 
 to sternness Nick have ever observe in he . " I never think so before . " 

 " forgive I ; it be all right . I be not frivolous ; that I promise you I be 
 not . " 

 " you have deceive I if you be . " 

 " it be all right , " Nick stammer with a blush . 

 " remember your name - carry it high . " 

 " I will - as high as possible . " 

 " you have   no excuse . do not   tell I , after your speech at Harsh ! " Nick 
 be on the point of declare again that he be a humbug , so vivid be 
 his inner sense of what he think of his factitious public utterance , 
 which have the cursed property of create dreadful responsibility and 
 importunate credulity for he . if he be " clever "   ah the idiotic 
 " clever " !   what fool many other people be ! he repress his impulse 
 and Mr. Carteret pursue . " if , as you express it , Mrs. Dallow do not 
 know what she have get hold of , will not   it clear the matter up a little by 
 inform she that the day before your marriage be definitely settle to 
 take place you will come into something comfortable ? " 

 a quick vision of what Mr. Carteret would be likely to regard as 
 something comfortable flit before Nick , but it do not   prevent his 
 replying : " oh I be afraid that will not   do any good . it would make she like 
 you well , but it would not   make she like I . I be afraid she will not   care 
 for any benefit that come to I from another hand than her . her 
 affection be a very jealous sentiment . " 

 " it be a very peculiar one ! " sigh Mr. Carteret . " mine be a jealous 
 sentiment too . however , if she take it that way do not   tell she . " 

 " I will let you know as soon as she come round , " say Nick . 

 " and you will tell your mother , " Mr. Carteret return . " I shall like 
  she to know . " 

 " it will be delightful news to she . but she be keen enough already . " 

 " I know that . I may mention now that she have write to I , " the old man 
 add . 

 " so I suspect . " 

 " we have   - a - corresponded on the subject , " Mr. Carteret continue to 
 confess . " my view of the advantageous character of such an alliance have 
 entirely coincide with her . " 

 " it be very good - natured of you then to leave I to speak first , " say 
 Nick . 

 " I should have be disappoint if you have not . I do not   like all you have 
 tell I . but do not   disappoint I now . " 

 " dear Mr. Carteret ! " Nick vaguely and richly sound . 

 " I will not   disappoint you , " that gentleman go on with a fine point 
 while he look at his big old - fashioned watch . 




 BOOK FOURTH 




 xviii 


 at first Peter Sherringham think of ask to be transfer to 
 another post and go so far , in London , as to take what he believe 
 good advice on the subject . the advice , perhaps strike he as the well 
 for consist of a strong recommendation to do nothing so foolish . two 
 or three reason be mention to he why such a request would not , in 
 the particular circumstance , raise he in the esteem of his superior , 
 and he promptly recognise their force . he next become aware that it 
 might help he - not with his superior but with himself - to apply for an 
 extension of leave , and then on further reflexion make out that , though 
 there be some danger before which it be perfectly consistent with 
 honour to flee , it be well for every one concern that he should 
 fight this especial battle on the spot . during his holiday his plan of 
 campaign give he plenty of occupation . he refurbish his arm , rub 
 up his strategy , lay down his line of defence . 

 there be only one thing in life his mind have be much make up to , but 
 on this question he have never waver : he would get on , to the utmost , 
 in his profession . that be a point on which it be perfectly lawful to 
 be unamiable to other - to be vigilant , eager , suspicious , selfish . he 
 have not in fact be unamiable to other , for his affair have not 
 require it : he have get on well enough without harden his heart . 
 Fortune have be kind to he and he have pass so many competitor on 
 the way that he could forswear jealousy and be generous . but he have 
 always flatter himself his hand would not   falter on the day he should 
 find it necessary to drop bitterness into his cup . this day would be 
 sure to dawn , since no career could be all clear water to the end ; and 
 then the sacrifice would find he ready . his mind be familiar with the 
 thought of a sacrifice : it be true that no great plainness invest 
 beforehand the occasion , the object or the victim . all that particularly 
 stand out be that the propitiatory offering would have to be some 
 cherish enjoyment . very likely indeed this enjoyment would be 
 associate with the charm of another person - a probability pregnant 
 with the idea that such charm would have to be dash out of sight . at 
 any rate it never have occur to Sherringham that he himself might be 
 the sacrifice . you have to pay to get on , but at least you borrow from 
 other to do it . when you could not   borrow you do not   get on , for what 
 be the situation in life in which you meet the whole requisition 
 yourself ? 

 Least of all have it occur to our friend that the wrench might come 
 through his interest in that branch of art on which Nick Dormer have 
 rally he . the beauty of a love of the theatre be precisely in its 
 be a passion exercise on the easy term . this be not the region 
 of responsibility . it be sniff at , to its discredit , by the austere ; 
 but if it be not , as such people say , a serious field , be not the 
 compensation just that you could not   be seriously entangle in it ? 
 Sherringham 's great advantage , as he regard the matter , be that he 
 have always keep his taste for the drama quite in its place . his 
 facetious cousin be free to pretend that it sprawl through his life ; 
 but this be nonsense , as any unprejudiced observer of that life would 
 unhesitatingly attest . there have not be the least sprawling , and his 
 interest in the art of Garrick have never , he be sure , make he in any 
 degree ridiculous . it have never draw down from above anything 
 approach a reprimand , a remonstrance , a remark . Sherringham be 
 positively proud of his discretion , for he be not a little proud of 
 what he do know about the stage . trifle for trifling , there be 
 plenty of his fellow who have in their life infatuation less edifying 
 and less confessable . had not   he know man who collect old 
 invitation - card and be ready to commit bassesse for those of the 
 eighteenth century ? have not   he know other who have a secret passion for 
 shuffleboard ? his little weakness be intellectual - they be a part 
 of the life of the mind . all the same , on the day they show a symptom 
 of interfere they should be pluck off with a turn of the wrist . 

 Sherringham scented interference now , and interference in rather an 
 invidious form . it might be a bore , from the point of view of the 
 profession , to find one 's self , as a critic of the stage , in love with a 
  coquine ; but it be a much great bore to find one 's self in love 
 with a young woman whose character remain to be estimate . Miriam 
 Rooth be neither fish nor flesh : one have with she neither the 
 guarantee of one 's own class nor the immunity of her . what be 
 her if one come to that ? a rare ambiguity on this point be part of the 
 fascination she have end by throw over he . Poor Peter 's scheme for 
 get on have contain no proviso against his fall in love , but it 
 have embody an important clause on the subject of surprise . it be 
 always a surprise to fall in love , especially if one be look out for 
 it ; so this contingency have not be worth official paper . but it 
 become a man who respect the service he have undertake for the State 
 to be on his guard against predicament from which the only issue be 
 the rigour of matrimony . ambition , in the career , be probably 
 consistent with marrying - but only with open one 's eye very wide to 
 do it . that be the fatal surprise - to be lead to the altar in a dream . 
 Sherringham 's view of the propriety attach to such a step be high 
 and strict ; and if he hold that a man in his position be , above all as 
 the position improve , essentially a representative of the greatness of 
 his country , he consider that the wife of such a personage would 
 exercise in her degree - for instance at a foreign court - a function no 
 less symbolic . she would in short always be a very important quantity , 
 and the scene be strew with illustration of this general truth . she 
 might be such a help and might be such a blight that common prudence 
 require some test of she in advance . Sherringham have see woman in the 
 career , who be stupid or vulgar , make such a mess of thing as would 
 wring your heart . then he have his positive idea of the perfect 
 ambassadress , the full - blow lily of the future ; and with this idea 
 Miriam Rooth present no analogy whatever . 

 the girl have describe herself with characteristic directness as " all 
 right " ; and so she might be , so she assuredly be : only all right for 
 what ? he have make out she be not sentimental - that whatever capacity 
 she might have for respond to a devotion or for desire it be at 
 any rate not in the direction of vague philandering . with he certainly 
 she have no disposition to philander . Sherringham almost fear to dwell 
 on this , lest it should beget in he a rage convertible mainly into 
 care for her more . rage or no rage it would be charming to be in love 
 with she if there be no complication ; but the complication be 
 just what be clear in the prospect . he be perhaps cold - blooded to 
 think of they , but it must be remember that they be the particular 
 thing his training have equip he for deal with . he be at all 
 event not too cold - blooded to have , for the two month of his holiday , 
 very little inner vision of anything more abstract than Miriam 's face . 
 the desire to see it again be as press as thirst , but he try to 
 practise the endurance of the traveller in the desert . he keep the 
 Channel between they , but his spirit consume every day an inch of the 
 interval , until - and it be not long - there be no more inch leave . 
 the last thing he expect the future ambassadress to have be be 
  fille de thĂ Ă tre . the answer to this objection be of course that 
 Miriam be not yet so much of one but that he could easily , by a 
 handsome " worldly " offer , arrest her development . then come worry 
 retort to that , chief among which be the sense that to his artistic 
 conscience arrest her development would be a plan combine on his 
 part fatuity , not to say imbecility , with baseness . it be exactly to 
 her development the poor girl have the great right , and he should not 
 really alter anything by deprive she of it . be not   she the artist to 
 the tip of her tress - the ambassadress never in the world - and 
 would not   she take it out in something else if one be to make she 
 deviate ? so certain be that demonic gift to insist ever on its own . 

 besides , could one make her deviate ? if she have no disposition to 
 philander what be his warrant for suppose she could be corrupt into 
 respectability ? how could the career - his career - speak to a nature that 
 have glimpse as vivid as they be crude of such a different range and 
 for which success mean quite another sauce to the dish ? would the 
 brilliancy of marry Peter Sherringham be such a bribe to 
 relinquishment ? how could he think so without pretension of the sort he 
 pretend exactly not to flaunt ? - how could he put himself forward as so 
 high a prize ? Relinquishment of the opportunity to exercise a rare 
 talent be not , in the nature of thing , an easy effort to a young lady 
 who be herself presumptuous as well as ambitious . besides , she might 
 eat her cake and have it - might make her fortune both on the stage and 
 in the world . successful actress have end by marry duke , and be 
 not that well than remain obscure and marry a commoner ? there 
 be moment when he try to pronounce the girl 's " gift " not a force to 
 reckon with ; there be so little to show for it as yet that the caprice 
 of believe in it would perhaps suddenly leave he . but his conviction 
 that it be real be too uneasy to make such an experiment peaceful , and 
 he come back , moreover , to his deep impression - that of her be of 
 the inward mould for which the only consistency be the play of genius . 
 had not   Madame CarrĂ   declare at the last that she could " do anything " ? 
 it be true that if Madame CarrĂ   have be mistake in the first place 
 she might also be mistake in the second . but in this latter case she 
 would be mistake with he - and such an error would be too like a truth . 

 how , far , shall we exactly measure for he - Sherringham feel the 
 discomfort of the advantage Miriam have of he - the advantage of she 
 present herself in a light that render any passion he might 
 entertain an implication of duty as well as of pleasure ? why there 
 should have be this implication be more than he could say ; sometimes 
 he hold himself rather abject , or at least absurdly superstitious , for 
 see it . he do not   know , he could scarcely conceive , of another case 
 of the same general type in which he would have recognise it . in 
 foreign country there be very few lady of Miss Rooth 's intend 
 profession who would not have regard it as too strong an order that , 
 to console they for not be admit into drawing - room , they should 
 have no offset but the exercise of a virtue in which no one would 
 believe . this be because in foreign country actress be not 
 admit into drawing - room : that be a pure english drollery , 
 minister equally little to real histrionic and to the high tone of 
 these resort . do the oppressive sanctity which make it a burden to 
 have to reckon with his young friend come then from her be English ? 
 Peter could recall case in which that privilege operate as little as 
 possible as a restriction . it come a great deal from Mrs. Rooth , in whom 
 he apprehend depth of calculation as to what she might achieve for 
 her daughter by " work " the idea of a life blameless amid dire 
 obsession . her romantic turn of mind would not   in the least prevent she 
 regard that idea as a substantial capital , to be lay out to the good 
 worldly advantage . Miriam 's essential irreverence be capable , on a 
 pretext , of make mince - meat of it - that he be sure of ; for the only 
 capital she recognise be the talent which some day manager and agent 
 would outbid each other in pay for . yet as a creature easy at so many 
 point she be fond of her mother , would do anything to oblige - that 
 might work in all sort of way - and would probably like the loose 
 slipper of blamelessness quite as well as have to meet some of the 
 queer high standard of the opposite camp . 

 Sherringham , I may add , have no desire that she should indulge a 
 different preference : it be distasteful to he to compute the 
 probability of a young lady 's misbehaving for his advantage - that 
 seem to he definitely base - and he would have think himself a 
 blackguard if , even when a prey to his desire , he have not wish the 
 thing that be good for the object of it . the thing well for Miriam 
 might be to become the wife of the man to whose suit she should incline 
 her ear . that this would be the good thing for the gentleman in question 
 by no mean , however , equally follow , and Sherringham 's final 
 conviction be that it would never do for he to act the part of that 
 hypothetic personage . he ask for no removal and no extension of leave , 
 and he prove to himself how well he know what he be about by never 
 address a line , during his absence , to the HĂ tel de la Garonne . he 
 would simply go straight , inflict as little injury on Peter 
 Sherringham as on any one else . he remain away to the last hour of his 
 privilege and continue to act lucidly in have nothing to do with the 
 mother and daughter for several day after his return to Paris . 

 it be when this discipline come to an end one afternoon after a week 
 have pass that he feel most the force of the reference we have just 
 make to Mrs. Rooth 's private calculation . he find she at home , alone , 
 write a letter under the lamp , and as soon as he come in she cry out 
 that he be the very person to whom the letter be address . she could 
 bear it no long ; she have permit herself to reproach he with his 
 terrible silence - to ask why he have quite forsake they . it be an 
 illustration of the way in which her visitor have come to regard she that 
 he put rather less than more faith into this description of the crumple 
 paper lie on the table . he be not even sure he quite believe Miriam 
 to have just go out . he tell her mother how busy he have be all the 
 while he be away and how much time above all he have have to give in 
 London to see on her daughter 's behalf the people connect with the 
 theatre . 

 " ah if you pity I tell I you have   get she an engagement ! " Mrs. Rooth 
 cry while she clasp her hand . 

 " I take a great deal of trouble ; I write ever so many note , seek 
 introduction , talk with people - such impossible people some of they . 
 in short I knock at every door , I go into the question 
 exhaustively . " and he enumerate the thing he have do , report on 
 some of the knowledge he have gather . the difficulty be immense , 
 and even with the influence he could command , such as it be , there be 
 very little to be achieve in face of they . still he have gain ground : 
 two or three approachable fellow , man with inferior theatre , have 
 listen to he well than the other , and there be one in particular 
 whom he have a hope he really might have interest . from he he have 
 extract benevolent assurance : this person would see Miriam , would 
 listen to she , would do for she what he could . the trouble be that no 
 one would lift a finger for a girl unless she be know , and yet that 
 she never could become know till innumerable finger have be lift . 
 you could not   go into the water unless you could swim , and you could not 
 swim until you have be in the water . 

 " but new performer appear ; they get theatre , they get audience , they 
 get notice in the newspaper , " Mrs. Rooth object . " I know of these 
 thing only what Miriam tell I . it be no knowledge that I be bear to . " 

 " it be perfectly true . it be all do with money . " 

 " and how do they come by money ? " Mrs. Rooth candidly ask . 

 " when they be woman people give it to they . " 

 " well , what people now ? " 

 " People who believe in they . " 

 " as you believe in Miriam ? " 

 Peter have a pause . " no , rather differently . a poor man do not   believe 
 in anything the same way that a rich man do . " 

 " ah do not   call yourself poor ! " groan Mrs. Rooth . 

 " what good would it do I to be rich ? " 

 " why you could take a theatre . you could do it all yourself . " 

 " and what good would that do I ? " 

 " ah do not   you delight in her genius ? " demand Mrs. Rooth . 

 " I delight in her mother . you think I more disinterested than I be , " 
 Sherringham add with a certain soreness of irritation . 

 " I know why you do not   write ! " Mrs. Rooth declare archly . 

 " you must go to London , " Peter say without heed this remark . 

 " ah if we could only get there it would be a relief . I should draw a 
 long breath . there at least I know where I be and what people be . but 
 here one live on hollow ground ! " 

 " the soon you get away the well , " our young man go on . 

 " I know why you say that . " 

 " it be just what I be explain . " 

 " I could not   have hold out if I have not   be so sure of Miriam , " say Mrs. 
 Rooth . 

 " well , you need not   hold out any long . " 

 " do not   you trust she ? " ask Sherringham 's hostess . 

 " trust she ? " 

 " you do not   trust yourself . that be why you be silent , why we might have 
 think you be dead , why we might have perish ourselves . " 

 " I do not   think I understand you ; I do not   know what you be talk 
 about , " Peter return . " but it do not   matter . " 

 " do not   it ? let yourself go . why should you struggle ? " the old woman 
 agreeably inquire . 

 her unexpected insistence annoy her visitor , and he be silent again , 
 meet her eye with reserve and on the point of tell she that he 
 do not   like her tone . but he have his tongue under such control that he 
 be able presently to say instead of this - and it be a relief to he to 
 give audible voice to the reflexion - " it be a great mistake , either way , 
 for a man to be in love with an actress . either it mean nothing 
 serious , and what be the use of that ? or it mean everything , and that be 
 still more delusive . " 

 " delusive ? " 

 " idle , unprofitable . " 

 " surely a pure affection be its own beautiful reward , " Mrs. Rooth 
 plead with soft reasonableness . 

 " in such a case how can it be pure ? " 

 " I think you be talk of an english gentleman , " she reply . 

 " call the poor fellow whatever you like : a man with his life to lead , 
 his way to make , his work , his duty , his career to attend to . if it 
 mean nothing , as I say , the thing it mean least of all be marriage . " 

 " oh my own Miriam ! " Mrs. Rooth wail . 

 " Fancy , on the other hand , the complication when such a man marry a 
 woman who be on the stage . " 

 Mrs. Rooth look as if she be try to follow . " Miriam be not   on the 
 stage yet . " 

 " go to London and she soon will be . " 

 " yes , and then you will have your excuse . " 

 " my excuse ? " 

 " for desert we altogether . " 

 he break into laughter at this , the logic be so droll . then he go on : 
 " show I some good acting and I will not   desert you . " 

 " good acting ? ah what be the good acting compare with the position of a 
 true english lady ? if you will take she as she be you may have she , " Mrs. 
 Rooth suddenly add . 

 " as she be , with all her ambition unassuage ? " 

 " to marry you - might not that be an ambition ? " 

 " a very paltry one . do not   answer for she , do not   attempt that , " say 
 Peter . " you can do much well . " 

 " do you think you can ? " smile Mrs. Rooth . 

 " I do not   want to ; I only want to let it alone . she be an artist ; you must 
 give she her head , " the young man pursue . " you must always give an 
 artist his head . " 

 " but I have   know great lady who be artist . in english society 
 there be always a field . " 

 " do not   talk to I of english society ! thank goodness , in the first 
 place , I do not   live in it . do you want she to give up her genius ? " he 
 demand . 

 " I think you do not   care for it . " 

 " she would say , ' no I thank you , dear mamma . ' " 

 " my wonderful child ! " Mrs. Rooth almost comprehendingly murmur . 

 " have you ever propose it to she ? " 

 " propose it ? " 

 " that she should give up try . " 

 Mrs. Rooth hesitate , look down . " not for the reason you mean . we 
 do not   talk about love , " she simper . 

 " then it be so much less time waste . do not   stretch out your hand to the 
 bad when it may some day grasp the well , " Peter continue . Mrs. 
 Rooth raise her eye at he as if recognise the force there might be 
 in that , and he add : " let she blaze out , let she look about she . then 
 you may talk to I if you like . " 

 " it be very puzzling ! " the old woman artlessly sigh . 

 he laugh again and then say : " now do not   tell I I be not a good 
 friend . " 

 " you be indeed - you be a very noble gentleman . that be just why a quiet 
 life with you - - " 

 " it would not   be quiet for I ! " he break in . " and that be not what 
 Miriam be make for . " 

 " do not   say that for my precious one ! " Mrs. Rooth quaver . 

 " go to London - go to London , " her visitor repeat . 

 thoughtfully , after an instant , she extend her hand and take from the 
 table the letter on the composition of which he have find she engage . 
 then with a quick movement she tear it up . " that be what Mr. Dashwood 
 say . " 

 " Mr. Dashwood ? " 

 " I forget you do not   know he . he be the brother of that lady we meet the 
 day you be so good as to receive we ; the one who be so kind to 
 us - Mrs. Lovick . " 

 " I never hear of he . " 

 " do not   you remember how she speak of he and that Mr. Lovick do not   seem 
 very nice about he ? she tell we that if he be to meet we - and she be 
 so good as to intimate that it would be a pleasure to he to do so - he 
 might give we , as she say , a tip . " 

 Peter achieve the effort to recollect . " yes he come back to I . he be 
 an actor . " 

 " he be a gentleman too , " say Mrs. Rooth . 

 " and you have   meet he , and he have give you a tip ? " 

 " as I say , he want we to go to London . " 

 " I see , but even I can tell you that . " 

 " oh yes , " say Mrs. Rooth ; " but he say he can help we . " 

 " keep hold of he then , if he be in the business , " Peter be all for 
 that . 

 " he be a perfect gentleman , " say Mrs. Rooth . " he be immensely strike with 
 Miriam . " 

 " well and well . keep hold of he . " 

 " well , I be glad you do not   object , " she grimace . 

 " why should I object ? " 

 " you do not   regard we as all your own ? " 

 " my own ? why , I regard you as the public 's - the world 's . " 

 she give a little shudder . " there be a sort of chill in that . it be grand , 
 but it be cold . however , I need not   hesitate then to tell you that it be 
 with Mr. Dashwood Miriam have go out . " 

 " why hesitate , gracious heaven ? " but in the next breath Sherringham 
 ask : " where have they go ? " 

 " you do not   like it ! " his hostess laugh . 

 " why should it be a thing to be enthusiastic about ? " 

 " well , he be charming and I trust he . " 

 " so do I , " say Sherringham . 

 " they have   go to see Madame CarrĂ . " 

 " she have come back then ? " 

 " she be expect back last week . Miriam want to show she how she have 
 improve . " 

 " and have she improve ? " 

 " how can I tell - with my mother 's heart ? " ask Mrs. Rooth . " I do not 
 judge ; I only wait and pray . but Mr. Dashwood think she be wonderful . " 

 " that be a blessing . and when do he turn up ? " 

 " about a fortnight ago . we meet Mrs. Lovick at the english church , and 
 she be so good as to recognise we and speak to we . she say she have 
 be away with her child - otherwise she would have come to see we . she 
 have just return to Paris . " 

 " yes , I have   not yet see she . I see Lovick , " Peter add , " but he do not 
 talk of his brother - in - law . " 

 " I do not , that day , like his tone about he , " Mrs. Rooth observe . " we 
 walk a little way with Mrs. Lovick after church and she ask Miriam 
 about her prospect and if she be work . Miriam say she have no 
 prospect . " 

 " that be not   very nice to I , " Sherringham comment . 

 " but when you have leave we in black darkness what be our prospect ? " 

 " I see . it be all right . go on . " 

 " then Mrs. Lovick say her brother be to be in Paris a few day and she 
 would tell he to come and see we . he arrive , she tell he and he come . 
  Voila ! " say Mrs. Rooth . 

 " so that now - so far as he be concern - Miss Rooth have prospect ? " 

 " he be not   a manager unfortunately , " she qualify . 

 " where do he act ? " 

 " he be not   act just now ; he have be abroad . he have be to Italy , I 
 believe , and be just stop here on his way to London . " 

 " I see ; he be a perfect gentleman , " say Sherringham . 

 " ah you be jealous of he ! " 

 " no , but you be try to make I so . the more competitor there be for 
 the glory of bring she out the well for she . " 

 " Mr. Dashwood want to take a theatre , " say Mrs. Rooth . 

 " then perhaps he be our man . " 

 " oh if you would help he ! " she richly cry . 

 " help he ? " 

 " help he to help we . " 

 " we will all work together ; it will be very jolly , " say Sherringham 
 gaily . " it be a sacred cause , the love of art , and we shall be a happy 
 band . Dashwood 's his name ? " he add in a moment . " Mrs. Lovick be not   a 
 Dashwood . " 

 " it be his nom de thĂ Ă tre - Basil Dashwood . do you like it ? " Mrs. Rooth 
 wonderfully inquire . 

 " you say that as Miriam might . her talent 's catch ! " 

 " she be always practise - always say thing over and over to seize 
 the tone . I have   her voice in my ear . he want she not to have any . " 

 " not to have any what ? " 

 " any nom de thĂ Ă tre . he want she to use her own ; he like it so much . 
 he say it will do so well - you can not   well it . " 

 " he be a capital adviser , " say Sherringham , get up . " I will come back 
 to - morrow . " 

 " I will not   ask you to wait for they - they may be so long , " his hostess 
 return . 

 " will he come back with she ? " Peter ask while he smooth his hat . 

 " I hope so , at this hour . with my child in the street I tremble . we 
 do not   live in cab , as you may easily suppose . " 

 " do they go on foot ? " Sherringham continue . 

 " oh yes ; they start in high spirit . " 

 " and be Mr. Basil Dashwood acquaint with Madame CarrĂ ? " 

 " ah no , but he long to be introduce to she ; he persuade Miriam to 
 take he . naturally she wish to oblige he . she be very nice to he - if 
 he can do anything . " 

 " quite right ; that be the way ! " Peter cheerfully ring out . 

 " and she also want he to see what she can do for the great critic , " 
 Mrs. Rooth add - " that terrible old woman in the red wig . " 

 " that be what I should like to see too , " Peter permit himself to 
 acknowledge . 

 " oh she have go ahead ; she be pleased with herself . ' work , work , work , ' 
 say Madame CarrĂ . well , she have work , work , work . that be what 
 Mr. Dashwood be pleased with even more than with other thing . " 

 " what do you mean by other thing ? " 

 " oh her genius and her fine appearance . " 

 " he approve of her fine appearance ? I ask because you think he know 
 what will take . " 

 " I know why you ask ! " Mrs. Rooth bravely mock . " he say it will be 
 worth hundred of thousand to she . " 

 " that be the sort of thing I like to hear , " Peter return . " I will come in 
 to - morrow , " he repeat . 

 " and shall you mind if Mr. Dash wood be here ? " 

 " do he come every day ? " 

 " oh they be always at it . " 

 " at it - - ? " he be vague . 

 " why she act to he - every sort of thing - and he say if it will do . " 

 " how many day have he be here then ? " 

 Mrs. Rooth reflect . " oh I do not   know ! since he turn up they have 
 pass so quickly . " 

 " so far from ' mind ' it I be eager to see he , " Sherringham declare ; 
 " and I can imagine nothing well than what you describe - if he be not   an 
 awful ass . " 

 " dear I , if he be not   clever you must tell we : we can not   afford to be 
 deceive ! " Mrs. Rooth innocently wail . " what do we know - how can we 
 judge ? " she appeal . 

 he have a pause , his hand on the latch . " oh , I will tell you frankly what I 
 think of he ! " 




 XIX 


 when he get into the street he look about he for a cab , but be 
 oblige to walk some distance before encounter one . in this little 
 interval he see no reason to modify the determination he have form in 
 descend the steep staircase of the HĂ tel de la Garonne ; indeed the 
 desire prompt it only quicken his pace . he have an hour to spare and 
 would also go to see Madame CarrĂ . if Miriam and her companion have 
 proceed to the Rue de Constantinople on foot he would probably reach 
 the house as soon as they . it be all quite logical : he be eager to see 
 Miriam - that be natural enough ; and he have admit to Mrs. Rooth that 
 he be keen on the subject of Mrs. Lovick 's theatrical brother , in whom 
 such effective aid might perhaps reside . to catch Miriam really 
 reveal herself to the old actress after the jump she believe herself 
 to have take - since that be her errand - would be a very happy stroke , 
 the thought of which make her benefactor impatient . he presently find 
 his cab and , as he bound in , bade the coachman drive fast . he learn 
 from Madame CarrĂ 's portress that her illustrious locataire be at 
 home and that a lady and a gentleman have go up some time before . 

 in the little antechamber , after his admission , he hear a high voice 
 come from the salon and , stop a moment to listen , note that Miriam 
 be already launch in a recitation . he be able to make out the 
 word , all the more that before he could prevent the movement the 
 maid - servant who have lead he in have already open the door of the 
 room - one of the leaf of it , there be , as in most french door , two 
 of these - before which , within , a heavy curtain be suspend . Miriam 
 be in the act of roll out some speech from the english poetic 
 drama - 

  " for I be sick and capable of fear , 
  oppress with wrong and therefore full of fear . " 

 he recognise one of the great tirade of Shakespeare 's Constance and 
 see she have just begin the magnificent scene at the beginning of the 
 third act of King John , in which the passionate , injure mother and 
 widow sweep in wild organ - tone the entire scale of her irony and 
 wrath . the curtain conceal he and he lurk three minute after he 
 have motion to the femme de chambre to retire on tiptoe . the trio in 
 the salon , absorb in the performance , have apparently not hear his 
 entrance or the opening of the door , which be cover by the girl 's 
 splendid declamation . Peter listen intently , arrest by the spirit 
 with which she attack her formidable verse . he have need to hear she 
 set afloat but a dozen of they to measure the long stride she have take 
 in his absence ; they assure he she have leap into possession of her 
 mean . he remain where he be till she arrive at 

  " then speak again ; not all thy former tale , 
  but this one word , whether thy tale be true . " 

 this apostrophe , briefly respond to in another voice , give he time 
 quickly to raise the curtain and show himself , pass into the room 
 with a " go on , go on ! " and a gesture earnestly deprecate a stop . 

 Miriam , in the full swing of her part , pause but for an instant and let 
 herself ring out again , while Peter sink into the near chair and she 
 fix he with her illumined eye , that be , with those of the raving 
 Constance . Madame CarrĂ , bury in a chair , kiss her hand to he , and 
 a young man who , near the girl , stand give the cue , star at he over 
 the top of a little book . " admirable , magnificent , go on , " Sherringham 
 repeat - " go on to the end of the scene , do it all ! " Miriam 's colour 
 rise , yet he as quickly feel that she have no personal emotion in see 
 he again ; the cold passion of art have perch on her banner and she 
 listen to herself with an ear as vigilant as if she have be a 
 Paganini draw a fiddle - bow . this effect deepen as she go on , 
 rise and rise to the great occasion , move with extraordinary ease 
 and in the large , clear style at the dizzy height of her idea . that 
 she have an idea be visible enough , and that the whole thing be very 
 different from all Sherringham have hitherto hear her attempt . it 
 belong quite to another class of effort ; she be now the finish 
 statue lift from the ground to its pedestal . it be as if the sun of 
 her talent have rise above the hill and she know she be move and 
 would always move in its guide light . this conviction be the one 
 artless thing that glimmer like a young joy through the tragic mask of 
 Constance , and Sherringham 's heart beat fast as he catch it in her 
 face . it only show she as more intelligent , and yet there have be a 
 time when he think her stupid ! Masterful the whole spirit in which she 
 carry the scene , make he cry to himself from point to point , " how 
 she feel it , see it and really ' render ' it ! " 

 he look now and again at Madame CarrĂ   and see she have in her lap an 
 open book , apparently a french prose version , bring by her visitor , 
 of the play ; but she never either glance at he or at the volume : she 
 only sit screw into the girl her hard , bright eye , polish by 
 experience like fine old brass . the young man utter the line of 
 the other speaker be attentive in another degree ; he follow Miriam , 
 in his own copy , to keep sure of the cue ; but he be elated and 
 expressive , be evidently even surprised ; he colour and smile , and 
 when he extend his hand to assist Constance to rise , after the 
 performer , act out her text , have seat herself grandly on " the huge 
 firm earth , " he bow over she as obsequiously as if she have be his 
 veritable sovereign . he be a good - look young man , tall , 
 well - proportion , straight - feature and fair , of whom manifestly the 
 first thing to be say on any occasion be that he have remarkably the 
 stamp of a gentleman . he earn this appearance , which prove inveterate 
 and importunate , to a point that be almost a denial of its spirit : so 
 prompt the question of whether it could be in good taste to wear any 
 character , even that particular one , so much on one 's sleeve . it be 
 literally on his sleeve that this young man partly wear his own ; for it 
 reside considerably in his garment , and in especial in a certain 
 close - fitting dark blue frock - coat , a miracle of a fit , which mould 
 his juvenility just enough and not too much , and constitute , as 
 Sherringham be destine to perceive later , his perpetual uniform or 
 badge . it be not till afterwards that Peter begin to feel exasperate 
 by Basil Dashwood 's " type " - the young stranger be of course Basil 
 Dashwood - and even by his blue frock - coat , the recurrent , unvarying , 
 imperturbable good form of his aspect . this unprofessional air end by 
 strike the observer as the very profession he have adopt , and be 
 indeed , so far as have as yet be indicate , his mimetic capital , his 
 main qualification for the stage . 

 the ample and powerful manner in which Miriam handle her scene produce 
 its full impression , the art with which she surmount its difficulty , 
 the liberality with which she meet its great demand upon the voice , and 
 the variety of expression that she throw into a torrent of objurgation . 
 it be a real composition , stud with passage that call a 
 suppress tribute to the lip and seem to show that a talent capable 
 of such an exhibition be capable of anything . 

  " but thou art fair , and at thy birth , dear boy , 
  Nature and Fortune join'd to make thee great : 
  of Nature 's gift thou mayst with lily boast , 
  and with the half - blow rose . " 

 as the girl turn to her imagine child with this exquisite 
 apostrophe - she address Mr. Dashwood as if he be play Arthur , and 
 he lower his book , drop his head and his eye and look handsome 
 and ingenuous - she open at a stroke to Sherringham 's vision a prospect 
 that they would yet see her express tenderness well even than anything 
 else . her voice be enchant in these line , and the beauty of her 
 performance be that though she utter the full fury of the part she 
 miss none of its poetry . 

 " where do she get hold of that - where do she get hold of that ? " Peter 
 wonder while his whole sense vibrate . " she have not   get hold of it when 
 I go away . " and the assurance flow over he again that she have find 
 the key to her box of treasure . in the summer , during their week of 
 frequent meeting , she have only fumble with the lock . one October day , 
 while he be away , the key have slip in , have fit , or her finger at 
 last have touch the right spring and the capricious casket have fly 
 open . 

 it be during the present solemnity that , excite by the way she come 
 out and with a hundred stir idea about she wheeling through his 
 mind , he be for the first time and most vividly visit by a perception 
 that end by become frequent with he - that of the perfect presence 
 of mind , unconfuse , unhurrie by emotion , that any artistic performance 
 require and that all , whatever the instrument , require in exactly the 
 same degree : the application , in other word , clear and calculate , 
 crystal - firm as it be , of the idea conceive in the glow of 
 experience , of suffering , of joy . he be afterwards often to talk of 
 this with Miriam , who , however , be never to be able to present he with 
 a neat theory of the subject . she have no knowledge that it be publicly 
 discuss ; she only range herself in practice on the side of those who 
 hold that at the moment of production the artist can not   too much have his 
 wit about he . when Peter name to she the opinion of those maintain 
 that at such a crisis the office of attention cease to be fill she 
 star with surprise and then break out : " ah the poor idiot ! " she 
 eventually become , in her judgement , in impatience and the expression 
 of contempt , very free and absolutely irreverent . 

 " what a splendid scolding ! " the new visitor exclaim when , on the 
 entrance of the Pope 's legate , her companion close the book on the 
 scene . Peter press his lip to Madame CarrĂ 's finger - tip ; the old 
 actress get up and hold out her arm to Miriam . the girl never take she 
 eye off Sherringham while she pass into that lady 's embrace and 
 remain there . they be full of their usual sombre fire , and it be 
 always the case that they express too much anything they could express 
 at all ; but they be not defiant nor even triumphant now - they be 
 only deeply explicative . they seem to say , " that be the sort of thing 
 I mean ; that be what I have in mind when I ask you to try to do 
 something for I . " Madame CarrĂ   fold her pupil to her bosom , hold 
 she there as the old marquise in a comă die de moeur might in the last 
 scene have hold her god - daughter the ingĂ nue . 

 " have you get I an engagement ? " - the young woman then appeal eagerly 
 to her friend . " yes , he have do something splendid for I , " she go on 
 to Madame CarrĂ , rest her hand caressingly on one of the actress 's 
 while the old woman discourse with Mr. Dashwood , who be tell she in 
 very pretty french that he be tremendously excited about Miss Rooth . 
 Madame CarrĂ   look at he as if she wonder how he appear when he 
 be calm and how , as a dramatic artist , he express that condition . 

 " yes , yes , something splendid , for a beginning , " Peter answer 
 radiantly , recklessly ; feel now only that he would say anything and 
 do anything to please she . he spend on the spot , in imagination , his 
 last penny . 

 " it be such a pity you could not   follow it ; you would have like it so much 
 well , " Mr. Dashwood observe to their hostess . 

 " could not   follow it ? do you take I for une sotte ? " the celebrated 
 artist cry . " I suspect I follow it de plus pre que vous , 
 monsieur ! " 

 " ah you see the language be so awfully fine , " Basil Dashwood reply , 
 look at his shoe . 

 " the language ? why she rail like a fish - wife . be that what you call 
 language ? Ours be another business . " 

 " if you understand , if you understand , you would see all the greatness of 
 it , " Miriam declare . and then in another tone : " such delicious 
 expression ! " 

 " on dit que c'est tre - fort . but who can tell if you really say it ? " 
 Madame CarrĂ   demand . 

 " ah , par exemple , I can ! " Sherringham answer . 

 " oh you - you be a Frenchman . " 

 " could not   he make it out if he be not ? " ask Basil Dashwood . 

 the old woman shrug her shoulder . " he would not   know . " 

 " that be flattering to I . " 

 " oh you - do not   you pretend to complain , " Madame CarrĂ   say . " I prefer 
  our imprecation - those of Camille , " she go on . " they have the 
 beauty de plus belle chose . " 

 " I can say they too , " Miriam break in . 

 " Insolente ! " smile Madame CarrĂ . " Camille do not   squat down on the 
 floor in the middle of they . 

  " for grief be proud and make his owner stoop . 
  to I and to the state of my great grief 
  Let king assemble , " 

 Miriam quickly declaim . " ah if you do not   feel the way she make a 
 throne of it ! " 

 " it be really tremendously fine , chere madame , " Sherringham say . 
 " there be nothing like it . " 

 " vous ete insupportable , " the old woman answer . " stay with we . 
 I will teach you Phedre . " 

 " ah Phadra , Phadra ! " Basil Dashwood vaguely ejaculate , look more 
 gentlemanly than ever . 

 " you have   learn all I have   teach you , but where the devil have you 
 learn what I have not ? " Madame CarrĂ   go on . 

 " I have   work - I have ; you would call it work - all through the bright , late 
 summer , all through the hot , dull , empty day . I have   batter down the 
 door - I do hear it crash one day . but I be not so very good yet . I be 
 only in the right direction . " 

 " Malicieuse ! " growl Madame CarrĂ . 

 " oh I can beat that , " the girl go on . 

 " do you wake up one morning and find you have grow a pair of wing ? " 
 Peter ask . " because that be what the difference amount to - you really 
 soar . moreover , you be an angel , " he add , charm with her 
 unexpectedness , the good nature of her forbearance to reproach he for 
 not have write to she . and it seem to he privately that she be 
 angelic when in answer to this she say ever so blandly : 

 " you know you read King John with I before you go away . I think 
 over immensely what you say . I do not   understand it much at the time - I 
 be so stupid . but it all come to I later . " 

 " I wish you could see yourself , " Peter return . 

 " my dear fellow , I do . what sort of a dunce do you take I for ? I do not 
 miss a vibration of my voice , a fold of my robe . " 

 " well , I do not   see you troubling about it , " Peter handsomely insist . 

 " no one ever will . do you think I would ever show it ? " 

 " Ars celare artem , " Basil Dashwood jocosely drop . 

 " you must first have the art to hide , " say Sherringham , wonder a 
 little why Miriam do not   introduce her young friend to he . she be , 
 however , both then and later perfectly neglectful of such care , never 
 thinking , never mind how other people get on together . when she find 
 they do not   get on she jeer at they : that be the near she come to 
 arrange for they . our young man note in she from the moment she feel 
 her strength an immense increase of this good - humour inattention to 
 detail - all detail save that of her work , to which she be ready to 
 sacrifice holocaust of feeling when the feeling be other people 's . 
 this confer on her a large profanity , an absence of ceremony as to 
 her social relation , which be both amusing because it suggest that 
 she would take what she give , and formidable because it be inconvenient 
 and you might not   care to give what she would take . 

 " if you have not   any art it be not quite the same as if you do not   hide 
 it , be it ? " Basil Dashwood ingeniously throw out . 

 " that be right - say one of your clever thing ! " Miriam sweetly respond . 

 " you be always act , " he declare in English and with a simple - minded 
 laugh , while Sherringham remain strike with his express just what 
 he himself have feel week before . 

 " and when you have   show they your fish - wife , to your public de la - bas , 
 what will you do next ? " ask Madame CarrĂ . 

 " I will do Juliet - I will do Cleopatra . " 

 " rather a big bill , be not   it ? " Mr. Dashwood volunteer to Sherringham 
 in a friendly but discriminating manner . 

 " Constance and Juliet - take care you do not   mix they , " say Sherringham . 

 " I want to be various . you once tell I I have a hundred character , " 
 Miriam return . 

 " ah , vous en ete la ? " cry the old actress . " you may have a hundred 
 character , but you have   only three play . I be tell that be all there be 
 in English . " 

 Miriam , admirably indifferent to this charge , appeal to Peter . " what 
 arrangement have you make ? what do the people want ? " 

 " the people at the theatre ? " 

 " I be afraid they do not   want King John , and I do not   believe they hunger 
 for Antony and Cleopatra , " Basil Dashwood suggest . " ship and siege 
 and army and pyramid , you know : we must not   be too heavy . " 

 " oh I hate scenery ! " the girl sigh . 

 " elle est superbe , " say Madame CarrĂ . " you must put those piece on 
 the stage : how will you do it ? " 

 " oh we know how to get up a play in London , Madame CarrĂ " - Mr. Dashwood 
 be all geniality . " they put money on it , you know . " 

 " on it ? but what do they put in it ? who will interpret they ? who will 
 manage a style like that - the style of which the rhapsody she have just 
 repeat be a speciman ? whom have you get that one have ever hear of ? " 

 " oh you will hear of a good deal when once she get start , " Dashwood 
 cheerfully contend . 

 Madame CarrĂ   look at he a moment ; then , " I feel that you will become 
 very bad , " she say to Miriam . " I be glad I shall not   see it . " 

 " People will do thing for I - I will make they , " the girl declare . " I will 
 stir they up so that they will have idea . " 

 " what people , pray ? " 

 " ah terrible woman ! " Peter theatrically groan . 

 " we translate your piece - there will be plenty of part , " Basil 
 Dashwood say . 

 " why then go out of the door to come in at the window ? - especially if 
 you smash it ! an english arrangement of a french piece be a pretty woman 
 with her back turn . " 

 " do you really want to keep she ? " Sherringham ask of Madame 
 CarrĂ   - quite as if think for a moment that this after all might be 
 possible . 

 she bend her strange eye on he . " no , you be all too queer together . we 
 could not   be bother with you and you be not worth it . " 

 " I be glad it be ' together ' that we be queer then - we can console each 
 other . " 

 " if you only would ; but you do not   seem to ! in short I do not   understand 
 you - I give you up . but it do not   matter , " say the old woman wearily , 
 " for the theatre 's dead and even you , ma toute - belle , will not   bring it 
 to life . everything be go from bad to bad , and I do not   care what 
 become of you . you would not   understand we here and they will not 
 understand you there , and everything be impossible , and no one be a whit 
 the wiser , and it be not of the least consequence . only when you raise 
 your arm lift they just a little high , " Madame CarrĂ   add . 

 " my mother will be happy chez nous " say Miriam , throw her arm 
 straight up and give they a noble tragic movement . 

 " you will not   be in the least in the right path till your mother 's in 
 despair . " 

 " well , perhaps we can bring that about even in London , " Sherringham 
 patiently laugh . 

 " Dear Mrs. Rooth - she be great fun , " Mr. Dashwood as imperturbably 
 drop . 

 Miriam transfer the dark weight of her gaze to he as if she be 
 practise . " you will not   upset she , at any rate . " then she stand with 
 her beautiful and fatal mask before her hostess . " I want to do the 
 modern too . I want to do le drame , with intense realistic effect . " 

 " and do you want to look like the portico of the Madeleine when it be 
 drape for a funeral ? " her instructress mock . " never , never . I do not 
 believe you be various : that be not the way I see you . you be pure 
 tragedy , with de grand Ă clats de voix in the great style , or you be 
 nothing . " 

 " be beautiful - be only that , " Peter urge with high interest . " be only 
 what you can be so well - something that one may turn to for a glimpse of 
 perfection , to lift one out of all the vulgarity of the day . " 

 thus apostrophise the girl break out with one of the speech of 
 Racine 's Phadra , hush her companion on the instant . " you will be the 
 English Rachel , " say Basil Dashwood when she stop . 

 " act in French ! " Madame CarrĂ   amend . " I do not   believe in an English 
 Rachel . " 

 " I shall have to work it out , what I shall be , " Miriam conclude with a 
 rich pensive effect . 

 " you be in wonderfully good form to - day , " Sherringham say to she ; his 
 appreciation reveal a personal subjection he be unable to conceal 
 from his companion , much as he wish it . 

 " I really mean to do everything . " 

 " very well ; after all Garrick do . " 

 " then I shall be the Garrick of my sex . " 

 " there be a very clever author do something for I ; I should like you 
 to see it , " say Basil Dashwood , address himself equally to Miriam 
 and to her diplomatic friend . 

 " ah if you have   very clever author - - ! " and Madame CarrĂ   spin the sound 
 to the fine satiric thread . 

 " I shall be very happy to see it , " Peter return . 

 this response be so benevolent that Basil Dashwood presently begin : 
 " may I ask you at what theatre you have   make arrangement ? " 

 Sherringham look at he a moment . " come and see I at the embassy and 
 I will tell you . " then he add : " I know your sister , Mrs. Lovick . " 

 " so I suppose : that be why I take the liberty of ask such a 
 question . " 

 " it be no liberty , but Mr. Sherringham do not   appear to be able to tell 
 you , " say Miriam . 

 " well , you know , it be a very curious world , all those theatrical people 
 over there , " Peter concede . 

 " ah do not   say anything against they when I be one of they , " Basil 
 Dashwood laugh . 

 " I might plead the absence of information , " Peter return , " as Miss 
 Rooth have neglect to make we acquaint . " 

 Miriam vaguely smile . " I know you both so little . " but she present 
 they with a great stately air to each other , and the two man shake hand 
 while Madame CarrĂ   observe they . 

 " Tiens ! you gentleman meet here for the first time ? you do right to 
 become friend - that be the good thing . live together in peace and mutual 
 confidence . C'est de beaucoup le plus sage . " 

 " certainly , for yoke - fellow , " say Sherringham . 

 he begin the next moment to repeat to his new acquaintance some of the 
 thing he have be tell in London ; but their hostess stop he off , 
 wave the talk away with charming overdone stage horror and the young 
 hand of the heroine of Marivaux . " ah wait till you go - for that ! do 
 you suppose I care for news of your mountebank ' booth ? " 




 XX 


 as many people know , there be not , in the famous thă Ă tre FranĂ ais , more 
 than a dozen good seat accessible to lady .     the stall be 
 forbid they , the box be a quarter of a mile from the stage and the 
 balcony be a delusion save for a few chair at either end of its vast 
 horseshoe . but there be two excellent baignoire d'avant - scene , which 
 indeed be by no mean always to be have . it be , however , into one of 
 they that , immediately after his return to Paris , Sherringham usher 
 Mrs. Rooth and her daughter , with the further escort of Basil Dashwood . 
 he have choose the evening of the reappearance of the celebrated 
 Mademoiselle Voisin - she have be enjoy a congĂ   of three month - an 
 actress whom Miriam have see several time before and for whose method 
 she profess a high though somewhat critical esteem . it be only for 
 the return of this charming performer that Peter have be wait to 
 respond to Miriam 's most ardent wish - that of spend an hour in the 
  foyer des artiste of the great theatre . she be the person whom he 
 know well in the house of Moliere ; he could count on she to do they the 
 honour some night when she be in the " bill , " and to make the occasion 
 sociable . Miriam have be impatient for it - she be so convinced that 
 her eye would be open in the holy of holy ; but wish as 
 particularly as he do to participate in her impression he have make she 
 promise she would not   taste of this experience without he - not let 
 Madame CarrĂ , for instance , take she in his absence . there be 
 question the girl wish to put to Mademoiselle Voisin - question 
 which , have admire she from the balcony , she feel she be exactly the 
 person to answer . she be more " in it " now , after all , than Madame 
 CarrĂ , in spite of her slenderer talent : she be young , fresher , more 
 modern and - Miriam find the word - less academic . she be in fine less 
 " vieux jeu . " Peter perfectly foresee the day when his young friend 
 would make indulgent allowance for poor Madame CarrĂ , patronise she 
 as an old woman of good intention . 

   : 1890 

 the play to - night be six month old , a large , serious , successful 
 comedy by the most distinguished of author , with a thesis , a chorus 
 embody in one character , a scene a faire and a part full of 
 opportunity for Mademoiselle Voisin . there be thing to be say 
 about this artist , stricture to be drop as to the general quality of 
 her art , and Miriam lean back now , make her comment as if they cost 
 she less , but the actress have knowledge and distinction and pathos , and 
 our young lady repeat several time : " how quiet she be , how 
 wonderfully quiet ! scarcely anything move but her face and her voice . 
  Le geste rare , but really expressive when it come . I like that 
 economy ; it be the only way to make the gesture significant . " 

 " I do not   admire the way she hold her arm , " Basil Dash wood say : " like 
 a demoiselle de magasin try on a jacket . " 

 " well , she hold they at any rate . I daresay it be more than you do with 
 your . " 

 " oh yes , she hold they ; there be no mistake about that . ' I hold they , I 
 hope , hein ? ' she seem to say to all the house . " the young English 
 professional laugh good - humouredly , and Sherringham be strike with 
 the pleasant familiarity he have establish with their brave companion . 
 he be know and ready and he say in the first entr'acte - they be 
 wait for the second to go behind - amuse perceptive thing . " they 
 teach they to be ladylike and Voisin 's always try to show that . ' see 
 how I walk , see how I sit , see how quiet I be and how I have le geste 
 rare . now can you say I be not   a lady ? ' she do it all as if she have a 
 class . " 

 " well , to - night I be her class , " say Miriam . 

 " oh I do not   mean of actress , but of femme du monde . she show they 
 how to act in society . " 

 " you have well take a few lesson , " Miriam retort . 

 " ah you should see Voisin in society , " Peter interpose . 

 " do she go into it ? " Mrs. Rooth demand with interest . 

 her friend hesitate . " she receive a great many people . " 

 " why should not   they when they be nice ? " Mrs. Rooth frankly want to 
 know . 

 " when the people be nice ? " Miriam ask . 

 " now do not   tell I she be not what one would wish , " say Mrs. Rooth to 
 Sherringham . 

 " it depend on what that be , " he darkly smile . 

 " what I should wish if she be my daughter , " the old woman rejoin 
 blandly . 

 " ah wish your daughter to act as well as that and you will do the handsome 
 thing for she ! " 

 " well , she seem to feel what she say , " Mrs. Rooth piously risk . 

 " she have some stiff thing to say . I mean about her past , " Basil 
 Dashwood remark . " the past - the dreadful past - on the stage ! " 

 " wait till the end , to see how she come out . we must all be merciful ! " 
 sigh Mrs. Rooth . 

 " we have   see it before ; you know what happen , " Miriam observe to her 
 mother . 

 " I have   see so many I get they mixed . " 

 " yes , they be all in queer predicament . poor old mother - what we show 
 you ! " laugh the girl . 

 " ah it will be what you show I - something noble and wise ! " 

 " I want to do this ; it be a magnificent part , " say Miriam . 

 " you could not   put it on in London - they would not   swallow it , " Basil 
 Dashwood declare . 

 " be not   there thing they do there to get over the difficulty ? " the 
 girl inquire . 

 " you can not   get over what she do ! " - her companion have a rueful 
 grimace . 

 " yes , we must pay , we must expiate ! " Mrs. Rooth moan as the curtain 
 rise again . 

 when the second act be over our friend pass out of their baignoire 
 into those corridor of tribulation where the bristling ouvreuse , like 
 a pawnbroker drive a roar trade , mount guard upon pile of 
 heterogeneous clothing , and , gain the top of the fine staircase which 
 form the state entrance and connect the statue vestibule of the 
 basement with the grand tier of box , open an ambiguous door compose 
 of little mirror and find themselves in the society of the initiate . 
 the janitor be courteous folk who greet Sherringham as an 
 acquaintance , and he have no difficulty in marshal his little troop 
 toward the foyer . they traverse a low , curve lobby , hang with 
 picture and furnish with velvet - cover bench where several 
 unrecognised person of both sex look at they without hostility , and 
 arrive at an opening , on the right , from which , by a short flight of 
 step , there be a descent to one of the wing of the stage . here 
 Miriam pause , in silent excitement , like a young warrior arrest by a 
 glimpse of the battle - field . her vision be carry off through a lane 
 of light to the point of vantage from which the actor hold the house ; 
 but there be a hush guard over the place and curiosity could only 
 glance and pass . 

 then she come with her companion to a sort of parlour with a polished 
 floor , not large and rather vacant , where her attention fly delightedly 
 to a coat - tree , in a corner , from which three or four dress be 
 suspend - dress she immediately perceive to be costume in that 
 night 's play - accompany by a saucer of something and a much - wear 
 powder - puff casually leave on a sofa . this be a familiar note in the 
 general impression of high decorum which have begin at the threshold - a 
 sense of majesty in the place . Miriam rush at the powder - puff - there 
 be no one in the room - snatch it up and gaze at it with droll 
 veneration , then stand rapt a moment before the charming petticoat 
  " that be Dunoyer 's first underskirt , " she say to her mother   while 
 Sherringham explain that in this apartment an actress traditionally 
 change her gown when the transaction be simple enough to save the long 
 ascent to her loge . he feel himself a cicerone show a church to a 
 party of provincial ; and indeed there be a grave hospitality in the 
 air , mingle with something academic and important , the tone of an 
 institution , a temple , which make they all , out of respect and delicacy , 
 hold their breath a little and tread the shin floor with discretion . 

 these precaution increase - Mrs. Rooth creep about like a friendly but 
 undomesticated cat - after they enter the foyer itself , a square , 
 spacious saloon cover with picture and relic and drape in official 
 green velvet , where the genius loci hold a reception every night in 
 the year . the effect be freshly charming to Peter ; he be fond of the 
 place , always see it again with pleasure , enjoy its honourable look 
 and the way , among the portrait and scroll , the record of a splendid 
 history , the green velvet and the waxed floor , the genius loci seem 
 to be " at home " in the quiet lamplight . at the end of the room , in an 
 ample chimney , blaze a fire of log . Miriam say nothing ; they look 
 about , note that most of the portrait and picture be 
 " old - fashioned , " and Basil Dashwood express disappointment at the 
 absence of all the people they want most to see . three or four 
 gentleman in evening dress circulate slowly , look , like themselves , 
 at the picture , and another gentleman stand before a lady , with whom he 
 be in conversation , seat against the wall . the foyer resemble in 
 these condition a ball - room , clear for the dance , before the guest 
 or the music have arrive . 

 " oh it be enough to see this ; it make my heart beat , " say Miriam . 
 " it be full of the vanish past , it make I cry . I feel they here , all , 
 the great artist I shall never see . think of Rachel - look at her grand 
 portrait there ! - and how she stand on these very board and trail over 
 they the robe of Hermione and Phedre . " the girl break out theatrically , 
 as on the spot be right , not a bit afraid of her voice as soon as it 
 roll through the room ; appeal to her companion as they stand under 
 the chandelier and make the other person present , who have already 
 give she some attention , turn round to stare at so unusual a speciman 
 of the English miss . she laugh , musically , when she notice this , and 
 her mother , scandalise , beg she to lower her tone . " it be all right . 
 I produce an effect , " say Miriam : " it shall not   be say that I too have not 
 have my little success in the maison de Moliere . " and Sherringham 
 repeat that it be all right - the place be familiar with mirth and 
 passion , there be often wonderful talk there , and it be only the 
 setting that be still and solemn . it happen that this evening - there 
 be no knowing in advance - the scene be not characteristically 
 brilliant ; but to confirm his assertion , at the moment he speak , 
 Mademoiselle Dunoyer , who be also in the play , come into the room 
 attend by a pair of gentleman . 

 she be the celebrate , the perpetual , the necessary ingĂ nue , who with 
 all her talent could not   have represent a woman of her actual age . she 
 have the gliding , hop movement of a small bird , the same air of 
 have nothing to do with time , and the clear , sure , pierce note , a 
 miracle of exact vocalisation . she chaff her companion , she chaff 
 the room ; she might have be a very clever little girl try to 
 personate a more innocent big one . she scatter her amiability 
 about - show Miriam how the child of Moliere take their ease - and 
 it quickly place she in the friendly communication with Peter 
 Sherringham , who already enjoy her acquaintance and who now extend 
 it to his companion , and in particular to the young lady sur le point 
 d'entrer au thĂ Ă tre . 

 " you deserve a happy lot , " say the actress , look up at Miriam 
 brightly , as if to a great height , and take she in ; upon which 
 Sherringham leave they together a little and lead Mrs. Rooth and young 
 Dashwood to consider far some of the picture . 

 " most delightful , most curious , " the old woman murmur about 
 everything ; while Basil Dashwood exclaim in the presence of most of 
 the portrait : " but their ugliness - their ugliness : do you ever see 
 such a collection of hideous people ? and those who be suppose to be 
 good - look - the beauty of the past - they be bad than the other . 
 ah you may say what you will , nous somme mieux que Ă a ! " Sherringham 
 suspect he of irritation , of not like the theatre of the great 
 rival nation to be thrust down his throat . they return to Miriam and 
 Mademoiselle Dunoyer , and Peter ask the actress a question about one 
 of the portrait to which there be no name attach . she reply , like 
 a child who have only play about the room , that she be toute 
 honteuse not to be able to tell he the original : she have forget , 
 she have never ask - " Vous allez I trouver bien lă gere ! " she appeal 
 to the other person present , who form a gallery for she , and laugh 
 in delightful ripple at their suggestion , which she cover with 
 ridicule . she bestir herself ; she declare she would ascertain , she 
 should not   be happy till she do , and swam out of the room , with the 
 prettiest paddle , to obtain the information , leave behind her a 
 perfume of delicate kindness and gaiety . she seem above all thing 
 oblige , and Peter pronounce she almost as natural off the stage as 
 on . she do not   come back . 




 XXI 


 whether he have prearrange it be more than I can say , but Mademoiselle 
 Voisin delay so long to show herself that Mrs. Rooth , who wish to 
 see the rest of the play , though she have sit it out on another occasion , 
 express a return relish for her corner of the baignoire and give 
 her conductor the good pretext he could have desire for ask Basil 
 Dashwood to be so good as to escort she back . when the young actor , of 
 whose personal preference Peter be quite aware , have lead Mrs. Rooth away 
 with an absence of moroseness which show that his strike resemblance 
 to a gentleman be not keep for the footlight , the two other sit on a 
 divan in the part of the room furth from the entrance , so that it 
 give they a degree of privacy , and Miriam watch the come and go 
 of their fellow - visitor and the indefinite people , attach to the 
 theatre , hang about , while her companion give a name to some of the 
 figure , parisian celebrity . 

 " fancy poor Dashwood coope up there with mamma ! " the girl exclaim 
 whimsically . 

 " you be awfully cruel to he ; but that be of course , " say Sherringham . 

 " it seem to I I be as kind as you ; you send he off . " 

 " that be for your mother ; she be tired . " 

 " oh gammon ! and why , if I be cruel , should it be of course ? " 

 " because you must destroy and torment and wear out - that be your nature . 
 but you can not   help your type , can you ? " 

 " my type ? " she echo . 

 " it be bad , perverse , dangerous . it be essentially insolent . " 

 " and pray what be yours when you talk like that ? would you say such 
 thing if you do not   know the depth of my good nature ? " 

 " your good nature all come back to that , " say Sherringham . " it be an 
 abyss of ruin - for other . you have   no respect . I be speak of the 
 artistic character - in the direction and in the plentitude in which you 
 have it . it be unscrupulous , nervous , capricious , wanton . " 

 " I do not   know about respect . one can be good , " Miriam muse and 
 reason . 

 " it do not   matter so long as one 's powerful , " he return . " we can not 
 have everything , and surely we ought to understand that we must pay for 
 thing . a splendid organisation for a special end , like your , be so 
 rare and rich and fine that we ought not   to grudge it its condition . " 

 " what do you call its condition ? " Miriam ask as she turn and look 
 at he . 

 " oh the need to take its ease , to take up space , to make itself at home 
 in the world , to square its elbow and knock , other about . that be large 
 and free ; it be the good nature you speak of . you must forage and ravage 
 and leave a track behind you ; you must live upon the country you 
 traverse . and you give such delight that , after all , you be 
 welcome - you be infinitely welcome ! " 

 " I do not   know what you mean . I only care for the idea , " the girl say . 

 " that be exactly what I pretend - and we must all help you to it . you use 
 we , you push we about , you break we up . we be your table and chair , the 
 simple furniture of your life . " 

 " whom do you mean by ' we ' ? " 

 Peter give an ironic laugh . " oh do not   be afraid - there will be plenty of 
 other ! " 

 she make no return to this , but after a moment break out again . " poor 
 Dashwood immure with mamma - he be like a lame chair that one have put 
 into the corner . " 

 " do not   break he up before he have serve . I really believe something 
 will come out of he , " her companion go on . " however , you will break I 
 up first , " he add , " and he probably never at all . " 

 " and why shall I honour you so much more ? " 

 " because I be a well article and you will feel that . " 

 " you have   the superiority of modesty - I see . " 

 " I be well than a young mountebank - I have   vanity enough to say that . " 

 she turn on he with a flush in her cheek and a splendid dramatic 
 face . " how you hate we ! yes , at bottom , below your little cold taste , 
 you hate we ! " she repeat . 

 he colour too , meet her eye , look into they a minute , seem to 
 accept the imputation and then say quickly : " give it up : come away with 
 I . " 

 " come away with you ? " 

 " leave this place . give it up . " 

 " you bring I here , you insist it should be only you , and now you 
 must stay , " she declare with a head - shake and a high manner . " you 
 should know what you want , dear Mr. Sherringham . " 

 " I do - I know now . come away before you see she . " 

 " before - - ? " she seem to wonder . 

 " she be success , this wonderful Voisin , she be triumph , she be full 
 accomplishment : the hard , brilliant realisation of what I want to avert 
 for you . " Miriam look at he in silence , the cold light still in her 
 face , and he repeat : " give it up - give it up . " 

 her eye soften after a little ; she smile and then say : " yes , you be 
 well than poor Dashwood . " 

 " give it up and we will live for ourselves , in ourselves , in something 
 that can have a sanctity . " 

 " all the same you do hate we , " the girl go on . 

 " I do not   want to be conceite , but I mean that I be sufficiently fine and 
 complicated to tempt you . I be an expensive modern watch with a wonderful 
 escapement - therefore you will smash I if you can . " 

 " never - never ! " she say as she get up . " you tell I the hour too well . " 
 she quit her companion and stand look at GĂ rĂ I 's fine portrait of 
 the pale Rachel invest with the antique attribute of tragedy . the 
 rise of the curtain have draw away most of the company . Peter , from his 
 bench , watch his friend a little , turn his eye from she to the 
 vivid image of the dead actress and think how little she suffer by 
 the juxtaposition . presently he come over and join she again and she 
 resume : " I wonder if that be what your cousin have in his mind . " 

 " my cousin - - ? " 

 " what be his name ? Mr. Dormer ; that first day at Madame CarrĂ ' s. he 
 offer to paint my portrait . " 

 " I remember . I put he up to it . " 

 " be he think of this ? " 

 " I doubt if he have ever see it . I daresay I be . " 

 " well , when we go to London he must do it , " say Miriam . 

 " oh there be no hurry , " Peter be move to reply . 

 " do not   you want my picture ? " ask the girl with one of her successful 
 touch . 

 " I be not sure I want it from he . I do not   know quite what he would make of 
 you . " 

 " he look so clever - I like he . I see he again at your party . " 

 " he be a jolly good fellow ; but what be one to say , " Peter put to she , " of 
 a painter who go for his inspiration to the House of Commons ? " 

 " to the House of Commons ? " she echo . 

 " he have lately get himself elect . " 

 " dear I , what a pity ! I want to sit for he . but perhaps he will not 
 have I - as I be not a member of Parliament . " 

 " it be my sister , rather , who have get he in . " 

 " your sister who be at your house that day ? what have she to do with 
 it ? " Miriam ask . 

 " why she be his cousin just as I be . and in addition , " Sherringham go 
 on , ' she be to be married to he . " 

 " Married - really ? " she have a pause , but she continue . " so he paint 
  she , I suppose ? " 

 " not much , probably . his talent in that line be not   what she esteem in 
 he most . " 

 " it be not   great , then ? " 

 " I have not   the least idea . " 

 " and in the political line ? " the girl persist . 

 " I scarcely can tell . he be very clever . " 

 " he do paint decently , then ? " 

 " I daresay . " 

 Miriam look once more at GĂ rĂ I 's picture . " Fancy his go into the 
 House of Commons ! and your sister put he there ? " 

 " she work , she canvass . " 

 " ah you be a queer family ! " she sigh , turn round at the sound of a 
 step . 

 " we be lose - here 's Mademoiselle Voisin , " say Sherringham . 

 this celebrity present herself smile and address Miriam . " I act 
 for you to - night - I do my good . " 

 " what a pleasure to speak to you , to thank you ! " the girl murmur 
 admiringly . she be startled and dazzle . 

 " I could not   come to you before , but now I have   get a rest - for half an 
 hour , " the actress go on . gracious and passive , as if a little spend , 
 she let Sherringham , without look at he , take her hand and raise it 
 to his lip . " I be sorry I make you lose the other - they be so good in 
 this act , " she add . 

 " we have   see they before and there be nothing so good as you , " Miriam 
 promptly return . 

 " I like my part , " say Mademoiselle Voisin gently , smile still at our 
 young lady with clear , charming eye . " one be always well in that 
 case . " 

 " she be so bad sometimes , you know ! " Peter jest to Miriam ; lead the 
 actress thus to glance at he , kindly and vaguely , in a short silence 
 which you could not   call on her part embarrassment , but which be still 
 less affectation . 

 " and it be so interesting to be here - so interesting ! " Miriam protest . 

 " ah you like our old house ? yes , we be very proud of it . " and 
 Mademoiselle Voisin smile again at Sherringham all good - humouredly , but 
 as if to say : " well , here I be , and what do you want of I ? do not   ask I 
 to invent it myself , but if you will tell I I will do it . " Miriam admire 
 the note of discreet interrogation in her voice - the slight suggestion 
 of surprise at their " old house " be like . this performer be an 
 astonishment from her seem still more perfect on a near view - which 
 be not , the girl have an idea , what performer usually do . this be 
 very encouraging to she - it widen the programme of a young lady about 
 to embrace the scenic career . to have so much to show before the 
 footlight and yet to have so much leave when you come off - that be 
 really wonderful . Mademoiselle Voisin 's eye , as one look into they , 
 be still more agreeable than the distant spectator would have 
 suppose ; and there be in her appearance an extreme finish which 
 instantly suggest to Miriam that she herself , in comparison , be big 
 and rough and coarse . 

 " you be lovely to - night - you be particularly lovely , " Sherringham say 
 very frankly , translate Miriam 's own impression and at the same time 
 give she an illustration of the way that , in Paris at least , gentleman 
 express themselves to the star of the drama . she think she know her 
 companion very well and have be witness of the degree to which , in such 
 general condition , his familiarity could increase ; but his address to 
 the slim , distinguished , harmonious woman before they have a different 
 quality , the note of a special usage . if Miriam have have an apprehension 
 that such directness might be take as excessive it be remove by the 
 manner in which Mademoiselle Voisin return : 

 " oh one be always well enough when one 's make up ; one be always exactly 
 the same . " that serve as an example of the good taste with which a star 
 of the drama could receive homage that be want in originality . 
 Miriam determine on the spot that this should be the way she would 
 ever receive it . the grace of her new acquaintance be the great as 
 the become bloom to which she allude as artificial be the result of 
 a science so consummate that it have none of the grossness of a mask . the 
 perception of all this be exciting to our young aspirant , and her 
 excitement relieve itself in the inquiry , which strike she as rude as 
 soon as she have utter it : 

 " you act for ' I ' ? how do you know ? what be I to you ? " 

 " Monsieur Sherringham have tell I about you . he say we be nothing 
 beside you - that you be to be the great star of the future . I be proud 
 that you have   see I . " 

 " that of course be what I tell every one , " Peter acknowledge a trifle 
 awkwardly to Miriam . 

 " I can believe it when I see you . Je vous ai bien observĂ e , " the 
 actress continue in her sweet conciliatory tone . 

 Miriam look from one of her interlocutor to the other as if there 
 be joy for she in this report of Sherringham 's remark - joy 
 accompanied and partly mitigate , however , by a quick vision of what 
 might have pass between a secretary of embassy and a creature so 
 exquisite as Mademoiselle Voisin . " ah you be wonderful people - a most 
 interesting impression ! " she yearningly sigh . 

 " I be look for you ; he have prepare I . we be such old friend ! " 
 say the actress in a tone courteously exempt from intention : upon which 
 Sherringham , again take her hand , raise it to his lip with a 
 tenderness which her whole appearance seem to bespeak for she , a sort 
 of practical consideration and carefulness of touch , as if she be an 
 object precious and frail , an instrument for produce rare sound , to 
 be handle , like a legendary violin , with a recognition of its value . 

 " your dressing - room be so pretty - show she your dressing - room , " he go 
 on . 

 " Willingly , if she will come up . vous savez que c'est une montĂ e. " 

 " it be a shame to inflict it on you , " Miriam object . 

 " comment donc ? if it will interest you in the least ! " they exchange 
 civility , almost caress , try which could have the nice manner 
 to the other . it be the actress 's manner that strike Miriam most ; it 
 denote such a training , so much taste , express such a ripe conception 
 of urbanity . 

 " no wonder she act well when she have that tact - feel , perceive , be so 
 remarkable , mon Dieu , mon Dieu ! " the girl say to herself as they 
 follow their conductress into another corridor and up a wide , plain 
 staircase . the staircase be spacious and long and this part of the 
 establishment sombre and still , with the gravity of a college or a 
 convent . they reach another passage line with little door , on each 
 of which the name of a comedian be paint , and here the aspect become 
 still more monastic , like that of a row of solitary cell . Mademoiselle 
 Voisin lead the way to her own door all obligingly and as if wish to 
 be hospitable ; she drop little subdue , friendly attempt at 
 explanation on the way . at her threshold the monasticism stop - Miriam 
 find herself in a wonderfully upholstered nook , a nest of lamplight and 
 delicate cretonne . save for its pair of long glass it might have be 
 a tiny boudoir , with a water - colour drawing of value in each of its 
 panel of stretch stuff , with its crackling fire and its charming 
 order . it be intensely bright and extremely hot , singularly pretty and 
 exempt from litter . nothing lie about , but a small drape doorway lead 
 into an inner sanctuary . to Miriam it seem royal ; it immediately make 
 the art of the comedian the most distinguished thing in the world . it 
 be just such a place as they should have for their interval if they 
 be expect to be great artist . it be a result of the same evolution 
 as Mademoiselle Voisin herself - not that our young lady find this 
 particular term at hand to express her idea . but her mind be flood 
 with an impression of style , of refinement , of the long continuity of a 
 tradition . the actress say , " Voila , c'est tout ! " as if it be little 
 enough and there be even something clumsy in she have bring they 
 so far for nothing , and in their all sit there wait and look 
 at each other till it be time for she to change her dress . but to 
 Miriam it be occupation enough to note what she do and say : these 
 thing and her whole person and carriage strike our young woman as 
 exquisite in their adaptation to the particular occasion . she have have an 
 idea that foreign actress be rather of the cabotin order , but she 
 hostess suggest to her much more a princess than a cabotine . she 
 would do thing as she like and do they straight off : Miriam could not 
 fancy she in the groping and humiliation of rehearsal . everything in 
 she have be sift and form , her tone be perfect , her amiability 
 complete , and she might have be the charming young wife of a secretary 
 of state receive a pair of stranger of distinction . the girl observe 
 all her movement . and then , as Sherringham have say , she be 
 particularly lovely . but she suddenly tell this gentleman that she must 
 put he a la porte - she want to change her dress . he retire and 
 return to the foyer , where Miriam be to rejoin he after remain 
 the few minute more with Mademoiselle Voisin and come down with she . 
 he wait for his companion , walk up and down and make up his mind ; 
 and when she presently come in he say to she : 

 " please do not   go back for the rest of the play . stay here . " they now have 
 the foyer virtually to themselves . 

 " I want to stay here . I like it well , " she move back to the 
 chimney - piece , from above which the cold portrait of Rachel look down , 
 and as he accompany she he go on : 

 " I mean what I say just now . " 

 " what you say to Voisin ? " 

 " no , no ; to you . give it up and live with I . " 

 " give it up ? " she turn her stage face on he . 

 " give it up and I will marry you to - morrow . " 

 " this be a happy time to ask it ! " she say with superior amusement . " and 
 this be a good place ! " 

 " very good indeed , and that be why I speak : it be a place to make one 
 choose - it put it all before one . " 

 " to make you choose , you mean . I be much oblige , but that be not my 
 choice , " laugh Miriam . 

 " you shall be anything you like except this . " 

 " except what I most want to be ? I be much oblige . " 

 " do not   you care for I ? have not   you any gratitude ? " Sherringham 
 insist . 

 " gratitude for kindly remove the bl cup from my lip ? I want to be 
 what she be - I want it more than ever . " 

 " ah what she be - ! " he take it impatiently . 

 " do you mean I can not ? well see if I can not . tell I more about she - tell 
 I everything . " 

 " have not   you see for yourself and , know thing as you do , can not   you 
 judge ? " 

 " she be strange , she be mysterious , " Miriam allow , look at the fire . 
 " she show we nothing - nothing of her real self . " 

 " so much the well , all thing consider . " 

 " be there all sort of other thing in her life ? that be what I 
 believe , " the girl go on , raise her eye to he . 

 " I can not   tell you what there be in the life of such a woman . " 

 " Imagine - when she be so perfect ! " she exclaim thoughtfully . " ah she 
 keep I off - she keep I off ! her charming manner be in itself a kind 
 of contempt . it be an abyss - it be the wall of China . she have a hard 
 polish , an inimitable surface , like some wonderful porcelain that cost 
 more than you would think . " 

 " do you want to become like that ? " Sherringham ask . 

 " if I could I should be enchant . one can always try . " 

 " you must act well than she , " he go on . 

 " Better ? I think you want I to give it up . " 

 " ah I do not   know what I want , " he cry , " and you torment I and turn I 
 inside out ! what I want be you yourself . " 

 " oh do not   worry , " say Miriam - now all kindly . then she add that 
 Mademoiselle Voisin have invite she to " call " ; to which Sherringham 
 reply with a certain dryness that she would probably not find that 
 necessary . this make the girl stare and she ask : " do you mean it will not 
 do on account of mamma 's prejudice ? " 

 " say this time on account of mine . " 

 " do you mean because she have lover ? " 

 " her lover be none of our business . " 

 " none of mine , I see . so you have   be one of they ? " 

 " no such luck ! " 

 " what a pity ! " she richly wail . " I should have like to see that . one 
 must see everything - to be able to do everything . " and as he press for 
 what in particular she have wish to see she reply : " the way a woman 
 like that receive one of the old one . " 

 Peter give a groan at this , which be at the same time partly a laugh , 
 and , turn away to drop on a bench , ejaculate : " you will do - you will 
 do ! " 

 he sit there some minute with his elbow on his knee and his face in 
 his hand . his friend remain look at the portrait of Rachel , after 
 which she put to he : " do not   such a woman as that receive - receive 
 every one ? " 

 " every one who go to see she , no doubt . " 

 " and who go ? " 

 " lot of man - clever man , eminent man . " 

 " ah what a charming life ! then do not   she go out ? " 

 " not what we Philistines mean by that - not into society , never . she 
 never enter a lady 's drawing - room . " 

 " how strange , when one be as distinguished as that ; except that she must 
 escape a lot of stupidity and corvă es . then where do she learn 
 such manner ? " 

 " she teach manner , a ses heure : she do not   need to learn they . " 

 " oh she have give I idea ! but in London actress go into society , " 
 Miriam continue . 

 " oh into our , such as it be . in London nous melon le genre . " 

 " and shall not   I go - I mean if I want ? " 

 " you will have every facility to bore yourself . do not   doubt it . " 

 " and do not   she feel exclude ? " Miriam ask . 

 " exclude from what ? she have the full life . " 

 " the full ? " 

 " an intense artistic life . the cleverest man in Paris talk over her work 
 with she ; the principal author of play discuss with her subject and 
 character and question of treatment . she live in the world of art . " 

 " ah the world of art - how I envy she ! and you offer I Dashwood ! " 

 Sherringham rise in his emotion . " I ' offer ' you - ? " 

 Miriam burst out laugh . " you look so droll ! you offer I yourself , 
 then , instead of all these thing . " 

 " my dear child , I also be a very clever man , " he say , try to sink 
 his consciousness of have for a moment stand gap . 

 " you be - you be ; I delight in you . no lady at all - no femmes comme 
 il faut ? " she begin again . 

 " ah what do they matter ? your business be the artistic life ! " he break 
 out with inconsequence , irritated , moreover , at hear her sound that 
 trivial note again . 

 " you be a dear - your charming good sense come back to you ! what do you 
 want of I , then ? " 

 " I want you for myself - not for other ; and now , in time , before 
 anything be do . " 

 " why , then , do you bring I here ? everything be do - I feel it 
 to - night . " 

 " I know the way you should look at it - if you do look at it at all , " 
 Sherringham concede . 

 " that be so easy ! I think you like the stage so , " Miriam artfully 
 add . 

 " do not   you want I to be a great swell ? " 

 " and do not   you want I to be ? " 

 " you will be - you will share my glory . " 

 " so will you share mine . " 

 " the husband of an actress ? yes , I see myself that ! " Peter cry with a 
 frank ring of disgust . 

 " it be a silly position , no doubt . but if you be too good for it why talk 
 about it ? do not   you think I be important ? " she demand . her companion 
 meet her eye and she suddenly say in a different tone : " ah why should 
 we quarrel when you have   be so kind , so generous ? can not   we always be 
 friend - the true friend ? " 

 her voice sink to the sweetest cadence and her eye be grateful and 
 good as they rest on he . she sometimes say thing with such 
 perfection that they seem dishonest , but in this case he be stir 
 to an expressive response . just as he be make it , however , he be 
 move to utter other word : " take care , here be Dashwood ! " Mrs. Rooth 's 
 try attendant be in the doorway . he have come back to say that they 
 really must relieve he . 




 BOOK FIFTH 




 XXII 


 Mrs. Dallow come up to London soon after the meeting of Parliament ; she 
 make no secret of the fact that she be fond of " town " and that in 
 present condition it would of course not have become less attractive to 
 she . but she prepare to retreat again for the Easter vacation , not to 
 go back to Harsh , but to pay a couple of country visit . she do not , 
 however , depart with the crowd - she never do anything with the 
 crowd - but wait till the Monday after Parliament rise ; face with 
 composure , in Great Stanhope Street , the horror , as she have be teach 
 to consider they , of a Sunday out of the session . she have do what she 
 could to mitigate they by ask a handful of ' stray man " to dine with 
 she that evening . several member of this disconsolate class seek 
 comfort in Great Stanhope Street in the afternoon , and they for the most 
 part she also invite to return at eight o'clock . there be accordingly 
 almost too many people at dinner ; there be even a couple of wife . 
 Nick Dormer be then present , though he have not be in the afternoon . 
 each of the other person have say on come in , " so you have   not 
 go - I be awfully glad . " Mrs. Dallow have reply , " no , I have   not go , " 
 but she have in no case add that she be glad , nor have she offer an 
 explanation . she never offer explanation ; she always assume that no 
 one could invent they so well as those who have the florid taste to 
 desire they . 

 and in this case she be right , since it be probable that few of her 
 visitor fail to say to themselves that she not have go would have 
 have something to do with Dormer . that could pass for an explanation with 
 many of Mrs. Dallow 's friend , who as a general thing be not morbidly 
 analytic ; especially with those who meet Nick as a matter of course at 
 dinner . his figuring at this lady 's entertainment , be in her house 
 whenever a candle be light , be take as a sign that there be 
 something rather particular between they . Nick have say to she more than 
 once that people would wonder why they do not   marry ; but he be wrong in 
 this , inasmuch as there be many of their friend to whom it would not 
 have occur that his position could be improve . that they be 
 cousin be a fact not so evident to other as to themselves , in 
 consequence of which they appear remarkably intimate . the person 
 see clear in the matter be Mrs. Gresham , who live so much in the 
 world that be leave now and then to one 's own company have become her 
 idea of true sociability . she know very well that if she have be 
 privately engage to a young man as amiable as Nick Dormer she would 
 have manage that publicity should not   play such a part in their 
 intercourse ; and she have her secret scorn for the stupidity of people 
 whose conception of Nick 's relation to Julia rest on the fact that he 
 be always include in her party . " if he never be there they might 
 talk , " she say to herself . but Mrs. Gresham be supersubtle . to she it 
 would have appear natural that her friend should celebrate the 
 parliamentary recess by go down to Harsh and secure the young man 's 
 presence there for a fortnight ; she recognise Mrs. Dallow 's actual plan 
 as a comparatively poor substitute - the project of spend the 
 holiday in other people 's house , to which Nick have also promise to 
 come . Mrs. Gresham be romantic ; she wonder what be the good of mere 
 snippet and snatch , the chance that any one might have , when large , 
 still day a deux be open to you - chance of which half the sanctity 
 be in what they exclude . however , there be more unsettled matter 
 between Mrs. Dallow and her queer kinsman than even Mrs. Gresham 's fine 
 insight could embrace . she be not on the Sunday evening before Easter 
 among the guest in Great Stanhope Street ; but if she have be Julia 's 
 singular indifference to observation would have stop short of 
 encourage she to remain in the drawing - room , along with Nick , after 
 the other have go . I may add that Mrs. Gresham 's extreme curiosity 
 would have embolden she as little to do so . she would have take for 
 grant that the pair wish to be alone together , though she would have 
 regard this only as a snippet . the company have at all event stay 
 late , and it be nearly twelve o'clock when the last of they , stand 
 before the fire in the room they have quit , break out to his 
 companion : 

 " see here , Julia , how long do you really expect I to endure this kind 
 of thing ? " Julia make he no answer ; she only lean back in her chair 
 with her eye upon his . he meet her gaze a moment ; then he turn round 
 to the fire and for another moment look into it . after this he face 
 his hostess again with the exclamation : " it be so foolish - it be so 
 damnably foolish ! " 

 she still say nothing , but at the end of a minute she speak without 
 answer he . " I shall expect you on Tuesday , and I hope you will come by 
 a decent train . " 

 " what do you mean by a decent train ? " 

 " I mean I hope you will not leave it till the last thing before dinner , so 
 that we can have a little walk or something . " 

 " what be a little walk or something ? why , if you make such a point of my 
 come to Griffin , do you want I to come at all ? " 

 she hesitate an instant ; then she return ; " I know you hat it ! " 

 " you provoke I so , " say Nick . " you try to , I think . " 

 " and Severals be still bad . you will get out of that if you can , " Mrs. 
 Dallow go on . 

 " if I can ? what be to prevent I ? " 

 " you promise Lady Whiteroy . but of course that be nothing . " 

 " I do not   care a straw for Lady Whiteroy . " 

 " and you promise I . but that be less still . " 

 " it be foolish - it be quite idiotic , " say Nick with his hand in his 
 pocket and his eye on the ceiling . 

 there be another silence , at the end of which Julia remark : " you 
 might have answer Mr. Macgeorge when he speak to you . " 

 " Mr. Macgeorge - what have he to do with it ? " 

 " he have to do with your get on a little . if you think that be the 
 way - ! " 

 Nick break into a laugh . " I like lesson in get on - in other word I 
 suppose you mean in urbanity - from you , Julia ! " 

 " why not from I ? " 

 " because you can do nothing base . you be incapable of put on a 
 flattering manner to get something by it : therefore why should you 
 expect I to ? you be unflattering - that be , you be austere - in 
 proportion as there may be something to be get . " 

 she spring from her chair , come toward he . " there be only one thing I 
 want in the world - you know very well . " 

 " yes , you want it so much that you will not   even take it when it be press 
 on you . how long do you seriously expect I to bear it ? " Nick repeat . 

 " I never ask you to do anything base , " she say as she stand in front 
 of he . " if I be not clever about throw myself into thing it be all 
 the more reason you should be . " 

 " if you be not clever , my dear Julia - ? " Nick , close to she , place his 
 hand on her shoulder and shake she with a mixture of tenderness and 
 passion . " you be clever enough to make I furious , sometimes ! " 

 she open and close her fan look down at it while she submit to 
 his mild violence . " all I want be that when a man like Mr. Macgeorge 
 talk to you you should not   appear bored to death . you use to be so 
 charming under those infliction . now you appear to take no interest in 
 anything . at dinner to - night you scarcely open your lip ; you treat 
 they all as if you only wish they would go . " 

 " I do wish they would go . have not   I tell you a hundred time what I think 
 of your salon ? " 

 " how then do you want I to live ? " she ask . " be I not to have a 
 creature in the house ? " 

 " as many creature as you like . your freedom 's complete and , as far as 
 I be concern , always will be . only when you challenge I and overhaul 
 I - not justly , I think - I must confess the simple truth , that there be 
 many of your friend I do not   delight in . " 

 " oh your idea of pleasant people ! " Julia lament . " I should like once 
 for all to know what it really be . " 

 " I can tell you what it really be not : it be not   Mr. Macgeorge . he be a 
 be almost grotesquely limited . " 

 " he will be where you will never be - unless you change . " 

 " to be where Mr. Macgeorge be not would be very much my desire . 
 therefore why should I change ? " Nick demand . " however , I have not   the 
 least intention of be rude to he , and I do not   think I be , " he go 
 on . " to the good of my ability I assume a virtue if I have not   it ; but 
 apparently I be not enough of a comedian . " 

 " if you have not   it ? " she echo . " it be when you say thing like that 
 that you be so dreadfully tiresome . as if there be anything that you 
 have not   or might not   have ! " 

 Nick turn away from she ; he take a few impatient step in the room , 
 look at the carpet , his hand always in his pocket . then he come 
 back to the fire with the observation : " it be rather hard to be find so 
 want when one have try to play one 's part so beautifully . " he pause 
 with his eye on her own and then go on with a vibration in his voice : 
 " I have   imperille my immortal soul , or at least bemuddle my 
 intelligence , by all the thing I do not   care for that I have   try to do , 
 and all the thing I detest that I have   try to be , and all the thing I 
 never can be that I have   try to look as if I be - all the appearance 
 and imitation , the pretence and hypocrisy in which I have   steep 
 myself to the eye ; and at the end of it   it serve I right !   my reward 
 be simply to learn that I be still not half humbug enough ! " 

 Julia look away from he as soon as he have speak these word ; she 
 attach her eye to the clock behind he and observe irrelevantly : 
 " I be very sorry , but I think you have well go . I do not   like you to stay 
 after midnight . " 

 " ah what you like and what you do not   like , and where one begin and the 
 other end - all that be an impenetrable mystery ! " the young man 
 declare . but he take no further notice of her allusion to his 
 departure , add in a different tone : " ' a man like Mr. Macgeorge ' ! when 
 you say a thing of that sort in a certain , particular way I should 
 rather like to suffer you to perish . " 

 Mrs. Dallow star ; it might have seem for an instant that she be 
 try to look stupid . " how can I help it if a few year hence he be 
 certain to be at the head of any Liberal Government ? " 

 " we can not   help it of course , but we can help talk about it , " Nick 
 smile . " if we do not   mention it it may not   be notice . " 

 " you be try to make I angry . you be in one of your vicious mood , " 
 she return , blow out on the chimney - piece a gutter candle . 

 " that I be exasperate I have   already have the honour very positively to 
 inform you . all the same I maintain that I be irreproachable at dinner . 
 I do not   want you to think I shall always be as good as that . " 

 " you look so out of it ; you be as gloomy as if every earthly hope 
 have leave you , and you do not   make a single contribution to any 
 discussion that take place . do not   you think I observe you ? " she ask 
 with an irony temper by a tenderness unsuccessfully conceal . 

 " ah my darling , what you observe - ! " Nick cry with a certain 
 bitterness of amusement . but he add the next moment more seriously , as 
 if his tone have be disrespectful : " you probe I to the bottom , no 
 doubt . " 

 " you need not   come either to Griffin or to Severals if you do not   want 
 to . " 

 " give they up yourself ; stay here with I ! " 

 she colour quickly as he say this , and break out : " Lord , how you hate 
 political house ! " 

 " how can you say that when from February to August I spend every blessed 
 night in one ? " 

 " yes , and hate that bad of all . " 

 " so do half the people who be in it . you , my dear , must have so many 
 thing , so many people , so much mise - en - scene and such a perpetual 
 spectacle to live , " Nick go on . " perpetual motion , perpetual visit , 
 perpetual crowd ! if you go into the country you will see forty people 
 every day and be mix up with they all day . the idea of a quiet 
 fortnight in town , when by a happy if idiotic superstition everybody 
 go out of it , disconcert and frighten you . it be the very time , it be 
 the very place , to do a little work and possess one 's soul . " 

 this vehement allocution find she evidently somewhat unprepared ; but 
 she be sagacious enough , instead of attempt for the moment a general 
 rejoinder , to seize on a single phrase and say : " work ? what work can you 
 do in London at such a moment as this ? " 

 Nick consider . " I might tell you I want to get up a lot of subject , 
 to sit at home and read blue - book ; but that would not   be quite what I 
 mean . " 

 " do you mean you want to paint ? " 

 " yes , that be it , since you gouge it out of I . " 

 " why do you make such a mystery about it ? you be at perfect liberty , " 
 Julia say . 

 she put out her hand to rest it on the mantel - shelf , but her companion 
 take it on the way and hold it in both his own . " you be delightful , 
 Julia , when you speak in that tone - then I know why it be I love you . 
 but I can not   do anything if I go to Griffin , if I go to Severals . " 

 " I see - I see , " she answer thoughtfully and kindly . 

 " I have   scarcely be inside of my studio for month , and I feel quite 
 homesick for it . the idea of put in a few quiet day there have take 
 hold of I : I rather cling to it . " 

 " it seem so odd your have a studio ! " Julia drop , speak so 
 quickly that the word be almost incomprehensible . 

 " do not   it sound absurd , for all the good it do I , or I do in it ? 
 of course one can produce nothing but rubbish on such term - without 
 continuity or persistence , with just a few day here and there . I ought 
 to be ashamed of myself , no doubt ; but even my rubbish interest I . 
 ' Guenille si l'on veut , ma guenille m'est chere . ' but I will go down to 
 harsh with you in a moment , Julia , " Nick pursue : " that would do as well 
 if we could be quiet there , without people , without a creature ; and I 
 should really be perfectly content . you would beautifully sit for I ; it 
 would be the occasion we have   so often want and never find . " 

 she shake her head slowly and with a smile that have a meaning for he . 
 " thank you , my dear ; nothing would induce I to go to Harsh with you . " 

 he look at her hard . " what be the matter whenever it be a question of 
 anything of that sort ? be you afraid of I ? " she pull her hand from 
 he quickly , turn away ; but he go on : " stay with I here then , when 
 everything be so right for it . we shall do beautifully - have the whole 
 place , have the whole day , to ourselves . hang your engagement ! 
 Telegraph you will not   come . we will live at the studio - you will sit to I 
 every day . now or never be our chance - when shall we have so good a one ? 
 think how charming it will be ! I will make you wish awfully that I may do 
 something . " 

 " I can not   get out of Griffin - it be impossible , " Julia say , move 
 far away and with her back present to he . 

 " then you be afraid of I - simply ! " 

 she turn straight round , very pale . " of course I be . you be welcome to 
 know it . " 

 he go toward she , and for a moment she seem to make another slight 
 movement of retreat . this , however , be scarcely perceptible , and there 
 be nothing to alarm in the tone of reasonable entreaty in which he 
 speak as he stand there . " put an end , Julia , to our absurd situation - it 
 really can not   go on . you have   no right to expect a man to be happy or 
 comfortable in so false a position . we be speak of odiously - of that we 
 may be sure ; and yet what good have we of it ? " 

 " speak of ? do I care for that ? " 

 " do you mean you be indifferent because there be no ground ? that be 
 just why I hate it . " 

 " I do not   know what you be talk about ! " she return with sharp 
 disdain . 

 " be my wife to - morrow - be my wife next week . let we have do with this 
 fantastic probation and be happy . " 

 " leave I now - come back to - morrow . I will write to you . " she have the air 
 of plead with he at present , plead as he plead . 

 " you can not   resign yourself to the idea of one 's look ' out of it ' ! " 
 Nick laugh . 

 " come to - morrow , before lunch , " she go on . 

 " to be tell I must wait six month more and then be send about my 
 business ? ah , Julia , Julia ! " the young man groan . 

 something in this simple lament - it sound natural and perfectly 
 unstudied - seem straightway to make a great impression on she . " you 
 shall wait no long , " she say after a short silence . 

 " what do you mean by no long ? " 

 " give I about five week - say till the whitsuntide recess . " 

 " five week be a great deal , " smile Nick . 

 " there be thing to be do - you ought to understand . " 

 " I only understand how I love you . " 

 she let herself go - " Dearest Nick ! " - and he catch she and keep she in 
 his arm . 

 " I have   your promise then for five week hence to a day ? " he demand as 
 she at last release herself . 

 " we will settle that - the exact day ; there be thing to consider and to 
 arrange . come to luncheon to - morrow . " 

 " I will come early - I will come at one , " he say ; and for a moment they 
 stand all deeply and intimately take each other in . 

 " do you think I want to wait , any more than you ? " she ask in 
 congruity with this . 

 " I do not   feel so much out of it now ! " he declare by way of answer . 
 " you will stay of course now - you will give up your visit ? " 

 she have hold of the lappet of his coat ; she have keep it in her hand even 
 while she detach herself from his embrace . there be a white flower in 
 his buttonhole that she look at and play with a moment before she 
 say ; " I have   a well idea - you need not   come to Griffin . stay in your 
 studio - do as you like - paint dozen of picture . " 

 " Dozens ? Barbarian ! " Nick wail . 

 the epithet apparently have an endearing suggestion for she ; it at any 
 rate lead she to let he possess himself of her head and , so hold it , 
 kiss she - lead she to say : " what on earth do I want but that you should 
 do absolutely as you please and be as happy as you can ? " 

 he kiss she in another place at this ; but he put it to she ; " what 
 dreadful proposition be come now ? " 

 " I will go off and do up my visit and come back . " 

 " and leave I alone ? " 

 " do not   be affect ! you know you will work much well without I . you will 
 live in your studio - I shall be well out of the way . " 

 " that be not what one want of a sitter . how can I paint you ? " 

 " you can paint I all the rest of your life . I shall be a perpetual 
 sitter . " 

 " I believe I could paint you without look at you " - and his light 
 face shine down on she . " you do excuse I then from those dreary 
 place ? " 

 " how can I insist after what you say about the pleasure of keep 
 these day ? " she admirably - it be so all sincerely - ask . 

 " you be the good woman on earth - though it do seem odd you should rush 
 away as soon as our little business be settle . " 

 " we shall make it up . I know what I be about . and now go ! " she end by 
 almost push he out of the room . 




 XXIII 


 it be certainly singular , in the light of other matter , that on 
 sit down in his studio after she have leave town Nick should not , as 
 regard the effort to project plastically some beautiful form , have feel 
 more chilled by the absence of a friend who be such an embodiment of 
 beauty . she be away and he miss she and long for she , and yet 
 without she the place be more fill with what he want to find in it . 
 he turn into it with confused feeling , the strong of which be a 
 sense of release and recreation . it look blighted and lonely and 
 dusty , and his old study , as he rummage they out , strike he even as 
 less inspired than the last time he have venture to face they . but amid 
 this neglected litter , in the colourless and obstruct light of a high 
 north window which need washing , he come nearer taste the 
 possibility of positive happiness : it appear to he that , as he have 
 say to Julia , he be more in possession of his soul . it be frivolity 
 and folly , it be puerility , to spend valuable hour potter over the 
 vain implement of an art he have relinquish ; and a certain shame that 
 he have feel in present his plea to Julia that Sunday night arise from 
 the sense not of what he cling to , but of what he have give up . he have 
 turn his back on serious work , so that pottering be now all he could 
 aspire to . it could not   be fruitful , it could not   be anything but 
 ridiculous , almost ignoble ; but it soothe his nerve , it be in the 
 nature of a secret dissipation . he have never suspect he should some 
 day have nerve on his own part to count with ; but this possibility have 
 be reveal to he on the day it become clear that he be let 
 something precious go . he be glad he have not to justify himself to the 
 critical , for this might have be a delicate business . the critical 
 be mostly absent ; and besides , shut up all day in his studio , how 
 should he ever meet they ? it be the place in the world where he feel 
 furthest away from his constituent . that be a part of the 
 pleasure - the consciousness that for the hour the coast be clear and 
 his mind independent . his mother and his sister have go to Broadwood : 
 Lady Agnes - the phrase sound brutal but represent his state of 
 mind - be well out of the way . he have write to she as soon as Julia 
 leave town - he have apprise she of the fact that his wedding - day be 
 fix : a relief for poor Lady Agnes to a period of intolerable 
 mystification , of dark , dumb wondering and watch . she have say she 
 say the day of the poll at Harsh ; she be too proud to ask and too 
 discreet to " nag " ; so she could only wait for something that do not 
 come . the unconditioned loan of Broadwood have of course be something 
 of a bribe to patience : she have at first feel that on the day she should 
 take possession of that capital house Julia would indeed seem to have 
 enter the family . but the gift have confirm expectation just enough 
 to make disappointment more bitter ; and the discomfort be great in 
 proportion as she fail to discover what be the matter . her daughter 
 Grace be much occupy with this question , and bring it up for 
 discussion in a manner irritate to her ladyship , who have a high theory 
 of be silent about it , but who , however , in the long run , be more 
 unhappy when , in consequence of a reprimand , the girl suggest no 
 reason at all than when she suggest stupid one . it ease Lady Agnes 
 a little to advert to the mystery when she could have the air of not 
 have begin . 

 the letter Nick receive from she the first day of Passion Week in reply 
 to his important communication be the only one he read at that moment ; 
 not count of course the several note Mrs. Dallow address to he 
 from Griffin . there be letter pile up , as he know , in Calcutta 
 Gardens , which his servant have strict order not to bring to the studio . 
 Nick sleep now in the bedroom attach to this retreat ; get thing , as 
 he want they , from Calcutta Gardens ; and din at his club , where a 
 stray surviving friend or two , see he prowl about the library in the 
 evening , be free to impute to such eccentricity some subtly political 
 basis . when he think of his neglect letter he remember Mr. 
 Carteret 's conviction on the subject of not " get behind " ; they make 
 he laugh , in the slightly sonorous painting - room , as he bend over one 
 of the old canvas that he have venture to turn to the light . he be 
 fully determine , however , to master his correspondence before go 
 down , the last thing before Parliament should reassemble , to spend 
 another day at beauclere . master his correspondence mean , in Nick 's 
 mind , break open envelope ; write answer be scarcely involve in 
 the idea . but Mr. Carteret would never guess that . Nick be not move 
 even to write to he that the affair with Julia be on the point of 
 take the form he have be so good as to desire : he reserve the 
 pleasure of this announcement for a personal interview . 

 the day before Good Friday , in the morning , his stillness be break by 
 a rat - tat - tat on the outer door of his studio , administer apparently 
 by the knob of a walking - stick . his servant be out and he go to the 
 door , wonder who his visitor could be at such a time , especially of 
 the rather presume class . the class be indicate by the visitor 's 
 failure to look for the bell - since there be a bell , though it 
 require a little research . in a moment the mystery be solve : the 
 gentleman who stand smile at he from the threshold could only be 
 Gabriel Nash . Nick have not see this whimsical personage for several 
 month , and have have no news of he beyond a general intimation that he 
 be follow his fancy in foreign part . his old friend have 
 sufficiently prepare he , at the time of their reunion in Paris , for 
 the idea of the fitful in intercourse ; and he have not be ignorant , on 
 his return from Paris , that he should have have an opportunity to miss 
 he if he have not be too busy to take advantage of it . in London , 
 after the episode at Harsh , Gabriel have not reappear : he have redeem 
 none of the pledge give the night they walk together to Notre Dame 
 and converse on important matter . he be to have interpose in Nick 's 
 destiny , but he have not interpose ; he be to have pull he hard and 
 in the opposite sense from Julia , but there have be no pull ; he be 
 to have save he , as he call it , and yet Nick be lose . this 
 circumstance indeed form his excuse : the member for Harsh have rush 
 so wantonly to perdition . Nick have for the hour seriously wish to keep 
 hold of he : he value he as a salutary influence . yet on come to his 
 sens after his election our young man have recognise that Nash might 
 very well have reflect on the thanklessness of such a slippery 
 subject - might have hold himself release from his vow . of course it 
 have be particularly in the event of a liberal triumph that he have 
 threaten to make himself feel ; the effect of a brand pluck from the 
 burning would be so much great if the flame be already high . yet 
 Nick have not keep he to the letter of this pledge , and have so fully 
 admit the right of a thorough connoisseur , let alone a faithful 
 friend , to lose patience with he that he be now far from greet his 
 visitor with a reproach . he feel much more throw on his defence . 

 Gabriel , however , forbore at first to attack he . he bring in only 
 blandness and benevolence and a great content at have obey the 
 mystic voice - it be really a remarkable case of second sight - which have 
 whisper he that the recreant comrade of his prime be in town . he have 
 just come back from Sicily after a southern winter , accord to a 
 custom frequent with he , and have be move by a miraculous prescience , 
 unfavourable as the moment might seem , to go and ask for Nick in 
 Calcutta Gardens , where he have extract from his friend 's servant an 
 address not know to all the world . he show Nick what a mistake it have 
 be to fear a dull arraignment , and how he habitually ignore all 
 lapse and keep up the standard only by take a hundred fine thing for 
 grant . he also abound more than ever in his own sense , remind his 
 relieved listener how no recollection of he , no evocation of he in 
 absence , could ever do he justice . you could not   recall he without 
 seem to exaggerate he , and then acknowledge , when you see he , that 
 your exaggeration have fall short . he emerge out of vagueness - his 
 Sicily might have be the Sicily of a winter 's Tale - and would 
 evidently be reabsorb in it ; but his presence be positive and 
 pervasive enough . he be duly " intense " while he last . his connexion 
 be with beauty , urbanity and conversation , as usual , but they make up 
 a circle you could not   find in the Court Guide . Nick have a sense that he 
 know " a lot of esthetic people , " but he deal in idea much more than 
 in name and address . he be genial and jocose , sunburnt and 
 romantically allusive . it be to be gather that he have be live for 
 many day in a saracenic tower where his principal occupation be to 
 watch for the flushing of the west . he have retain all the serenity of 
 his opinion and make light , with a candour of which the only defect be 
 apparently that it be not quite enough a conscious virtue , of many of 
 the object of common esteem . when Nick ask he what he have be do 
 he reply , " oh living , you know " ; and the tone of the word offer 
 they as the story of a great deed . he make a long visit , stay to 
 luncheon and after luncheon , so that the little studio hear all at once 
 a great quantity of brave talk than in the several previous year of 
 its history . with much of our tale leave to tell it be a pity that so 
 little of this colloquy may be report here ; since , as affair take 
 their course , it mark really - if the question be of note the exact 
 point - a turn of the tide in Nick Dormer 's personal situation . he be 
 destine to remember the accent with which Nash exclaim , on his 
 drawing forth sundry specimen of amateurish earnestness : 

 " I say - I say - I say ! " 

 he glance round with a heighten colour . " they be pretty bad , eh ? " 

 " oh you be a deep one , " Nash go on . 

 " what be the matter ? " 

 " do you call your conduct that of a man of honour ? " 

 " Scarcely perhaps . but when no one have see they - ! " 

 " that be your villainy . C'est de l'exquis , du pur exquis . come , my dear 
 fellow , this be very serious - it be a bad business , " say Gabriel Nash . 
 then he add almost with austerity : " you will be so good as to place 
 before I every patch of paint , every sketch and scrap , that this room 
 contain . " 

 Nick comply in great good humour . he turn out his box and drawer , 
 shovel forth the content of bulge portfolio , mount on chair to 
 unhook old canvas that have be severely ' ski . " he be modest and 
 docile and patient and amuse , above all he be quite thrill - thrill 
 with the idea of elicit a note of appreciation so late in the day . it 
 be the oddest thing how he at present in fact find himself impute 
 value to his visitor - attribute to he , among attribution more 
 confused , the dignity of judgement , the authority of knowledge . Nash be 
 an ambiguous character but an excellent touchstone . the two say very 
 little for a while , and they have almost half an hour 's silence , during 
 which , after our young man have hastily improvise an exhibition , there 
 be only a puffing of cigarette . Gabriel walk about , look at this 
 and that , take up rough study and lay they down , ask a 
 question of fact , fish with his umbrella , on the floor , amid a pile 
 of unarranged sketch . Nick accept jocosely the attitude of suspense , 
 but there be even more of it in his heart than in his face . so few 
 people have see his young work - almost no one who really count . he have 
 be ashamed of it , never show it to bring on a conclusion , since a 
 conclusion be precisely what he fear . he whistle now while he let 
 his companion take time . he rub old panel with his sleeve and dab 
 wet sponge on surface that have sink . it be a long time since he have 
 feel so gay , strange as such an assertion sound in regard to a young 
 man whose bridal - day have at his urgent solicitation lately be fix . 
 he have stay in town to be alone with his imagination , and suddenly , 
 paradoxically , the sense of that result have arrive with poor nash . 

 " Nicholas Dormer , " this personage remark at last , " for grossness of 
 immorality I think I have   never see your equal . " 

 " that sound so well , " Nick return , " that I hesitate to risk spoil 
 it by wish it explain . " 

 " do not   you recognise in any degree the grand idea of duty ? " 

 " if I do not   grasp it with a certain firmness I be a deadly failure , for I 
 be quite bring up on it , " Nick say . 

 " then you be indeed the wretched failure I know . life be ugly , after 
 all . " 

 " do I gather that you yourself recognise obligation of the order you 
 allude to ? " 

 " do you ' gather ' ? " Nash star . " why , be not   they the very flame of my 
 faith , the burden of my song ? " 

 " my dear fellow , duty be do , and I have   infer that you think rather 
 poorly of do - that it spoil one 's style . " 

 " do wrong , assuredly . " 

 " but what do you call right ? what be your canon of certainty there ? " Nick 
 ask . 

 " the conscience that be in we - that charming , conversible , infinite 
 thing , the intense thing we know . but you must treat the oracle 
 civilly if you wish to make it speak . you must not   stride into the temple 
 in muddy jack - boot and with your hat on your head , as the Puritan 
 trooper tramp into the dear old abbey . one must do one 's good to 
 find out the right , and your criminality appear to be that you have   not 
 take the commonest trouble . " 

 " I have not   you to ask , " smile Nick . " but duty strike I as do 
 something in particular . if you be too afraid it may be the wrong thing 
 you may let everything go . " 

 " be be do , and if do be duty being be duty . do you follow ? " 

 " at a very great distance . " 

 " to be what one may be , really and efficaciously , " Nash go on , " to 
 feel it and understand it , to accept it , adopt it , embrace it - that be 
 conduct , that be life . " 

 " and suppose one be a brute or an ass , where be the efficacy ? " 

 " in one 's very want of intelligence . in such case one be out of it - the 
 question do not   exist ; one simply become a part of the duty of other . 
 the brute , the ass , " Nick 's visitor develop , " neither feel nor 
 understand , nor accept nor adopt . those fine process in themselves 
 classify we . they educate , they exalt , they preserve ; so that to profit 
 by they we must be as perceptive as we can . we must recognise our 
 particular form , the instrument that each of we - each of we who carry 
 anything - carry in his being . master this instrument , learn to 
 play it in perfection - that be what I call duty , what I call conduct , 
 what I call success . " 

 Nick listen with friendly attention and the air of general assent be 
 in his face as he say : " every one have it then , this individual pipe ? " 

 " ' every one , ' my dear fellow , be too much to say , for the world 's full 
 of the crudest remplissage . the book of life 's pad , ah but 
 pad - a deplorable want of editing ! I speak of every one who be any 
 one . of course there be pipe and pipe - little quavering flute for 
 the concerted movement and big cornet - a - piston for the great solo . " 

 " I see , I see . and what might your instrument be ? " 

 Nash hesitate not a moment ; his answer be radiantly there . " to speak 
 to people just as I be speak to you . to prevent for instance a great 
 wrong be do . " 

 " a great wrong - ? " 

 " yes - to the human race . I talk - I talk ; I say the thing other people 
 do not , the thing they can not   the thing they will not , " Gabriel go on 
 with his inimitable candour . 

 " if it be a question of mastery and perfection you certainly have they , " 
 his companion reply . 

 " and you have not , alas ; that be the pity of it , that be the scandal . 
 that be the wrong I want to set right before it become too public a 
 shame . if I call you just now grossly immoral it be on account of the 
 spectacle you present - a spectacle to be hide from the eye of 
 ingenuous youth : that of a man neglect his own fiddle to blunder away 
 on that of one of his fellow . we can not   afford such mistake , we can not 
 tolerate such licence . " 

 " you think then I have a fiddle ? " - and our young man , in spite of 
 himself , attach to the question a quaver of suspense fine , doubtless , 
 than any that have ever pass his lip . 

 " a regular Stradivarius ! all these thing you have   show I be remarkably 
 interesting . you have   a talent of a wonderfully pure strain . " 

 " I say - I say - I say ! " Nick exclaim , hover there with his hand in 
 his pocket and a blush on his lighted face , while he repeat with a 
 change of accent Nash 's exclamation of half an hour before . 

 " I like it , your talent ; I measure it , I appreciate it , I insist upon 
 it , " that critic go on between the whiff of his cigarette . " I have to 
 be awfully wise and good to do so , but fortunately I be . in such a case 
 that be my duty . I shall make you my business for a while . therefore , " he 
 add piously ; " do not   say I be unconscious of the moral law . " 

 " a Stradivarius ? " say Nick interrogatively and with his eye wide open . 
 the thought in his mind be of how different this seem from his have 
 go to Griffin . 




 XXIV 


 his counsellor have plenty of further opportunity to develop this and 
 other figurative remark , for he not only spend several of the middle 
 hour of the day at the studio , but come back in the evening - the pair 
 have din together at a little foreign pothouse in Soho , reveal to 
 Nick on this occasion - and discuss the great question far into the 
 night . the great question be whether , on the showing of those example 
 of his ability with which the scene of their discourse be now densely 
 bestrewn , Nick Dormer would be justify in " really go in " for the 
 practice of pictorial art . this may strike many reader of his history 
 as a limited and even trivial inquiry , with little of the heroic or the 
 romantic in it ; but it be none the less carry to the fine point by 
 our impassioned young man . Nick suspect Nash of exaggerate his 
 encouragement in order to play a malign trick on the political world at 
 whose expense it be his fond fancy to divert himself - without indeed 
 make that organisation perceptibly totter - and remind he that his 
 present accusation of immorality be strangely inconsistent with the 
 wanton hope express by he in Paris , the hope that the liberal 
 candidate at Harsh would be return . Nash reply , first , " oh I have not 
 be in this place then ! " but he defend himself later and more 
 effectually by say that it be not of Nick 's have get elect he 
 complain : it be of his visible hesitancy to throw up his seat . Nick 
 beg that he would not   mention this , and his gallantry fail to render 
 he incapable of say : " the fact be I have not   the nerve for it . " they 
 talk then for a while of what he could do , not of what he could not ; 
 of the mystery and miracle of reproduction and representation ; of the 
 strong , sane joy of the artistic life . Nick make afresh , with more 
 fulness , his great confession , that his private ideal of happiness be 
 the life of a great painter of portrait . he utter his thought on that 
 head so copiously and lucidly that Nash 's own abundance be still and 
 he listen almost as if he have be listen to something 
 new - difficult as it be to conceive a point of view for such a matter 
 with which he be unacquainted . 

 " there it be , " say Nick at last - " there be the naked , preposterous 
 truth : that if I be to do exactly as I like I should spend my year 
 reproduce the more or less vacuous countenance of my fellow - mortal . 
 I should find peace and pleasure and wisdom and worth , I should find 
 fascination and a measure of success in it - out of the din and the dust 
 and the scramble , the world of party label , party cry , party bargain 
 and party treachery : of humbuggery , hypocrisy and can not . the cleanness 
 and quietness of it , the independent effort to do something , to leave 
 something which shall give joy to man long after the howling have die 
 away to the last ghost of an echo - such a vision solicit I in the 
 watch of night with an almost irresistible force . " 

 as he drop these remark he loll on a big divan with one of his 
 long leg fold up , while his visitor stop in front of he after 
 move about the room vaguely and softly , almost on tiptoe , so as not to 
 interrupt he . " you speak , " Nash say , " with the special and dreadful 
 eloquence that rise to a man 's lip when he have practically , whatever 
 his theory may be , renounce the right and drop hideously into the 
 wrong . then his regret for the right , a certain exquisite appreciation 
 of it , put on an accent I know well how to recognise . " 

 Nick look up at he a moment . " you have   hit it if you mean by that that 
 I have not   resign my seat and that I do not   intend to . " 

 " I think you take it only to give it up . do not   you remember our talk 
 in Paris ? " 

 " I like to be a part of the spectacle that amuse you , " Nick return , 
 " but I could scarcely have take so much trouble as that for it . " 

 " be not   it then an absurd comedy , the life you lead ? " 

 " comedy or tragedy - I do not   know which ; whatever it be I appear to be 
 capable of it to please two or three people . " 

 " then you can take trouble ? " say Nash . 

 " yes , for the woman I be to marry . " 

 " oh you be to marry ? " 

 " that be what have come on since we meet in Paris , " Nick explain , " and it 
 make just the difference . " 

 " ah my poor friend , " smile Gabriel , much arrest , " no wonder you have   an 
 eloquence , an accent ! " 

 " it be a pity I have they in the wrong place . I be expect to have they 
 in the House of Commons . " 

 " you will when you make your farewell speech there - to announce that you 
 chuck it up . and may I venture to ask who be to be your wife ? " the 
 visitor pursue . 

 " Mrs. Dallow have kindly consent to accept that yoke . I think you see 
 she in Paris . " 

 " ah yes : you speak of she to I , and I remember ask you even then if 
 you be in love with she . " 

 " I be not   then , " say Nick . 

 Nash have a grave pause . " and be you now ? " 

 " oh dear , yes . " 

 " that would be well - if it be not   bad . " 

 " nothing could be well , " Nick declare . " it be the good thing that can 
 happen to I . " 

 " well , " his friend continue , " you must let I very respectfully 
 approach this lady . you must let I bring she round . " 

 " bring she round to what ? " 

 " to everything . talk she over . " 

 " talk she under ! " Nick laugh - but make his joke a little as to gain 
 time . he remember the effect this adviser have produce on Julia - an 
 effect that scantly minister to the idea of another meeting . Julia have 
 have no occasion to allude again to Nick 's imperturbable friend ; he have 
 pass out of her life at once and for ever ; but there flicker up a 
 quick memory of the contempt he have lead she to express , together with a 
 sense of how odd she would think it her intend should have throw over 
 two pleasant visit to cultivate such company . 

 " over to a proper pride in what you may do , " Nash return - " what you 
 may do above all if she will help you . " 

 " I scarcely see how she can help I , " say Nick with an air of thinking . 

 " she be extremely handsome as I remember she . you could do great thing 
 with she . " 

 " ah , there be the rub , " Nick go on . " I want she to sit for I this 
 week , but she would not   hear of it . " 

 " Elle a bien tort . you should attack some fine strong type . be Mrs. 
 Dallow in London ? " Nash inquire . 

 " for what do you take she ? she be pay visit . " 

 " then I have   a model for you . " 

 " then you have - ? " Nick star . " what have that to do with Mrs. 
 Dallow 's be away ? " 

 " do not   it give you more time ? " 

 " oh the time fly ! " sigh Nick with a spontaneity that make his 
 companion again laugh out - a demonstration in which for a moment he 
 himself rather ruefully join . 

 " do she like you to paint ? " that personage ask with one of his 
 candid intonation . 

 " so she say . " 

 " well , do something fine to show she . " 

 " I would rather show it to you , " Nick confess . 

 " my dear fellow , I see it from here - if you do your duty . do you 
 remember the Tragic Muse ? " Nash add for explanation . 

 " the Tragic Muse ? " 

 " that girl in Paris , whom we hear at the old actress 's and afterwards 
 meet at the charming entertainment give by your cousin - be not   he ? - the 
 secretary of embassy . " 

 " oh Peter 's girl ! of course I remember she . " 

 " do not   call she Peter 's ; call she rather mine , " Nash say with easy 
 rectification . " I invent she . I introduce she . I reveal she . " 

 " I think you on the contrary ridicule and repudiate she . " 

 " as a fine , handsome young woman surely not - I seem to myself to have 
 be all the while render her service . I say I dislike tea - party 
 ranter , and so I do ; but if my estimate of her power be below the 
 mark she have more than punish I . " 

 " what have she do ? " Nick ask . 

 " she have become interesting , as I suppose you know . " 

 " how should I know ? " 

 " well , you must see she , you must paint she , " Nash return . " she tell 
 I something be say about it that day at Madame CarrĂ ' s. " 

 " oh I remember - say by Peter . " 

 " then it will please Mr. Sherringham - you will be glad to do that . I 
 suppose you know all he have do for Miriam ? " Gabriel pursue . 

 " not a bit , I know nothing about Peter 's affair , " Nick say , " unless it 
 be in general that he go in for mountebank and mime and that it 
 occur to I I have   hear one of my sister mention - the rumour have come 
 to she - that he have be back Miss Rooth . " 

 " Miss Rooth delight to talk of his kindness ; she be charming when she 
 speak of it . it be to his good office that she owe her appearance 
 here . " 

 " here ? " Nick 's interest rise . " be she in London ? " 

 " d'ou tombez - vous ? I think you people read the paper . " 

 " what should I read , when I sit - sometimes - through the stuff they put 
 into they ? " 

 " of course I see that - that your engagement at your own variety - show , 
 with its interminable ' turn , ' keep you from go to the other . learn 
 then , " say Gabriel Nash , " that you have   a great competitor and that 
 you be distinctly not , much as you may suppose it , the rise 
 comedian . the Tragic Muse be the great modern personage . have not   you 
 hear people speak of she , have not   you be take to see she ? " 

 Nick bethink himself . " I daresay I have   hear of she , but with a good 
 many other thing on my mind I have forget it . " 

 " certainly I can imagine what have be on your mind . she remember you 
 at any rate ; she repay neglect with sympathy . she want , " say Nash , 
 " to come and see you . " 

 " ' see ' I ? " it be all for Nick now a wonder . 

 " to be see by you - it come to the same thing . she be really worth 
 see ; you must let I bring she ; you will find she very suggestive . that 
 idea that you should paint she - she appear to consider it a sort of 
 bargain . " 

 " a bargain ? " our young man enter , as he believe , into the humour of 
 the thing . " what will she give I ? " 

 " a splendid model . she be splendid . " 

 " oh then bring she , " say Nick . 




 XXV 


 Nash bring she , the great modern personage , as he have describe she , 
 the very next day , and it take his friend no long time to test his 
 assurance that Miriam Rooth be now splendid . she have make an impression 
 on he ten month before , but it have haunt he only a day , soon 
 overlay as it have be with other image . yet after Nash have talk of 
 she a while he recall she well ; some of her attitude , some of she 
 look and tone begin to hover before he . he be charm in advance 
 with the notion of paint she . when she stand there in fact , however , 
 it seem to he he have remember she wrong ; the brave , free , rather 
 grand creature who instantly fill his studio with such an unexampled 
 presence have so shake off her clumsiness , the rudeness and crudeness 
 that have make he pity she , a whole provincial and ' second - rate " side . 
 Miss Rooth be light and bright and direct to - day - direct without be 
 stiff and bright without be garish . to Nick 's perhaps inadequately 
 sophisticated mind the model , the actress be figure of a vulgar 
 setting ; but it would have be impossible to show that taint less than 
 this extremely natural yet extremely distinguished aspirant to 
 distinction . she be more natural even than Gabriel Nash - " nature " be 
 still Nick 's formula for his amusing old friend - and beside she he 
 appear almost commonplace . 

 Nash recognise her superiority with a frankness honourable to both of 
 they - testify in this manner to his sense that they be all three 
 serious being , worthy to deal with fine reality . she attract crowd 
 to her theatre , but to his appreciation of such a fact as that , 
 important doubtless in its way , there be the limit he have already 
 express . what he now feel bind in all integrity to register be his 
 perception that she have , in general and quite apart from the question of 
 the box - office , a remarkable , a very remarkable , artistic nature . he 
 allow that she have surprise he here ; know of she in other day 
 mainly that she be hungry to adopt an overrated profession he have not 
 impute to she the normal measure of intelligence . now he see - he have 
 have some talk with she - that she be capable almost of a violent play 
 of mind ; so much so that he be sorry for the embarrassment it would be 
 to she . Nick could imagine the discomfort of have anything in the 
 nature of a mind to arrange for in such condition . " she be a woman of 
 the good intention , really of the good , " Nash explain kindly and 
 lucidly , almost paternally , " and the quite rare head you can see for 
 yourself . " 

 Miriam , smile as she sit on an old venetian chair , hold aloft , with 
 the noble effect , that quarter of her person to which this patronage 
 be extend , remark to her host that , strange as it might appear , 
 she have get quite to like poor Mr. Nash : she could make he go about 
 with she - it be a relief to her mother . 

 " when I take he she have perfect peace , " the girl say ; " then she can 
 stay at home and see the interviewer . she delight in that and I hate 
 it , so our friend here be a great comfort . of course a femme de 
 thĂ Ă tre be suppose to be able to go out alone , but there be a kind of 
 ' smartness , ' an add chic , in have some one . People think he be my 
 ' companion ' ; I be sure they fancy I pay he . I would pay he , if he would take 
 it - and perhaps he will yet ! - rather than give he up , for it do not 
 matter that he be not a lady . he be one in tact and sympathy , as you 
 see . and base as he think the sort of thing I do he can not   keep away 
 from the theatre . when you be celebrate people will look at you who 
 could never before find out for themselves why they should . " 

 " when you be celebrate you grow handsomer ; at least that be what have 
 happen to you , though you be pretty too of old , " Gabriel placidly 
 argue . " I go to the theatre to look at your head ; it give I the 
 great pleasure . I take up anything of that sort as soon as I find it . 
 one never know how long it may last . " 

 " be you attribute that uncertainty to my appearance ? " Miriam 
 beautifully ask . 

 " dear no , to my own pleasure , the first precious bloom of it , " Nash go 
 on . " dormer at least , let I tell you in justice to he , have not   wait 
 till you be celebrate to want to see you again - he stand there 
 open - eyed - for the simple reason that he have not   the least idea of your 
 renown . I have to announce it to he . " 

 " have not   you see I act ? " Miriam put , without reproach , to her host . 

 " I will go to - night , " he handsomely declare . 

 " you have your terrible House , have not   you ? what do they call it - the 
 demand of public life ? " Miriam continue : in answer to which Gabriel 
 explain that he have the demand of private life as well , inasmuch as 
 he be in love - he be on the point of be marry . she listen to 
 this with participation ; then she say : " ah then do bring your - what do 
 they call she in English ? I be always afraid of say something 
 improper - your future . I will send you a box , under the circumstance ; 
 you will like that well . " she add that if he be to paint she he 
 would have to see she often on the stage , would not   he ? to profit by the 
  optique de la scene - what do they call that in English ? - study 
 she and fix his impression . but before he have time to meet this 
 proposition she ask he if it disgust he to hear she speak like 
 that , as if she be always pose and think about herself , live 
 only to be look at , thrust forward her person . she already often 
 get sick of do so , but a la guerre comme a la guerre . 

 " that be the fine artistic nature , you see - a sort of divine disgust 
 break out in she , " Nash expound . 

 " if you want to paint I ' at all at all ' of course . I be strike with the 
 way I be take that for grant , " the girl decently continue . " when Mr. 
 Nash speak of it to I I jump at the idea . I remember our meeting in 
 Paris and the kind thing you say to I . but no doubt one ought not   to 
 jump at idea when they represent serious sacrifice on the part of 
 other . " 

 " do not   she speak well ? " Nash demand of Nick . " oh she will go far ! " 

 " it be a great privilege to I to paint you : what title in the world have 
 I to pretend to such a model ? " Nick reply to Miriam . " the sacrifice be 
 your - a sacrifice of time and good nature and credulity . you come , in 
 your bright beauty and your genius , to this shabby place where I have 
 nothing worth speak of to show , not a guarantee to offer you ; and I 
 wonder what I have   do to deserve such a gift of the god . " 

 " do not   he speak well ? " - and Nash appeal with radiance to their 
 companion . 

 she take no notice of he , only repeat to Nick that she have not 
 forget his friendly attitude in Paris ; and when he answer that he 
 surely have do very little she break out , first rest her eye on 
 he with a deep , reasonable smile and then spring up quickly ; " ah 
 well , if I must justify myself I like you ! " 

 " Fancy my appear to challenge you ! " laugh Nick in deprecation . " to 
 see you again be to want tremendously to try something . but you must 
 have an infinite patience , because I be an awful duffer . " 

 she look round the wall . " I see what you have   do - bien des chose . " 

 " she understand - she understand , " Gabriel drop . and he add to 
 their visitor : " Imagine , when he might do something , his choose a life 
 of sham ! at bottom he be like you - a wonderful artistic nature . " 

 " I will have patience , " say the girl , smile at Nick . 

 " then , my child , I leave you - the peace of the Lord be with you . " 
 with which word Nash take his departure . 

 the other choose a position for the young woman 's sitting after she have 
 place herself in many different attitude and different light ; but an 
 hour have elapse before Nick get to work - begin , on a large canvas , to 
 " knock she in , " as he call it . he be hinder even by the fine 
 element of agitation , the emotion of find himself , out of a clear 
 sky , confront with such a subject and launch in such a task . what 
 could the situation be but incongruous just after he have formally 
 renounce all manner of " art " ? - the renunciation take effect not a bit 
 the less from the whim he have all consciously treat himself to as a 
 whim   the last he should ever descend to !   the freak of a fortnight 's 
 relapse into a fingering of old sketch for the purpose , as he might 
 have say , of burn they up , of clear out his studio and 
 terminate his lease . there be both embarrassment and inspiration in 
 the strange chance of snatch back for an hour a relinquished joy : the 
 jump with which he find he could still rise to such an occasion take 
 away his breath a little , at the same time that the idea - the idea of 
 what one might make of such material - touch he with an irresistible 
 wand . on the spot , to his inner vision , Miriam become a rich result , 
 draw a hundred formative force out of their troubled sleep , defy 
 he where he privately feel strong and impose herself triumphantly 
 in her own strength . he have the good fortune , without strike match , 
 to see she , as a subject , in a vivid light , and his quick attempt be as 
 exciting as a sudden gallop - he might have be astride , in a boundless 
 field , of a runaway horse . 

 she be in her way so fine that he could only think how to " do " she : 
 that hard calculation soon flatten out the consciousness , lively in 
 he at first , that she be a beautiful woman who have seek he out of 
 his retirement . at the end of their first sit she have do so 
 appear the most natural thing in the world : he have a perfect right to 
 entertain she there - explanation and complication be engulf in the 
 productive mood . the business of " knock she in " hold up a lamp to her 
 beauty , show he how much there be of it and that she be infinitely 
 interesting . he do not   want to fall in love with she - that would be a 
 sell , he say to himself - and she promptly become much too interesting 
 for it . Nick might have reflect , for simplification 's sake , as his 
 cousin Peter have do , but with more validity , that he be engage with 
 Miss Rooth in an undertaking which do not   in the least refer to 
 themselves , that they be work together seriously and that decent 
 work quite gainsaid sensibility - the humbug sort alone have to help 
 themselves out with it . but after her first sit - she come , poor 
 girl , but twice - the need of such exorcism pass from his spirit : he 
 have so thoroughly , so practically take she up . as to whether his 
 visitor have the same bright and still sense of co - operation to a 
 definite end , the sense of the distinctively technical nature of the 
 answer to every question to which the occasion might give birth , that 
 mystery would be light only be it open to we to regard this young 
 lady through some other medium than the mind of her friend . we have 
 choose , as it happen , for some of the great advantage it carry with 
 it , the indirect vision ; and it fail as yet to tell we - what Nick of 
 course wonder about before he cease to care , as indeed he intimate 
 to she - why a bud celebrity should have dream of there be 
 something for she in so blight a spot . she should have go to one of 
 the regular people , the great people : they would have welcome she with 
 open arm . when Nick ask she if some of the R.A. 's have not   express a 
 wish for a crack at she she reply : " oh dear no , only the tiresome 
 photographer ; and fancy they in the future . if mamma could only do 
  that for I ! " and she add with the charming fellowship for which she 
 be conspicuous at these hour : " you know I do not   think any one yet have 
 be quite so much strike with I as you . " 

 " not even Peter Sherringham ? " her host jest while he step back to 
 judge of the effect of a line . 

 " oh Mr. Sherringham 's different . you be an artist . " 

 " for pity 's sake do not   say that ! " he cry . " and as regard your art I 
 think Peter know more than any one . " 

 " ah you be severe , " say Miriam . 

 " Severe - ? " 

 " because that be what the poor dear think . but he do know a lot - he 
 have be a providence to I . " 

 " then why have not   he come over to see you act ? " 

 she have a pause . " how do you know he have not   come ? " 

 " because I take for grant he would have call on I if he have . " 

 " do he like you very much ? " the girl ask . 

 " I do not   know . I like he . " 

 " he be a gentleman - pour cela , " she say . 

 " oh yes , for that ! " Nick go on absently , labour hard . 

 " but he be afraid of I - afraid to see I . " 

 " do not   he think you good enough ? " 

 " on the contrary - he believe I shall carry he away and he be in a 
 terror of my do it . " 

 " he ought to like that , " say Nick with conscious folly . 

 " that be what I mean when I say he be not an artist . however , he declare 
 he do like it , only it appear to be not the right thing for he . oh 
 the right thing - he be ravenous for that . but it be not for I to blame 
 he , since I be too . he be come some night , however . then , " she add 
 almost grimly , " he shall have a dose . " 

 " Poor Peter ! " Nick return with a compassion none the less real because 
 it be mirthful : the girl 's tone be so expressive of easy unscrupulous 
 power . 

 " he be such a curious mixture , " she luxuriously go on ; ' sometimes I 
 quite lose patience with he . it be not   exactly try to serve both God 
 and Mammon , but it be muddle up the stage and the world . the world be 
 hang ! the stage , or anything of that sort - I mean one 's artistic 
 conscience , one 's true faith - come first . " 

 " Brava , brava ! you do I good , " Nick murmur , still amuse , beguile , 
 and at work . " but it be very kind of you , when I be in this absurd state 
 of ignorance , to impute to I the honour of have be more strike with 
 you than any one else , " he continue after a moment . 

 " yes , I confess I do not   quite see - when the shop be full of my 
 photograph . " 

 " oh I be so poor - I do not   go into shop , " he explain . 

 " be you very poor ? " 

 " I live on alm . " 

 " and do not   they pay you - the government , the ministry ? " 

 " dear young lady , for what ? - for shut myself up with beautiful 
 woman ? " 

 " ah you have   other then ? " she extravagantly groan . 

 " they be not so kind as you , I confess . " 

 " I will buy it from you - what you be do : I will pay you well when it be 
 do , " say the girl . " I have   get money now . I make it , you know - a good 
 lot of it . it be too delightful after scrap and starving . try it and 
 you will see . give up the base , bad world . " 

 " but be not   it suppose to be the base , bad world that pay ? " 

 " precisely ; make it pay without mercy - knock it silly , squeeze it dry . 
 that be what it be mean for - to pay for art . ah if it be not   for that ! 
 I will bring you a quantity of photograph to - morrow - you must let I come 
 back to - morrow : it be so amusing to have they , by the hundred , all for 
 nothing , to give away . that be what take mamma most : she can not   get over 
 it . that be luxury and glory ; even at Castle Nugent they do not   do that . 
 People use to sketch I , but not so much as mamma veut bien le dire ; 
 and in all my life I never have but one poor little carte - de - visite , when 
 I be sixteen , in a plaid frock , with the bank of a river , at three 
 franc the dozen . " 




 XXVI 


 it be success , the member for Harsh feel , that have make she fine - the 
 full possession of her talent and the sense of the recognition of it . 
 there be an intimation in her presence   if he have give his mind to it 
 that for he too the same cause would produce the same effect - that be 
 would show he how be launch in the practice of an art make 
 strange and prompt revelation . Nick feel clumsy beside a person who 
 manifestly , now , have such an extraordinary familiarity with the esthetic 
 point of view . he remember too the clumsiness that have be in his 
 visitor - something silly and shabby , pert rather than proper , and of 
 quite another value than her actual smartness , as London people would 
 call it , her well - appointedness and her evident command of more than one 
 manner . handsome as she have be the year before , she have suggest 
 sordid lodging , bread and butter , heavy tragedy and tear ; and if then 
 she be an ill - dress girl with thick hair who want to be an actress , 
 she be already in these few week a performer who could even produce an 
 impression of not perform . she show what a light hand she could 
 have , forbore to startle and look as well , for unprofessional life , as 
 Julia : which be only the perfection of her professional character . 

 this function come out much in her talk , for there be many little 
 burst of confidence as well as many familiar pause as she sit there ; 
 and she be ready to tell Nick the whole history of her dă but - the 
 chance that have suddenly turn up and that she have catch , with a 
 fierce leap , as it pass . he miss some of the detail in his 
 attention to his own task , and some of they he fail to understand , 
 attach as they be to the name of Mr. Basil Dashwood , which he hear 
 for the first time . it be through Mr. Dashwood 's extraordinary 
 exertion that a hearing - a morning performance at a London theatre - have 
 be obtain for she . that have be the great step , for it have lead to 
 the putting on at night of the play , at the same theatre , in place of a 
 wretched thing they be try   it be no use   to keep on its foot , and 
 to her engagement for the principal part . she have make a hit in it - she 
 could not   pretend not to know that ; but she be already tired of it , 
 there be so many other thing she want to do ; and when she think 
 it would probably run a month or two more she fall to curse the odious 
 condition of artistic production in such an age . the play be a more or 
 less idiotised version of a new french piece , a thing that have take in 
 Paris at a third - rate theatre and be now prove itself in London good 
 enough for house mainly make up of ten - shill stall . it be Dashwood 
 who have say it would go if they could get the right and a fellow to 
 make some change : he have discover it at a nasty little place she have 
 never be to , over the Seine . they have get the right , and the fellow 
 who have make the change be practically Dashwood himself ; there be 
 another man in London , Mr. Gushmore - Miriam do not   know if Nick have 
 hear of he   Nick have not    who have do some of it . it have be awfully 
 chop down , to a mere bone , with the meat all gone ; but that be what 
 people in London seem to like . they be very innocent - thousand of 
 little dog amuse themselves with a bone . at any rate she have make 
 something , she have make a figure , of the woman - a dreadful stick , with 
 what Dashwood have muddle she into ; and Miriam add in the complacency 
 of her young expansion : " oh give I fifty word any time and the ghost 
 of a situation , and I will set you up somebody . besides , I must not   abuse 
 poor Yolande - she have save we , " she say . 

 " ' yolande ' - ? " 

 " our ridiculous play . that be the name of the impossible woman . she have 
 put bread into our mouth and she be a loaf on the shelf for the future . 
 the right be mine . " 

 " you be lucky to have they , " say Nick a little vaguely , trouble about 
 his sitter 's nose , which be somehow jewish without the convex arch . 

 " indeed I be . he give they to I . be not   it charming ? " 

 " ' he ' give they - Mr. Dashwood ? " 

 " dear I , no - where should poor Dashwood have get they ? he have not   a 
 penny in the world . besides , if he have get they he would have keep they . I 
 mean your blessed cousin . " 

 " I see - they be a present from Peter . " 

 " like many other thing . be not   he a dear ? if it have not   be for he the 
 shelf would have remain bare . he buy the play for this country and 
 America for four hundred pound , and on the chance : fancy ! there be no 
 rush for it , and how could he tell ? and then he gracefully press it on 
 I . so I have   my little capital . be not   he a duck ? you have   nice cousin . " 

 Nick assent to the proposition , only insert an amendment to the 
 effect that surely Peter have nice cousin too , and make , as he go on 
 with his work , a tacit , preoccupy reflexion or two ; such as that it 
 must be pleasant to render little service like that to youth , beauty 
 and genius - he rather wonder how Peter could afford they - and that , 
 " duck " as he be , Miss Rooth 's benefactor be rather take for grant . 
  Sic vos non vobis softly sound in his brain . this community of 
 interest , or at least of relation , quicken the flight of time , so 
 that he be still fresh when the sitting come to an end . it be settle 
 Miriam should come back on the morrow , to enable her artist to make the 
 most of the few day of the parliamentary recess ; and just before she 
 leave he she ask : 

 " then you will come to - night ? " 

 " without fail . I hate to lose an hour of you . " 

 " then I will place you . it will be my affair . " 

 " you be very kind " - he quite rise to it . " be not   it a simple matter for 
 I to take a stall ? this week I suppose they be to be have . " 

 " I will send you a box , " say Miriam . " you shall do it well . there be 
 plenty now . " 

 " why should I be lose , all alone , in the grandeur of a box ? " 

 " can not   you bring your friend ? " 

 " my friend ? " 

 " the lady you be engaged to . " 

 " unfortunately she be out of town . " 

 Miriam look at he in the grand manner . " do she leave you alone like 
 that ? " 

 " she think I should like it - I should be more free to paint . you see I 
 be . " 

 " yes , perhaps it be good for I . have you get her portrait ? " Miriam 
 ask . 

 " she do not   like I to paint she . " 

 " really ? perhaps then she will not   like you to paint I . " 

 " that be why I want to be quick ! " laugh Nick . 

 " before she know it ? " 

 " Shell know it to - morrow . I shall write to she . " 

 the girl face he again portentously . " I see you be afraid of she . " but 
 she add : " Mention my name ; they will give you the box at the office . " 

 whether or no Nick be afraid of Mrs. Dallow he still wave away this 
 bounty , protest that he would rather take a stall accord to his 
 will not and pay for it . which lead his guest to declare with a sudden 
 flicker of passion that if he do not   do as she wish she would never 
 sit to he again . 

 " ah then you have I , " he have to reply . " only I do not   see why you 
 should give I so many thing . " 

 " what in the world have I give you ? " 

 " why an idea . " and Nick look at his picture rather ruefully . " I do not 
 mean to say though that I have not   let it fall and smash it . " 

 " ah an idea - that be a great thing for people in our line . but you will 
 see I much well from the box and I will send you Gabriel Nash . " she get 
 into the hansom her host 's servant have fetch for she , and as Nick 
 turn back into his studio after watch she drive away he laugh at 
 the conception that they be in the same " line . " 

 he do share , in the event , his box at the theatre with Nash , who talk 
 during the entr'acte not in the least about the performance or the 
 performer , but about the possible greatness of the art of the 
 portraitist - its reach , its range , its fascination , the magnificent 
 example it have leave we in the past : window open into history , into 
 psychology , thing that be among the most precious possession of the 
 human race . he insist above all on the interest , the importance of 
 this great peculiarity of it , that unlike most other form it be a 
 revelation of two reality , the man whom it be the artist 's conscious 
 effort to reveal and the man - the interpreter - express in the very 
 quality and temper of that effort . it offer a double vision , the 
 strong dose of life that art could give , the strong dose of art 
 that life could give . Nick Dormer have already become aware of have two 
 state of mind when listen to this philosopher ; one in which he 
 laugh , doubt , sometimes even reprobate , fail to follow or accept , 
 and another in which his old friend seem to take the word out of his 
 mouth , to utter for he , well and more completely , the very thing he 
 be on the point of say . Gabriel 's say they at such moment 
 appear to make they true , to set they up in the world , and to - night he 
 say a good many , especially as to the happiness of cultivate one 's 
 own garden , grow there , in stillness and freedom , certain strong , 
 pure flower that would bloom for ever , bloom long after the rank weed 
 of the hour be wither and blow away . 

 it be to keep Miriam Rooth in his eye for his current work that Nick 
 have come to the play ; and she dwelt there all the evening , be 
 constantly on the stage . he be so occupy in watch her face - for he 
 now see pretty clearly what he should attempt to make of it - that he be 
 conscious only in a secondary degree of the story she illustrate , and 
 have in regard to she act a surprised sense that she be 
 extraordinarily quiet . he remember her loudness , her violence in 
 Paris , at Peter Sherringham 's , her wild wail , the first time , at Madame 
 CarrĂ 's ; compare with which her present manner be eminently temperate 
 and modern . Nick Dormer be not critical at the theatre ; he believe 
 what he see and have a pleasant sense of the inevitable ; therefore he 
 would not   have guess what Gabriel Nash have to tell he - that for this 
 young woman , with her tragic cast and her peculiar attribute , her 
 present performance , full of actuality , of light fine indication and at 
 moment of pointed touch of comedy , be a rare tour de force . it 
 go on altogether in a register he have not   suppose she to possess and 
 in which , as he say , she do not   touch her capital , do it all with 
 her wonderful little saving . it convey to he that she be capable of 
 almost anything . 

 in one of the interval they go round to see she ; but for Nick this 
 purpose be partly defeat by the extravagant transport , as they 
 strike he , of Mrs. Rooth , whom they find sit with her daughter and 
 who attack he with a hundred question about his dear mother and his 
 charming sister . she have volume to say about the day in Paris when 
 they have show she the kindness she should never forget . she abound 
 also in admiration of the portrait he have so cleverly begin , declare 
 she be so eager to see it , however little he might as yet have 
 accomplish , that she should do herself the honour to wait upon he in 
 the morning when Miriam come to sit . 

 " I be act for you to - night , " the girl more effectively say before he 
 return to his place . 

 " no , that be exactly what you be not do , " Nash interpose with one of 
 his happy sagacity . " you have   stop act , you have   reduce it to the 
 least that will do , you simply be - you be just the visible image , the 
 picture on the wall . it keep you wonderfully in focus . I have   never see 
 you so beautiful . " 

 Miriam star at this ; then it could be see that she colour . " what a 
 luxury in life to have everything explain ! he be the great explainer , " 
 she herself explain to Nick . 

 he shake hand with she for good - night . " well then , we must give he 
 lot to do . " 

 she come to his studio in the morning , but unaccompanie by her mother , 
 in allusion to whom she simply say , " Mamma wish to come but I 
 would not   let she . " they proceed promptly to business . the girl 
 divest herself of her hat and coat , take the position already 
 determine . after they have work more than an hour with much less talk 
 than the day before , Nick be extremely absorb and Miriam wear in 
 silence an air of noble compunction for the burden impose on he , at 
 the end of this period of patience , pervade by a holy calm , our young 
 lady suddenly get up and exclaim , " I say , I must see it ! " - with which , 
 quickly , she step down from her place and come round to the canvas . 
 she have at Nick 's request not look at his work the day before . he fall 
 back , glad to rest , and put down his palette and brush . 

 " ah bien , c'est tapă   ! " she cry as she stand before the easel . Nick 
 be pleased with her ejaculation , he be even pleased with what he have 
 do ; he have have a long , happy spurt and feel excited and sanction . 
 Miriam , retreat also a little , sink into a high - back , old - fashioned 
 chair that stand two or three yard from the picture and recline in it , 
 her head on one side , look at the rough resemblance . she make a 
 remark or two about it , to which Nick reply , stand behind she and 
 after a moment lean on the top of the chair . he be away from his 
 work and his eye search it with a shy fondness of hope . they rise , 
 however , as he presently become conscious that the door of the large 
 room opposite he have open without make a sound and that some one 
 stand upon the threshold . the person on the threshold be Julia Dallow . 

 as soon as he be aware Nick wish he have post a letter to she the 
 night before . he have write only that morning . there be nevertheless 
 genuine joy in the word with which he bound toward she - " ah my dear 
 Julia , what a jolly surprise ! " - for her unannounced descent speak to 
 he above all of an irresistible desire to see he again soon than 
 they have arrange . she have take a step forward , but she have do no 
 more , stop short at the sight of the strange woman , so divested of 
 visit - gear that she look half - undressed , who lounge familiarly in 
 the middle of the room and over whom Nick have be still more familiarly 
 hang . Julia 's eye rest on this embodied unexpectedness , and as 
 they do so she grow pale - so pale that Nick , observe it , 
 instinctively look back to see what Miriam have do to produce such an 
 effect . she have do nothing at all , which be precisely what be 
 embarrassing ; she only star at the intruder , motionless and superb . 
 she seem somehow in easy possession of the place , and even at that 
 instant Nick note how handsome she look ; so that he say to himself 
 inaudibly , in some deep depth of consciousness , " how I should like to 
 paint she that way ! " Mrs. Dallow 's eye move for a single moment to her 
 friend 's ; then they turn away - away from Miriam , range over the 
 room . 

 " I have   get a sitter , but you must not   mind that ; we be take a rest . I be 
 delighted to see you " - he be all cordiality . he close the door of the 
 studio behind she ; his servant be still at the outer door , which be 
 open and through which he see Julia 's carriage draw up . this make she 
 advance a little far , but still she say nothing ; she drop no 
 answer even when Nick go on with a sense of awkwardness : " when do you 
 come back ? I hope nothing have go wrong . you come at a very interesting 
 moment , " he continue , aware as soon as he have speak of something in 
 his word that might have make her laugh . she be far from laugh , 
 however ; she only manage to look neither at he nor at Miriam and to 
 say , after a little , when he have repeat his question about she 
 return : 

 " I come back this morning - I come straight here . " 

 " and nothing be wrong , I hope ? " 

 " oh no - everything be all right , " she return very quickly and without 
 expression . she vouchsafe no explanation of her premature descent and 
 take no notice of the seat Nick offer she ; neither do she appear to 
 hear he when he beg she not to look yet at the work on the easel - it 
 be in such a dreadful state . he be conscious , as he phrase it , that 
 this request give to Miriam 's position , directly in front of his canvas , 
 an air of privilege which her neglect to recognise in any way Mrs. 
 Dallow 's entrance or her importance do nothing to correct . but that 
 matter less if the appeal fail to reach Julia 's intelligence , as he 
 judge , see presently how deeply she be agitated . nothing matter 
 in face of the sense of danger take possession of he after she have 
 be in the room a few moment . he want to say , " what be the 
 difficulty ? have anything happen ? " but he feel how little she would 
 like he to utter word so intimate in presence of the person she have 
 be rudely startled to find between they . he pronounce Miriam 's name 
 to she and her own to Miriam , but Julia 's recognition of the ceremony 
 be so slight as to be scarcely perceptible . Miriam have the air of 
 wait for something more before she herself make a sign ; and as 
 nothing more come she continue to say nothing and not to budge . Nick 
 add a remark to the effect that Julia would remember to have have the 
 pleasure of meet she the year before - in Paris , that day at old 
 Peter 's ; to which Mrs. Dallow make answer , " ah yes , " without any 
 qualification , while she look down at some rather rusty study on 
 panel range along the floor and rest against the base of the wall . 
 her discomposure be a clear pain to herself ; she have have a shock of 
 extreme violence , and Nick see that as Miriam show no symptom of 
 offering to give up she sit her stay would be of the brief . he 
 wish that young woman would do something - say she would go , get up , 
 move about ; as it be she have the appearance of watch from her point 
 of vantage the other 's upset . he make a series of inquiry about 
 Julia 's doing in the country , to two or three of which she give answer 
 monosyllabic and scarcely comprehensible , only turn her eye round 
 and round the room as in search of something she could not   find - of an 
 escape , of something that be not Miriam . at last she say - it be at 
 the end of a very few minute : 

 " I do not   come to stay - when you be so busy . I only look in to see if 
 you be here . good - bye . " 

 " it be charming of you to have come . I be so glad you have   see for yourself 
 how well I be occupy , " Nick reply , not unconscious of how red he be . 
 this make Mrs. Dallow look at he while Miriam consider they both . 
 Julia 's eye have a strange light he have never see before - a flash of 
 fear by which he be himself frightened . " of course I will see you later , " 
 he add in awkward , in really misplace gaiety while she reach the 
 door , which she open herself , get out with no further attention to 
 Miriam . " I write to you this morning - you have   miss my letter , " he 
 repeat behind she , have already give she this information . the door 
 of the studio be very near that of the house , but before she have 
 reach the street the visitor ' bell be set ring . the passage be 
 narrow and she keep in advance of Nick , anticipate his motion to open 
 the street - door . the bell be tinkle still when , by the action of her 
 own hand , a gentleman on the step stand reveal . 

 " ah my dear , do not   go ! " Nick hear pronounce in quick , soft dissuasion 
 and in the now familiar accent of Gabriel Nash . the rectification 
 follow more quickly still , if that be a rectification which so 
 little improve the matter : " I beg a thousand pardon - I think you 
 be Miriam . " 

 Gabriel give way and Julia the more sharply pursue her retreat . her 
 carriage , a victoria with a pair of precious heated horse , have take a 
 turn up the street , but the coachman have already see his mistress and 
 be rapidly come back . he draw near ; not so fast , however , but that 
 Gabriel Nash have time to accompany Mrs. Dallow to the edge of the 
 pavement with an apology for the freedom into which he have blunder . 
 Nick be at her other hand , wait to put she into the carriage and 
 freshly disconcert by the encounter with Nash , who somehow , as he 
 stand make Julia an explanation that she do not   listen to , look less 
 eminent than usual , though not more conscious of difficulty . our young 
 man colour deeply and watch the footman spring down as the victoria 
 drive up ; he hear Nash say something about the honour of have meet 
 Mrs. Dallow in Paris . Nick want he to go into the house ; he damn 
 inwardly his lack of delicacy . he desire a word with Julia alone - as 
 much alone as the two annoying servant would allow . but Nash be not 
 too much discourage to say : " you come for a glimpse of the great model ? 
 do not   she sit ? that be what I want too , this morning - just a look , 
 for a blessing on the day . ah but you , madam - " 

 Julia have spring into her corner while he be still speak and have 
 flash out to the coachman a " home ! " which of itself set the horse in 
 motion . the carriage go a few yard , but while Gabriel , with an 
 undiscouraged bow , turn away , Nick Dormer , his hand on the edge of 
 the hood , move with it . 

 " you do not   like it , but I will explain , " he try to say for its occupant 
 alone . 

 " explain what ? " she ask , still very pale and grave , but in a voice 
 that show nothing . she be think of the servant - she could think 
 of they even then . 

 " oh it be all right . I will come in at five , " Nick return , gallantly 
 jocular , while she be whirl away . 

 Gabriel have go into the studio and Nick find he stand in 
 admiration before Miriam , who have resume the position in which she be 
 sit . " Lord , she be good to - day ! be not   she good to - day ? " he break out , 
 seize their host by the arm to give he a particular view . Miriam 
 look indeed still handsomer than before , and she have take up her 
 attitude again with a splendid , sphinx - like air of be capable of 
 keep it for ever . Nick say nothing , but go back to work with a 
 tingle of confusion , which begin to act after he have resume his palette 
 as a sharp , a delightful stimulus . Miriam speak never a word , but she 
 be doubly grand , and for more than an hour , till Nick , exhausted , 
 declare he must stop , the industrious silence be break only by the 
 desultory discourse of their friend . 




 XXVII 


 Nick go to Great Stanhope Street at five o'clock and learn , rather 
 to his surprise , that Julia be not at home - to his surprise because he 
 have tell she he would come at that hour , and he attribute to she , with 
 a certain simplicity , an eager state of mind in regard to his 
 explanation . apparently she be not eager ; the eagerness be his own - he 
 be eager to explain . he recognise , not without a certain consciousness 
 of magnanimity in do so , that there have be some reason for she 
 quick withdrawal from his studio or at any rate for her extreme 
 discomposure there . he have a few day before put in a plea for a snatch 
 of worship in that sanctuary and she have accept and approve it ; but 
 the worship , when the curtain happen to blow back , show for that of 
 a magnificent young woman , an actress with disorder hair , who wear in 
 a singular degree the appearance of a person settle for many hour . the 
 explanation be easy : it dwelt in the simple truth that when one be 
 painting , even very badly and only for a moment , one have to have model . 
 Nick be impatient to give it with frank , affectionate lip and a full , 
 pleasant admission that it be natural Julia should have be startle ; 
 and he be the more impatient that , though he would not in the least 
 have expect she to like find a strange woman intimately instal 
 with he , she have dislike it even more than would have seem probable 
 or natural . that be because , not have hear from he about the 
 matter , the impression be for the moment irresistible with she that a 
 trick have be play she . but three minute with he alone would make 
 the difference . 

 they would indeed have a considerable difference to make , Nick 
 reflect , as minute much more numerous elapse without bring Mrs. 
 Dallow home . for he have say to the butler that he would come in and 
 wait - though it be odd she should not have leave a message for he : she 
 would doubtless return from one moment to the other . he have of course 
 full licence to wait anywhere he prefer ; and he be usher into 
 Julia 's particular sitting - room and supply with tea and the evening 
 paper . after a quarter of an hour , however , he give little attention to 
 these beguilement , thank to his feeling still more acutely that since 
 she definitely know he be come she might have take the trouble to be 
 at home . he walk up and down and look out of the window , take up her 
 book and drop they again , and then , as half an hour have elapse , 
 become aware he be really sore . what could she be about when , with 
 London a thankless void , she be of course not pay visit ? a footman 
 come in to attend to the fire , whereupon Nick question he as to the 
 manner in which she be possibly engage . the man disclose the fact 
 that his mistress have go out but a quarter of an hour before Nick 's 
 arrival , and , as if appreciate the opportunity for a little decorous 
 conversation , give he still more information than he invite . from this 
 it appear that , as Nick know , or could surmise , she have the evening 
 before , from the country , wire for the victoria to meet she in the 
 morning at Paddington and then go straight from the station to the 
 studio , while her maid , with her luggage , proceed in a cab to Great 
 Stanhope Street . on leave the studio , however , she have not come 
 directly home ; she have choose this unusual season for an hour 's drive in 
 the Park . she have finally re - enter her house , but have remain 
 upstairs all day , see no one and not come down to luncheon . at four 
 o'clock she have order the brougham for four forty - five , and have get 
 into it punctually , say , " to the Park ! " as she do so . 

 Nick , after the footman have leave he , make what he could of Julia 's 
 sudden passion for the bank of the Serpentine , forsaken and foggy now , 
 inasmuch as the afternoon have come on grey and the light be wan . she 
 usually hat the Park and hat a closed carriage . he have a gruesome 
 vision of she , shrink into a corner of her brougham and veil as if 
 in consequence of tear , revolve round the solitude of the Drive . she 
 have of course be deeply displeased and be not herself ; the motion of 
 the carriage soothe she , have an effect on her nerve . Nick remember 
 that in the morning , at his door , she have appear to be go home ; so 
 she have plunge into the dreary resort on second thought and as she 
 note herself near it . he linger another half - hour , walk up and down 
 the room many time and think of many thing . have she misunderstood 
 he when he say he would come at five ? could not   she be sure , even if 
 she have , that he would come early rather than late , and might not   she 
 have leave a message for he on the chance ? go out that way a few 
 minute before he be to come have even a little the air of a thing do 
 on purpose to offend he ; as if she have be so displeased that she have 
 take the near occasion of give he a sign she mean to break with 
 he . but be these the thing Julia do and be that the way she do 
 they - his fine , proud , delicate , generous Julia ? 

 when six o'clock come poor Nick feel distinctly resentful ; but he stay 
 ten minute long on the possibility that she would in the morning have 
 understand he to mention that hour . the April dusk begin to gather and 
 the unsociability of her behaviour , especially if she be still 
 rumble round the Park , become absurd . Anecdotes come back to he , 
 vaguely remember , hear he could not   have say when or where , of poor 
 artist for whom life have be render difficult by wife who would not 
 allow they the use of the live female model and who make scene if 
 they encounter on the staircase such source of inspiration . these 
 lady strike he as vulgar and odious person , with whom it seem 
 grotesque that Julia should have anything in common . of course she be 
 not his wife yet , and of course if she be he should have wash his 
 hand of every form of activity require the service of the sitter ; 
 but even these qualification leave he with a power to wince at the way 
 in which the woman he be so sure he love just escape rank herself 
 with the Philistines . 

 at a quarter past six he ring a bell and tell the servant who answer 
 it that he be go and that Mrs. Dallow be to be inform as soon as 
 she come in that he have expect to find she and have wait an hour and 
 a quarter . but he have just reach the doorstep of departure when her 
 brougham , emerge from the evening mist , stop in front of the house . 
 Nick stand there hang back till she get out , allow the servant 
 only to help she . she see he - she be less veiled than his mental 
 vision of she ; but this do not   prevent her pausing to give an order to 
 the coachman , a matter apparently require some discussion . when she 
 come to the door her visitor remark that he have be wait an 
 eternity ; to which she reply that he must make no grievance of 
 that - she be too unwell to do he justice . he immediately profess 
 regret and sympathy , add , however , that in that case she have much 
 well not have go out . she make no answer to this - there be three 
 servant in the hall who look as if they might understand at least 
 what be not say to they ; only when he follow she in she ask if his 
 idea have be to stay long . 

 " certainly , if you be not too ill to see I . " 

 " come in then , " Julia say , turn back after have go to the foot 
 of the stair . 

 this strike he immediately as a further restriction of his visit : she 
 would not   readmit he to the drawing - room or to her boudoir ; she would 
 receive he in the impersonal apartment downstairs where she see people 
 on business . what do she want to do to he ? he be prepare by this 
 time for a scene of jealousy , since he be sure he have learn to read 
 her character justly in feeling that if she have the appearance of a cold 
 woman a fork flame in she be liable on occasion to break out . she be 
 very still , but from time to time she would fire off a pistol . as soon 
 as he have close the door she say without sit down : 

 " I daresay you see I do not   like that at all . " 

 " my have a sitter in that professional way ? I be very much annoyed at 
 it myself , " Nick answer . 

 " why be you annoyed ? she be very handsome , " Mrs. Dallow perversely 
 say . 

 " I do not   know you have look at she ! " Nick laugh . 

 Julia have a pause . " be I very rude ? " 

 " oh it be all right ; it be only awkward for I because you do not 
 know , " he reply . 

 " I do know ; that be why I come . " 

 " how do you mean ? my letter could not   have reach you . " 

 " I do not   know anything about your letter , " Julia cast about she for a 
 chair and then seat herself on the edge of a sofa with her eye on the 
 floor . 

 " she sit to I yesterday ; she be there all the morning ; but I do not 
 write to tell you . I go at she with great energy and , absurd as it may 
 seem to you , find myself very tired afterwards . besides , in the evening 
 I go to see her act . " 

 " do she act ? " ask Mrs. Dallow . 

 " she be an actress : it be her profession . do not   you remember she that day 
 at Peter 's in Paris ? she be already a celebrity ; she have great talent ; 
 she be engage at a theatre here and be make a sensation . as I tell 
 you , I see she last night . " 

 " you need not   tell I , " Julia return , look up at he with a face of 
 which the intense , the tragic sadness startle he . 

 he have be stand before she , but at this he instantly sit down 
 close , take her passive hand . " I want to , please ; otherwise it must 
 seem so odd to you . I know she be come when I write to you the day 
 before yesterday . but I do not   tell you then because I do not   know how 
 it would turn out , and I do not   want to exult in advance over a poor 
 little attempt that might come to nothing . moreover , it be no use 
 speaking of the matter at all unless I tell you exactly how it have come 
 about , " Nick go on , explain kindly and copiously . " it be the 
 result of a visit unexpectedly pay I by Gabriel Nash . " 

 " that man - the man who speak to I ? " her memory of he shudder into 
 life . 

 " he do what he think would please you , but I daresay it do not . you 
 meet he in Paris and do not   like he ; so I judge well to hold my tongue 
 about he . " 

 " do you like he ? " 

 " very much . " 

 " Great heaven ! " Julia ejaculate , almost under her breath . 

 " the reason I be annoy be because , somehow , when you come in , I 
 suddenly have the air of have get out of those visit and shut myself 
 up in town to do something that I have keep from you . and I have be 
 very unhappy till I could explain . " 

 " you do not   explain - you can not   explain , " Mrs Dallow declare , turn on 
 her companion eye which , in spite of her studied stillness , express 
 deep excitement . " I know it - I know everything ; that be why I come . " 

 " it be a sort of second - sight - what they call a brainwave , " Nick 
 smile . 

 " I feel uneasy , I feel a kind of call ; it come suddenly , yesterday . it 
 be irresistible ; nothing could have keep I this morning . " 

 " that be very serious , but it be still more delightful . you must not   go 
 away again , " say Nick . " we must stick together - forever and ever . " 

 he put his arm round she , but she detach herself as soon as she feel 
 its pressure . she rise quickly , move away , while , mystify , he sit 
 look up at she as she have look a few moment before at he . " I have 
 think it all over ; I have   be think of it all day , " she begin . 
 " that be why I do not   come in . " 

 " do not   think of it too much ; it be not   worth it . " 

 " you like it more than anything else . you do - you can not   deny it , " she 
 go on . 

 " my dear child , what be you talk about ? " Nick ask , gently ... 

 " that be what you like - do what you be this morning ; with woman 
 lolling , with their thing off , to be paint , and people like that 
 man . " 

 Nick slowly get up , hesitate . " my dear Julia , apart from the surprise 
 this morning , do you object to the live model ? " 

 " not a bit , for you . " 

 " what be the inconvenience then , since in my studio they be only for I ? " 

 " you love it , you revel in it ; that be what you want - the only thing you 
 want ! " Julia break out . 

 " to have model , loll undressed woman , do you mean ? " 

 " that be what I feel , what I know , " she go on - " what come over I and 
 haunt I yesterday so that I could not   throw it off . it seem to I 
 that if I could see it with my eye and have the perfect proof I should 
 feel well , I should be quiet . and now I be quiet - after a struggle 
 of some hour , I confess . I have see ; the whole thing be before I and 
 I be satisfied . " 

 " I be not - to I neither the whole thing nor half of it be before I . 
 what exactly be you talk about ? " Nick demand . 

 " about what you be do this morning . that be your innermost 
 preference , that be your secret passion . " 

 " a feeble scratch at something serious ? yes , it be almost serious , " he 
 say . " but it be an accident , this morning and yesterday : I get on less 
 wretchedly than I intend . " 

 " I be sure you have   immense talent , " Julia return with a dreariness that 
 be almost droll . 

 " no , no , I might have have . I have   pluck it up : it be too late for it to 
 flower . my dear Julia , I be perfectly incompetent and perfectly 
 resign . " 

 " yes , you look so this morning , when you hang over she . oh she will 
 bring back your talent ! " 

 " she be an obliging and even an intelligent creature , and I have   no doubt 
 she would if she could , " Nick concede . " but I have   receive from you all 
 the help any woman 's destine to give I . no one can do for I again 
 what you have   do . " 

 " I should not   try it again ; I act in ignorance . oh I have   think it all 
 out ! " Julia declare . and then with a strange face of anguish rest on 
 his own : " before it be too late - before it be too late ! " 

 " too late for what ? " 

 " for you to be free - for you to be free . and for I - for I to be free 
 too . you hate everything I like ! " she flash out . " do not   pretend , do not 
 pretend ! " she go on as a sound of protest break from he . 

 " I think you so awfully want I to paint , " he gasp , flushed and 
 star . 

 " I do - I do . that be why you must be free , why we must part ? " 

 " why we must part - ? " 

 " oh I have   turn it well over . I have   face the hard truth . it would not   do 
 at all ! " Julia ring out . 

 " I like the way you talk of it - as if it be a trimming for your 
 dress ! " Nick retort with bitterness . " will not   it do for you to be love 
 and cherish as well as any woman in England ? " 

 she turn away from he , close her eye as not to see something 
 dangerous . " you must not   give anything up for I . I should feel it all 
 the while and I should hate it . I be not afraid of the truth , but you 
 be . " 

 " the truth , dear Julia ? I only want to know it , " Nick insist . " it 
 seem to I in fact just what I have   get hold of . when two person be 
 unite by the tender affection and be sane and generous and just , no 
 difficulty that occur in the union their life make for they be 
 insurmountable , no problem be insoluble . " 

 she appear for a moment to reflect upon this : it be speak in a tone 
 that might have touch she . yet at the end of the moment , lift her 
 eye , she bring out : " I hate art , as you call it . I think I do , I 
 know I do ; but till this morning I do not   know how much . " 

 " bless your dear soul , that be not   art , " Nick plead . " the real thing 
 will be a thousand mile away from we ; it will never come into the 
 house , soyez tranquille . it know where to look in and where to flee 
 shrieking . why then should you worry ? " 

 " because I want to understand , I want to know what I be do . you be an 
 artist : you be , you be ! " Julia cry , accuse he passionately . 

 " my poor Julia , it be not   so easy as that , nor a character one can take 
 on from one day to the other . there be all sort of thing ; one must be 
 catch young and put through the mill - one must see thing as they be . 
 there be very few profession that go with . there would be sacrifice 
 I never can make . " 

 " well then , there be sacrifice for both of we , and I can not   make they 
 either . I daresay it be all right for you , but for I it would be a 
 terrible mistake . when I think I be do a certain thing I must not   do 
 just the opposite , " she keep on as for true lucidity . " there be thing 
 I have   think of , the thing I like well ; and they be not what you mean . 
 it would be a great deception , and it be not the way I see my life , and 
 it would be misery if we do not   understand . " 

 he look at she with eye not light by her word . " if we do not 
 understand what ? " 

 " that we be utterly different - that you be do it all for I . " 

 " and be that an objection to I - what I do for you ? " he ask . 

 " you do too much . you be awfully good , you be generous , you be a dear , 
 oh yes - a dear . but that do not   make I believe in it . I do not   at 
 bottom , from the first - that be why I make you wait , why I give you your 
 freedom . oh I have   suspect you , " Julia continue , " I have my idea . it be 
 all right for you , but it will not   do for I : I be different altogether . why 
 should it always be put upon I when I hate it ? what have I do ? I be 
 drench with it before . " these last word , as they break forth , be 
 attend with a quick blush ; so that Nick could as quickly discern in 
 they the uncalculated betrayal of an old irritation , an old shame 
 almost - her late husband 's flat , inglorious taste for pretty thing , his 
 indifference to every chance to play a public part . this have be the 
 humiliation of her youth , and it be indeed a perversity of fate that a 
 new alliance should contain for she even an oblique demand for the same 
 spirit of accommodation , impose on her the secret bitterness of the same 
 concession . as Nick stand there before she , struggle sincerely with 
 the force that he now feel to be strong in she , the intense resolution 
 to break with he , a force mature in a few hour , he read a riddle that 
 hitherto have baffle he , see a great mystery become simple . a personal 
 passion for he have all but throw she into his arm   the sort of thing 
 that even a vain man - and Nick be not especially vain - might hesitate 
 to recognise the strength of ; hold in check at moment , with a strain 
 of the cord that he could still feel vibrate , by her deep , her rare 
 ambition , and arrest at the last only just in time to save she 
 calculation . his present glimpse of the immense extent of these 
 calculation do not   make he think her cold or poor ; there be in fact a 
 positive strange heat in they and they strike he rather as grand and 
 high . the fact that she could drop he even while she long for 
 he - drop he because it be now fix in her mind that he would not 
 after all serve her resolve to be associate , so far as a woman could , 
 with great affair ; that she could postpone , and postpone to an 
 uncertainty , the satisfaction of an ache tenderness and plan for the 
 long run - this exhibition of will and courage , of the large scheme that 
 possess she , command his admiration on the spot . he pay the heavy 
 price of the man of imagination ; he be capable of far excursion of the 
 spirit , disloyalty to habit and even to faith , he be open to rare 
 communication . he ache , on his side , for the moment , to convince she 
 that he would achieve what he would not , for the vision of his future she 
 have try to entertain shone before he as a bribe and a challenge . it 
 strike he there be nothing he could not   work for enough with she to be 
 so work with by she . presently he say : 

 " you want to be sure the man you marry will be prime minister of 
 England . but how can you be really sure with any one ? " 

 " I can be really sure some man will not ! " Julia return . 

 " the only safe thing perhaps would be to - marry Mr. Macgeorge , " he 
 suggest . 

 " possibly not even he . " 

 " you be a prime minister yourself , " Nick make answer . " to hold fast to 
 you as I hold , to be determined to be of your party - be not   that 
 political enough , since you be the incarnation of politic ? " 

 " ah how you hate they ! " she wail again . " I see that when I see you 
 this morning . the whole place reek of your aversion . " 

 " my dear child , the great statesman have have their distraction . what 
 do you make of my hereditary talent ? that be a tremendous force . " 

 " it would not   carry you far . " then she terribly add , " you must be a 
 great artist . " he toss his head at the involuntary contempt of this , 
 but she go on : " it be beautiful of you to want to give up anything , and 
 I like you for it . I shall always like you . we shall be friend , and I 
 shall always take an interest - ! " 

 but he stop she there , make a movement which interrupt her phrase , 
 and she suffer he to hold her hand as if she be not afraid of he 
 now . " it be not   only for you , " he argue gently ; " you be a great deal , 
 but you be not everything . innumerable vow and pledge repose upon my 
 head . I be inextricably commit and dedicated . I be bring up in the 
 temple like an infant Samuel ; my father be a high - priest and I be a 
 child of the Lord . and then the life itself - when you speak of it I 
 feel stir to my depth ; it be like a herald 's trumpet . fight with 
 I , Julia - not against I ! be on my side and we shall do everything . it 
 be uplift to be a great man before the people - to be love by they , 
 to be follow by they . an artist be not   - never , never . why should he 
 be ? do not   forget how clever I be . " 

 " oh if it be not   for that ! " she pant , pale with the effort to resist 
 his tone . then she put it to he : " do you pretend that if I be to die 
 to - morrow you would stay in the House ? " 

 " if you be to die ? God know ! but you do singularly little justice to 
 my incentive , " he pursue . " my political career 's everything to my 
 mother . " 

 this but make she say after a moment : " be you afraid of your mother ? " 

 " yes , immensely ; for she represent ever so many possibility of 
 disappointment and distress . she represent all my father 's as well as 
 all her own , and in they my father tragically live again . on the other 
 hand I see he in bliss , as I see my mother , over our marriage and our 
 life of common aspiration - though of course that be not a consideration 
 that I can expect to have power with you . " 

 she shake her head slowly , even smile with her recover calmness and 
 lucidity . " you will never hold high office . " 

 " but why not take I as I be ? " 

 " because I be abominably keen about that sort of thing - I must recognise 
 my keenness . I must face the ugly truth . I have   be through the bad ; 
 it be all settle . " 

 " the bad , I suppose , be when you find I this morning . " 

 " oh that be all right - for you . " 

 " you be magnanimous , Julia ; but evidently what be good enough for I 
 be not   good enough for you . " Nick speak with bitterness . 

 " I do not   like you enough - that be the obstacle , " she hold herself in hand 
 to say . 

 " you do a year ago ; you confess to it . " 

 " well , a year ago be a year ago . thing be change to - day . " 

 " you be very fortunate - to be able to throw away a real devotion , " Nick 
 return . 

 she have her pocket - handkerchief in her hand , and at this she quickly 
 press it to her lip as to check an exclamation . then for an instant 
 she appear to be listen to some sound from outside . he interpret 
 her movement as an honourable impulse to repress the " do you mean the 
 devotion I be witness of this morning ? " but immediately afterwards she 
 say something very different : " I think I hear a ring . I have 
 telegraph for Mrs. Gresham . " 

 he wonder . " why do you do that ? " 

 " oh I want she . " 

 he walk to the window , where the curtain have not be draw , and see 
 in the dusk a cab at the door . when he turn back he go on : " why 
 will not   you trust I to make you like I , as you call it , well ? if I 
 make you like I as well as I like you it will be about enough , I 
 think . " 

 " oh I like you enough for your happiness . and I do not   throw away a 
 devotion , " Mrs. Dallow continue . " I shall be constantly kind to you . I 
 shall be beautiful to you . " 

 " you will make I lose a fortune , " Nick after a moment say . 

 it bring a slight convulsion , instantly repress , into her face . " ah 
 you may have all the money you want ! " 

 " I do not   mean your , " he answer with plenty of expression of his own . 
 he have determine on the instant , since it might serve , to tell she what 
 he have never breathe to she before . " Mr. Carteret last year promise I 
 a pot of money on the day we should be man and wife . he have thoroughly 
 set his heart on it . " 

 " I be sorry to disappoint Mr. Carteret , " say Julia . " I will go and see 
 he . I will make it all right , " she go on . " then your work , you know , 
 will bring you an income . the great man get a thousand just for a head . " 

 " I be only joke , " Nick return with sombre eye that contradict this 
 profession . " but what thing you deserve I should do ! " 

 " do you mean strike likeness ? " 

 he watch she a moment . " you do hate it ! push to that point , it be 
 curious , " he audibly muse . 

 " do you mean you be joke about Mr. Carteret 's promise ? " 

 " no - the promise be real , but I do not   seriously offer it as a reason . " 

 " I shall go to beauclere , " Julia say . " you be an hour late , " she add 
 in a different tone ; for at that moment the door of the room be throw 
 open and Mrs. Gresham , the butler pronounce her name , usher in . 

 " ah do not   impugn my punctuality - it be my character ! " the useful lady 
 protest , put a sixpence from the cabman into her purse . Nick go 
 off at this with a simplified farewell - go off foresee exactly what 
 he find the next day , that the useful lady would have receive order 
 not to budge from her hostess 's side . he call on the morrow , late in 
 the afternoon , and Julia see he liberally , in the spirit of her 
 assurance that she would be " beautiful " to he , that she have not throw 
 away his devotion ; but Mrs. Gresham remain , with whatever delicacy 
 of deprecation , a spectator of her liberality . Julia look at he 
 kindly , but her companion be more benignant still ; so that what Nick 
 do with his own eye be not to appeal to she to see he a moment 
 alone , but to solicit , in the name of this luxury , the second occupant 
 of the drawing - room . Mrs. Gresham seem to say , while Julia say so 
 little , " I understand , my poor friend , I know everything - she have tell 
 I only her side , but I be so competent that I know yours too - and I 
 enter into the whole thing deeply . but it would be as much as my place 
 be worth to accommodate you . " still , she do not   go so far as to give he 
 an inkling of what he learn on the third day and what he have not go 
 so far as to suspect - that the two lady have make rapid arrangement 
 for a scheme of foreign travel . these arrangement have already be 
 carry out when , at the door of the house in Great Stanhope Street , the 
 announcement be make he that the subtle creature have start that 
 morning for Paris . 




 XXVIII 


 they spend on their way to Florence several day in Paris , where Peter 
 Sherringham have as much free talk with his sister as it often befell one 
 member of their family to have with another . he enjoy , that is , on two 
 different occasion , half an hour 's gossip with she in her sitting - room 
 at the hotel . on one of these he take the liberty of ask she whether 
 or no , decidedly , she mean to marry Nick Dormer . Julia express to he 
 that she appreciate his curiosity , but that Nick and she be nothing 
 more than relation and good friend . " he tremendously want it , " Peter 
 none the less observed ; to which she simply make answer , " well then , he 
 may want ! " 

 after this , for a while , they sit as silent as if the subject have be 
 quite thresh out between they . Peter feel no impulse to penetrate 
 far , for it be not a habit of the Sherringhams to talk with each 
 other of their love - affair ; and he be conscious of the particular 
 deterrent that he and Julia entertain in general such different 
 sentiment that they could never go far together in discussion . he like 
 she and be sorry for she , think her life lonely and wonder she 
 do not   make a " great " marriage . moreover he pity she for be without 
 the interest and consolation he himself have find substantial : those 
 of the intellectual , the studious order he consider these to be , not 
 know how much she suppose she reflect and study and what an 
 education she have find in her political aspiration , view by he as 
 scarce more a personal part of she than the livery of her servant or 
 the jewel George Dallow 's money have buy . her relation with Nick 
 strike he as queer , but be fortunately none of his business . no 
 business of Julia 's be sufficiently his to justify he in an attempt to 
 understand it . that there should have be a question of her marrying 
 Nick be the funny thing rather than that the question should have be 
 drop . he like his clever cousin very well as he be - enough for a 
 vague sense that he might be spoil by alteration to a brother - in - law . 
 moreover , though not perhaps distinctly conscious of this , Peter press 
 lightly on Julia 's doing from a tacit understanding that in this case 
 she would let he off as easily . he could not   have say exactly what it 
 be he judge it pertinent to be let off from : perhaps from irritate 
 inquiry as to whether he have give any more tea - party for gross young 
 woman connect with the theatre . 

 Peter 's forbearance , however , bring he not quite all the security he 
 prefigure . after an interval he indeed go so far as to ask Julia if 
 Nick have be want in respect to she ; but this be an appeal intend 
 for sympathy , not for other intervention . she answer : " dear no - though 
 he be very provoking . " thus Peter guess that they have have a quarrel in 
 which it do not   concern he to meddle : he add her epithet and her 
 flight from England together , and they make up to his perception one of 
 the little magnify embroilment which do duty for the real in 
 superficial life . it be bad to provoke Julia than not , and Peter 
 think Nick 's do so not particularly characteristic of his 
 versatility for good . he might wonder why she do not   marry the member 
 for Harsh if the subject have pressingly come up between they ; but he 
 wonder still more why Nick do not   marry that gentleman 's great backer . 
 Julia say nothing again , as if to give he a chance to address she some 
 challenge that would save she from gush ; but as his impulse appear 
 to be to change the subject , and as he change it only by silence , she 
 be reduce to resume presently : 

 " I should have think you would have come over to see your friend the 
 actress . " 

 " which of my friend ? I know so many actress , " Peter plead . 

 " the woman you inflict on we in this place a year ago - the one who be 
 in London now . " 

 " oh Miriam Rooth ? I should have like to come over , but I have   be tie 
 fast . have you see she there ? " 

 " yes , I have   see she . " 

 " do you like she ? " 

 " not at all . " 

 " she have a lovely voice , " Peter hazard after a moment . 

 " I do not   know anything about her voice - I have not   hear it . " 

 " but she do not   act in pantomime , do she ? " 

 " I do not   know anything about her act . I see she in private - at Nick 
 Dormer 's studio . " 

 " at Nick 's - ? " he be interested now . 

 " what be she do there ? " 

 " she be sprawl over the room and - rather insolently - star at I . " 

 if Mrs. Dallow have wish to " draw " her brother she must at this point 
 have suspect she succeed , in spite of his care to divest his tone of 
 all emotion . " why , do he know she so well ? I do not   know . " 

 " she be sit to he for her portrait - at least she be then . " 

 " oh yes , I remember - I put he up to that . I be greatly interested . be 
 the portrait good ? " 

 " I have not   the least idea - I do not   look at it . I daresay it be like , " 
 Julia throw off . 

 " but how in the world " - and Peter 's interest grow frank - " do Nick 
 find time to paint ? " 

 " I do not   know . that horrid man bring she . " 

 " which horrid man ? " - he speak as if they have their choice . 

 " the one Nick think so clever - the vulgar little man who be at your 
 place that day and try to talk to I . I remember he abuse theatrical 
 people to I - as if I care anything about they . but he have apparently 
 something to do with your girl . " 

 " oh I recollect he - I have a discussion with he , " Peter patiently say . 

 " how could you ? I must go and dress , " his sister go on more 
 importantly . 

 " he be clever , remarkably . Miss Rooth and her mother be old friend 
 of his , and he be the first person to speak of they to I . " 

 " what a distinction ! I think he disgusting ! " cry Julia , who be 
 press for time and who have now get up . 

 " oh you be severe , " say Peter , still bland ; but when they separate she 
 have give he something to think of . 

 that Nick be paint a beautiful actress be no doubt in part at least 
 the reason why he be provoke and why his most intimate female friend 
 have come abroad . the fact do not   render he provoking to his kinsman : 
 Peter have on the contrary be quite sincere when he qualify it as 
 interesting . it become indeed on reflexion so interesting that it have 
 perhaps almost as much to do with Sherringham 's now prompt rush over to 
 London as it have to do with Julia 's come away . Reflexion teach he 
 far that the matter be altogether a delicate one and suggest that 
 it be odd he should be mix up with it in fact when , as Julia 's own 
 affair , he have but wish to keep out of it . it might after all be his 
 affair a little as well - there be somehow a still more pointed 
 implication of that in his sister 's say to he the next day that she 
 wish immensely he would take a fancy to Biddy Dormer . she say more : 
 she say there have be a time when she believe he have do 
 so - believe too that the poor child herself have believe the same . 
 Biddy be far away the nice girl she know - the dear , sweetest , 
 cleverest , good , and one of the prettiest creature in England , which 
 never spoil anything . she would make as charming a wife as ever a man 
 have , suit to any position , however high , and - Julia do not   mind 
 mention it , since her brother would believe it whether she mention 
 it or no - be so predisposed in his favour that he would have no trouble 
 at all . in short she herself would see he through - she would answer for it 
 that he would have but to speak . Biddy 's life at home be horrid ; she be 
 very sorry for she - the child be worthy of a well fate . Peter 
 wonder what constitute the horridness of Biddy 's life , and gather 
 that it mainly arise from the fact of Julia 's dislike Lady Agnes and 
 Grace and of her profit comfortably by that freedom to do so which 
 be a fruit of she have give they a house she have perhaps not feel 
 the want of till they be in possession of it . he know she have always 
 like Biddy , but he ask himself - this be the rest of his wonder - why 
 she have take to like she so extraordinarily just now . he like she 
 himself - he even like to be talk to about she and could believe 
 everything Julia say : the only thing that have mystify he be her 
 motive for suddenly say it . he have assure she he be perfectly 
 sensible of her goodness in so plot out his future , but be also 
 sorry if he have put it into any one 's head - most of all into the girl 's 
 own - that he have ever look at Biddy with a covetous eye . he be not   in 
 the least sure she would make a good wife , but like she quite too much 
 to wish to put any such mystery to the test . she be certainly not 
 offer they for cruel experiment . as it happen , really , he be not 
 think of marry any one - he have ever so many ground for neglecting 
 that . of course one be never safe against accident , but one could at 
 least take precaution , and he do not   mind tell she that there be 
 several he have take . 

 " I do not   know what you mean , but it seem to I quite the good 
 precaution would be to care for a charming , steady girl like Biddy . then 
 you would be quite in shelter , you would know the bad that can happen to you , 
 and it would not   be bad . " the objection he have make to this plea be not 
 important , especially as it be not quite candid ; it need only be 
 mention that before the pair part Julia say to he , still in 
 reference to their young friend : " do go and see she and be nice to she ; 
 she will save you disappointment . " 

 these last word reverberate for he - there be a shade of the 
 portentous in they and they seem to proceed from a large knowledge of 
 the subject than he himself as yet possess . they be not absent from 
 his memory when , in the beginning of May , avail himself , to save 
 time , of the night - service , he cross from Paris to London . he arrive 
 before the breakfast - hour and go to his sister 's house in Great 
 Stanhope Street , where he always find quarter , be she in town or 
 not . when at home she welcome he , and in her absence the relaxed 
 servant hail he for the chance he give they to recover their " form . " 
 in either case his allowance of space be large and his independence 
 complete . he have obtain permission this year to take in scattered 
 snatch rather than as a single draught the quantum of holiday to which 
 he be entitle ; and there be , moreover , a question of his being 
 transfer to another capital - in which event he believe he might 
 count on a month or two in England before proceed to his new post . 

 he wait , after breakfast , but a very few minute before jump into a 
 hansom and rattle away to the north . a part of his wait indeed 
 consist of a fidgety walk up Bond Street , during which he look at 
 his watch three or four time while he pause at shop window for fear 
 of be a little early . in the cab , as he roll along , after have 
 give an address - Balaklava Place , Saint John 's Wood - the fear he might 
 be too early take curiously at moment the form of a fear that he should 
 be too late : a symbol of the inconsistency of which his spirit at 
 present be full . Peter Sherringham be nervously form , too nervously 
 for a diplomatist , and haunt with inclination and indeed with design 
 which contradict each other . he want to be out of it and yet dread 
 not to be in it , and on this particular occasion the sense of exclusion 
 be an ache . at the same time he be not unconscious of the impulse to 
 stop his cab and make it turn round and drive due south . he see himself 
 launch in the breezy fact while morally speak he be haul up on 
 the hot sand of the principle , and he could easily note how little these 
 two face of the same idea have in common . however , as the consciousness 
 of go help he to reflect , a principle be a poor affair if it 
 merely become a fact . yet from the hour it do turn to action the action 
  have to be the particular one in which he be engage ; so that he be 
 in the absurd position of think his conduct wise for the reason 
 that it be directly oppose to his intention . 

 he have keep away from London ever since Miriam Rooth come over ; 
 resist curiosity , sympathy , importunate haunt passion , and 
 consider that his resistance , found , to be salutary , on a general 
 scheme of life , be the great success he have yet achieve . he be 
 deeply occupy with pluck up the feeling that attach he to she , 
 and he have already , by various little ingenuity , loosen some of its 
 root . he have suffer she to make her first appearance on any stage 
 without the comfort of his voice or the applause of his hand ; say to 
 himself that the man who could do the more could do the less and that 
 such an act of fortitude be a proof he should keep straight . it be not 
 exactly keep straight to run over to London three month later and , 
 the hour he arrive , scramble off to Balaklava Place ; but after all he 
 pretend only to be human and aim in behaviour only at the heroic , 
 never at the monstrous . the high heroism be obviously three part 
 tact . he have not write to his young friend that he be come to 
 England and would call upon she at eleven o'clock in the morning , 
 because it be his secret pride that he have cease to correspond with 
 she . Sherringham take his prudence where he could find it , and in do 
 so be rather like a drunkard who should flatter himself he have forswear 
 liquor since he do not   touch lemonade . 

 it be a sign of how far he be draw in different direction at once 
 that when , on reach Balaklava Place and alight at the door of a 
 small detach villa of the type of the " retreat , " he learn that Miss 
 Rooth have but a quarter of an hour before quit the spot with her 
 mother - they have go to the theatre , to rehearsal , say the maid who 
 answer the bell he have set tinkle behind a stuccoed garden - wall : 
 when at the end of his pilgrimage he be greet by a disappointment he 
 suddenly find himself relieve and for the moment even save . 
 Providence be after all take care of he and he submit to 
 Providence . he would still be watch over doubtless , even should he 
 follow the two lady to the theatre , send in his card and obtain 
 admission to the scene of their experiment . all his keen taste for 
 these matter flame up again , and he wonder what the girl be 
 study , be rehearse , what she be to do next . he get back into his 
 hansom and drive down the Edgware Road . by the time he reach the 
 Marble Arch he have change his mind again , have determine to let Miriam 
 alone for that day . it would be over at eight in the evening - he hardly 
 play fair - and then he should consider himself free . instead of 
 pursue his friend he direct himself upon a shop in Bond Street to 
 take a place for their performance . on first come out he have try , at 
 one of those establishment strangely denominate " library , " to get a 
 stall , but the people to whom he apply be unable to accommodate 
 he - they have not   a single seat leave . his actual attempt , at another 
 library , be more successful : there be no question of obtain a 
 stall , but he might by a miracle still have a box . there be a 
 wantonness in pay for a box at a play on which he have already 
 expend four hundred pound ; but while he be mentally measure this 
 abyss an idea come into his head which flush the extravagance with the 
 hue of persuasion . 

 Peter come out of the shop with the voucher for the box in his pocket , 
 turn into Piccadilly , note that the day be grow warm and fine , 
 feel glad that this time he have no other strict business than to leave a 
 card or two on official people , and ask himself where he should go if 
 he do not   go after Miriam . then it be that he find himself attach 
 a lively desire and impute a high importance to the possible view of 
 Nick Dormer 's portrait of she . he wonder which would be the natural 
 place at that hour of the day to look for the artist . the House of 
 Commons be perhaps the near one , but Nick , inconsequent and 
 incalculable though so many of his step , probably do not   keep the 
 picture there ; and , moreover , it be not generally characteristic of he 
 to be in the natural place . the end of Peter 's debate be that he again 
 enter a hansom and drive to Calcutta Gardens . the hour be early for 
 calling , but cousin with whom one 's intercourse be mainly a 
 conversational scuffle would accept it as a practical illustration of 
 that method . and if Julia want he to be nice to Biddy - which be 
 exactly , even if with a different view , what he want himself - how 
 could he well testify than by a visit to Lady Agnes - he would have in 
 decency to go to see she some time - at a friendly , fraternise hour 
 when they would all be likely to be at home ? 

 unfortunately , as it turn out , they be none of they at home , so that 
 he have to fall back on neutrality and the butler , who be , however , more 
 luckily , an old friend . her ladyship and Miss Dormer be absent from 
 town , pay a visit ; and Mr. Dormer be also away , or be on the point 
 of go away for the day . Miss Bridget be in London , but be out ; 
 Peter 's informant mention with earnest vagueness that he think she 
 have go somewhere to take a lesson . on Peter 's ask what sort of 
 lesson he mean he reply : " oh I think - a - the a - sculpture , you know , 
 sir . " Peter know , but Biddy 's lesson in " a - sculpture " - it sound on the 
 butler 's lip like a fashionable new art - strike he a little as a 
 mockery of the helpful spirit in which he have come to look she up . the 
 man have an air of participate respectfully in his disappointment and , 
 to make up for it , add that he might perhaps find Mr. Dormer at his 
 other address . he have go out early and have direct his servant to 
 come to Rosedale Road in an hour or two with a portmanteau : he be go 
 down to beauclere in the course of the day , Mr. Carteret be 
 ill - perhaps Mr. Sherringham do not   know it . perhaps too Mr. Sherringham 
 would catch he in Rosedale Road before he take his train - he be to 
 have be busy there for an hour . this be worth try , and Peter 
 immediately drive to Rosedale Road ; where in answer to his ring the door 
 be open to he by Biddy Dormer . 




 XXIX 


 when that young woman see he her cheek exhibit the prettiest , 
 please , surprised red he have ever observe there , though far from 
 unacquainted with its living tide , and she stand smile at he with 
 the outer dazzle in her eye , still make he no motion to enter . she 
 only say , " oh Peter ! " and then , " I be all alone . " 

 " so much the well , dear Biddy . be that any reason I should not   come 
 in ? " 

 " dear no - do come in . you have   just miss Nick ; he have go to the 
 country - half an hour ago . " she have on a large apron and in her hand 
 carry a small stick , besmear , as his quick eye saw , with 
 modelling - clay . she drop the door and flee back before he into the 
 studio , where , when he follow she , she be in the act of fling a 
 damp cloth over a rough head , in clay , which , in the middle of the room , 
 be support on a high wooden stand . the effort to hide what she have 
 be do before he catch a glimpse of it make her red still and 
 lead to her smile more , to she laugh with a confusion of shyness and 
 gladness that charm he . she rub her hand on her apron , she pull 
 it off , she look delightfully awkward , not meet Peter 's eye , and 
 she say : " I be just scrap here a little - you must not   mind I . what I 
 do be awful , you know . please , Peter , do not   look , I have   be come 
 here lately to make my little mess , because mamma do not   particularly 
 like it at home . I have   have a lesson or two from a lady who exhibit , but 
 you would not   suppose it to see what I do . Nick 's so kind ; he let I 
 come here ; he use the studio so little ; I do what I want , or rather 
 what I can . what a pity he be go - he would have be so glad . I be really 
 alone - I hope you do not   mind . Peter , please do not   look . " 

 Peter be not bent on look ; his eye have occupation enough in Biddy 's 
 own agreeable aspect , which be full of a rare element of domestication 
 and responsibility . though she have , stretch her bravery , take 
 possession of her brother 's quarter , she strike her visitor as more at 
 home and more herself than he have ever see she . it be the first time 
 she have be , to his notice , so separate from her mother and sister . she 
 seem to know this herself and to be a little frightened by it - just 
 enough to make he wish to be reassure . at the same time Peter also , 
 on this occasion , find himself touch with diffidence , especially 
 after he have go back and close the door and settle down to a regular 
 call ; for he become acutely conscious of what Julia have say to he in 
 Paris and be unable to rid himself of the suspicion that it have be 
 say with Biddy 's knowledge . it be not   that he suppose his sister have 
 tell the girl she mean to do what she could to make he propose to she : 
 that would have be cruel to she - if she like he enough to 
 consent - in Julia 's perfect uncertainty . but Biddy participate by 
 imagination , by divination , by a clever girl 's secret , tremulous 
 instinct , in her good friend 's view about she , and this probability 
 constitute for Sherringham a sort of embarrassing publicity . he have 
 impression , possibly gross and unjust , in regard to the way woman move 
 constantly together amid such consideration and subtly 
 intercommunicate , when they do not   still more subtly dissemble , the hope 
 or fear of which person of the opposite sex form the subject . 
 therefore poor Biddy would know that if she fail to strike he in the 
 right light it would not   be for want of an attention definitely call to 
 her claim . she would have be tacitly reject , virtually condemn . 
 he could not   without an impulse of fatuity endeavour to make up for this 
 to she by console kindness ; he be aware that if any one know it a man 
 would be ridiculous who should take so much as that for grant . but no 
 one would know it : he oddly enough in this calculation of security leave 
 Biddy herself out . it do not   occur to he that she might have a secret , 
 small irony to spare for his ingenious and magnanimous effort to show 
 she how much he like she in reparation to she for not like she more . 
 this high charity colour at any rate the whole of his visit to 
 Rosedale Road , the whole of the pleasant , prolonged chat that keep he 
 there more than an hour . he beg the girl to go on with her work , not 
 to let he interrupt it ; and she oblige he at last , take the cloth 
 off the lump of clay and give he a chance to be delightful by 
 guess that the shapeless mass be intend , or would be intend 
 after a while , for Nick . he see she be more comfortable when she begin 
 again to smooth it and scrape it with her little stick , to manipulate it 
 with an ineffectual air of know how ; for this give she something to 
 do , relieve her nervousness and permit she to turn away from he 
 when she talk . 

 he walk about the room and sit down ; get up and look at Nick 's 
 thing ; watch she at moment in silence - which make she always say in 
 a minute that he be not to pass judgement or she could do nothing ; 
 observe how her position before her high stand , her lift arm , her 
 turn of the head , consider her work this way and that , all help 
 she to be pretty . she repeat again and again that it be an immense 
 pity about Nick , till he be oblige to say he do not   care a straw for 
 Nick and be perfectly content with the company he find . this be not 
 the sort of tone he think it right , give the condition , to take ; but 
 then even the circumstance do not   require he to pretend he like she 
 less than he do . after all she be his cousin ; she would cease to be so 
 if she should become his wife ; but one advantage of she not enter 
 into that relation be precisely that she would remain his cousin . it 
 be very pleasant to find a young , bright , slim , rose - colour kinswoman 
 all ready to recognise consanguinity when one come back from cousinless 
 foreign land . Peter talk about family matter ; he do not   know , in his 
 exile , where no one take an interest in they , what a fund of latent 
 curiosity about they he treasure . it draw he on to gossip accordingly 
 and to feel how he have with Biddy indefeasible property in 
 common - ever so many thing as to which they would always understand each 
 other a demi - mot . he smoke a cigarette because she beg he - people 
 always smoke in studio and it make she feel so much more an artist . 
 she apologise for the badness of her work on the ground that Nick be 
 so busy he could scarcely ever give she a sitting ; so that she have to do 
 the head from photograph and occasional glimpse . they have hop to be 
 able to put in an hour that morning , but news have suddenly come that Mr. 
 Carteret be bad , and Nick have hurry down to Beauclere . Mr. Carteret 
 be very ill , poor old dear , and Nick and he be immense friend . Nick 
 have always be charming to he . Peter and Biddy take the concern of 
 the house of Dormer and Sherringham in order , and the young man feel 
 after a little as if they be as wise as a french conseil de famille 
 and settle what be good for every one . he hear all about Lady Agnes ; 
 he show an interest in the detail of her existence that he have not 
 suppose himself to possess , though indeed Biddy throw out intimation 
 which excite his curiosity , present her mother in a light that might 
 call on his sympathy . 

 " I do not   think she have be very happy or very pleased of late , " the 
 girl say . " I think she have have some disappointment , poor dear mamma ; 
 and Grace have make she go out of town for three or four day in the hope 
 of a little change . they have   go down to see an old lady , Lady St. 
 Dunstans , who never come to London now and who , you know - she be 
 tremendously old - be papa 's godmother . it be not very lively for Grace , 
 but Grace be such a dear she will do anything for mamma . Mamma will go 
 anywhere , no matter at what risk of discomfort , to see people she can 
 talk with about papa . " 

 Biddy add in reply to a further question that what her mother be 
 disappointed about be - well , themselves , her child and all their 
 affair ; and she explain that Lady Agnes want all kind of thing 
 for they that do not   come , that they do not   get or seem likely to get , 
 so that their life appear altogether a failure . she want a great 
 deal , Biddy admit ; she really want everything , for she have think 
 in her happy day that everything be to be her . she love they all 
 so much and be so proud too : she could not   get over the thought of their 
 not be successful . Peter be unwilling to press at this point , for he 
 suspect one of the thing Lady Agnes want ; but Biddy relieve he a 
 little by describe she as eager above all that Grace should get 
 married . 

 " that be too unselfish of she , " he pronounce , not care at all for 
 Grace . " Cousin Agnes ought to keep she near she always , if Grace be so 
 oblige and devote . " 

 " oh mamma would give up anything of that sort for our good ; she would not 
 sacrifice we that way ! " Biddy protest . " besides , I be the one to stay 
 with mamma ; not that I can manage and look after she and do everything 
 so well as Grace . but , you know , I want to , " say Biddy with a liquid 
 note in her voice - and give her lump of clay a little stab for 
 mendacious emphasis . 

 " but do not   your mother want the rest of you to get marry - Percival 
 and Nick and you ? " Peter ask . 

 " oh she have give up Percy . I do not   suppose she think it would do . dear 
 Nick of course - that be just what she do want . " 

 he have a pause . " and you , Biddy ? " 

 " oh I daresay . but that do not   signify - I never shall . " 

 Peter get up at this ; the tone of it set he in motion and he take a 
 turn round the room . he throw off something cheap about she be too 
 proud ; to which she reply that that be the only thing for a girl to 
 be to get on . 

 " what do you mean by get on ? " - and he stop with his hand in his 
 pocket on the other side of the studio . 

 " I mean cry one 's eye out ! " Biddy unexpectedly exclaim ; but she 
 drown the effect of this pathetic paradox in a laugh of clear 
 irrelevance and in the quick declaration : " of course it be about Nick 
 that she be really break - hearted . " 

 " what be the matter with Nick ? " he go on with all his diplomacy . 

 " oh Peter , what be the matter with Julia ? " Biddy quaver softly back to 
 he , her eye suddenly frank and mournful . " I daresay you know what we 
 all hop , what we all suppose from what they tell we . and now they 
 will not ! " say the girl . 

 " yes , Biddy , I know . I have the bright prospect of become your 
 brother - in - law : would not   that have be it - or something like that ? but 
 it be indeed visibly clouded . what be the matter with they ? may I have 
 another cigarette ? " Peter come back to the wide , cushion bench where 
 he have previously lounge : this be the way they take up the subject he 
 want most to look into . " do not   they know how to love ? " he speculate 
 as he seat himself again . 

 " it seem a kind of fatality ! " Biddy sigh . 

 he say nothing for some moment , at the end of which he ask if his 
 companion be to be quite alone during her mother 's absence . she 
 reply that this parent be very droll about that : would never leave 
 she alone and always think something dreadful would happen to she . she 
 have therefore arrange that Florence Tressilian should come and stay in 
 Calcutta Gardens for the next few day - to look after she and see she 
 do no wrong . Peter inquire with fulness into Florence Tressilian 's 
 identity : he greatly hop that for the success of Lady Agnes 's 
 precaution she be not   a flighty young genius like Biddy . she be 
 describe to he as tremendously nice and tremendously clever , but also 
 tremendously old and tremendously safe ; with the addition that Biddy be 
 tremendously fond of she and that while she remain in Calcutta Gardens 
 they expect to enjoy themselves tremendously . she be to come that 
 afternoon before dinner . 

 " and be you to dine at home ? " say Peter . 

 " certainly ; where else ? " 

 " and just you two alone ? do you call that enjoy yourself 
 tremendously ? " 

 " it will do for I . no doubt I ought not   in modesty to speak for poor 
 Florence . " 

 " it be not   fair to she ; you ought to invite some one to meet she . " 

 " do you mean you , Peter ? " the girl ask , turn to he quickly and 
 with a look that vanish the instant he catch it . 

 " try I . I will come like a shot . " 

 " that be kind , " say Biddy , drop her hand and now rest her eye 
 on he gratefully . she remain in this position as if under a charm ; 
 then she jerk herself back to her work with the remark : " florence will 
 like that immensely . " 

 " I be delighted to please Florence - your description of she 's so 
 attractive ! " Sherringham laugh . and when his companion ask he if he 
 mind there not be a great feast , because when her mother go away 
 she allow she a fix amount for that sort of thing and , as he might 
 imagine , it be not   million - when Biddy , with the frankness of their 
 pleasant kinship , touch anxiously on this economic point 
  illustrating , as Peter see , the lucidity with which Lady Agnes have have 
 in her old age to learn to recognise the occasion when she could be 
 conveniently frugal   he answer that the short dinner be the 
 good , especially when one be go to the theatre . that be his case 
 to - night , and do Biddy think he might look to Miss Tressilian to go 
 with they ? they would have to dine early - he want not to miss a moment . 

 " the theatre - Miss Tressilian ? " she star , interrupted and in suspense 
 again . 

 " would it incommode you very much to dine say at 7.15 and accept a place 
 in my box ? the finger of Providence be in it when I take a box an hour 
 ago . I particularly like your be free to go - if you be free . " 

 she begin almost to rave with pleasure . " Dear Peter , how good you be ! 
 they will have it at any hour . florence will be so glad . " 

 " and have Florence see Miss Rooth ? " 

 " Miss Rooth ? " the girl repeat , red than before . he feel on the spot 
 that she have hear of the expenditure of his time and attention on that 
 young lady . it be as if she be conscious of how conscious he would 
 himself be in speak of she , and there be a sweetness in her 
 allowance for he on that score . but Biddy be more confused for he 
 than he be for himself . he guess in a moment how much she have think 
 over what she have hear ; this be indicate by her say vaguely , " no , 
 no , I have   not see she . " then she know she be answer a question he 
 have not   ask she , and she go on : " we shall be too delighted . I see 
 she - perhaps you remember - in your room in Paris . I think she so 
 wonderful then ! every one be talk of she here . but we do not   go to the 
 theatre much , you know : we do not   have box offer we except when you 
 come . Poor Nick 's too much take up in the evening . I have   want awfully 
 to see she . they say she be magnificent . " 

 " I do not   know , " Peter be glad to be able honestly to answer . " I have not 
 see she . " 

 " you have not   see she ? " 

 " never , Biddy . I mean on the stage . in private often - yes , " he 
 conscientiously add . 

 " oh ! " Biddy exclaim , bend her face on Nick 's bust again . she ask 
 he no question about the new star , and he offer she no further 
 information . there be thing in his mind pull he different way , 
 so that for some minute silence be the result of the conflict . at last 
 he say , after an hesitation cause by the possibility that she be 
 ignorant of the fact he have lately elicit from Julia , though it be 
 more probable she might have learn it from the same source : 

 " be I perhaps indiscreet in allude to the circumstance that Nick have 
 be paint Miss Rooth 's portrait ? " 

 " you be not indiscreet in allude to it to I , because I know it . " 

 " then there be no secret nor mystery about it ? " 

 Biddy just consider . " I do not   think mamma know it . " 

 " you mean you have   be keep it from she because she would not   like it ? " 

 " we be afraid she may think papa would not   have like it . " 

 this be say with an absence of humour at which Peter could but show 
 amusement , though he quickly recover himself , repent of any 
 apparent failure of respect to the high memory of his late celebrated 
 relative . he throw off rather vaguely : " ah yes , I remember that great 
 man 's idea , " and then go on : " may I ask if you know it , the fact 
 we be talk of , through Julia or through Nick ? " 

 " I know it from both of they . " 

 " then if you be in their confidence may I far ask if this 
 undertaking of Nick 's be the reason why thing seem to be at an end 
 between they ? " 

 " oh I do not   think she like it , " Biddy have to say . 

 " be not   it good ? " 

 " oh I do not   mean the picture - she have not   see it . but his have do 
 it . " 

 " do she dislike it so much that that be why she will not   marry he ? " 

 Biddy give up her work , move away from it to look at it . she come and 
 sit down on the long bench on which Sherringham have place himself . then 
 she break out : " oh Peter , it be a great trouble - it be a very great 
 trouble ; and I can not   tell you , for I do not   understand it . " 

 " if I ask you , " he say , " it be not to pry into what do not   concern I ; 
 but Julia 's my sister , and I can not   after all help take some interest 
 in her life . she tell I herself so little . she do not   think I 
 worthy . " 

 " ah poor Julia ! " Biddy wail defensively . her tone recall to he that 
 Julia have at least think he worthy to unite himself to Bridget 
 Dormer , and inevitably betray that the girl be think of that also . 
 while they both think of it they sit look into each other 's eye . 

 " Nick , I be sure , do not   treat you that way ; I be sure he confide in 
 you ; he talk to you about his occupation , his ambition , " Peter 
 continue . " and you understand he , you enter into they , you be nice to 
 he , you help he . " 

 " oh Nick 's life - it be very dear to I , " Biddy grant . 

 " that must be jolly for he . " 

 " it make I very happy . " 

 Peter utter a low , ambiguous groan ; then he cry with irritation ; 
 " what the deuce be the matter with they then ? why can not   they hit it off 
 together and be quiet and rational and do what every one want they to ? " 

 " oh Peter , it be awfully complicated ! " the girl sigh with sagacity . 

 " do you mean that Nick 's in love with she ? " 

 " in love with Julia ? " 

 " no , no , with Miriam Rooth . " 

 she shake her head slowly , then with a smile which strike he as one of 
 the sweetest thing he have ever see - it convey , at the expense of her 
 own prospect , such a shy , generous little mercy of reassurance - " he 
 be not , Peter , " she bring out . " Julia think it trifle - all that 
 sort of thing , " she add " she want he to go in for different 
 honour . " 

 " Julia 's the oddest woman . I mean I think she love he , " Peter 
 explain . " and when you love a person - ! " he continue to make it out , 
 leave his sentence impatiently unfinishe , while Biddy , with lowered 
 eye , sit wait - it so interested she - to learn what you do when you 
 love a person . " I can not   conceive she give he up . he have great 
 ability , besides be such a good fellow . " 

 " it be for his happiness , Peter - that be the way she reason , " Biddy set 
 forth . " she do it for an idea ; she have tell I a great deal about it , 
 and I see the way she feel . " 

 " you try to , Biddy , because you be such a dear good - natured girl , but I 
 do not   believe you do in the least , " he take the liberty of reply . 
 " it be too little the way you yourself would feel . Julia 's idea , as you 
 call it , must be curious . " 

 " well , it be , Peter , " Biddy mournfully admit . " she will not   risk not 
 come out at the top . " 

 " at the top of what ? " 

 " oh of everything . " her tone show a trace of awe of such high view . 

 " surely one be at the top of everything when one be in love . " 

 " I do not   know , " say the girl . 

 " do you doubt it ? " Peter ask . 

 " I have   never be in love and I never shall be . " 

 " you be as perverse , in your way , as Julia , " he return to this . " but I 
 confess I do not   understand Nick 's attitude any well . he seem to I , 
 if I may say so , neither fish nor flesh . " 

 " oh his attitude 's very noble , Peter ; his state of mind 's wonderfully 
 interesting , " Biddy plead . " surely you must be in favour of art , " 
 she beautifully say . 

 it make he look at she a moment . " Dear Biddy , your little dig be as 
 soft as zephyr . " 

 she colour , but she protest . " my little dig ? what do you mean ? 
 be not   you in favour of art ? " 

 " the question be delightfully simple . I do not   know what you be talk 
 about . everything have its place . a parliamentary life , " he opine , 
 ' scarce seem to I the situation for portrait - painting . " 

 " that be just what Nick say . " 

 " you talk of it together a great deal ? " 

 " yes , Nick 's very good to I . " 

 " Clever Nick ! and what do you advise he ? " 

 " oh to do something . " 

 " that be valuable , " Peter laugh . " not to give up his sweetheart for the 
 sake of a paint - pot , I hope ? " 

 " never , never , Peter ! it be not a question of his give up , " Biddy 
 pursue , " for Julia have herself shake free . I think she never really 
 feel safe - she love he , but be afraid of he . now she be only 
 afraid - she have lose the confidence she try to have . Nick have try to 
 hold she , but she have wrest herself away . do you know what she say to 
 I ? she say , ' my confidence have go for ever . ' " 

 " I do not   know she be such a prig ! " Julia 's brother comment . " they be 
 queer people , verily , with water in their vein instead of blood . you 
 and I would not   be like that , should we ? - though you have take up such 
 a discouraging position about care for a fellow . " 

 " I care for art , " poor Biddy return . 

 " you do , to some purpose " - and Peter glance at the bust . 

 " to that of make you laugh at I . " 

 but this he do not   heed . " would you give a good man up for ' art ' ? " 

 " a good man ? what man ? " 

 " well , say I - if I want to marry you . " 

 she have the brief of pause . " of course I would - in a moment . at any 
 rate I would give up the House of Commons , " she amend . " that be what Nick 's 
 go to do now - only you must not   tell any one . " 

 Peter wonder . " he be go to chuck up his seat ? " 

 " I think his mind be make up to it . he have talk I over - we have   have 
 some deep discussion . yes , I be on the side of art ! " she ardently say . 

 " do you mean in order to paint - to paint that girl ? " Peter go on . 

 " to paint every one - that be what he want . by keep his seat he have not 
 keep Julia , and she be the thing he care for most in public life . when 
 he have get out of the whole thing his attitude , as he say , will be at 
 least clear . he be tremendously interesting about it , Peter , " Biddy 
 declare ; " have talk to I wonderfully - have win I over . Mamma 's 
 heart - break ; tell she will be the hard part . " 

 " if she do not   know , " he ask , " why then be she heart - break ? " 

 " oh at the hitch about their marriage - she know that . their marriage 
 have be so what she want . she think it perfection . she blame Nick 
 fearfully . she think he hold the whole thing in his hand and that he 
 have throw away a magnificent opportunity . " 

 " and what do Nick say to she ? " 

 " he say , ' dear old mummy ! ' " 

 " that be good , " Peter pronounce . 

 " I do not   know what will become of she when this other blow arrive , " 
 Biddy go on . " Poor Nick want to please she - he do , he do . but , as 
 he say , you can not   please every one and you must before you die please 
 yourself a little . " 

 Nick 's kinsman , whose brother - in - law he be to have be , sit look 
 at the floor ; the colour have rise to his face while he listen . then 
 he spring up and take another turn about the room . his companion 's 
 artless but vivid recital have set his blood in motion . he have take 
 Nick 's political prospect very much for grant , think of they as 
 definite and almost dazzle . to learn there be something for which he 
 be ready to renounce such honour , and to recognise the nature of that 
 bribe , affect our young man powerfully and strangely . he feel as if he 
 have hear the sudden blare of a trumpet , yet feel at the same time as if 
 he have receive a sudden slap in the face . Nick 's bribe be " art " - the 
 strange temptress with whom he himself have be wrestle and over whom 
 he have finally venture to believe that wisdom and training have win a 
 victory . there be something in the conduct of his old friend and 
 playfellow that make all his reasoning small . so unexpected , so 
 courageous a choice move he as a reproach and a challenge . he feel 
 ashamed of have place himself so unromantically on his guard , and 
 rapidly say to himself that if Nick could afford to allow so much for 
 " art " he might surely exhibit some of the same confidence . there have 
 never be the least avow competition between the cousin - their line 
 lie too far apart for that ; but they nevertheless ride their course in 
 sight of each other , and Peter have now the impression of suddenly see 
 Nick Dormer give his horse the spur , bind forward and fly over a wall . 
 he be put on his mettle and have not   to look long to spy an obstacle he 
 too might ride at . High rise his curiosity to see what warrant his 
 kinsman might have for such risk - how he be mount for such exploit . 
 he really know little about Nick 's talent - so little as to feel no right 
 to exclaim " what an ass ! " when Biddy mention the fact which the 
 existence of real talent alone could redeem from absurdity . all his 
 eagerness to see what Nick have be able to make of such a subject as 
 Miriam Rooth come back to he : though it be what mainly have bring he 
 to Rosedale Road he have forget it in the happy accident of his 
 encounter with the girl . he be conscious that if the surprise of a 
 revelation of power be in store for he Nick would be justify more 
 than he himself would feel reinstate in self - respect ; since the courage 
 of renounce the forum for the studio hover before he as great 
 than the courage of marry an actress whom one be in love with : the 
 reward be in the latter case so much more immediate . Peter at any rate 
 ask Biddy what Nick have do with his portrait of Miriam . he have not 
 see it anywhere in rummage about the room . 

 " I think it be here somewhere , but I do not   know , " she reply , get up 
 to look vaguely round she . 

 " have not   you see it ? have not   he show it to you ? " 

 she rest her eye on he strangely a moment , then turn they away 
 with a mechanical air of still search . " I think it be in the room , put 
 away with its face to the wall . " 

 " one of those dozen canvas with their back to we ? " 

 " one of those perhaps . " 

 " have not   you try to see ? " 

 " I have not   touch they " - and Biddy have a colour . 

 " have not   Nick have it out to show you ? " 

 " he say it be in too bad a state - it be not   finish - it will not   do . " 

 " and have not   you have the curiosity to turn it round for yourself ? " 

 the embarrassed look in her face deepen under his insistence and it 
 seem to he that her eye plead with he a moment almost to tear . 
 " I have   have an idea he would not   like it . " 

 her visitor 's own desire , however , have become too sharp for easy 
 forbearance . he lay his hand on two or three canvas which prove , as 
 he extricate they , to be either blank or cover with rudimentary 
 form . " Dear Biddy , have you such intense delicacy ? " he ask , pull 
 out something else . 

 the inquiry be mean in familiar kindness , for Peter be strike even to 
 admiration with she have a sense of honour that all girl have not . she 
 must in this particular case have long for a sight of Nick 's work - the 
 work that have bring about such a crisis in his life . but she have 
 pass hour in his studio alone without permit herself a steal 
 peep ; she be capable of that if she believe it would please he . Peter 
 like a charming girl 's be capable of that - he have know charming 
 girl who would not   in the least have be - and his question be really a 
 form of homage . Biddy , however , apparently discover some light mockery 
 in it , and she break out incongruously : 

 " I have not   want so much to see it ! I do not   care for she so much as 
 that ! " 

 " so much as what ? " he could not   but wonder . 

 " I do not   care for his actress - for that vulgar creature . I do not   like 
 she ! " say Biddy almost startlingly . 

 Peter star . " I think you have not   see she . " 

 " I see she in Paris - twice . she be wonderfully clever , but she do not 
 charm I . " 

 he quickly consider , say then all kindly : " I will not   inflict the 
 thing on you in that case - we will leave it alone for the present . " Biddy 
 make no reply to this at first , but after a moment go straight over 
 to the row of stack canvas and expose several of they to the light . 
 " why do you say you wish to go to the theatre to - night ? " her 
 companion continue . 

 still she be silent ; after which , with her back turn to he and a 
 little tremor in her voice while she draw forth successively her 
 brother 's study , she make answer : " for the sake of your company , 
 Peter ! here it be , I think , " she add , move a large canvas with some 
 effort . " no , no , I will hold it for you . be that the light ? " 

 she would not   let he take it ; she bid he stand off and allow she to 
 place it in the right position . in this position she carefully present 
 it , support it at the proper angle from behind and show her head 
 and shoulder above it . from the moment his eye rest on the picture 
 Peter accept this service without protest . unfinishe , simplified and 
 in some portion merely suggest , it be strong , vivid and assured , it 
 have already the look of life and the promise of power . Peter feel all 
 this and be startle , be strangely affect - he have no idea Nick move 
 with that stride . Miriam , seat , be represent in three - quarter , 
 almost to her foot . she lean forward with one of her leg cross over 
 the other , her arm extend and foreshorten , her hand lock 
 together round her knee . her beautiful head be bent a little , 
 broodingly , and her splendid face seem to look down at life . she have a 
 grand appearance of be raise aloft , with a wide regard , a survey 
 from a height of intelligence , for the great field of the artist , all 
 the figure and passion he may represent . Peter ask himself where his 
 kinsman have learn to paint like that . he almost gasp at the 
 composition of the thing and at the drawing of the difficult arm . Biddy 
 abstain from look round the corner of the canvas as she hold it ; 
 she only watch , in Peter 's eye , for this gentleman 's impression of 
 it . that she easily catch , and he measure her impression - her 
 impression of his impression - when he go after a few minute to 
 relieve she . she let he lift the thing out of her grasp ; he move it 
 and rest it , so that they could still see it , against the high back of 
 a chair . " it be tremendously good , " he then handsomely pronounce . 

 " dear , dear Nick , " Biddy murmur , look at it now . 

 " poor , poor Julia ! " Peter be prompt to exclaim in a different tone . 
 his companion make no rejoinder to this , and they stand another minute 
 or two side by side and in silence , gaze at the portrait . at last he 
 take up his hat - he have no more time , he must go . " will you come 
 to - night all the same ? " he ask with a laugh that be somewhat awkward 
 and an offer of a hand - shake . 

 " all the same ? " Biddy seem to wonder . 

 " why you say she be a terrible creature , " Peter complete with his eye 
 on the paint face . 

 " oh anything for art ! " Biddy smile . 

 " well , at seven o'clock then . " and Sherringham depart , leave the 
 girl alone with the Tragic Muse and feel with a quickened rush the 
 beauty of that young woman as well as , all freshly , the peculiar 
 possibility of Nick . 




 XXX 


 it be not till after the noon of the next day that he be to see Miriam 
 Rooth . he write she a note that evening , to be deliver to she at the 
 theatre , and during the performance she send round to he a card with 
 " all right , come to luncheon to - morrow " scrawl on it in pencil . 

 when he present himself at Balaklava Place he learn that the two 
 lady have not come in - they have go again early to rehearsal ; but they 
 have leave word that he be to be pleased to wait , they would appear from 
 one moment to the other . it be far mention to he , as he be 
 usher into the drawing - room , that Mr. Dashwood be in possession of 
 that ground . this circumstance , however , Peter barely note : he have be 
 soar so high for the past twelve hour that he have almost lose 
 consciousness of the minor difference of earthly thing . he have take 
 Biddy Dormer and her friend Miss Tressilian home from the play and after 
 leave they have walk about the street , have roam back to his 
 sister 's house , in a state of exaltation the intenser from his having 
 for the previous time contain himself , think it more decorous and 
 considerate , less invidious and less blatant , not to " rave . " sit 
 there in the shade of the box with his companion he have watch Miriam 
 in attentive but inexpressive silence , glow and vibrate inwardly , 
 yet for these fine , deep reason not commit himself to the speak 
 rapture . delicacy , it appear to he , should rule the hour ; and indeed 
 he have never have a pleasure less alloy than this little period of 
 still observation and repressed ecstasy . Miriam 's art lose nothing by 
 it , and Biddy 's mild nearness only gain . this young lady be virtually 
 mute as well - wonderingly , dauntedly , as if she too associate with the 
 performer various other question than that of her mastery of her art . 
 to this mastery Biddy 's attitude be a candid and liberal tribute : the 
 poor girl sit quench and pale , as if in the blind light of a 
 comparison by which it would be presumptuous even to be annihilate . her 
 subjection , however , be a gratified , a charmed subjection : there be 
 beneficence in such beauty - the beauty of the figure that move before 
 the footlight and speak in music - even if it deprive one of hope . 
 Peter do not   say to she in vulgar elation and in reference to her 
 whimsical profession of dislike at the studio , " well , do you find our 
 friend so disagreeable now ? " and she be grateful to he for his 
 forbearance , for the tacit kindness of which the idea seem to be : " my 
 poor child , I would prefer you if I could ; but - judge for yourself - how can 
 I ? expect of I only the possible . expect that certainly , but only 
 that . " in the same degree Peter like Biddy 's sweet , hush air of 
 judge for herself , of recognise his discretion and let he off 
 while she be lose in the illusion , in the convincing picture of the 
 stage . Miss Tressilian do most of the criticism : she break out 
 cheerfully and sonorously from time to time , in reference to the 
 actress , " most striking certainly , " or " she be clever , be not   she ? " she 
 utter a series of proposition to which her companion find it 
 impossible to respond . Miss Tressilian be disappoint in nothing but 
 their enjoyment : they do not   seem to think the exhibition as amusing as 
 she . 

 walk away through the order void of Lady Agnes 's quarter , with the 
 four act of the play glow again before he in the smokeless London 
 night , Peter find the lively thing in his impression the certitude 
 that if he have never see Miriam before and she have have for he none of 
 the advantage of association , he would still have recognise in her 
 performance the rich interest the theatre have ever offer he . he 
 float in the felicity of it , in the general encouragement of a sense 
 of the perfectly do , in the almost aggressive bravery of still 
 large claim for an art which could so triumphantly , so exquisitely 
 render life . " render it ? " he say to himself . " create it and reveal it , 
 rather ; give we something new and large and of the first order ! " he have 
  see Miriam now ; he have never see she before ; he have never see she 
 till he see she in her condition . oh her condition - there be many 
 thing to be say about they ; they be paltry enough as yet , inferior , 
 inadequate , obstructive , as compare with the right , full , finish 
 setting of such a talent ; but the essence of they be now , irremovably , 
 in our young man 's eye , the vision of how the uplifted stage and the 
 listening house transform she . that idea of she have no character of 
 her own come back to he with a force that make he laugh in the empty 
 street : this be a disadvantage she reduce so to nothing that obviously 
 he have not   know she till to - night . her character be simply to hold you 
 by the particular spell ; any other - the good nature of home , the 
 relation to her mother , her friend , her lover , her debt , the practice 
 of virtue or industry or vice - be not worth speak of . these 
 thing be the fiction and shadow ; the representation be the deep 
 substance . 

 Peter have as he go an intense vision - he have often have it before - of 
 the condition still absent , the great and complete one , those which 
 would give the girl 's talent a superior , a discussable stage . More than 
 ever he desire they , mentally invoke they , fill they out in 
 imagination , cheat himself with the idea that they be possible . he 
 see they in a momentary illusion and confusion : a great academic , 
 artistic theatre , subsidise and unburden with money - getting , rich in 
 its repertory , rich in the high quality and the wide array of its 
 servant , rich above all in the authority of an impossible 
 administrator - a manager personally disintereste , not an actor with an 
 eye to the main chance ; pour forth a continuity of tradition , 
 strive for perfection , lay a splendid literature under 
 contribution . he see the heroine of a hundred ' situation , " variously 
 dramatic and vividly real ; he see comedy and drama and passion and 
 character and english life ; he see all humanity and history and poetry , 
 and then perpetually , in the midst of they , shin out in the high 
 relief of some great moment , an image as fresh as an unveiled statue . he 
 be not unconscious that he be take all sort of impossibility and 
 miracle for grant ; but he be under the conviction , for the time , 
 that the woman he have be watch three hour , the incarnation of the 
 serious drama , would be a new and vivifying force . the world be just 
 then so bright to he that even Basil Dashwood strike he at first as a 
 conceivable agent of his dream . 

 it must be add that before Miriam arrive the breeze that fill 
 Sherringham 's sail begin to sink a little . he pass out of the 
 eminently " let " drawing - room , where twenty large photograph of the 
 young actress bloom in the desert ; he go into the garden by a glass 
 door that stand open , and find Mr. Dashwood loll on a bench and 
 smoke cigarette . this young man 's conversation be a different 
 music - it take he down , as he feel ; show he , very sensibly and 
 intelligibly , it must be confess , the actual theatre , the one they 
 be all concerned with , the one they would have to make the miserable 
 good of . it be fortunate that he keep his intoxication mainly to 
 himself : the Englishman 's habit of not be effusive still prevail 
 with he after his year of exposure to the foreign infection . nothing 
 could have be less exclamatory than the meeting of the two man , with 
 its question or two , its remark or two , about the new visitor 's arrival 
 in London ; its off - hand " I notice you last night , I be glad you turn 
 up at last " on one side and its attenuated " oh yes , it be the first 
 time ; I be very much interested " on the other . Basil Dashwood play a 
 part in Yolande and Peter have not fail to take with some comfort the 
 measure of his aptitude . he judge it to be of the small order , as 
 indeed the part , which be neither that of the virtuous nor that of the 
 villainous hero , restrict he to two or three inconspicuous effect 
 and three or four change of dress . he represent an ardent but 
 respectful young lover whom the distracted heroine find time to pity a 
 little and even to rail at ; but it be impress upon his critic that he 
 scarcely represent young love . he look very well , but Peter have 
 hear he already in a hundred contemporary piece ; he never get out of 
 rehearsal . he utter sentiment and breathe vow with a nice voice , 
 with a shy , boyish tremor , but as if he be afraid of be chaff for 
 it afterwards ; give the spectator in the stall the sense of hold 
 the prompt - book and listen to a recitation . he make one think of 
 country - house and lawn - tennis and private theatrical ; than which there 
 could not   be , to Peter 's mind , a range of association more disconnected 
 from the actor 's art . 

 Dashwood know all about the new thing , the piece in rehearsal ; he know 
 all about everything - receipt and salary and expense and newspaper 
 article , and what old Baskerville say and what Mrs. Ruffler think : 
 matter of superficial concern to his fellow - guest , who wonder , before 
 they have sight of Miriam , if she talk with she " walking - gentleman " 
 about they by the hour , deep in they and find they not vulgar and 
 boring but the natural air of her life and the essence of her 
 profession . of course she do - she naturally would ; it be all in the 
 day 's work and he might feel sure she would not   turn up her nose at the 
 shop . he have to remind himself that he do not   care if she do not , that 
 he would really think bad of she if she should . she certainly be in 
 deep with her bland playmate , talk shop by the hour : he could see 
 this from the fellow 's ease of attitude , the air of a man at home and 
 do the honour . he divine a great intimacy between the two young 
 artist , but ask himself at the same time what he , Peter Sherringham , 
 have to say about it . he do not   pretend to control Miriam 's intimacy , 
 it be to be suppose ; and if he have encourage she to adopt a 
 profession rich in opportunity for comradeship it be not for he to 
 cry out because she have take to it kindly . he have already descry a 
 fund of utility in Mrs. Lovick 's light brother ; but it irritate he , 
 all the same , after a while , to hear the youth represent himself as 
 almost indispensable . he be practical - there be no doubt of that ; and 
 this idea add to Peter 's paradoxical sense that as regard the matter 
 actually in question he himself have not this virtue . Dashwood have get 
 Mrs. Rooth the house ; it happen by a lucky chance that Laura Lumley , 
 to whom it belong - Sherringham would know Laura Lumley ? - want to get 
 rid , for a mere song , of the remainder of the lease . she be go to 
 Australia with a troupe of her own . they just step into it ; it be 
 good air - the good sort of London air to live in , to sleep in , for 
 people of their trade . Peter come back to his wonder at what Miriam 's 
 personal relation with this deucedly know gentleman might be , and 
 be again able to assure himself that they might be anything in the 
 world she like , for any stake he , the familiar of the Foreign Office , 
 have in they . Dashwood tell he of all the smart people who have try to 
 take up the new star - the way the London world have already hold out its 
 hand ; and perhaps it be Sherringham 's irritation , the crush sentiment 
 I just mention , that give a little heave in the exclamation , " oh 
 that - that be all rubbish : the less of that the well ! " at this Mr. 
 Dashwood sniff a little , rather resentful ; he have expect Peter to be 
 pleased with the name of the eager lady who have " call " - which 
 prove how low a view he take of his art . our friend explain - it be to 
 be hop not pedantically - that this art be serious work and that 
 society be humbug and imbecility ; also that of old the great comedian 
 would not   have know such people . Garrick have essentially his own circle . 

 " no , I suppose they do not   ' call ' in the old narrow - minded time , " say 
 Basil Dashwood . 

 " your profession do not   call . they have well company - that of the 
 romantic gallant character they represent . they live with they , so 
 it be well all round . " and Peter ask himself - for that clearly 
 strike the young man as a dreary period - if he only , for Miriam , in 
 her new life and among the futility of those who try to lionise she , 
 express the artistic idea . this at least , Sherringham reflect , be 
 a situation that could be improve . 

 he learn from his companion that the new play , the thing they be 
 rehearse , be an old play , a romantic drama of thirty year before , 
 very frequently revive and threadbare with honourable service . Dashwood 
 have a part in it , but there be an act in which he do not   appear , and 
 this be the act they be do that morning . yolande have do all 
 Yolande could do ; the visitor be mistaken if he suppose Yolande such a 
 tremendous hit . it have do very well , it have run three month , but they 
 be by no means coin money with it . it would not   take they to the end 
 of the season ; they have see for a month past that they would have to 
 put on something else . Miss Rooth , moreover , want a new part ; she be 
 above all impatient to show her big range . she have grand idea ; she 
 think herself very good - natured to repeat the same stuff for three 
 month . the young man light another cigarette and describe to his 
 listener some of Miss Rooth 's idea . he abound in information about 
 she - about her character , her temper , her peculiarity , her little 
 way , her manner of produce some of her effect . he speak with 
 familiarity and confidence , as if know more about she than any one 
 else - as if he have invent or discover she , be in a sense her 
 proprietor or guarantor . it be the talk of the shop , both with a native 
 sharpness and a touching young candour ; the expansion of the commercial 
 spirit when it relax and generalise , be conscious of safety with 
 another member of the guild . 

 Peter at any rate could not   help protest against the lame old 
 war - horse it be propose to bring into action , who have be ride to 
 death and have save a thousand desperate field ; and he exclaim on 
 the strange passion of the good british public for sit again and 
 again through expect situation , watch for speech they have hear 
 and surprise that strike the hour . Dashwood defend the taste of 
 London , praise it as loyal , constant , faithful ; to which his 
 interlocutor retort with some vivacity that it be faithful to sad 
 trash . he justify this sally by declare the play in rehearsal sad 
 trash , clumsy mediocrity with all its convenience gone , and that the 
 fault be the want of life in the critical sense of the public , which 
 be ignobly docile , open its mouth for its dose like the pupil of 
 Dotheboys Hall ; not insist on something different , on a fresh brew 
 altogether . Dashwood ask he if he then wish their friend to go on 
 play for ever a part she have repeat more than eighty night on end : 
 he think the modern " run " be just what he have hear he denounce in 
 Paris as the disease the theatre be die of . this imputation Peter 
 quite deny , want to know if she could not   change to something less 
 stale than the great staleness of all . dashwood opine that Miss 
 Rooth must have a strong part and that there happen to be one for she 
 in the before - mention venerable novelty . she have to take what she 
 could get - she be not   a person to cry for the moon . this be a 
 stop - gap - she would try other thing later ; she would have to look round 
 she ; you could not   have a new piece , one that would do , leave at your door 
 every day with the milk . on one point Sherringham 's mind might be at 
 rest : Miss Rooth be a woman who would do every bless thing there be 
 to do . give her time and she would walk straight through the repertory . 
 she be a woman who would do this - she be a woman who would do that : 
 her spokesman employ this phrase so often that Peter , nervous , get up 
 and throw an unsmoked cigarette away . of course she be a woman ; there 
 be no need of his say it a hundred time . 

 as for the repertory , the young man go on , the most beautiful girl in 
 the world could give but what she have . he explain , after their visitor 
 sit down again , that the noise make by Miss Rooth be not exactly what 
 this admirer appear to suppose . Sherringham have see the house the 
 night before and would recognise that , though good , it be very far from 
 great . she have do very well , it be all right , but she have never go 
 above a point which Dashwood express in pound sterling , to the 
 edification of his companion , who vaguely think the figure high . Peter 
 remember that he have be unable to get a stall , but Dashwood insist 
 that " Miriam " have not leap into command fame : that be a thing that 
 never happen in fact - it happen only in grotesque work of fiction . 
 she have attract notice , unusual notice for a woman whose name , the day 
 before , have never be hear of : she be recognise as have , for a 
 novice , extraordinary cleverness and confidence - in addition to her 
 look , of course , which be the thing that have really fetch the 
 crowd . but she have not   be the talk of London ; she have only be the 
 talk of Gabriel Nash . he be not   London , more be the pity . he know the 
 esthetic people - the worldly , semi - smart one , not the frumpy , sickly 
 lot who wear dirty drapery ; and the esthetic people have run after she . 
 Mr. Dashwood sketchily instruct the pilgrim from Paris as to the 
 different sect in the great religion of beauty , and be able to give 
 he the particular " note " of the critical clique to which Miriam have 
 begin so quickly to owe it that she have a vogue . the information make 
 our friend feel very ignorant of the world , very uninitiated and bury 
 in his little professional hole . Dashwood warn he that it would be a 
 long time before the general public would wake up to Miss Rooth , even 
 after she have wake up to herself ; she would have to do some really big 
 thing first . they know it be in she , the big thing - Peter and he and 
 even poor Nash - because they have see she as no one else have ; but London 
 never take any one on trust - it have to be cash down . it would take their 
 young lady two or three year to pay out her cash and get she 
 equivalent . but of course the equivalent would be simply a gold - mine . 
 within its limit , however , certainly , the mark she have make be already 
 quite a fairy - tale : there be magic in the way she have conceal from 
 the first her want of experience . she absolutely make you think she have 
 a lot of it , more than any one else . Mr. Dashwood repeat several time 
 that she be a cool hand - a deucedly cool hand , and that he watch she 
 himself , see idea come to she , see she have different notion , and more 
 or less put they to the test , on different night . she be always 
 alive - she like it herself . she give he idea , long as he have be on 
 the stage . naturally she have a great deal to learn , no end even of quite 
 basic thing ; a cosmopolite like Sherringham would understand that a 
 girl of that age , who have never have a friend but her mother - her mother 
 be great fun than ever now - naturally would have . Sherringham 
 wince at be dub a " cosmopolite " by his young entertainer , just as 
 he have wince a moment before at hear himself lump in esoteric 
 knowledge with Dashwood and Gabriel Nash ; but the former of these 
 gentleman take no account of his sensibility while he enumerate a few 
 of the element of the " basic . " he be a mixture of acuteness and 
 innocent fatuity ; and Peter have to recognise in he a rudiment or two of 
 criticism when he say that the wonderful thing in the girl be that she 
 learn so fast - learn something every night , learn from the same 
 old piece a lot more than any one else would have learn from twenty . 
 " that be what it be to be a genius , " Peter concur . " Genius be only the 
 art of get your experience fast , of steal it , as it be ; and in 
 this sense Miss Rooth 's a regular brigand . " Dashwood condone the 
 subtlety and add less analytically , " oh she will do ! " it be exactly in 
 these simple word , address to she , that her other admirer have phrase 
 the same truth ; yet he do not   enjoy hear they on his neighbour 's 
 lip : they have a profane , patronise sound and suggest displease 
 equality . 

 the two man sit in silence for some minute , watch a fat robin hop 
 about on the little seedy lawn ; at the end of which they hear a vehicle 
 stop on the other side of the garden - wall and the voice of occupant 
 alight . " here they come , the dear creature , " say Basil Dashwood 
 without move ; and from where they sit Peter see the small door in the 
 wall push open . the dear creature be three in number , for a 
 gentleman have add himself to Mrs. Rooth and her daughter . as soon as 
 Miriam 's eye take in her parisian friend she fall into a large , droll , 
 theatrical attitude and , seize her mother 's arm , exclaim 
 passionately : " look where he sit , the author of all my woe - cold , 
 cynical , cruel ! " she be evidently in the high spirit ; of which Mrs. 
 Rooth partook as she cry indulgently , give she a slap , " oh get 
 along , you gypsy ! " 

 " she be always up to something , " Dashwood laugh as Miriam , radiant and 
 with a conscious stage tread , glide toward Sherringham as if she be 
 come to the footlight . he rise slowly from his seat , look at she 
 and strike with her beauty : he have be impatient to see she , yet in the 
 act his impatience have have a disconcert check . 

 he have have time to note that the man who have come in with she be 
 Gabriel Nash , and this recognition bring a low sigh to his lip as he 
 hold out his hand to she - a sigh expressive of the sudden sense that his 
 interest in she now could only be a gross community . of course that 
 do not   matter , since he have set it , at the most , such rigid limit ; but 
 he none the less feel vividly remind that it would be public and 
 notorious , that inferior people would be inveterately mix up with it , 
 that she have cross the line and sell herself to the vulgar , make he 
 indeed only one of an equalised multitude . the way Nash turn up there 
 just when he do not   want to see he prove how complicated a thing it 
 be to have a friendship with a young woman so clearly book for 
 renown . he quite forget that the intruder have have this object of 
 interest long before his own first view of it and have be present at 
 that passage , which he have in a measure bring about . have Sherringham 
 not be so cut out to make trouble of this particular joy he might have 
 find some adequate assurance that their young hostess distinguish he 
 in the way in which , take his hand in both of her , she look up at 
 he and murmur , " dear old master ! " then as if this be not 
 acknowledgment enough she raise her head still higher and , whimsically , 
 gratefully , charmingly , almost nobly , kiss he on the lip before the 
 other man , before the good mother whose " oh you honest creature ! " make 
 everything regular . 




 XXXI 


 if he be ruffle by some of her condition there be thus comfort and 
 consolation to be draw from other , beside the essential 
 fascination - so small the doubt of that now - of the young lady 's own 
 society . he spend the afternoon , they all spend the afternoon , and the 
 occasion remind he of page in Wilhelm Meister . he himself could 
 pass for Wilhelm , and if Mrs. Rooth have little resemblance to Mignon , 
 Miriam be remarkably like Philina . the movable feast await 
 they - luncheon , tea , dinner ? - be delay two or three hour ; but the 
 interval be a source of gaiety , for they all smoke cigarette in the 
 garden and Miriam give strike illustration of the part she be 
 study . Peter be in the state of a man whose toothache have suddenly 
 stop - he be exhilarate by the cessation of pain . the pain have be 
 the effort to remain in Paris after the creature in the world in whom he 
 be most interested have go to London , and the balm of see she now 
 be the measure of the previous soreness . 

 Gabriel Nash have , as usual , plenty to say , and he talk of Nick 's 
 picture so long that Peter wonder if he do it on purpose to vex he . 
 they go in and out of the house ; they make excursion to see what form 
 the vague meal be take ; and Sherringham get half an hour alone , or 
 virtually alone , with the mistress of his unsanctioned passion - draw 
 she publicly away from the other and make she sit with he in the 
 most sequestered part of the little gravelled ground . there be summer 
 enough for the tree to shut out the adjacent villa , and Basil Dashwood 
 and Gabriel Nash lounge together at a convenient distance while Nick 's 
 whimsical friend drop polished pebble , sometimes audibly splash , 
 into the deep well of the histrionic simplicity . Miriam confess that 
 like all comedian they eat at queer hour ; she send Dashwood in for 
 biscuit and sherry - she propose send he round to the grocer 's in 
 the Circus Road for superior wine . Peter judge he the factotum of the 
 little household : he know where the biscuit be keep and the state of 
 the grocer 's account . when he himself congratulate she on have so 
 useful an inmate she say genially , but as if the word dispose of he , 
 " oh he be awfully handy . " to this she add , " you be not , you know " ; 
 rest the kind , most pity eye on he . the sensation they give 
 he be as sweet as if she have stroke his cheek , and her manner be 
 responsive even to tenderness . she call he " dear master " again and 
 again , and still often " Cher maĂ tre , " and appear to express 
 gratitude and reverence by every intonation . 

 " you be do the humble dependent now , " he say : " you do it 
 beautifully , as you do everything . " she reply that she do not   make it 
 humble enough - she could not ; she be too proud , too insolent in her 
 triumph . she like that , the triumph , too much , and she do not   mind 
 tell he she be perfectly happy . of course as yet the triumph be 
 very limited ; but success be success , whatever its quantity ; the dish 
 be a small one but have the right taste . her imagination have already 
 bound beyond the first phase unexpectedly great as this have be : her 
 position strike she as modest compare with the probably future now 
 vivid to she . Peter have never see she so soft and sympathetic ; she have 
 insist in Paris that her personal character be that of the good 
 girl - she use the term in a fine loose way - and it be impossible to be 
 a well girl than she show herself this pleasant afternoon . she be 
 full of gossip and anecdote and drollery ; she have exactly the air he 
 would have wish she to have - that of thinking of no end of thing to 
 tell he . it be as if she have just return from a long journey and have 
 have strange adventure and make wonderful discovery . she begin to 
 speak of this and that , then break off to speak of something else ; she 
 talk of the theatre , of the " critic , " and above all of London , of the 
 people she have meet and the extraordinary thing they say to she , of the 
 part she be go to take up , of lot of new idea that have come to 
 she about the art of comedy . she want to do comedy now - to do the 
 comedy of London life . she be delighted to find that see more of the 
 world suggest thing to she ; they come straight from the fact , from 
 nature , if you could call it nature ; she be thus convince more than 
 ever that the artist ought to live so as to get on with his business , 
 gather idea and light from experience - ought to welcome any 
 experience that would give he light . but work of course be 
 experience , and everything in one 's life that be good be work . that 
 be the jolly thing in the actor 's trade - it make up for other element 
 that be odious : if you only keep your eye open nothing could happen 
 to you that would not   be food for observation and grist to your mill , 
 show you how people look and move and speak , cry and grimace , 
 writhe and dissimulate , in give situation . she see all round her 
 thing she want to " do " - London bristle with they if you have eye to 
 see . she be fierce to know why people do not   take they up , put they 
 into play and part , give one a chance with they ; she express she 
 sharp impatience of the general literary bă tise . she have never be 
 chary of this particular displeasure , and there be moment - it be an 
 old story and a subject of frank raillery to Sherringham - when to hear 
 she you might have think there be no cleverness anywhere but in her 
 own splendid impatience . she want tremendous thing do that she 
 might use they , but she do not   pretend to say exactly what they be to 
 be , nor even approximately how they be to be handle : her ground be 
 rather that if she only have a pen - it be exasperate to have to 
 explain ! she mainly content herself with the view that nothing have 
 really be touch : she feel that more and more as she see more of 
 people 's going - on . 

 Peter go to her theatre again that evening and indeed make no scruple 
 of go every night for a week . rather perhaps I should say he make a 
 scruple , but a high part of the pleasure of his life during these 
 arbitrary day be to overcome it . the only way to prove he could 
 overcome it be to go ; and he be satisfied , after he have be seven 
 time , not only with the spectacle on the stage but with his perfect 
 independence . he know no satiety , however , with the spectacle on the 
 stage , which induce for he but a further curiosity . Miriam 's 
 performance be a thing alive , with a power to change , to grow , to 
 develop , to beget new form of the same life . Peter contribute to it in 
 his amateurish way and watch with solicitude the effect of his care 
 and the fortune of his hint . he talk it over in Balaklava Place , 
 suggest modification and variation worth try . she profess 
 herself thankful for any refreshment that could be administer to her 
 interest in Yolande , and with an energy that show large resource 
 touch up her part and draw several new air from it . Peter 's 
 liberty bore on her way of utter certain speech , the intonation 
 that would have more beauty or make the word mean more . she have she 
 idea , or rather she have her instinct , which she defend and 
 illustrate , with a vividness superior to argument , by a happy pictorial 
 phrase or a snatch of mimicry ; but she be always for try ; she like 
 experiment and catch at they , and she be especially thankful when 
 some one give she a showy reason , a plausible formula , in a case where 
 she only stand on an intuition . she pretend to despise reason and to 
 like and dislike at her sovereign pleasure ; but she always honour the 
 exotic gift , so that Sherringham be amuse with the liberal way she 
 produce it , as if she have be a naked islander rejoice in a present 
 of crimson cloth . 

 Day after day he spend most of his time in her society , and Miss Laura 
 Lumley 's recent habitation become the place in London to which his 
 thought and his step be most attach . he be highly conscious of 
 his not now carry out that principle of abstention he have bring to 
 such maturity before leave Paris ; but he content himself with a much 
 cruder justification of this lapse than he would have think adequate 
 in advance . it consist simply in the idea that to be identify with 
 the first fresh exploit of a young genius be a delightful experience . 
 what be the harm of it when the genius be real ? his main security be 
 thus that his relation with Miriam have be place under the protection 
 of that idea of approve extravagance . in this department they make a 
 very creditable figure and require much less watching and prune than 
 when it have be his effort to adjust they to a worldly plan . he have in 
 fine a sense of real wisdom when he pronounce it surely enough that 
 this momentary intellectual participation in the girl 's dawn fame be 
 a charming thing . charming thing be not frequent enough in a busy 
 man 's life to be kick out of the way . Balaklava Place , look at in 
 this philosophic way , become almost idyllic : it give Peter the 
 pleasantest impression he have ever have of London . 

 the season happen to be remarkably fine ; the temperature be high , but 
 not so high as to keep people from the theatre . Miriam 's " business " 
 visibly increase , so that the question of put on the second play 
 undergo some revision . the girl persist , show in her persistence 
 a temper of which Peter have already catch some sharp gleam . it be 
 plain that through her career she would expect to carry thing with a 
 high hand . her manager and agent would not   find she an easy victim or a 
 calculable force ; but the public would adore she , surround she with the 
 popularity that attach to a good - natured and free - speak princess , and 
 her comrade would have a kindness for she because she would not   be 
 selfish . they too would , besides represent her body - guard , form in a 
 manner a portion of her affectionate public . this be the way her friend 
 read the sign , like her whimsical tolerance of some of her vulgar 
 playfellow almost well enough to forgive their presence in Balaklava 
 Place , where they be a sore trial to her mother , who want she to 
 multiply her point of contact only with the high order . there be 
 hour when Peter seem to make out that her principal relation to the 
 proper world would be to have within two or three year a grand battle 
 with it result in its take she , should she let it have she at all , 
 absolutely on her own term : a picture which lead our young man to ask 
 himself with a helplessness that be not exempt , as he perfectly know , 
 from absurdity , what part he should find himself play in such a 
 contest and if it would be reserve to he to be the more ridiculous as 
 a peacemaker or as a heavy backer . 

 " she might know any one she would , and the only person she appear to 
 take any pleasure in be that dreadful Miss Rover , " Mrs. Rooth whimper 
 to he more than once - lead he thus to recognise in the young lady 
 so designate the principal complication of Balaklava Place . Miss Rover 
 be a little actress who play at Miriam 's theatre , combine with an 
 unusual aptitude for delicate comedy a less exceptional absence of 
 rigour in private life . she be pretty and quick and brave , and have a 
 fineness that Miriam profess herself already in a position to estimate 
 as rare . she have no control of her inclination , yet sometimes they be 
 wholly laudable , like the devotion she have form for her beautiful 
 colleague , whom she admire not only as an ornament of the profession 
 but as a be altogether of a more fortunate essence . she have have an 
 idea that real lady be " nasty , " but Miriam be not nasty , and who 
 could gainsay that Miriam be a real lady ? the girl justify herself to 
 her patron from Paris , who have find no fault with she ; she know how 
 much her mother fear the proper world would not   come in if they know 
 that the improper , in the person of pretty Miss Rover , be on the 
 ground . what do she care who come and who do not , and what be to be 
 gain by receive half the snob in London ? People would have to take 
 she exactly as they find she - that they would have to learn ; and they 
 would be much mistaken if they think she capable of turn snob too 
 for the sake of their sweet company . she do not   pretend to be anything 
 but what she mean to be , the good general actress of her time ; and what 
 have that to do with her seeing or not see a poor ignorant girl who 
 have love - well , she need not   say what Fanny have do . they have meet in 
 the way of business ; she do not   say she would have run after she . she 
 have like she because she be not   a slick , and when Fanny Rover have ask 
 she quite wistfully if she might not   come and see she and like she she 
 have not   bristle with scandalise virtue . Miss Rover be not   a bit more 
 stupid or more ill - natured than any one else ; it would be time enough to 
 shut the door when she should become so . 

 Peter commend even to extravagance the liberality of such comradeship ; 
 say that of course a woman do not   go into that profession to see how 
 little she could swallow . she be right to live with the other so long 
 as they be at all possible , and it be for she and only for she to 
 judge how long that might be . this be rather heroic on his part , for 
 his assumed detachment from the girl 's personal life still leave he a 
 margin for some form of uneasiness . it would have make in his spirit a 
 great difference for the bad that the woman he love , and for whom he 
 wish no base lover than himself , should have embrace the prospect of 
 consort only with the cheap kind . it be all very well , but Fanny 
 Rover be simply a rank cabotine , and that sort of association be an 
 odd training for a young woman who be to have be good enough - he 
 could not   forget that , but keep remember it as if it might still have 
 a future use - to be his admired wife . certainly he ought to have think 
 of such thing before he permit himself to become so interested in a 
 theatrical nature . his heroism do he service , however , for the hour ; 
 it help he by the end of the week to feel quite broken in to Miriam 's 
 little circle . what help he most indeed be to reflect that she would 
 get tired of a good many of its member herself in time ; for if it be 
 not that they be shocking - very few of they shine with that intense 
 light - they could yet be thoroughly trust in the long run to bore 
 you . 

 there be a lovely Sunday in particular , spend by he almost all in 
 Balaklava Place - he arrive so early - when , in the afternoon , every sort 
 of odd person drop in . Miriam hold a reception in the little garden 
 and insist on all the company 's staying to supper . her mother shed 
 tear to Peter , in the desecrate house , because they have accept , 
 Miriam and she , an invitation - and in Cromwell Road too - for the 
 evening . Miriam have now decree they should not   go - they would have so 
 much well fun with their good friend at home . she be send off a 
 message - it be a terrible distance - by a cabman , and Peter have the 
 privilege of pay the messenger . Basil Dashwood , in another vehicle , 
 proceed to an hotel know to he , a mile away , for supplementary 
 provision , and come back with a cold ham and a dozen of champagne . it 
 be all very bohemian and dishevel and delightful , very supposedly 
 droll and enviable to outsider ; and Miriam tell anecdote and give 
 imitation of the people she would have meet if she have go out , so that 
 no one have a sense of loss - the two occasion be fantastically united . 
 Mrs. Rooth drink champagne for consolation , though the consolation be 
 imperfect when she remember she might have drink it , though not quite 
 so much perhaps , in Cromwell Road . 

 take in connection with the evening before , the day form for our 
 friend the most complete exhibition of his young woman he have yet 
 enjoy . he have be at the theatre , to which the Saturday night 
 happen to have bring the very full house she have play to , and 
 he come early to Balaklava Place , to tell she once again - he have tell 
 her half - a - dozen time the evening before - that with the excitement of 
 her big audience she have surpass herself , act with remarkable 
 intensity . it please she to hear this , and the spirit with which she 
 interpret the sign of the future and , during an hour he spend alone 
 with she , Mrs. Rooth be upstairs and Basil Dashwood luckily absent , 
 treat he to twenty specimen of feigned passion and character , be 
 beyond any natural abundance he have yet see in a woman . the impression 
 could scarcely have be other if she have be play wild snatch to 
 he at the piano : the bright up - dart flame of her talk rise and fall 
 like an improvisation on the key . later , the rest of the day , he could 
 as little miss the good grace with which she fraternise with her 
 visitor , find always the fair word for each - the key to a common 
 ease , the right turn to keep vanity quiet and make humility brave . it 
 be a wonderful expenditure of generous , nervous life . but what he read 
 in it above all be the sense of success in youth , with the future loose 
 and big , and the action of that charm on the faculty . Miriam 's limited 
 past have yet pinch she enough to make emancipation sweet , and the 
 emancipation have come at last in an hour . she have step into her magic 
 shoe , divine and appropriate everything they could help she to , 
 become in a day a really original contemporary . he be of course not 
 less conscious of that than Nick Dormer have be when in the cold light 
 of his studio this more detach observer see too how she have alter . 

 but the great thing to his mind , and during these first day the 
 irresistible seduction of the theatre , be that she be a rare 
 revelation of beauty . Beauty be the principle of everything she do and 
 of the way she unerringly do it - an exquisite harmony of line and 
 motion and attitude and tone , what be at once most general and most 
 special in her performance . accident and instinct play together to 
 this end and constitute something that be independent of her talent 
 or of her merit in a give case , and which as a value to Peter 's 
 imagination be far superior to any merit and any talent . he could but 
 call it a felicity and an importance incalculable , and but know that it 
 connect itself with universal value . to see this force in operation , 
 to sit within its radius and feel it shift and revolve and change and 
 never fail , be a corrective to the depression , the humiliation , the 
 bewilderment of life . it transport our troubled friend from the vulgar 
 hour and the ugly fact ; draw he to something that have no warrant but 
 its sweetness , no name nor place save as the pure , the remote , the 
 antique . it be what most make he say to himself " oh hang it , what do 
 it matter ? " when he reflect that an homme să rieux , as they say in 
 Paris , rather give himself away , as they say in America , by go every 
 night to the same sordid stall at which all the world might stare . it 
 be what keep he from do anything but hover round Miriam - keep he 
 from pay any other visit , from attend to any business , from go 
 back to Calcutta Gardens . it be a spell he shrink intensely from 
 breaking and the cause of a hundred postponement , confusion , and 
 absurdity . it put he in a false position altogether , but it make of 
 the crooked little stucco villa in Saint John 's Wood a place in the 
 upper air , command the prospect ; a nest of wing liberty and 
 irony far aloft above the huddled town . one should live at altitude 
 when one could - they brace and simplify ; and for a happy interval he 
 never touch the earth . 

 it be not that there be no influence tend at moment to drag he 
 down - an abasement from which he escape only because he be up so high . 
 we have see that Basil Dashwood could affect he at time as a chunk of 
 wood tie to his ankle - this through the circumstance that he make 
 Miriam 's famous condition , those of the public exhibition of her 
 genius , seem small and prosaic ; so that Peter have to remind himself how 
 much this smallness be perhaps involve in their be at all . she 
 carry his imagination off into infinite space , whereas she carry 
 Dashwood 's only into the box - office and the revival of play that be 
 barbarously bad . the bad be its be so open to he to see that a 
 sharp young man really in the business might know well than he . 
 another vessel of superior knowledge - he talk , that is , as if he know 
 well than any one - be Gabriel Nash , who lack no leisure for 
 hatefully haunt Balaklava Place , or in other word appear to enjoy 
 the same command of his time as Peter Sherringham . the pilgrim from 
 Paris regard he with mingled feeling , for he have not forget the 
 contentious character of their first meeting or the degree to which he 
 have be move to urge upon Nick Dormer 's consideration that his 
 talkative friend be probably one of the most eminent of ass . this 
 personage turn up now as an admirer of the charming creature he have 
 scoff at , and there be much to exasperate in the smooth gloss of his 
 inconsistency , at which he never cast an embarrassed glance . he 
 practise indeed such loose license of regard to every question that it 
 be difficult , in vulgar parlance , to " have " he ; his sympathy hum 
 about like bee in a garden , with no visible plan , no economy in their 
 flight . he think meanly of the modern theatre and yet have discover a 
 fund of satisfaction in the most promising of its exponent ; and Peter 
 could more than once but say to he that he should really , to keep his 
 opinion at all in hand , attach more value to the stage or less to the 
 interesting a tress . Miriam take her perfect ease at his expense and 
 treat he as the most abject of her slave : all of which be worth 
 seeing as an exhibition , on Nash 's part , of the beautifully 
 imperturbable . when Peter all too grossly pronounce he " damned " 
 impudent he always feel guilty later on of an injustice - Nash have so 
 little the air of a man with something to gain . he be aware 
 nevertheless of a certain itching in his boot - toe when his 
 fellow - visitor bring out , and for the most part to Miriam herself , in 
 answer to any charge of tergiversation , " oh it be all right ; it be the 
 voice , you know - the enchanting voice ! " Nash mean by this , as indeed he 
 more fully set forth , that he come to the theatre or to the villa simply 
 to treat his ear to the sound - the rich then to be hear on earth , as 
 he maintain - issue from Miriam 's lip . its richness be quite 
 independent of the word she might pronounce or the poor fable they 
 might subserve , and if the pleasure of hear she in public be the 
 great by reason of the large volume of her utterance it be still 
 highly agreeable to see she at home , for it be there the strictly 
 mimetic gift he freely concede to she come out most . he speak as if she 
 have be form by the bounty of nature to be his particular recreation , 
 and as if , be an expert in innocent joy , he take his pleasure 
 wherever he find it . 

 he be perpetually in the field , sociable , amiable , communicative , 
 inveterately contradict but never confound , ready to talk to any one 
 about anything and make disagreement - of which he leave the 
 responsibility wholly to other - a basis of harmony . every one know what 
 he think of the theatrical profession , and yet who could say he do not 
 regard , its member as embodiment of comedy when he touch with such a 
 hand the spring of their foible ? - touch it with an art that make even 
 Peter laugh , notwithstanding his attitude of reserve where this 
 interloper be concern . at any rate , though he have commit himself 
 as to their general fatuity he put up with their company , for the sake 
 of Miriam 's vocal vibration , with a practical philosophy that be all 
 his own . and she frankly take he for her supreme , her incorrigible 
 adorer , masquerade as a critic to save his vanity and tolerate for 
 his secret constancy in spite of be a bore . he be meanwhile really 
 not a bore to Peter , who fail of the luxury of be able to regard 
 he as one . he have see too many strange country and curious thing , 
 observe and explore too much , to be void of illustration . Peter have a 
 sense that if he himself be in the grandes espace Gabriel have 
 probably , as a fine critic , a still wide range . if among Miriam 's 
 associate Mr. Dashwood drag he down , the other main sharer of his 
 privilege challenge he rather to high and more fantastic flight . if 
 he see the girl in large relation than the young actor , who mainly see 
 she in ill - write part , Nash go a step far and regard she , 
 irresponsibly and sublimely , as a priestess of harmony , a figure with 
 which the vulgar idea of success and failure have nothing to do . he 
 laugh at her " part , " hold that without they she would still be 
 great . Peter envy he his power to content himself with the pleasure 
 he could get ; Peter have a shrewd impression that contentment would not   be 
 the final sweetener of his own repast . 

 above all Nash hold his attention by a constant element of easy 
 reference to Nick Dormer , who , as we know , have suddenly become much more 
 interesting to his kinsman . Peter find food for observation , and in 
 some measure for perplexity , in the relation of all these clever people 
 with each other . he know why his sister , who have a personal impatience 
 of unapplied idea , have not be agreeably affect by Miriam 's prime 
 patron and have not feel happy about the attribution of value to ' such 
 people " by the man she be to marry . this be a side on which he have no 
 desire to resemble Julia , for he need no teaching to divine that Nash 
 must have find she accessible to no light - none even about himself . he , 
 Peter , would have be sorry to have to confess he could not   more or less 
 understand he . he understand furthermore that Miriam , in Nick 's studio , 
 might very well have appear to Julia a formidable force . she be 
 young and would have ' see nothing , " but she have quite as much her own 
 resource and be beautiful enough to have make Nick compare she with 
 the lady of Harsh even if he have be in love with that benefactress - a 
 pretension as to which her brother , as we know , entertain doubt . 

 Peter at all event see for many day nothing of his cousin , though it 
 might have be say that Nick participate by implication at least in 
 the life of Balaklava Place . have he give Julia tangible ground and be 
 his unexpectedly fine rendering of Miriam an act of virtual infidelity ? 
 in that case to what degree be the girl to be regard as an accomplice 
 in his defection , and what be the real nature of Miriam 's esteem for 
 her new and   as he might be call   distinguish ally ? these question 
 would have give Peter still more to think about have he not flatter 
 himself he have make up his mind that they concern Nick and his sitter 
 herself infinitely more than they concern any one else . that young 
 lady meanwhile be personally before he , so that he have no need to 
 consult for his pleasure his fresh recollection of the portrait . but he 
 think of this strike production each time he think of his so 
 good - look kinsman 's variety of range . and that happen often , for in 
 his hearing Miriam often discuss the happy artist and his 
 possibility with Gabriel Nash , and Nash break out about they to all 
 who might hear . her own tone on the subject be uniform : she keep it on 
 record to a degree slightly irritate that Mr. Dormer have be 
 unforgettably - Peter particularly note " unforgettably " - kind to she . 
 she never mention Julia 's irruption to Julia 's brother ; she only 
 refer to the portrait , with inscrutable amenity , as a direct 
 consequence of this gentleman 's fortunate suggestion that first day at 
 Madame CarrĂ ' s. Nash show , however , such a disposition to dwell 
 sociably and luminously on the peculiarly interesting character of what 
 he call Dormer 's predicament and on the fine suspense it be fit to 
 kindle in the breast of the truly discerning , that Peter wonder , as I 
 have already hint , if this insistence be not a subtle perversity , a 
 devilish little invention to torment a man whose jealousy be 
 presumable . yet his fellow - pilgrim strike he as on the whole but 
 scantly devilish and as still less occupy with the prefigurement of so 
 plain a man 's emotion . indeed he throw a glamour of romance over Nick ; 
 toss off toward he such illuminate yet mystify reference that 
 they operate quite as a bait to curiosity , invest with amusement the 
 view of the possible , any wish to follow out the chain of event . he 
 learn from Gabriel that Nick be still away , and he then feel he could 
 almost submit to instruction , to initiation . the loose charm of these 
 day be troubled , however - it cease to be idyllic - when late on the 
 evening of the second Sunday he walk away with Nash southward from 
 Saint John 's Wood . for then something come out . 




 BOOK SIX 




 XXXII 


 it matter not so much what the doctor think - and Sir Matthew Hope , 
 the great of they all , have be down twice in one week - as that Mr. 
 Chayter , the omniscient butler , declare with all the authority of his 
 position and his experience that Mr. Carteret be very bad indeed . Nick 
 Dormer have a long talk with he - it last six minute - the day he 
 hurry to beauclere in response to a telegram . it be Mr. Chayter who 
 have take upon himself to telegraph in spite of the presence in the 
 house of Mr. Carteret 's near relation and only survive sister , Mrs. 
 Lendon . this lady , a large , mild , healthy woman with a heavy tread , a 
 person who prefer early breakfast , uncomfortable chair and the 
 advertisement - sheet of the Times , have arrive the week before and be 
 await the turn of event . she be a widow and occupy in Cornwall a 
 house nine mile from a station , which have , to make up for this 
 inconvenience as she have once tell Nick , a fine old herbaceous garden . 
 she be extremely fond of an herbaceous garden - her main consciousness 
 be of herbaceous possibility . Nick have often see she - she have always 
 come to Beauclere once or twice a year . her sojourn there make no great 
 difference ; she be only an " Urania dear " for Mr. Carteret to look 
 across the table at when , on the close of dinner , it be time for she to 
 retire . she go out of the room always as if it be after some one 
 else ; and on the gentleman 's " join " her later - the junction be not 
 very close - she receive they with an air of gratified surprise . 

 Chayter honour Nick with a regard which approach , though not 
 improperly compete with it , the affection his master have place on the 
 same young head , and Chayter know a good many thing . among they he know 
 his place ; but it be wonderful how little that knowledge have render 
 he inaccessible to other kind . he take upon himself to send for Nick 
 without speak to Mrs. Lendon , whose influence be now a good deal 
 like that of some large occasional piece of furniture introduce on a 
 contingency . she be one of the solid convenience that a comfortable 
 house would have , but you could not   talk with a mahogany sofa or a 
 folding screen . Chayter know how much she have " have " from her brother , 
 and how much her two daughter have each receive on marriage ; and he be 
 of the opinion that it be quite enough , especially consider the 
 society in which they - you could scarcely call it - move . he know beyond 
 this that they would all have more , and that be why he hesitate little 
 about communicate with Nick . if Mrs. Lendon should be ruffle at the 
 intrusion of a young man who neither be the child of a cousin nor have 
 be formally adopt , Chayter be parliamentary enough to see that the 
 form of debate be observe . he have indeed a slightly compassionate 
 sense that Mrs. Lendon be not easily ruffle . she be always down an 
 extraordinary time before breakfast - Chayter refuse to take it as in 
 the least admonitory - but usually go straight into the garden as if to 
 see that none of the plant have be steal in the night , and have in the 
 end to be look for by the footman in some out - of - the - way spot behind 
 the shrubbery , where , plump upon the ground , she be mostly do 
 something " rum " to a flower . 

 Mr. Carteret himself have express no wish . he sleep most of the 
 time - his failure at the last have be sudden , but he be rheumatic and 
 seventy - seven - and the situation be in Chayter 's hand . Sir Matthew 
 Hope have opine even on a second visit that he would rally and go on , in 
 rudimentary comfort , some time long ; but Chayter take a different and 
 a still more intimate view . Nick be embarrassed : he scarcely know what 
 he be there for from the moment he could give his good old friend no 
 conscious satisfaction . the doctor , the nurse , the servant , Mrs. 
 Lendon , and above all the settle equilibrium of the square thick house , 
 where an immutable order appear to slant through the polished window 
 and tinkle in the quieter bell , all these thing represent well the 
 kind of supreme solace to which the master be most accessible . 

 it be judge good that for the first day Nick should not be introduce 
 into the darken room . this be the decision of the two decorous 
 nurse , of whom the visitor have have a glimpse and who , with their black 
 uniform and fresh face of business , suggest the barmaid emulate 
 the nun . he be depressed and restless , feel himself in a false 
 position , and think it lucky Mrs. Lendon have power of placid 
 acceptance . they be old acquaintance : she treat he formally , 
 anxiously , but it be not the rigour of mistrust . it be much more an 
 expression of remote cornish respect for young ability and 
 distinguished connexion , inasmuch as she ask he rather yearningly 
 about Lady Agnes and about Lady Flora and Lady Elizabeth . he know she 
 be kind and ungrudge , and his main regret be for his meagre 
 knowledge and poor response in regard to his large blank aunt . he sit 
 in the garden with newspaper and look at the lower blind in Mr. 
 Carteret 's window ; he wander round the abbey with cigarette and 
 lighten his tread and feel grave , wish everything might be over . he 
 would have like much to see Mr. Carteret again , but have no desire that 
 Mr. Carteret should see he . in the evening he din with Mrs. Lendon , 
 and she talk to he at his request and as much as she could about her 
 brother 's early year , his beginning of life . she be so much young 
 that they appear to have be rather a tradition of her own youth ; but 
 her talk make Nick feel how tremendously different Mr. Carteret have be 
 at that period from what he , Nick , be to - day . he have publish at the 
 age of thirty a little volume , think at the time wonderfully clever , 
 call the Incidence of Rates ; but Nick have not yet collect the 
 material for any such treatise . after dinner Mrs. Lendon , who be in 
 merciless full dress , retire to the drawing - room , where at the end of 
 ten minute she be follow by Nick , who have remain behind only 
 because he think Chayter would expect it . Mrs. Lendon almost shake 
 hand with he again and then Chayter bring in coffee . almost in no 
 time afterwards he bring in tea , and the occupant of the drawing - room 
 sit for a slow half - hour , during which the lady look round at the 
 apartment with a sigh and say : " do not   you think poor Charles have 
 exquisite taste ? " 

 fortunately the " local man " be at this moment usher in . he have be 
 upstairs and he smile himself in with the remark : " it be quite 
 wonderful , quite wonderful . " what be wonderful be a marked improvement 
 in the breathing , a distinct indication of revival . the doctor have some 
 tea and chat for a quarter of an hour in a way that show what a 
 " good " manner and how large an experience a local man could have . when 
 he retire Nick walk out with he . the doctor 's house be near by and 
 he have come on foot . he leave the visitor with the assurance that in all 
 probability Mr. Carteret , who be certainly pick up , would be able to 
 see he on the morrow . our young man turn his step again to the abbey 
 and take a stroll about it in the starlight . it never look so huge as 
 when it rear itself into the night , and Nick have never feel more fond 
 of it than on this occasion , more comfort and confirm by its beauty . 
 when he come back he be readmitte by Chayter , who survey he in 
 respectful deprecation of the frivolity which have lead he to attempt to 
 help himself through such an evening in such a way . 

 he go to bed early and sleep badly , which be unusual with he ; but it 
 be a pleasure to he to be tell almost as soon as he appear that Mr. 
 Carteret have ask for he . he go in to see he and be strike with 
 the change in his appearance . he have , however , spend a day with he just 
 after the New Year and another at the beginning of March , and have then 
 note in he the menace of the final weakness . a week after Julia 
 Dallow 's departure for the continent he have again devote several hour 
 to the place and to the intention of tell his old friend how the 
 happy event have be bring to naught - the advantage he have be so 
 good as to desire for he and to make the condition of a splendid gift . 
 before this , for a few day , he have be keep back , to announce it 
 personally , the good news that Julia have at last set their situation in 
 order : he want to enjoy the old man 's pleasure - so sore a trial have 
 her arbitrary behaviour be for a year . if she have offer Mr. Carteret 
 a conciliatory visit before Christmas , have come down from London one day 
 to lunch with he , this have but contribute to make he subsequently 
 exhibit to poor Nick , as the victim of her elegant perversity , a great 
 deal of earnest commiseration in a jocose form . upon his honour , as he 
 say , she be as clever and ' specious " a woman - this be his odd 
 expression - as he have ever see in his life . the merit of her behaviour 
 on that occasion , as Nick know , be that she have not be specious at 
 her lover 's expense : she have breathe no doubt of his public purpose and 
 have have the strange grace to say that in truth she be old than he , so 
 that it be only fair to give his affection time to mature . but when 
 Nick see their hopeful host after the rupture at which we have be 
 present he find he in no state to deal with worry : he be seriously 
 ail , it be the beginning of bad thing and not a time to put his 
 attention to the stretch . after this excursion Nick have go back to 
 town sadden by his patient 's now unmistakably settle decline , but 
 rather relieve that he have have himself to make no confession . it have 
 even occur to he that the need for make one at all might never 
 come up . certainly it would not   if the ebb of Mr. Carteret 's strength 
 should continue unchecked . he might pass away in the persuasion that 
 everything would happen as he wish it , though indeed without enrich 
 Nick on his wedding - day to the tune he have promise . very likely he have 
 make legal arrangement in virtue of which his bounty would take effect 
 in case of the right event and in that case alone . at present Nick have a 
 big , an uglier truth to tell - the last three day have make the 
 difference ; but , oddly enough , though his responsibility have increase 
 his reluctance to speak have vanish : he be positively eager to clear 
 up a situation over which it be not consistent with his honour to leave 
 a shade . 

 the doctor have be right on come in after dinner ; it be clear in 
 the morning that they have not see the last of Mr. Carteret 's power of 
 pick up . Chayter , who have wait on he , refuse austerely to change 
 his opinion with every change in his master 's temperature ; but the 
 nurse take the cheer view that it would do their charge good for Mr. 
 Dormer to sit with he a little . one of they remain in the room in the 
 deep window - seat , and Nick spend twenty minute by the bedside . it be 
 not a case for much conversation , but his helpless host seem still to 
 like to look at he . there be life in his kind old eye , a stir of 
 something that would express itself yet in some further wise provision . 
 he lay his liberal hand on Nick 's with a confidence that show how 
 little it be really disabled . he say very little , and the nurse have 
 recommend that the visitor himself should not overflow in speech ; but 
 from time to time he murmur with a faint smile : " to - night 's division , 
 you know - you must not   miss it . " there be probably to be no division 
 that night , as happen , but even Mr. Carteret 's aberration be 
 parliamentary . before Nick withdraw he have be able to assure he he 
 be rapidly get well and that such valuable hour , the young man 's 
 own , must not   be waste . " come back on Friday if they come to the second 
 reading . " these be the word with which Nick be dismiss , and at 
 noon the doctor say the invalid be do very well , but that Nick have 
 well leave he quiet for that day . our young man accordingly 
 determine to go up to town for the night , and even , should he receive 
 no summon , for the next day . he arrange with Chayter that he should be 
 telegraph to if Mr. Carteret be either well or bad . 

 " oh he can not   very well be bad , sir , " Chayter reply inexorably ; but 
 he relax so far as to remark that of course it would not   do for Nick 
 to neglect the House . 

 " oh the House ! " - Nick be ambiguous and avoid the butler 's eye . it 
 would be easy enough to tell Mr. Carteret , but nothing would have 
 sustain he in the effort to make a clean breast to Chayter . 

 he might equivocate about the House , but he have the sense of thing to 
 be do await he in London . he telegraph to his servant and spend 
 that night in Rosedale Road . the thing to be do be apparently to be 
 do in his studio : his servant meet he there with a large bundle of 
 letter . he fail that evening to stray within two mile of 
 Westminster , and the legislature of his country reassemble without his 
 support . the next morning he receive a telegram from Chayter , to whom 
 he have give Rosedale Road as an address . this missive simply inform 
 he that Mr. Carteret wish to see he ; it seem a sign that he be 
 well , though Chayter would not   say so . Nick again accordingly take his 
 place in the train to beauclere . he have be there very often , but it 
 be present to he that now , after a little , he should go only once 
 more - for a particular dismal occasion . all that be over , everything 
 that belong to it be over . he learn on his arrival - he see Mrs. 
 Lendon immediately - that his old friend have continue to pick up . he have 
 express a strong and a perfectly rational desire to talk with his 
 expect visitor , and the doctor have say that if it be about anything 
 important they should forbear to oppose he . " he say it be about 
 something very important , " Mrs. Lendon remark , rest shy eye on he 
 while she add that she herself be now sit with her dear brother . 
 she have send those wonderful young lady out to see the abbey . Nick 
 pause with she outside Mr. Carteret 's door . he want to say something 
 rather intimate and all soothe to she in return for her homely 
 charity - give she a hint , for which she be far from look , that 
 practically he have now no interest in her brother 's estate . this be of 
 course impossible ; her lack of irony , of play of mind , give he no 
 pretext , and such a reference would be an insult to her simple 
 discretion . she be either not think of his interest at all , or be 
 think of it with the tolerance of a nature train to a hundred 
 decent submission . Nick look a little into her mild , uninvestigating 
 eye , and it come over he supremely that the goodness of these people 
 be singularly pure : they be a part of what be clean and sane 
 and dull in humanity . there have be just a little mocking inflexion 
 in Mrs. Lendon 's pleasant voice ; but it be dedicate to the young 
 lady in the black uniform - she could perhaps be humorous about 
  they - and not to the theory of the " importance " of Nick 's interview 
 with her brother . his arrest desire to let she know he be not greedy 
 translate itself into a vague friendliness and into the abrupt , rather 
 bewilder word : " I can not   tell you half the good I think of you . " as 
 he pass into Mr. Carteret 's room it occur to he that she would 
 perhaps interpret this speech as an acknowledgment of obligation - of her 
 good nature in not keep he away from the rich old man . 




 XXXIII 


 the rich old man be prop up on pillow , and in this attitude , 
 beneath the high , spare canopy of his bed , present himself to Nick 's 
 picture - seek vision as a figure in a clever composition or a ' story . " 
 he have gather strength , though this strength be not much in his 
 voice ; it be mainly in his bright eye and his air of be please 
 with himself . he put out his hand and say , " I daresay you know why I 
 send for you " ; on which Nick sink into the seat he have occupy the day 
 before , reply that he have be delighted to come , whatever the 
 reason . Mr. Carteret say nothing more about the division or the second 
 reading ; he only murmur that they be keep the newspaper for he . 
 " I be rather behind - I be rather behind , " he go on ; " but two or three 
 quiet morning will make it all right . you can go back to - night , you 
 know - you can easily go back . " this be the only thing not quite 
 straight that Nick find in he - his make light of his young friend 's 
 fly to and fro . the young friend sit look at he with a sense that 
 be half compunction and half the idea of the rare beauty of his face , 
 to which , strangely , the waste of illness now seem to have restore 
 something of its youth . Mr. Carteret be evidently conscious that this 
 morning he should not   be able to go on long , so that he must be 
 practical and concise . " I daresay you know - you have   only to remember , " he 
 continue . 

 " I need not   tell you what a pleasure it be to I to see you - there can be 
 no well reason than that , " be what Nick could say . 

 " have not   the year come round - the year of that foolish arrangement ? " 

 Nick think a little , ask himself if it be really necessary to 
 disturb his companion 's earnest faith . then the consciousness of the 
 falsity of his own position surge over he again and he reply : " do 
 you mean the period for which Mrs. Dallow insist on keep I 
 dangle ? oh that be over ! " he almost gaily bring out . 

 " and be you married - have it come off ? " the old man ask eagerly . " how 
 long have I be ill ? " 

 " we be uncomfortable , unreasonable people , not deserve of your 
 interest . we be not married , " Nick say . 

 " then I have not   be ill so long ? " his host quaver with vague relief . 

 " not very long - but thing be different , " he go on . 

 the old man 's eye rest on his - he note how much large they 
 appear . " you mean the arrangement be make - the day 's at hand ? " 

 " there be no arrangement , " Nick smile . " but why should it trouble 
 you ? " 

 " what then will you do - without arrangement ? " the inquiry be plaintive 
 and childlike . 

 " we shall do nothing - there be nothing to be do . we be not to be 
 married - it be all off , " say poor Nick . then he add : " Mrs. Dallow have 
 go abroad . " 

 the old man , motionless among his pillow , give a long groan . " ah I 
 do not   like that . " 

 " no more do I , sir . " 

 " what be the matter ? it be so good - so good . " 

 " it be not   good enough for Julia , " Nick declare . 

 " for Julia ? be Julia so great as that ? she tell I she have the great 
 regard for you . you be good enough for the good , my dear boy , " Mr. 
 Carteret pursue . 

 " you do not   know I : I be disappointing . she have , I believe , a great 
 regard for I , but I have   forfeit her good opinion . " 

 the old man star at this cynical announcement : he search his 
 visitor 's face for some attenuation of the word . but Nick apparently 
 strike he as unashamed , and a faint colour come into his wither 
 cheek indicate his mystification and alarm . " have you be unfaithful 
 to she ? " he still considerately ask . 

 " she think so - it come to the same thing . as I tell you a year ago , 
 she do not   believe in I . " 

 " you ought to have make she - you ought to have make she , " say Mr. 
 Carteret . Nick be about to plead some reason when he continue : " do you 
 remember what I tell you I would give you if you do ? do you remember what I 
 tell you I would give you on your wedding - day ? " 

 " you express the most generous intention ; and I remember they as much 
 as a man may do who have no wish to remind you of they . " 

 " the money 's there - I have   put it aside . " 

 " I have not   earn it - I have not   earn a penny of it . give it to those 
 who deserve it more , " say Nick . 

 " I do not   understand , I do not   understand , " Mr. Carteret whimper , the 
 tear of weakness in his eye . his face flush and he add : " I be not 
 good for much discussion ; I be very much disappointed . " 

 " I think I may say it be not my fault - I have   do what I can , " Nick 
 declare . 

 " but when people be in love they do more than that . " 

 " oh it be all over ! " say our young man ; not care much now , for the 
 moment , how disconcert his companion might be , so long as he disabuse 
 he of the idea that they be partner to a bargain . " we have   torment 
 each other and we have   torment you - and that be all that have come of it . " 

 his companion 's eye seem to stare at strange thing . " do not   you care 
 for what I would have do for you - should not   you have like it ? " 

 " of course one like kindness - one like money . but it be all over , " Nick 
 repeat . then he add : " I fatigue you , I knock you up , with tell 
 you these trouble . I only do so because it seem to I right you should 
 know . but do not   be worry - everything be for the good . " 

 he pat the pale hand reassuringly , incline himself affectionately , 
 but Mr. Carteret be not easily soothe . he have practise lucidity all 
 his life , have expect it of other and have never give his assent to an 
 indistinct proposition . he be weak , yet not too weak to recognise that 
 he have form a calculation now vitiate by a wrong factor - put his name 
 to a contract of which the other side have not be carry out . More 
 than fifty year of conscious success press he to try to understand ; 
 he have never muddle his affair and he could not   muddle they now . at the 
 same time he be aware of the necessity of economise his effort , and 
 he would gather that inward force , patiently and almost cunningly , for 
 the right question and the right induction . he be still able to make 
 his agitation reflective , and it could still consort with his high hope 
 of Nick that he should find himself regard mere vague , verbal 
 comfort , word in the air , as an inadequate guarantee . so after he have 
 attach his dim vision to his young friend 's face a moment he bring 
 out : " have you do anything bad ? " 

 " nothing bad than usual , " Nick laugh . 

 " ah everything should have be well than usual . " 

 " well , it have not   be that - that I must say . " 

 " do you sometimes think of your father ? " Mr. Carteret continue . 

 Nick have a decent pause . " you make I think of he - you have   always that 
 pleasant effect . " 

 " his name would have live - it must not   be lose . " 

 " yes , but the competition to - day be terrible , " Nick return . 

 his host consider this as if he find a serious flaw in it ; after 
 which he begin again : " I never suppose you a trifl . " 

 " I be determined not to be . " 

 " I think her charming . do not   you love Mrs. Dallow ? " Mr. Carteret 
 profoundly ask . 

 " do not   put it to I so to - day , for I feel sore and injure . I do not 
 think she have treat I well . " 

 " you should have hold she - you should not   have let she go , " the old man 
 return with unexpected fire . 

 his visitor flush at this , so strange be it to receive a lesson in 
 energy from a die octogenarian . yet after an instant Nick answer 
 with due modesty : " I have not   be clever enough , no doubt . " 

 " do not   say that , do not   say that - ! " Mr. Carteret shrink from the 
 thought . " do not   think I can allow you any easing - off of that sort . I 
 know how well you have   do . you be take your place . several gentleman 
 have tell I . have not   she feel a scruple , know my settlement on you to 
 depend - - ? " he pursue . 

 " oh she have not   know - have not   know anything about it . " 

 " I do not   understand ; though I think you explain somewhat a year 
 ago " - the poor gentleman give it up . " I think she want to speak to 
 I - of any intention I might have in regard to you - the day she be 
 here . very nicely , very properly she would have do it , I be sure . I think 
 her idea be that I ought to make any settlement quite independent of 
 your marry she or not marry she . but I try to convey to she - I 
 do not   know whether she understand I - that I like she too much for 
 that , I want too much to make sure of she . " 

 " to make sure of I , you mean , " say Nick . " and now after all you see 
 you have not . " 

 " well , perhaps it be that , " sigh the old man confusedly . 

 " all this be very bad for you - we will talk again , " Nick urge . 

 " no , no - let we finish it now . I like to know what I be do . I shall 
 rest well when I do know . there be great thing to be do ; the 
 future will be full - the future will be fine , " Mr. Carteret wander . 

 " let I be distinct about this for Julia : that if we have not   be 
 sunder her generosity to I would have be complete - she would have put 
 her great fortune absolutely at my disposal , " Nick say after a moment . 
 " her consciousness of all that naturally carry she over any particular 
 distress in regard to what will not   come to I now from another source . " 

 " ah do not   lose it ! " the old man painfully plead . 

 " it be in your hand , sir , " Nick return . 

 " I mean Mrs. Dallow 's fortune . it will be of the high utility . that 
 be what your father miss . " 

 " I shall miss more than my father do , " say Nick . 

 " Shell come back to you - I can not   look at you and doubt that . " 

 Nick smile with a slow headshake . " never , never , never ! you look at I , 
 my grand old friend , but you do not   see I . I be not what you think . " 

 " what be it - what be it ? have you be bad ? " Mr. Carteret pant . 

 " no , no ; I be not bad . but I be different . " 

 " Different - - ? " 

 " different from my father . different from Mrs. Dallow . different from 
 you . " 

 " ah why do you perplex I ? " the old man moan . " you have   do something . " 

 " I do not   want to perplex you , but I have do something , " say Nick , 
 get up . 

 he have hear the door open softly behind he and Mrs. Lendon come 
 forward with precaution . " what have he do - what have he do ? " quaver 
 Mr. Carteret to his sister . she , however , after a glance at the patient , 
 motion their young friend away and , bend over the bed , reply , in 
 a voice expressive at that moment of an ample provision of vital 
 comfort : 

 " he have only excite you , I be afraid , a little more than be good for 
 you . be not   your dear old head a little too high ? " Nick regard himself 
 as justly banish , and he quit the room with a ready acquiescence in 
 any power to carry on the scene of which Mrs. Lendon might find herself 
 possess . he feel distinctly brutal as he hear his host emit a weak 
 exhalation of assent to some change of position . but he would have 
 reproach himself more if he have wish less to guard against the 
 acceptance of an equivalent for duty unperforme . Mr. Carteret have have 
 in his mind , characteristically , the idea of a fine high contract , and 
 there be something more to be say about that . 

 Nick go out of the house and stay away for two or three hour , quite 
 ready to regard the place as quieter and safe without he . he haunt 
 the abbey as usual and sit a long time in its simplifying stillness , 
 turn over many thing . he come back again at the luncheon - hour , 
 through the garden , and hear , somewhat to his surprise and greatly to 
 his relief , that his host have compose himself promptly enough after 
 their agitate interview . Mrs. Lendon talk at luncheon much as if she 
 expect her brother to be , as she say , really quite fit again . she 
 ask Nick no awkward question ; which be uncommonly good of she , he 
 think , consider that she might have say , " what in the world be 
 you try to get out of he ? " she only report to our young man that 
 the invalid have every hope of a short interview about half - past seven , a 
  very short one : this gentle emphasis be Mrs. Lendon 's single tribute 
 to the critical spirit . Nick divine that Mr. Carteret 's desire for 
 further explanation be really strong and have be capable of 
 sustain he through a bad morning , capable even of help he - it 
 would have be a secret and wonderful momentary conquest of 
 weakness - to pass it off for a good one . he wish he might make a 
 sketch of he , from the life , as he have see he after breakfast ; he have 
 a conviction he could make a strong one , which would be a precious 
 memento . but he shrink from propose this - the dear man might think it 
 unparliamentary . the doctor have call while Nick be out , and he come 
 again at five o'clock without that inmate 's see he . the latter be 
 busy in his room at that hour : he write a short letter which take he a 
 long time . but apparently there have be no veto on a resumption of 
 talk , for at half - past seven his friend send for he . the nurse at the 
 door say , " only a moment , I hope , sir ? " but take he in and then 
 withdraw . 

 the prolonged daylight be in the room and its occupant again 
 establish on his pile of pillow , but with his head a little low . 
 Nick sit down by he and express the hope of not have upset he in 
 the morning ; but the old man , with fix , enlarged eye , take up their 
 conversation exactly where they have leave it . " what have you do - what 
 have you do ? have you associate yourself with some other woman ? " 

 " no , no ; I do not   think she can accuse I of that . " 

 " well then she will come back to you if you take the right way with she . " 

 it might have be droll to hear the poor gentleman , in his situation , 
 give his view on the right way with woman ; but Nick be not move to 
 enjoy that diversion . " I have   take the wrong way . I have   do something 
 that must spoil my prospect in that direction for ever . I have   write a 
 letter , " the visitor go on ; but his companion have already interrupt 
 he . 

 " you have   write a letter ? " 

 " to my constituent , inform they of my determination to resign my 
 seat . " 

 " to resign your seat ? " 

 " I have   make up my mind , after no end of reflexion , dear Mr. Carteret , to 
 work on quite other line . I have   a plan of become a painter . so I have 
 give up the idea of a political life . " 

 " a painter ? " Mr. Carteret seem to turn whiter . " I be go in for the 
 portrait in oil . it sound absurd , I know , and I be thus specific only 
 to show you I do not   in the least expect you to count on I . " the invalid 
 have continue to stare at first ; then his eye slowly close and he lay 
 motionless and blank . " do not   let it trouble you now ; it be a long story 
 and rather a poor one ; when you get well I will tell you all about it . 
 well talk it over amicably and I will bring you to my view , " Nick go on 
 hypocritically . he have lay his hand again on the hand beside he ; it 
 feel cold , and as the old man remain silent he have a moment of 
 exaggerated fear . 

 " this be dreadful news " - and Mr. Carteret open his eye . 

 " certainly it must seem so to you , for I have   always keep from you - I be 
 ashamed , and my present confusion be a just chastisement - the great 
 interest I have always take in the - - ! " but Nick break down with a 
 gasp , to add presently , with an intention of the pleasant and a sense of 
 the foolish : " in the pencil and the brush . " he speak of his current 
 confusion , though his manner might have be think to show it but 
 little . he be himself surprised at his brazen assurance and have to 
 recognise that at the point thing have come to now he be profoundly 
 obstinate and quiet . 

 " the pencil - the brush ? they be not the weapon of a gentleman , " Mr. 
 Carteret pronounce . 

 " I be sure that would be your feeling . I repeat that I mention they 
 only because you once say you intend to do something for I , as the 
 phrase be , and I think you ought not   to do it in ignorance . " 

 " my ignorance be well . such knowledge be not   good for I . " 

 " forgive I , my dear old friend , " Nick keep it bravely up . " when you be 
 well you will see it differently . " 

 " I shall never be well now . " 

 " ah no , " Nick insist ; " it will really do you good after a little . 
 think it over quietly and you will be glad I have   stop humbug . " 

 " I love you - I love you as my son , " the old man wail . 

 he sink on his knee beside the bed and lean over he tenderly . " get 
 well , get well , and I will be your son for the rest of your life . " 

 " Poor Dormer - poor Dormer ! " Mr. Carteret continue to lament . 

 " I admit that if he have live I probably should not   have do it , " say 
 Nick . " I daresay I should have defer to his prejudice even though 
 think they narrow . " 

 " do you turn against your father ? " his host ask , make , to disengage 
 his arm from the young man 's touch , an effort betray the irritation 
 of conscious weakness . Nick get up at this and stand a moment look 
 down at he while he go on : " do you give up your name , do you give up 
 your country ? " 

 " if I do something good my country may like it . " Nick speak as if he have 
 think that out . 

 " do you regard they as equal , the two glory ? " 

 " here come your nurse to blow I up and turn I out , " say Nick . 

 the nurse have come in , but Mr. Carteret direct to she an audible dry , 
 courteous " be so good as to wait till I send for you , " which arrest 
 she in the large room at some distance from the bed and then have the 
 effect of make her turn on her heel with a professional laugh . she 
 clearly judge that an old gentleman with the fine manner of his prime 
 might still be trust to take care of himself . when she have go that 
 personage address to his visitor the question for which his deep 
 displeasure lend he strength . " do you pretend there be a nobler life 
 than a high political career ? " 

 " I think the noble life 's do one 's work well . one can do it very ill 
 and be very base and mean in what you call a high political career . I 
 have not   be in the House so many month without find that out . it 
 contain some very small soul . " 

 " you should stand against they - you should expose they ! " stammer Mr. 
 Carteret . 

 " stand against they , against one 's own party ! " 

 the old man contend a moment with this and then break out : " God 
 forgive you , be you a tory , be you a tory ? " 

 " how little you understand I ! " laugh Nick with a ring of bitterness . 

 " little enough - little enough , my boy . have you send your elector your 
 dreadful letter ? " 

 " not yet ; but it be all ready and I shall not   change my mind . " 

 " you will - you will . you will think well of it . you will see your duty , " 
 say the invalid almost coaxingly . 

 " that seem very improbable , for my determination , crudely and abruptly 
 as , to my great regret , it come to you here , be the fruit of a long and 
 painful struggle . the difficulty be that I see my duty just in this 
 other effort . " 

 " an effort ? do you call it an effort to fall away , to sink far down , to 
 give up every effort ? what do your mother say , heaven help she ? " Mr. 
 Carteret go on before Nick could answer the other question . 

 " I have not   tell she yet . " 

 " you be ashamed , you be ashamed ! " Nick only look out of the west 
 window now - he feel his ear turn hot . " tell she it would have be 
 sixty thousand . I have the money all ready . " 

 " I shall not   tell she that , " say Nick , redder still . 

 " poor woman - poor dear woman ! " Mr. Carteret woefully cry . 

 " yes indeed - she will not   like it . " 

 " think it all over again ; do not   throw away a splendid future ! " these 
 word be utter with a final flicker of passion - Nick have never hear 
 such an accent on his old friend 's lip . but he next begin to murmur , 
 " I be tired - I be very tired , " and sink back with a groan and with closed 
 lip . his guest gently assure he that he have but too much cause to be 
 exhausted and that the bad be over now . he smooth his pillow for 
 he and say he must leave he , would send in the nurse . " come back , 
 come back , " Mr. Carteret plead against that ; " come back and tell I 
 it be a horrible dream . " 

 Nick do go back very late that evening ; his host have send a message to 
 his room . but one of the nurse be on the ground this time and make 
 good her opposition watch in hand . the sick - room be shroud and 
 darken ; the shade candle leave the bed in gloom . Nick 's interview with 
 his venerable friend be the affair of but a moment ; the nurse 
 interpose , impatient and not understand . she hear Nick say that he 
 have post his letter now and their companion flash out with an acerbity 
 still savour of the sordid association of a world he have not do 
 with : " then of course my settlement do not   take effect ! " 

 " oh that be all right , " Nick answer kindly ; and he go off next 
 morning by the early train - his injured host be still sleep . Mrs. 
 Lendon 's habit make it easy for she to be present in matutinal bloom at 
 the young man 's hasty breakfast , and she send a particular remembrance 
 to Lady Agnes and   when he should see they   to the Ladies Flora and 
 Elizabeth . Nick have a prevision of the spirit in which his mother at 
 least would now receive hollow compliment from Beauclere . 

 the night before , as soon as he have quit Mr. Carteret , the old man 
 say to the nurse that he wish Mr. Chayter instruct to go and fetch 
 Mr. Mitton the first thing in the morning . Mr. Mitton be the lead 
 solicitor at Beauclere . 




 XXXIV 


 the really formidable thing for Nick have be to tell his mother : a 
 truth of which he be so conscious that he have the matter out with she 
 the very morning he return from Beauclere . she and Grace have come back 
 the afternoon before from their own enjoyment of rural hospitality , and , 
 know this - she have write he her intention from the country - he 
 drive straight from the station to Calcutta Gardens . there be a little 
 room on the right of the house - door know as his own room ; but in which 
 of a morning , when he be not at home , Lady Agnes sometimes write she 
 letter . these be always numerous , and when she hear our young man 's 
 cab she happen to be engage with they at the big brass - mount bureau 
 that have belong to his father , where , amid a margin of work of 
 political reference , she seem to herself to make public affair feel 
 the point of her elbow . 

 she come into the hall to meet her son and to hear about their 
 benefactor , and Nick go straight back into the room with she and 
 close the door . it would be in the evening paper and she would see it , 
 and he have no right to allow she to wait for that . it prove indeed a 
 terrible hour ; and when ten minute later Grace , who have learn 
 upstairs her brother 's return , go down for further news of he she 
 hear from the hall a sound of voice that make she first pause and 
 then retrace her step on tiptoe . she mount to the drawing - room and 
 creep about there , palpitating , look at moment into the dull street 
 and wonder what on earth have take place . she have no one to express 
 her wonder to , for Florence Tressilian have depart and Biddy after 
 breakfast betake herself , in accordance with a custom now inveterate , 
 to Rosedale Road . her mother be unmistakably and passionately cry - a 
 fact tremendous in its significance , for Lady Agnes have not often be 
 bring so low . Nick have see her cry , but this almost awful spectacle 
 have seldom be offer to Grace , and it now convince she that some 
 dreadful thing have happen . 

 that be of course in order , after Nick 's mysterious quarrel with Julia , 
 which have make his mother so ill and be at present follow up with new 
 horror . the row , as Grace mentally phrase it , have have something to do 
 with the rupture of the lover - some deep depth of disappointment have 
 begin to yawn . Grace ask herself if they be talk about Broadwood ; 
 if Nick have demand that in the condition so unpleasantly altered Lady 
 Agnes should restore that awfully nice house to its owner . this be 
 very possible , but why should he so suddenly have break out about 
 it ? and , moreover , their mother , though sore to bleed about 
 the whole business - for Broadwood , in its fresh comfort , be too 
 delightful - would not   have meet this pretension with tear : have not   she 
 already so perversely declare that they could not   decently continue to 
 make use of the place ? Julia have say that of course they must go on , 
 but Lady Agnes be prepare with an effective rejoinder to that . it 
 do not   consist of word - it be to be austerely practical , be to 
 consist of let Julia see , at the moment she should least expect it , 
 that they quite would not   go on . Lady Agnes be ostensibly wait for 
 this moment - the moment when her renunciation would be most impressive . 

 Grace be conscious of how she have for many day be move with her 
 mother in darkness , deeply stricken by Nick 's culpable - oh he be 
 culpable ! - loss of his prize , but feel an obscure element in the 
 matter they do not   grasp , an undiscovered explanation that would perhaps 
 make it still worse , though it might make they , poor thing , a little 
 well . he have explain nothing , he have simply say , " dear mother , we 
 do not   hit it off , after all ; it be an awful bore , but we do not " - as if 
 that be in the dire condition an adequate balm for two ache heart . 
 from Julia naturally no flood of light be to be look for - Julia 
  never humour curiosity - and , though she very often do the thing you 
 would not   suppose , she be not unexpectedly apologetic in this case . 
 Grace recognise that in such a position it would savour of apology for 
 she to disclose to Lady Agnes her ground for have let Nick off ; and 
 she would not   have like to be the person to suggest to Julia that any 
 one look for anything from she . neither of the disunited pair blame 
 the other or cast an aspersion , and it be all very magnanimous and 
 superior and impenetrable and exasperating . with all this grace have a 
 suspicion that Biddy know something more , that for Biddy the tormenting 
 curtain have be lift . 

 Biddy have come and go in these day with a perceptible air of 
 detachment from the tribulation of home . it have make she , fortunately , 
 very pretty - still pretty than usual : it sometimes happen that at 
 moment when Grace be most angry she have a faint sweet smile which 
 might have be draw from some source of occult consolation . it be 
 perhaps in some degree connect with Peter Sherringham 's visit , as to 
 which the girl have not be superstitiously silent . when Grace ask 
 she if she have secret information and if it point to the idea that 
 everything would be all right in the end , she pretend to know 
 nothing - what should she know ? she ask with the lovely arch of 
 eyebrow over an unblinking candour - and beg her sister not to let 
 Lady Agnes believe she well off than themselves . she contribute 
 nothing to their groping save a much well patience , but she go with 
 noticeable regularity , on the pretext of her foolish modelling , to 
 Rosedale Road . she be frankly on Nick 's side ; not go so far as to 
 say he have be right , but say distinctly how sure she be that , 
 whatever have happen , he could not   have help it , not a mite . this be 
 strike , because , as Grace know , the young of the sister have be 
 much favour by Julia and would not   have sacrifice she easily . it 
 associate itself in the irritated mind of the elder with Biddy 's 
 frequent visit to the studio and make Miss Dormer ask herself if the 
 crisis in Nick 's and Julia 's business have not somehow be link to 
 that unnatural spot . 

 she have go there two or three time while Biddy be work , go to 
 pick up any clue to the mystery that might peep out . but she have put she 
 hand on nothing more - it would not   have occur to she to say nothing 
 less - than the so dreadfully point presence of Gabriel Nash . she once 
 find that odd satellite , to her surprise , pay a visit to her 
 sister - he have come for Nick , who be absent ; she remember how they 
 have meet in Paris and how little he have succeed with they . when she have 
 ask Biddy afterwards how she could receive he that way Biddy have 
 reply that even she , Grace , would have some charity for he if she 
 could hear how fond he be of poor Nick . he have talk to she only of 
 Nick - of nothing else . grace have observe how she speak of Nick as 
 injure , and have note the implication that some one else , cease to be 
 fond of he , be thereby condemn in Biddy 's eye . it seem to Grace 
 that some one else have at least a right not to like some of his friend . 
 the studio strike she as mean and horrid ; and so far from suggest to 
 she that it could have play a part in make Nick and Julia fall out 
 she only feel how little its dusty want of consequence , could count , one 
 way or the other , for Julia . Grace , who have no opinion on art , see no 
 merit whatever in those " impression " on canvas from Nick 's hand with 
 which the place be bestrewn . she do not   at all wish her brother to have 
 talent in that direction , yet it be secretly humiliating to she that he 
 have not   more . 

 Nick meanwhile feel a pang of almost horrified penitence , in the little 
 room on the right of the hall , the moment after he have make his mother 
 really understand he have throw up his scat and that it would probably 
 be in the evening paper . that she would take this very ill be an idea 
 that have press upon he hard enough , but she take it even bad than 
 he have fear . he measure , in the look she give he when the full truth 
 loom upon she , the mortal cruelty of her distress ; her face be like 
 that of a passenger on a ship who see the huge bow of another vessel 
 tower close out of the fog . there be vision of dismay before which 
 the good conscience recoil , and though Nick have make his choice on all 
 the ground there be a few minute in which he would gladly have 
 admit that his wisdom be a dark mistake . his heart be in his 
 throat , he have go too far ; he have be ready to disappoint his 
 mother - he have not be ready to destroy she . 

 Lady Agnes , I hasten to add , be not destroy ; she make , after she 
 first drown gasp , a tremendous scene of opposition , in the face of 
 which her son could only fall back on his intrenchment . she must know 
 the bad , he have think : so he tell she everything , include the 
 little story of the forfeiture of his " expectation " from Mr. Carteret . 
 he show she this time not only the face of the matter , but what lay 
 below it ; narrate briefly the incident in his studio which have lead to 
 Julia Dallow 's decide she could not   after all put up with he . this be 
 wholly new to Lady Agnes , she have have no clue to it , and he could 
 instantly see how it make the event bad for she , add a hideous 
 positive to an abominable negative . he note now that , distressed and 
 distract as she have be by his rupture with Julia , she have still hold 
 to the faith that their engagement would come on again ; believe 
 evidently that he have a personal empire over the mistress of Harsh which 
 would bring she back . Lady Agnes be force to recognise this empire as 
 precarious , to forswear the hope of a bless renewal from the moment 
 the question be of base infatuation on his own part . Nick confess to 
 an infatuation , but do his good to show she it be not   base ; that it 
 be not   - since Julia have have faith in his loyalty - for the person of the 
 young lady who have be discover posture to he and whom he have see 
 but half - a - dozen time in his life . he endeavour to recall to his 
 mother the identity of this young lady , he advert to the occasion in 
 Paris when they all have see she together . but Lady Agnes 's mind and 
 memory be a blank on the subject of Miss Miriam Rooth and she want 
 to hear nothing whatever about she : it be enough that she be the cause 
 of their ruin and a part of his pitiless folly . she need to know 
 nothing of she to allude to she as if it be superfluous to give a 
 definite name to the class to which she belong . 

 but she give a name to the group in which Nick have now take his place , 
 and it make he feel after the lapse of year like a small , scold , 
 sorry boy again ; for it be so far away he could scarcely remember 
 it - besides there have be but a moment or two of that sort in his 
 happy childhood - the time when this parent have slap he and call 
 he a little fool . he be a big fool now - hugely immeasurable ; she 
 repeat the term over and over with high - pitch passion . the most 
 painful thing in this painful hour be perhaps his glimpse of the 
 strange feminine cynicism that lurk in her fine sense of injury . where 
 there be such a complexity of revolt it would have be difficult to 
 pick out particular wrong ; but Nick could see that , to his mother 's 
 imagination , he be most a fool for not have keep his relation with 
 the actress , whatever they be , well from Julia 's knowledge . he 
 remain indeed freshly surprised at the ardour with which she have 
 rest her hope on Julia . Julia be certainly a combination - she be 
 accomplish , she be a sort of lead woman and she be rich ; but 
 after all - put aside what she might be to a man in love with 
 she - she be not the keystone of the universe . yet the form in which the 
 consequence of his apostasy appear most to come home to Lady Agnes 
 be the loss for the Dormer family of the advantage attach to the 
 possession of Mrs. Dallow . the large mortification would round itself 
 later ; for the hour the damn thing be that Nick have make that lady 
 the gift of an unforgivable grievance . he have clinch their separation 
 by his letter to his elector - and that above all be the wickedness of 
 the letter . Julia would have get over the other woman , but she would 
 never get over his become a nobody . 

 Lady Agnes challenge he upon this low prospect exactly as if he have 
 embrace it with the malignant purpose of make the return of his late 
 intend impossible . she contradict her premise and lose her way in 
 her wrath . what have make he suddenly turn round if he have be in good 
 faith before ? he have never be in good faith - never , never ; he have have 
 from his early childhood the nasty hankering after a vulgar 
 little daubing , trash - talk life ; they be not in he , the grander , 
 nobler aspiration - they never have be - and he have be anything but 
 honest to lead she on , to lead they all on , to think he would do 
 something : the fall and the shame would have be less for they if they 
 have come early . moreover , what need under heaven have he to tell 
 Charles Carteret of the cruel folly on his very death - bed ? - as if he 
 might not   have let it all alone and accept the benefit the old man be 
 so delighted to confer . no wonder Mr. Carteret would keep his money for 
 his heir if that be the way Nick propose to repay he ; but where be 
 the common sense , where be the common charity , where be the common 
 decency of torment he with such vile news in his last hour ? be he 
 try what he could invent that would break her heart , that would send 
 she in sorrow down to her grave ? be not   they all miserable enough and 
 have not   he a ray of pity for his wretched sister ? 

 the relation of effect and cause , in regard to his sister ' 
 wretchedness , be but dimly discernible to Nick , who , however , perceive 
 his mother genuinely to consider that his action have disconnect they 
 all , still more than she hold they be already disconnect , from the 
 good thing of life . Julia be money , Mr. Carteret be money - everything 
 else be the absence of it . if these precious people have be primarily 
 money for Nick it after all flatter the distributive impulse in he to 
 have take for grant that for the rest of the family too the 
 difference would have be so great . for day , for week and month to 
 come , the little room on the right of the hall be to vibrate for our 
 young man , as if the very wall and window - pane still suffer , with 
 the odious trial of his true temper . 




 XXXV 


 that evening - the evening of his return from Beauclere - he be conscious 
 of a keen desire to get away , to go abroad , to leave behind he the 
 little chatter his resignation would be sure to produce in an age of 
 publicity which never discriminate as to the quality of event . then he 
 feel it decidedly well to stay , to see the business through on the 
 spot . besides , he would have to meet his constituent - would a parcel of 
 cheese - eat burgess ever have be " meet " on so queer an 
 occasion ? - and when that be over the incident would practically be 
 close . Nick have an idea he know in advance how it would affect he to 
 be point at as a person who have give up a considerable chance of 
 eventual " office " to take likeness at so much a head . he would not 
 attempt down at Harsh to touch on the question of motive ; for , give the 
 nature of the public mind of Harsh , that would be a strain on his 
 faculty of exposition . but as regard the chaff of the political world 
 and of society he have a hope he should find chaff enough for retort . it 
 be true that when his mother twit he in her own effective way he 
 have feel rather flatten out ; but then one 's mother might have a 
 heavy hand than any one else . he have not throw up the House of 
 Commons to amuse himself ; he have throw it up to work , to sit quietly 
 down and bend over his task . if he should go abroad his parent might 
 think he have some weak - minded view of join Julia and try , with 
 however little hope , to win her back - an illusion it would be singularly 
 pernicious to encourage . his desire for Julia 's society have succumb 
 for the present at any rate to a dire interruption - he have become more 
 and more aware of their speak a different language . Nick feel like a 
 young man who have go to the Rhineland to " get up " his German for an 
 examination - commit to talk , to read , to dream only in the new idiom . 
 now that he have take his jump everything be simplify , at the same 
 time that everything be pitch in a high and intenser key ; and he 
 wonder how in the absence of a common dialect he have converse on the 
 whole so happily with Mrs. Dallow . then he have aftertaste of 
 understanding tolerably independent of word . he be excited because 
 every fresh responsibility be exciting , and there be no manner of doubt 
 he have accept one . no one know what it be but himself - Gabriel Nash 
 scarcely count , his whole attitude on the question of responsibility 
 be so fantastic - and he would have to ask his dear friend to take 
 he on trust . rather indeed he would ask nothing of any one , but would 
 cultivate independence , mulishness , and gaiety , and fix his thought on 
 a bright if distant morrow . it be disagreeable to have to remember that 
 his task would not be sweeten by a sense of heroism ; for if it might 
 be heroic to give up the mus for the strife of great affair , no 
 romantic glamour worth speak of would ever gather round an Englishman 
 who in the prime of his strength have give up great or even small 
 affair for the mus . such an original might himself privately and 
 perversely regard certain phase of this inferior commerce as a great 
 affair ; but who would give he the benefit of that sort of 
 confidence - except indeed a faithful , clever , exalt little sister 
 Biddy , if he should have the good luck to have one ? Biddy be in fact 
 all ready for heroic flight and eager to think she might fight the 
 battle of the beautiful by her brother 's side ; so that he have really to 
 moderate she and remind she how little his actual job be a crusade with 
 bugle and banner and how much a grey , sedentary grind , the charm of 
 which be all at the core . you might have an emotion about it , and an 
 emotion that would be a help , but this be not the sort of thing you 
 could show - the end in view would seem so disproportionately small . Nick 
 put it to she that one really could not   talk to people about the 
 " responsibility " of what she would see he potter at in his studio . 

 he therefore do not   " run , " as he would have say , to wing word any 
 more than he be force to , have , moreover , a sense that apologetic 
 work   if apology it should be call to carry the war straight into the 
 enemy 's country   might be freely leave to Gabriel Nash . he lay the 
 weight of explanation on his commentator , meet they all on the firm 
 ground of his own amusement . he see he should live for month in a thick 
 cloud of irony , not the fine air of the season , and he adopt the 
 weapon to which a person whose use of tobacco be only occasional resort 
 when every one else produce a cigar - he puff the spasmodic , defensive 
 cigarette . he accept as to what he have do the postulate of the 
 obscurely tortuous , abound so in that sense that his critic be 
 themselves bewildered . some of they feel that they get , as the phrase 
 be , little out of he - he rise in his good humour so much high than 
 the " rise " they have look for - on his very first encounter with the 
 world after his scrimmage with his mother . he go to a dinner - party - he 
 have accept the invitation many day before - have see his 
 resignation , in the form of a telegram from Harsh , announce in the 
 evening paper . the people he find there have see it as well , and the 
 wittiest want to know what he be now go to do . even the most 
 embarrassed ask if it be true he have change his politic . he give 
 different answer to different person , but leave most of they under the 
 impression that he have strange scruple of conscience . this , however , 
 be not a formidable occasion , for there have happen to be no one 
 present he would have desire , on the old basis , especially to gratify . 
 there be real good friend it would be less easy to meet - Nick be 
 almost sorry for an hour that he have so many real good friend . if he 
 have have more enemy the case would have be simple , and he be fully 
 aware that the hard thing of all would be to be let off too easily . 
 then he would appear to himself to have be put , all round , on his 
 generosity , and his deviation would thus wear its ugly face . 

 when he leave the place at which he have be din he betake himself to 
 Rosedale Road : he see no reason why he should go down to the House , 
 though he know he have not do with that yet . he have a dread of behave 
 as if he suppose he should be expect to make a farewell speech , and 
 be thankful his eminence be not of a nature to create on such an 
 occasion a demand for his oratory . he have in fact nothing whatever to 
 say in public - not a vain word , not a sorry syllable . though the hour 
 be late he find Gabriel Nash establish in his studio , draw thither 
 by the fine exhilaration of have see an evening paper . try it 
 late , on the chance , he have be tell by Nick 's servant that Nick would 
 sleep there that night , and he have come in to wait , he be so eager to 
 congratulate he . Nick submit with a good grace to his society - he 
 be tired enough to go to bed , but be restless too - in spite of note 
 now , oddly enough , that Nash 's congratulation could add little to his 
 fortitude . he have feel a good deal , before , as if he be in this 
 philosopher 's hand ; but since make his final choice he have begin to 
 strike himself as all in his own . Gabriel might have be the angel of 
 that name , but no angel could assist he much henceforth . 

 Nash indeed be as true as ever to his genius while he loll on a divan 
 and emit a series of reflexion that be even more ingenious than 
 opportune . Nick walk up and down the room , and it might have be 
 suppose from his manner that he be impatient for his friend to 
 withdraw . this idea would have be contradict , however , by the fact 
 that subsequently , after the latter have quit he , he continue to 
 perambulate . he have grow use to Gabriel and must now have be 
 possess of all he have to say . that be one 's penalty with person 
 whose main gift be for talk , however inspiring ; talk engender a sense 
 of sameness much soon than action . the thing a man do be 
 necessarily more different from each other than the thing he say , even 
 if he go in for surprise you . Nick feel Nash could never surprise 
 he any more save by mere plain perpetration . 

 he talk of his host 's future , talk of Miriam Rooth and of Peter 
 Sherringham , whom he have see at that young woman 's and whom he 
 describe as in a predicament delightful to behold . Nick put a question 
 about Peter 's predicament and learn , rather to his disappointment , 
 that it consist only of the fact that he be in love with Miriam . he 
 appeal to his visitor to do well than this , and Nash then add the 
 touch that Sherringham would not   be able to have she . " oh they have   idea ! " 
 he say when Nick ask he why . 

 " what idea ? so have he , I suppose . " 

 " yes , but they be not the same . " 

 " well , they will nevertheless arrange something , " Nick opine . 

 " you will have to help they a bit . she be in love with another man , " Nash 
 go on . 

 " do you mean with you ? " 

 " oh , I be never another man - I be always more the wrong one than the man 
 himself . it be you she be after . " and on his friend 's ask he what he 
 mean by this Nash add : " while you be engage in transfer her 
 image to the tablet of your genius you stamp your own on that of her 
 heart . " 

 Nick stop in his walk , star . " ah , what a bore ! " 

 " a bore ? do not   you think she form to please ? " 

 Nick wonder , but do not   conclude . " I want to go on with she - now I 
 can not . " 

 Nash himself , however , jump straight to what really matter . " my dear 
 fellow , it only make her handsomer . I wonder what happy turn she have 
 take . " 

 " oh , that be twaddle , " say Nick , turn away . " besides , have she tell 
 you ? " 

 " no , but her mother have . " 

 " have she tell her mother ? " 

 " Mrs. Rooth say not . but I have   know Mrs. Rooth to say that which 
 be not . " 

 " apply that rule then to the information you speak of . " 

 " well , since you press I , I know more , " Gabriel say . " Miriam know 
 you be engaged to a wonderful , rich lady ; she tell I as much , tell I 
 she have see she here . that be enough to set she off - she like 
 forbid fruit . " 

 " I be not engaged to any lady whatever . I be , " Nick handsomely 
 concede , " but we have   alter our mind . " 

 " ah , what a pity ! " his friend wail . 

 " Mephistopheles ! " - and he stop again with the point of this . 

 " pray then whom do you call Margaret ? may I ask if your failure of 
 interest in the political situation be the cause of this change in your 
 personal one ? " Nash go on . Nick signify that he might not ; whereupon 
 he add : " I be not in the least devilish - I only mean it be a pity you have 
 alter your mind , since Miriam may in consequence alter her . she go 
 from one thing to another . however , I will not   tell she . " 

 " I will then ! " Nick declare between jest and earnest . 

 " would that really be prudent ? " his companion ask more completely in 
 the frolic key . 

 " at any rate , " he resume , " nothing would induce I to interfere with 
 Peter Sherringham . that sound fatuous , but to you I do not   mind 
 appear an ass . " 

 " the thing would be to get Sherringham , out of spite , " Nash throw off , 
 " to entangle himself with another woman . " 

 " what good would that do ? " 

 " ah , Miriam would then begin to think of he . " 

 " spite surely be not   a conceivable motive - for a healthy man . " 

 the plea , however , find Gabriel ready . " Sherringham 's just precisely 
 not a healthy man . he be too much in love . " 

 " then he will not   care for another woman . " 

 " he would try to , and that would produce its effect - its effect on 
 Miriam . " 

 " you talk like an american novel . let he try , and God keep we all 
 straight . " Nick advert in extreme silence to his poor little Biddy 
 and greatly hop - he would have to see to it a little - that Peter 
 would not   " try " on she . he change the subject and before Nash withdraw 
 take occasion to remark - the occasion be offer by some new allusion 
 of the visitor 's to the sport he hop to extract from see Nick carry 
 out everything to which he stand commit - that the comedy of the 
 matter would fall flat and the incident pass unnoticed . 

 but Nash lose no heart . " oh , if you will simply do your part I will take 
 care of the rest . " 

 " if you mean by do my part mind my business and work like a 
 beaver I shall easily satisfy you , " Nick reply . 

 " ah , you reprobate , you will become another Sir Joshua , a mere P.R.A. ! " 
 his companion rail , get up to go . 

 when he have go Nick throw himself back on the cushion of the divan 
 and , with his hand lock above his head , sit a long time lose in 
 thought . he have send his servant to bed ; he be unmoleste . he gaze 
 before he into the gloom produce by the unheeded burning - out of the 
 last candle . the vague outer light come in through the tall studio 
 window and the paint image , range about , look confused in the 
 dusk . if his mother have see he she might have think he be star 
 at his father 's ghost . 




 xxxvi 


 the night Peter Sherringham walk away from Balaklava Place with 
 Gabriel Nash the talk of the two man direct itself , as be natural at 
 the time , to the question of Miriam 's future fame and the pace , as Nash 
 call it , at which she would go . critical spirit as they both be , 
 and one of they as dissimulative in passion as the other be paradoxical 
 in the absence of it , they yet take her career for grant as completely 
 as the simple - minded , a pair of hot spectator in the pit , might have 
 do , and exchange observation on the assumption that the only 
 uncertain element would be the pace . this be a proof of general 
 subjugation . Peter wish not to show , yet wish to know , and in the 
 restlessness of his anxiety be ready even to risk exposure , great as 
 the sacrifice might be of the imperturbable , urbane scepticism most 
 appropriate to a secretary of embassy . he could not   rid himself of the 
 sense that Nash have get up early than he , have have opportunity of 
 contact in day already distant , the day of Mrs. Rooth 's hungry foreign 
 ramble . something of authority and privilege stick to he from this , 
 and it make Sherringham still more uncomfortable when he be most 
 conscious that , at the good , even the train diplomatic mind would 
 never get a grasp of Miriam as a whole . she be construct to revolve 
 like the terraqueous globe ; some part or other of she be always out of 
 sight or in shadow . 

 Peter talk to conceal his feeling , and , like many a man practise 
 that indirectness , rather lose himself in the wood . they agree that , 
 put strange accident aside , the girl would go far than any one 
 have go in England within the memory of man ; and that it be a pity , as 
 regard mark the comparison , that for so long no one have go any 
 distance worth speak of . they far agree that it would naturally 
 seem absurd to any one who do not   know , their prophesy such big 
 thing on such small evidence ; and they agree lastly that the absurdity 
 quite vanish as soon as the prophet know as they know . their 
 knowledge - they quite recognise this - be simply confidence raise to a 
 high point , the communication of their young friend 's own confidence . 
 the condition be enormously to make , but it be of the very essence 
 of Miriam 's confidence that she would make they . the part , the play , 
 the theatre , the ' support , " the audience , the critic , the money be 
 all to be find , but she cast a spell that prevent this from seem a 
 serious hitch . one might not   see from one day to the other what she would 
 do or how she would do it , but this would not   stay her step - she would 
 none the less go on . she would have to construct her own road , as it 
 be , but at the bad there would only be delay in make it . these 
 delay would depend on the hardness of the stone she have to break . 

 as Peter have note , you never know where to " have " Gabriel Nash ; a truth 
 exemplified in his unexpected delight at the prospect of Miriam 's 
 draw forth the modernness of the age . you might have think he would 
 loathe that modernness ; but he have a joyous , amused , amusing vision of 
 it - see it as something huge and fantastically vulgar . its vulgarity 
 would rise to the grand style , like that of a London railway station , 
 and the publicity achieve by their charming charge be as big as the 
 globe itself . all the machinery be ready , the platform lay ; the 
 facility , the wire and bell and trumpet , the roaring , deafen 
 newspaperism of the period - its most distinctive sign - be wait for 
 she , their predestine mistress , to press her foot on the spring and set 
 they all in motion . Gabriel brush in a large , bright picture of her 
 progress through the time and round the world , round it and round it 
 again , from continent to continent and clime to clime ; with population 
 and deputation , reporter and photographer , placard and interview 
 and banquet , steamer , railway , dollar , diamond , speech and 
 artistic ruin all jumble into her train . regardless of expense the 
 spectacle would be and thrill , though somewhat monotonous , the 
 drama - a drama more bustling than any she would put on the stage and a 
 spectacle that would beat everything for scenery . in the end her divine 
 voice would crack , scream to foreign ear and antipodal barbarian , 
 and her clever manner would lose all quality , simplify to a few 
 unmistakable knock - down dodge . then she would be at the fine climax of 
 life and glory , still young and insatiate , but already coarse , hard , and 
 raddle , with nothing leave to do and nothing leave to do it with , the 
 remain year all before she and the raison d'etre all behind . it 
 would be splendid , dreadful , grotesque . 

 " oh , she will have some good year - they will be worth have , " Peter 
 insist as they go . " besides , you see she too much as a humbug and 
 too little as a real producer . she have idea - great one ; she love the 
 thing for itself . that may keep a woman serious . " 

 " her great idea must always be to show herself , and fortunately she 
 have a great quantity of that treasure to show . I think of she absolutely 
 as a real producer , but as a producer whose production be her own 
 person . no ' person , ' even as fine a one as her , will stand that for 
 more than an hour , so that humbuggery have very soon to lend a hand . 
 however , " Nash continue , " if she be a fine humbug it will do as well , it 
 will perfectly suit the time . we can all be save by vulgarity ; that be 
 the solvent of all difficulty and the blessing of this delightful age . 
 one do not   die of it - save in soul and sense : one die only of mind 
 it . therefore let no man despair - a new hope have dawn . " 

 " she will do she work like any other worker , with the advantage over many 
 that her talent 's rare , " Peter obliquely answer . " compare with the 
 life of many woman that be security and sanity of the high order . then 
 she can not   help her beauty . you can not   vulgarise that . " 

 " oh , can not   you ? " Gabriel cry . 

 " it will abide with she till the day of her death . it be not   a mere 
 superficial freshness . she be very noble . " 

 " yes , that be the pity of it , " say Nash . " she be a big more or less 
 direct force , and I quite admit that she will do for a while a lot of 
 good . she will have brighten up the world for a great many people - have 
 bring the ideal nearer to they and hold it fast for an hour with its 
 foot on earth and its great wing tremble . that be always something , 
 for blest be he who have drop even the small coin into the little 
 iron box that contain the precious saving of mankind . Miriam will 
 doubtless have drop a big gold - piece . it will be find in the general 
 scramble on the day the race go bankrupt . and then for herself she will 
 have have a great go at life . " 

 " oh yes , she will have get out of her hole - she will not   have vegetate , " 
 Peter concur . " that make she touch to I - it add to the many 
 good reason for which one may want to help she . she be tackle a big 
 job , and tackle it by herself ; throw herself upon the world in good 
 faith and deal with it as she can ; meet alone , in her youth , her 
 beauty , her generosity , all the embarrassment of notoriety and all the 
 difficulty of a profession of which , if one half be what be call 
 brilliant the other 's frankly odious . " 

 " she have great courage , but you speak of she as solitary with such a lot 
 of we all round she ? " Nash candidly inquire . 

 " she be a great thing for you and I , but we be a small thing for she . " 

 " well , a good many small thing , if they but stick together , may make up 
 a mass , " Gabriel say . " there must always be the man , you see . he be the 
 indispensable element in such a life , and he will be the last thing she will 
 ever lack . " 

 " what man be you talk about ? " Peter ask with imperfect ease . 

 " the man of the hour , whoever he be . she will inspire innumerable 
 devotion . " 

 " of course she will , and they will be precisely a part of the insufferable 
 side of her life . " 

 " insufferable to whom ? " Nash demand . " do not   forget that the 
 insufferable side of her life will be just the side she will thrive on . 
 you can not   eat your cake and have it , and you can not   make omelette 
 without break egg . you can not   at once sit by the fire and parade 
 about the world , and you can not   take all chance without have some 
 adventure . you can not   be a great actress without the luxury of nerve . 
 without a plentiful supply - or without the right one - you will only be 
 second fiddle . if you have   all the tense string you may take life for 
 your fiddlestick . your nerve and your adventure , your egg and your 
 cake , be part of the cost of the most expensive of profession . you 
 play with human passion , with exaltation and ecstasy and terror , 
 and if you trade on the fury of the element you must know how to ride 
 the storm . " 

 well , Peter think it over . " those be the fine old commonplace about 
 the artistic temperament , but I usually find the artist a very meek , 
 decent , little person . " 

 " you never find the artist - you only find his work , and that be all you 
 need find . when the artist 's a woman , and the woman 's an actress , 
 meekness and decency will doubtless be there in the right proportion , " 
 Nash go on . " Miriam will represent they for you , if you give she her 
 cue , with the utmost charm . " 

 " of course she will inspire devotion - that be all right , " say Peter 
 with a wild cheerfulness . 

 " and of course they will inspire response , and with that 
 consequence - do not   you see ? - they will mitigate her solitude , they will even 
 enliven it , " Nash set forth . 

 " she will probably box a good many ear : that will be lively ! " Peter 
 return with some grimness . 

 " oh magnificent ! - it will be a merry life . yet with its tragic passage , 
 its distracted or its pathetic hour , " Gabriel insist . " in short , a 
 little of everything . " 

 they walk on without further speech till at last Peter resume : " the 
 good thing for a woman in her situation be to marry some decent 
 care - take man . " 

 " oh I daresay she will do that too ! " Nash laugh ; a remark as a result of 
 which his companion lapse afresh into silence . Gabriel leave he a 
 little to enjoy this ; after which he add : " there be somebody she would 
 marry to - morrow . " 

 Peter wonder . " do you mean her friend Dashwood ? " 

 " no , no , I mean Nick Dormer . " 

 " she would marry he ? " Peter gasp . 

 " I mean her head 's full of he . but she will hardly get the chance . " 

 Peter watch himself . " do she like he as much as that ? " 

 " I do not   quite know how much you mean , but enough for all practical 
 end . " 

 " marry a fashionable actress be hardly a practical end . " 

 " certainly not , but I be not speak from his point of view . " Nash be 
 perfectly lucid . " moreover , I think you just now say it would be such 
 a good thing for she . " 

 " to marry Nick Dormer ? " 

 " you say a good decent man , and he be one of the very decentest . " 

 " I be not   think of the individual , but of the protection . it would 
 fence she about , settle certain question , or appear to ; it would make 
 thing safe and comfortable for she and keep a lot of cad and 
 blackguard away . " 

 " she ought to marry the prompter or the box - keeper , " say Nash . " then it 
 would be all right . I think indeed they generally do , do not   they ? " 

 Peter feel for a moment a strong disposition to drop his friend on the 
 spot , to cross to the other side of the street and walk away without 
 he . but there be a different impulse which struggle with this one and 
 after a minute overcome it , the impulse that lead to his saying 
 presently : " have she tell you she be - a - she be in love with Nick ? " 

 " no , no - that be not the way I know it . " 

 " have Nick tell you then ? " 

 " on the contrary , I have   tell he . " 

 " you have   render he a questionable service if you have   no proof , " Peter 
 pronounce . 

 " my proof be only that I have   see she with he . she be charming , poor dear 
 thing . " 

 " but surely she be not   in love with every man she be charming to . " 

 " I mean she be charming to I , " Nash return . " I see she that way . I 
 see her interested - and what it do to she , with she , for she . but 
 judge for yourself - the first time you get a chance . " 

 " when shall I get a chance ? Nick do not   come near she . " 

 " oh he will come , he will come ; his picture be not   finish . " 

 " you mean he will be the box - keeper , then ? " 

 " my dear fellow , I shall never allow it , " say Gabriel Nash . " it would 
 be idiotic and quite unnecessary . he be beautifully arrange - in quite a 
 different line . Fancy his take that sort of job on his hand ! besides , 
 she would never expect it ; she be not such a goose . they be very good 
 friend - it will go on that way . she be an excellent person for he to 
 know ; she will give he lot of idea of the plastic kind . he would have 
 be up there before this , but it have take he time to play his 
 delightful trick on his constituent . that of course be pure amusement ; 
 but when once his effect have be well produce he will get back to 
 business , and his business will be a very different matter from 
 Miriam 's . imagine he write her advertisement , live on her money , 
 add up her profit , have row and recrimination with her agent , 
 carry her shawl , spend his day in her rouge - pot . the right man 
 for that , if she must have one , will turn up . ' pour le mariage , non . ' 
 she be not   wholly an idiot ; she really , for a woman , quite see thing as 
 they be . " 

 as Peter have not cross the street and leave Gabriel plant he now 
 suffer the extremity of irritation . but descry in the dim vista of 
 the Edgware Road a vague and vigilant hansom he wave his stick with 
 eagerness and with the abrupt declaration that , feel tired , he must 
 drive the rest of his way . he offer Nash , as he enter the vehicle , 
 no seat , but this coldness be not reflect in the lucidity with which 
 that master of every subject go on to affirm that there be of course 
 a danger - the danger that in give circumstance Miriam would leave the 
 stage . 

 " leave it , you mean , for some man ? " 

 " for the man we be talk about . " 

 " for Nick Dormer ? " Peter ask from his place in the cab , his paleness 
 light by its lamp . 

 " if he should make it a condition . but why should he ? why should he make 
  any condition ? he be not an ass either . you see it would be a 
 bore " - Nash keep it up while the hansom wait - " because if she be to 
 do anything of that sort she would make he pay for the sacrifice . " 

 " oh yes , she would make he pay for the sacrifice , " Peter blindly concur . 

 " and then when he have pay she would go back to her footlight , " Gabriel 
 develop from the curbstone as his companion close the apron of the 
 cab . 

 " I see - she would go back - good - night , " Peter return . " please go on ! " he 
 cry to the driver through the hole in the roof . and while the vehicle 
 roll away he growl to himself : " of course she would - and quite 
 right ! " 




 XXXVII 


 " Judge for yourself when you get a chance , " Nash have say to he ; and as 
 it turn out he be able to judge two day later , for he find his 
 cousin in Balaklava Place on the Tuesday follow his walk with their 
 insufferable friend . he have not only stay away from the theatre on the 
 Monday evening - he regard this as an achievement of some 
 importance - but have not be near Miriam during the day . he have mean to 
 absent himself from her company on Tuesday as well ; a determination 
 confirm by the fact that the afternoon turn to rain . but when at ten 
 minute to five o'clock he jump into a hansom and direct his course 
 to Saint John 's Wood it be precisely upon the weather that he shift 
 the responsibility of his behaviour . 

 Miriam have din when he reach the villa , but she be lie down , 
 unduly fatigued , before go to the theatre . Mrs. Rooth be , however , 
 in the drawing - room with three gentleman , in two of whom the fourth 
 visitor be not startled to recognise Basil Dashwood and Gabriel Nash . 
 Dashwood appear to have become Miriam 's brother - in - arm and a second 
 child - a fonder one - to Mrs. Rooth ; it have reach Peter on some late 
 visit that the young actor have finally move his lodging into the 
 quarter , make himself a near neighbour for all sort of convenience . 
 " hang his convenience ! " Peter think , perceive that Mrs. Lovick 's 
 " Arty " be now altogether one of the family . oh the family ! - it be a 
 queer one to be connect with : that consciousness be acute in 
 Sherringham 's breast to - day as he enter Mrs. Rooth 's little circle . 
 the place be fill with cigarette - smoke and there be a messy 
 coffee - service on the piano , whose key Basil Dashwood lightly touch 
 for his own diversion . Nash , address the room of course , be at one 
 end of a little sofa with his nose in the air , and Nick Dormer be at 
 the other end , seat much at his ease and with a certain privileged 
 appearance of have be there often before , though Sherringham know he 
 have not . he look uncritical and very young , as rosy as a school - boy on 
 a half - holiday . it be past five o'clock in the day , but Mrs. Rooth be 
 not dress ; there be , however , no want of finish in her elegant 
 attitude - the same relaxed grandeur   she seem to let you understand 
 for which she use to be distinguish at Castle Nugent when the house 
 be full . she toy incongruously , in her unbuttoned wrapper , with a 
 large tinsel fan which resemble a theatrical property . 

 it be one of the discomfort of Peter 's position that many of those 
 minor matter which be superficially at least most characteristic of 
 the histrionic life have power to displease he , so that he be oblige 
 constantly to overlook and condone and pretend . he dislike besmoked 
 drawing - room and irregular meal and untidy arrangement ; he could 
 suffer from the vulgarity of Mrs. Rooth 's apartment , the importunate 
 photograph which give on his nerve , the barbarous absence of sign of 
 an orderly domestic life , the odd volume from the circulate library 
  you could see what they be - the very cover tell you - at a glance 
 tumble about under smeary cup and glass . he have not   wait till now 
 to feel it " rum " that fate should have let he in for such contact ; 
 but as he stand before his hostess and her companion he wonder 
 perhaps more than ever why he should . her companion somehow , who be 
 not responsible , do not   keep down his wonder ; which be particularly 
 odd , since they be not superficially in the least of bohemian type . 
 almost the first thing that strike he , as happen , in come into the 
 room , be the fresh fact of the high good look of his cousin , a 
 gentleman , to one 's taste and for one 's faith , in a different enough 
 degree from the stiff - collared , conversible Dashwood . Peter do not   hate 
 Nick for be of so fine an english grain ; he know rather the brush of 
 a new wave of annoyance at Julia 's stupid failure to get on with he 
 under that good oman . 

 it be his first encounter with the late member for Harsh since his 
 arrival in London : they have be on one side and the other so much take 
 up with their affair . since their last meeting Nick have , as we know , to 
 his kinsman 's perception , really put on a new character : he have do the 
 fine stroke of business in the quiet way . this have make he a 
 presence to be count with , and in just the sense in which poor Peter 
 desire least to count . poor Peter , after his somersault in the blue , 
 have just lately be much troubled ; he be ravage by contend 
 passion ; he pay every hour in a torment of unrest for what be false 
 in his position , the impossibility of keep the presentable part of 
 his character together , the opposition of interest and desire . Nick , his 
 junior and a light weight , have settle his problem and show no 
 wound ; there be something impertinent and mystify in it . yet he 
 look , into the bargain , too innocently young and happy , and too 
 careless and modest and amateurish , to figure as a rival or even as the 
 genius he be apparently go to try to be - the genius that the other 
 day , in the studio there with Biddy , Peter have get a startled glimpse of 
 his power to become . Julia 's brother would have like to be aware of 
 ground of resentment , to be able to hold she have be badly treat or 
 that Nick be basely fatuous , for in that case he might have have the 
 resource of take offence . but where be the outrage of his merely 
 be like by a woman in respect to whom one have definitely deny 
 one 's self the luxury of pretension , especially if , as the wrong - doer , 
 he have take no action in the matter ? it could scarcely be call 
 wrong - do to call , casually , on an afternoon when the lady do not   seem 
 to be there . Peter could at any rate rejoice that Miriam do not ; and he 
 propose to himself suggest to Nick after a little that they should 
 adjourn together - they have such interesting thing to talk about . 
 meanwhile Nick greet he with a friendly freedom in which he could 
 read neither confusion nor defiance . Peter be reassure against a 
 danger he believe he do not   recognise and puzzle by a mystery he 
 flatter himself he have not   heed . and he be still more ashamed of 
 be reassure than of be puzzle . 

 it must be record that Miriam 's absence from the scene be not 
 prolong . Nick , as Sherringham gather , have be about a quarter of an 
 hour in the house , which would have give she , gratify by his 
 presence , due time to array herself to come down to he . at all event 
 she be in the room , prepare apparently to go to the theatre , very 
 shortly after one of her guest have become sensible of how glad he be 
 she be out of it . Familiarity have never yet cure he of a certain 
 tremor of expectation , and even of suspense , in regard to her entrance ; 
 a flutter cause by the simple circumstance of her infinite variety . to 
 say she be always act would too much convey that she be often 
 fatiguing ; since her change face affect this particular admirer at 
 least not as a series of mask , but as a response to perceive 
 difference , an intensity of that perception , or still more as something 
 richly constructional , like the shifting of the scene in a play or like 
 a room with many window . the image she be to project be always 
 incalculable , but if her present deny her past and decline 
 responsibility for her future it make a good thing of the hour and keep 
 the actual peculiarly fresh . this time the actual be a bright , gentle , 
 graceful , smile , young woman in a new dress , eager to go out , draw 
 on fresh glove , who look as if she be about to step into a carriage 
 and - it be Gabriel Nash who thus formulate her physiognomy - do a lot 
 of London thing . 

 the young woman have time to spare , however , and she sit down and talk 
 and laugh and presently give , as seem to Peter , a deep glow to the 
 tawdry little room , which could do for other if it have to do for she . 
 she describe herself as in a state of nervous muddle , exhausted , 
 blinded , abrutie , with the rehearsal of the forthcoming piece - the 
 first night be close at hand , and it be go to be of a vileness : 
 they would all see ! - but there be no correspondence between this 
 account of the matter and her present bravery of mood . she send she 
 mother away - to " put on some clothe or something " - and , leave alone with 
 the visitor , go to a long glass between the window , talk always 
 to Nick Dormer , and revise and rearrange a little her own attire . she 
 talk to Nick , over her shoulder , and to Nick only , as if he be the 
 guest to recognise and the other do not   count . she break out at once on 
 his have throw up his seat , wish to know if the strange story tell 
 she by Mr. Nash be true - that he have knock all the hope of his 
 party into pie . 

 Nick take it any way she like and give a pleasant picture of his 
 party 's ruin , the critical condition of public affair : he be as yet 
 clearly close to contrition or shame . the pilgrim from Paris , before 
 Miriam 's entrance , have not , in shake hand with he , make even a 
 roundabout allusion to his odd " game " ; he feel he must somehow show good 
 taste - so english people often feel - at the cost of good manner . but he 
 wince on see how his scruple have be waste , and be strike with 
 the fine , jocose , direct turn of his kinsman 's conversation with the 
 young actress . it be a part of her unexpectedness that she take the 
 heavy literal view of Nick 's behaviour ; declare frankly , though without 
 ill nature , that she have no patience with his mistake . she be horribly 
 disappoint - she have set her heart on his be a great statesman , one 
 of the ruler of the people and the glory of England . what be so 
 useful , what be so noble ? - how it belittle everything else ! she have 
 expect he to wear a cordon and a star some day - acquire they with 
 the great promptitude - and then to come and see she in her loge : it 
 would look so particularly well . she talk after the manner of a lovely 
 Philistine , except perhaps when she express surprise at 
 hearing - hearing from Gabriel Nash - that in England gentleman accoutre 
 with those emblem of their sovereign 's esteem do not   so far forget 
 themselves as to stray into the dressing - room of actress . she 
 admit after a moment that they be quite right and the 
 dressing - room of actress nasty place ; but she be sorry , for that 
 be the sort of thing she have always figure in a corner - a 
 distinguished man , slightly bald , in evening dress , with order , 
 admire the smallness of a satin shoe and say witty thing . Nash be 
 convulse with hilarity at this - such a vision of the british political 
 hero . come back from the glass and make that critic give she his 
 place on the sofa , she seat herself near Nick and continue to 
 express her regret at his perversity . 

 " they all say that - all the charming woman , but I should not   have look 
 for it from you , " Nick reply . " I have   give you such an example of what 
 I can do in another line . " 

 " do you mean my portrait ? oh I have   get it , with your name and ' M.P. ' in 
 the corner , and that be precisely why I be content . ' M.P. ' in the corner 
 of a picture be delightful , but I want to break the mould : I do not   in 
 the least insist on your giving specimen to other . and the artistic 
 life , when you can lead another - if you have   any alternative , however 
 modest - be a very poor business . it come last in dignity - after 
 everything else . ai not   I up to my eye in it and do not   I truly know ? " 

 " you talk like my break - hearted mother , " say Nick . 

 " do she hate it so intensely ? " 

 " she have the dark idea about it - the wild theory . I can not 
 imagine where she get they ; partly I think from a general conviction 
 that the ' esthetic ' - a horrible insidious foreign disease - be eat the 
 healthy core out of english life   dear old english life !   and partly 
 from the charming picture in Punch and the clever satirical article , 
 pointing at mysterious depth of contamination , in the other weekly 
 paper . she believe there be a dreadful coterie of uncannily artful and 
 desperately refined people who wear a kind of loose fade uniform and 
 worship only beauty - which be a fearful thing ; that Gabriel have 
 introduce I to it ; that I now spend all my time in it , and that for 
 its sweet sake I have   break the most sacred vow . Poor Gabriel , who , so 
 far as I can make out , be not   in any sort of society , however bad ! " 

 " but I be uncannily artful , " Nash object , " and though I can not   afford 
 the uniform - I believe you get it well somewhere in South Audley 
 Street - I do worship beauty . I really think it be I the weekly paper 
 mean . " 

 " oh I have   read the article - I know the sort ! " say Basil Dashwood . 

 Miriam look at he . " go and see if the brougham 's there - I order it 
 early . " 

 Dashwood , without move , consult his watch . " it be not   time yet - I 
 know more about the brougham than you . I have   make a rip good 
 arrangement for her stable - it really cost her nothing , " the young 
 actor continue confidentially to Peter , near whom he have place 
 himself . 

 " your mother 's quite right to be break - hearted , " Miriam declare , " and 
 I can imagine exactly what she have be through . I should like to talk 
 with she - I should like to see she . " Nick show on this easy amusement , 
 remind she she have talk to he while she sit for her portrait in 
 quite the opposite sense , most helpfully and inspiringly ; and Nash 
 explain that she be study the part of a political duchess and 
 wish to take observation for it , to work herself into the character . 
 the girl might in fact have be a political duchess as she sit , her 
 head erect and her gloved hand fold , smile with aristocratic 
 dimness at Nick . she shake her head with stately sadness ; she might have 
 be try some effect for Mary Stuart in Schiller 's play . " I have 
 change since that . I want you to be the grand thing there be - the 
 counsellor of king . " 

 Peter wonder if it possibly be not   since she have meet his sister in 
 Nick 's studio that she have change , if perhaps she have not   see how it 
 might give Julia the sense of be more effectually rout to know that 
 the woman who have throw the bomb be one who also try to keep Nick in 
 the straight path . this indeed would involve an assumption that Julia 
 might know , whereas it be perfectly possible she might not   and more than 
 possible that if she should she would not   care . Miriam 's essential 
 fondness for try different way be always there as an adequate 
 reason for any particular way ; a truth which , however , sometimes only 
 half - prevent the particular way from be vexatious to a particular 
 observer . 

 " yet after all who be more esthetic than you and who go in more for the 
 beautiful ? " Nick ask . " you be never so beautiful as when you pitch 
 into it . " 

 " oh , I be an inferior creature , of an inferior sex , and I have   to earn my 
 bread as I can . I would give it all up in a moment , my odious trade - for an 
 inducement . " 

 " and pray what do you mean by an inducement ? " Nick demand . 

 " my dear fellow , she mean you - if you will give she a permanent 
 engagement to sit for you ! " Gabriel volunteer . " what singularly crude 
 question you ask ! " 

 " I like the way she talk , " Mr. Dashwood derisively say , " when I give 
 up the most brilliant prospect , of very much the same kind as Mr. 
 Dormer 's , expressly to go on the stage . " 

 " you be an inferior creature too , " Miriam promptly pronounce . 

 " Miss Rooth 's very hard to satisfy , " Peter observe at this . " a man of 
 distinction , slightly bald , in evening dress , with order , in the corner 
 of her loge - she have such a personage ready make to her hand and she 
 do not   so much as look at he . be I not an inducement ? have not   I 
 offer you a permanent engagement ? " 

 " your order - where be your order ? " she return with a sweet smile , 
 get up . 

 " I shall be a minister next year and an ambassador before you know it . 
 then I shall stick on everything that can be have . " 

 " and they call we mountebank ! " cry the girl . " I have   be so glad to 
 see you again - do you want another sitting ? " she go on to Nick as if 
 to take leave of he . 

 " as many as you will give I - I shall be grateful for all , " he make 
 answer . " I should like to do you as you be at present . you be totally 
 different from the woman I paint - you be wonderful . " 

 " the Comic Muse ! " she laugh . " well , you must wait till our first 
 night be over - I be sur le dent till then . there be everything to do 
 and I have   to do it all . that fellow 's good for nothing , for nothing but 
 domestic life " - and she glance at Basil Dashwood . " he have not   an 
 idea - not one you would willingly tell of he , though he be rather useful for 
 the stable . we have   get stable now - or we try to look as if we have : 
 Dashwood 's idea be de cette force . in ten day I shall have more 
 time . " 

 " the Comic Muse ? never , never , " Peter protest . " you be not to go 
 smirk through the age and down to posterity - I would rather see you as 
 Medusa crown with serpent . that be what you look like when you look 
 well . " 

 " that be console - when I have   just buy a lovely new bonnet , all red 
 rose and bow . I forgot to tell you just now that when you be an 
 ambassador you may propose anything you like , " Miriam go on . " but 
 forgive I if I make that condition . seriously speak , come to I 
 glitter with order and I shall probably succumb . I can not   resist 
 star and garter . only you must , as you say , have they all . I do not  
 like to hear Mr. Dormer talk the slang of the studio - like that phrase 
 just now : it be a fall to a low state . however , when one 's low one 
 must crawl , and I be crawl down to the Strand . dashwood , see if 
 mamma 's ready . if she be not   I decline to wait ; you must bring she in a 
 hansom . I will take Mr. Dormer in the brougham ; I want to talk with Mr. 
 Dormer ; he must drive with I to the theatre . his situation be full of 
 interest . " Miriam lead the way out of the room as she continue to 
 chatter , and when she reach the house - door with the four man in she 
 train the carriage have just draw up at the garden - gate . it appear 
 that Mrs. Rooth be not ready , and the girl , in spite of a remonstrance 
 from Nick , who have a sense of usurp the old lady 's place , repeat 
 her injunction that she should be bring on in a cab . Miriam 's 
 gentleman hang about she at the gate , and she insist on Nick 's taking 
 his seat in the brougham and take it first . before she enter she put 
 her hand out to Peter and , look up at he , hold his own kindly . " dear 
 old master , be not   you come to - night ? I miss you when you be not 
 there . " 

 " do not   go - do not   go - it be too much , " Nash freely declare . 

 " she be wonderful , " say Mr. Dashwood , all expert admiration ; ' she have 
 go into the rehearsal tooth and nail . but nothing take it out of 
 she . " 

 " nothing put it into you , my dear ! " Miriam return . then she pursue 
 to Peter : " you be the faithful one - you be the one I count on . " he be 
 not look at she ; his eye travel into the carriage , where they 
 rest on Nick Dormer , establish on the farth seat with his face 
 turn toward the farth window . he be the one , faithful or no , 
 count on or no , whom a charming woman have prefer to carry off , and 
 there be clear triumph for he in that fact . yet it please , it 
 somewhat relieve , his kinsman to see his passivity as not a little 
 foolish . Miriam note something of this in Peter 's eye , for she 
 exclaim abruptly , " do not   kill he - he do not   care for I ! " with which 
 she pass into the carriage and let it roll away . 

 Peter stand watch it till he hear Dashwood again beside he . " you 
 would not   believe what I make he do the whole thing for - a little rascal 
 I know . " 

 " good - bye ; take good care of Mrs. Rooth , " say Gabriel Nash , wave a 
 bland farewell to the young actor . he give a smile survey of the 
 heaven and remark to Sherringham that the rain have stop . be he 
 walk , be he drive , should they be go in the same direction ? 
 Peter care little about his direction and have little account of it to 
 give ; he simply move away in silence and with Gabriel at his side . this 
 converser be partly an affliction to he ; indeed the fact that he 
 could not   only make light of he add to the oppression . it be just to 
 he nevertheless to note that he could hold his peace occasionally : he 
 have for instance this afternoon take little part in the talk at 
 Balaklava Place . Peter greatly dislike to speak to he of Miriam , but 
 he like Nash himself to make free with she , and even like he to say 
 such thing as might be a little viciously and unguardedly contradict . 
 he be not , however , move to gainsay something drop by his 
 companion , disconnectedly , at the end of a few minute ; a word to the 
 effect that she be after all the well - natured soul alive . all the same , 
 Nash add , it would not   do for she to take possession of a nice life 
 like Nick 's ; and he repeat that for his part he would never allow it . 
 it would be on his conscience to interfere . to which Peter return 
 disingenuously that they might all do as they like - it do not   matter a 
 button to he . and with an effort to carry off that comedy he change 
 the subject . 




 xxxviii 


 he would not   for a moment have admit that he be jealous of his old 
 comrade , but would almost have like to be accuse of it : for this would 
 have give he a chance he rather lack and miss , the right occasion 
 to declare with plausibility that motive he could not   avow have no 
 application to his case . how could a man be jealous when he be not a 
 suitor ? how could he pretend to guard a property which be neither his 
 own nor destine to become his own ? there could be no question of loss 
 when one have nothing at stake , and no question of envy when the 
 responsibility of possession be exactly what one pray to be deliver 
 from . the measure of one 's susceptibility be one 's pretension , and 
 Peter be not only ready to declare over and over again that , thank God , 
 he have none : his spiritual detachment be still more complete - he 
 literally suffer from the fact that nobody appear to care to hear 
 he say it . he connect an idea of virtue and honour with his attitude , 
 since surely it be a high case of conduct to have quench a personal 
 passion for the good of the public service . he have go over the whole 
 question at odd , irrepressible hour ; he have return , spiritually 
 speak , the buffet administer to he all at once , that day in 
 Rosedale Road , by the spectacle of the cră nerie with which Nick could 
 let worldly glory slide . resolution for resolution he prefer after 
 all another sort , and his own cră nerie would be show in the way he 
 should stick to his profession and stand up for british interest . if 
 Nick have leap over a wall he would leap over a river . the course of 
 his river be already trace and his loin be already gird . thus he 
 be justify in hold that the measure of a man 's susceptibility be 
 a man 's attitude : that be the only thing he be bind to give an 
 account of . 

 he be perpetually give an account of it to his own soul in default of 
 other listener . he be quite angry at have taste a sweetness in 
 Miriam 's assurance at the carriage - door , bestow indeed with very 
 little solemnity , that Nick do not   care for she . wherein do it concern 
 he that Nick care for she or that Nick do not ? wherein do it signify 
 to he that Gabriel Nash should have take upon himself to disapprove of 
 a union between the young actress and the young painter and to frustrate 
 an accident that might perhaps prove fortunate ? for those have also be 
 cool word at the hour , though Peter blush on the morrow to think 
 that he feel in they anything but Nash 's personal sublimity . he be 
 ashamed of have be refresh , and refresh by so sickly a 
 draught - it be all his theory that he be not in a fever . as for 
 keep an eye on Nick , it would soon become clear to that young man and 
 that young man 's charming friend that he have quite other us for his 
 eye . the pair , with Nash to help , might straighten out their 
 complication accord to their light . he would never speak to Nick of 
 Miriam ; he feel indeed just now as if he should never speak to Nick of 
 anything . he have trace the course of his river , as I say , and the real 
 proof would be in the way he should , clear the air , land on the 
 opposite bank . it be a case for action - for vigorous , unmistakable 
 action . he have do very little since his arrival in London but moon 
 round a fille de thĂ Ă tre who be take up partly , though she bluff 
 it off , with another man , and partly with arrange new petticoat for a 
 beastly old " poetic drama " ; but this little waste of time should 
 instantly be make up . he have give himself a definite rope , and he have 
 dance to the end of his rope , and now he would dance back . that be all 
 right - so right that Peter could only express to himself how right it 
 be by whistle with extravagance . 

 he whistle as he go to dine with a great personage the day after his 
 meeting with Nick in Balaklava Place ; a great personage to whom he have 
 originally pay his respect - it be high time - the day before that 
 meeting , the previous Monday . the sense of omission to repair , of a 
 superior line to take , perhaps make he study with more zeal to please 
 the personage , who give he ten minute and ask he five question . a 
 great many door be successively open before any palpitating pilgrim 
 who be about to enter the presence of this distinguished man ; but they 
 be discreetly close again behind Sherringham , and I must ask the 
 reader to pause with I at the nearer end of the momentary vista . this 
 particular pilgrim fortunately feel he could count on recognition not 
 only as a faithful if obscure official in the great hierarchy , but as a 
 clever young man who happen to be connect by blood with people his 
 lordship have intimately know . no doubt it be simply as the clever 
 young man that Peter receive the next morning , from the dispenser of 
 his lordship 's hospitality , a note ask he to dine on the morrow . 
 such card have come to he before , and he have always obey their call ; 
 he do so at present , however , with a sense of unusual intention . in due 
 course his intention be translate into word ; before the gentleman 
 leave the dining - room he respectfully ask his noble host for some 
 further brief and benevolent hearing . 

 " what be it you want ? tell I now , " the master of his fate reply , 
 motion to the rest of the company to pass out and detain he where 
 they stand . 

 Peter 's excellent training cover every contingency : he could always be 
 as concise or as diffuse as the occasion require . even he himself , 
 however , be surprised at the quick felicity of the term in which he 
 be conscious of conveying that , be it compatible with high 
 convenience , he should extremely like to be transfer to duty in a 
 more distant quarter of the globe . indeed , fond as he be of think 
 himself a man of emotion control by civility , it be not impossible 
 that a great candour than he know glimmer through Peter 's expression 
 and tremble through his tone as he present this petition . he have 
 aim at a good manner in present it , but perhaps the good of the 
 effect produce for his interlocutor be just where it fail , where it 
 confess a secret that the high diplomacy would have guard . 
 Sherringham remark to the minister that he do not   care in the least 
 where the place might be , nor how little covet a post ; the further 
 away the well , and the climate do not   matter . he would only prefer of 
 course that there should be really something to do , though he would make 
 the good of it even if there be not . he stop in time , or at least 
 think he do , not to betray his covertly seek relief from mind 
 his have be jilt in a flight to latitude unfavourable to human 
 life . his august patron give he a sharp look which for a moment seem 
 the precursor of a sharp question ; but the moment elapse and the 
 question fail to come . this considerate omission , characteristic of a 
 true man of the world and represent quick guess and still quick 
 indifference , make our gentleman from that moment his lordship 's ardent 
 partisan . what do come be a good - natured laugh and the exclamation : 
 " you know there be plenty of swamp and jungle , if you want that sort 
 of thing , " Peter reply that it be very much that sort of thing he do 
 want ; whereupon his chief continue : " I will see - I will see . if anything 
 turn up you shall hear . " 

 something turn up the very next day : our young man , take at his word , 
 find himself indebted to the postman for a note of concise intimation 
 that the high position of minister to the small of Central american 
 republic would be apportion he . the republic , though small , be big 
 enough to be ' shaky , " and the position , though high , not so exalted that 
 there be not much great altitude above it to which it be a 
 step - stone . Peter , quite ready to take one thing with another , 
 rejoice at his easy triumph , reflect that he must have be even more 
 notice at headquarters than he have hop , and , on the spot , consulting 
 nobody and wait for nothing , signify his unqualified acceptance of 
 the place . nobody with a grain of sense would have advise he to do 
 anything else . it make he happy than he have suppose he should ever 
 be again ; it make he feel professionally in the train , as they say in 
 Paris ; it be serious , it be interesting , it be exciting , and his 
 imagination , let itself loose into the future , begin once more to 
 scale the crown eminence . it be very simple to hold one 's course if 
 one really try , and he bless the variety of people . far 
 communication pass , the last enjoining on he to return to Paris for 
 a short interval a week later , after which he would be advise of the 
 date for his proceeding to his remoter duty . 




 XXXIX 


 the next thing he meanwhile do be to call with his news on Lady Agnes 
 Dormer ; it be not unworthy of note that he take on the other hand no 
 step to make his promotion know to Miriam Rooth . to render it probable 
 he should find his aunt he go at the luncheon - hour ; and she be indeed 
 on the point of sit down to that repast with Grace . Biddy be not at 
 home - Biddy be never at home now , her mother say : she be always at 
 Nick 's place , she spend her life there , she eat and drink there , she 
 almost sleep there . what she contrive to do there for so many hour and 
 what be the irresistible spell Lady Agnes could not   pretend she have 
 succeed in discover . she speak of this baleful resort only as 
 " Nick 's place , " and speak of it at first as little as possible . she 
 judge highly probable , however , that Biddy would come in early that 
 afternoon : there be something or other , some common social duty , she 
 have condescend to promise she would perform with Grace . Poor Lady 
 Agnes , whom Peter find somehow at once grim and very prostrate - she 
 assure her nephew her nerve be all go - almost abuse her young 
 daughter for two minute , have evidently a deep - seat need of abuse 
 some one . I must yet add that she do not   wait to meet Grace 's eye before 
 recover , by a rapid gyration , her view of the possibility of 
 thing - those possibility from which she still might squeeze , as a 
 parent almost in despair , the drop that would sweeten her cup . " dear 
 child , " she have the presence of mind to subjoin , " her only fault be 
 after all that she adore her brother . she have a capacity for adoration 
 and must always take her gospel from some one . " 

 Grace declare to Peter that her sister would have stay at home if she 
 have dream he be come , and Lady Agnes let he know that she have 
 hear all about the hour he have spend with the poor child at Nick 's 
 place and about his extraordinary good nature in take the two girl to 
 the play . Peter lunch in Calcutta Gardens , spend an hour there 
 which prove at first unexpectedly and , as seem to he , unfairly 
 dismal . he know from his own general perception , from what Biddy have 
 tell he and from what he have hear Nick say in Balaklava Place , that 
 his aunt would have be wound by her son 's apostasy ; but it be not 
 till he see she that he appreciate the dark difference this young man 's 
 behaviour have make in the outlook of his family . evidently that 
 behaviour have spring a dreadful leak in the great vessel of their hope . 
 these be thing no outsider could measure , and they be none of an 
 outsider 's business ; it be enough that Lady Agnes strike he really as 
 a woman who have receive her death - blow . she look ten year old ; she 
 be white and haggard and tragic . her eye burn with a strange fitful 
 fire that prompt one to conclude her child have well look out for 
 she . when not fill with this unnatural flame they be suffuse with 
 comfortless tear ; and altogether the afflict lady be , as he view 
 she , very bad , a case for anxiety . it be because he have know she would 
 be very bad that he have , in his kindness , call on she exactly in this 
 manner ; but he recognise that to undertake to be kind to she in 
 proportion to her need might carry one very far . he be glad he have not 
 himself a wrong mad mother , and he wonder how Nick could bear the 
 burden of the home he have ruin . apparently he do not   bear it very far , 
 but have take final , convenient refuge in Rosedale Road . 

 Peter 's judgement of his perverse cousin be considerably confused , and 
 not the less so for the consciousness that he be perhaps just now not 
 in the good state of mind for judge he at all . at the same time , 
 though he hold in general that a man of sense have always warrant enough 
 in his sense for do the particular thing he prefer , he could 
 scarcely help ask himself whether , in the exercise of a virile 
 freedom , it have be absolutely indispensable Nick should work such 
 domestic woe . he admit indeed that that be an anomalous figure for 
 Nick , the worker of domestic woe . then he see that his aunt 's 
 grievance - there come a moment , later , when she assert as much - be 
 not quite what her recreant child , in Balaklava Place , have represent 
 it - with questionable taste perhaps - to a mocking actress ; be not a 
 mere shocked quarrel with his adoption of a " low " career , or a horror , 
 the old - fashioned horror , of the louche licence take by artist 
 under pretext of be conscientious : the day for this be past , and 
 english society think the brush and the fiddle as good as anything 
 else - with two or three exception . it be not what he have take up but 
 what he have put down that make the sorry difference , and the tragedy 
 would have be equally great if he have become a wine - merchant or a 
 horse - dealer . Peter have gather at first that Lady Agnes would not   trust 
 herself to speak directly of her trouble , and he have obey what he 
 suppose the good discretion in make no allusion to it . but a few 
 minute before they rise from table she break out , and when he 
 attempt to utter a word of mitigation there be something that go to 
 his heart in the way she return : " oh you do not   know - you do not   know ! " 
 he feel Grace 's eye fix on he at this instant in a mystery of 
 supplication , and be uncertain as to what she want - that he should 
 say something more to console her mother or should hurry away from the 
 subject . grace look old and plain and - he have think on come 
 in - rather cross , but she evidently want something . " you do not   know , " 
 Lady Agnes repeat with a trembling voice , " you do not   know . " she have 
 push her chair a little away from her place ; she hold she 
 pocket - handkerchief press hard to her mouth , almost stuff into it , 
 and her eye be fix on the floor . she make he aware he do 
 virtually know - know what tower pile of confidence and hope have be 
 dash to the earth . then she finish her sentence unexpectedly - " you 
 do not   know what my life with my great husband be . " here on the other 
 hand Peter be slightly at fault - he do not   exactly see what her life 
 with her great husband have to do with it . what be clear to he , 
 however , be that they literally have look for thing all in the very 
 key of that greatness from Nick . it be not quite easy to see why this 
 have be the case - it have not be precisely Peter 's own prefigurement . 
 Nick appear to have have the faculty of plant that sort of 
 flattering faith in woman ; he have originally give Julia a tremendous 
 dose of it , though she have since shake off the effect . 

 " do you really think he would have do such great thing , politically 
 speak ? " Peter risk . " do you consider that the root of the matter 
 be so essentially in he ? " 

 his hostess have a pause , look at he rather hard . " I only think what 
 all his friend - all his father 's friend - have think . he be his 
 father 's son after all . no young man ever have a fine training , and he 
 give from the first repeat proof of the high ability , the high 
 ambition . see how he get in everywhere . look at his first seat - look at 
 his second , " Lady Agnes continue . " look at what every one say at this 
 moment . " 

 " look at all the paper ! " say Grace . " do you ever hear he speak ? " she 
 ask . and when Peter remind she how he have spend his life in foreign 
 land , shut out from such pleasure , she go on : " well , you lose 
 something . " 

 " it be very charming , " say Lady Agnes quietly and poignantly . 

 " of course he be charming , whatever he do , " Peter return . " he will be a 
 charming artist . " 

 " oh God help we ! " the poor lady groan , rise quickly . 

 " he will not   - that be the bad , " Grace amend . " it be not   as if he would do 
 thing people would like , I have   be to his place , and I never see such a 
 horrid lot of thing - not at all clever or pretty . " 

 yet her mother , at this , turn upon she with sudden asperity . " you know 
 nothing whatever about the matter ! " then she add for Peter that , as it 
 happen , her child do have a good deal of artistic taste : Grace be 
 the only one who be totally deficient in it . Biddy be very 
 clever - Biddy really might learn to do pretty thing . and anything the 
 poor child could learn be now no more than her duty - there be so 
 little know what the future have in store for they all . 

 " you think too much of the future - you take terribly gloomy view , " say 
 Peter , look for his hat . 

 " what other view can one take when one 's son have deliberately throw 
 away a fortune ? " 

 " throw one away ? do you mean through not marry - - ? " 

 " I mean through killing by his perversity the good friend he ever have . " 

 Peter star a moment ; then with laughter : " ah but Julia be not   dead of 
 it ! " 

 " I be not talk of Julia , " say his aunt with a good deal of majesty . 
 " Nick be not   mercenary , and I be not complain of that . " 

 " she mean Mr. Carteret , " Grace explain with all her competence . " he would 
 have do anything if Nick have stay in the House . " 

 " but he be not dead ? " 

 " Charles Carteret 's dying , " say Lady Agnes - " his end 's dreadfully near . 
 he have be a sort of providence to we - he be Sir Nicholas 's second 
 self . but he will not   put up with such insanity , such wickedness , and that 
 chapter 's closed . " 

 " you mean he have drop Nick out of his will ? " 

 " cut he off utterly . he have give he notice . " 

 " the old scoundrel ! " - Peter could not   keep this back . " but Nick will work 
 the well for that - he will depend on himself . " 

 " yes , and whom shall we depend on ? " Grace speak up . 

 " do not   be vulgar , for God 's sake ! " her mother ejaculate with a certain 
 inconsequence . 

 " oh leave Nick alone - he will make a lot of money , " Peter declare 
 cheerfully , follow his two companion into the hall . 

 " I do not   in the least care if he do or not , " say Lady Agnes . " you 
 must come upstairs again - I have   lot to say to you yet , " she go on , 
 see he make for his hat . " you must arrange to come and dine with we 
 immediately ; it be only because I have   be so steeped in misery that I 
 do not   write to you the other day - directly after you have call . we 
 do not   give party , as you may imagine , but if you will come just as we 
 be , for old acquaintance ' sake - " 

 " just with Nick - if Nick will come - and dear Biddy , " Grace interpose . 

 " Nick must certainly come , as well as dear Biddy , whom I hop so much 
 to find , " Peter pronounce . " because I be go away - I do not   know when 
 I , shall see they again . " 

 " wait with mamma . Biddy will come in now at any moment , " Grace urge . 

 " you be go away ? " say Lady Agnes , pause at the foot of the stair 
 and turn her white face upon he . something in her voice show she 
 have be strike by his own tone . 

 " I have   have promotion and you must congratulate I . they be send I out 
 as minister to a little hot hole in Central America - six thousand mile 
 away . I shall have to go rather soon . " 

 " oh I be so glad ! " Lady Agnes breathe . still she pause at the foot of 
 the stair and still she gaze . 

 " how very delightful - it will lead straight off to all sort of other 
 good thing ! " grace a little coarsely commented . 

 " oh I be crawl up - I be an excellency , " Peter laugh . 

 " then if you dine with we your excellency must have great people to meet 
 you . " 

 " Nick and Biddy - they be great enough . " 

 " come upstairs - come upstairs , " say Lady Agnes , turn quickly and 
 begin to ascend . 

 " wait for Biddy - I be go out , " grace continue , extend her hand to 
 her kinsman . " I shall see you again - not that you care ; but good - bye 
 now . wait for Biddy , " the girl repeat in a low tone , fasten she 
 eye on his with the same urgent mystify gleam he think he have 
 note at luncheon . 

 " oh I will go and see she in Rosedale Road , " he throw off . 

 " do you mean to - day - now ? " 

 " I do not   know about to - day , but before I leave England . " 

 " well , she will be in immediately , " say Grace . " good - bye to your 
 excellency . " 

 " come up , Peter - please come up , " call Lady Agnes from the top of 
 the stair . 

 he mount and when he find himself in the drawing - room with she and 
 the door close she express her great interest in his fine prospect 
 and position , which she wish to hear all about . she ring for coffee 
 and indicate the seat he would find most comfortable : it shine before 
 he for a moment that she would tell he he might if he wish light a 
 cigar . for Peter have suddenly become restless - too restless to occupy a 
 comfortable chair ; he seat himself in it only to jump up again , and he 
 go to the window , while he impart to his hostess the very little he 
 know about his post , on hear a vehicle drive up to the door . a strong 
 light have just be throw into his mind , and it grow strong when , 
 look out , he see Grace Dormer issue from the house in a hat and a 
 jacket which have all the air of have be assume with extraordinary 
 speed . her jacket be unbuttoned and her glove still dangle from the 
 hand with which she be settle her hat . the vehicle into which she 
 hastily spring be a hansom - cab which have be summon by the butler 
 from the doorstep and which roll away with she after she have give an 
 address . 

 " where be Grace go in such a hurry ? " he ask of Lady Agnes ; to which 
 she reply that she have not   the least idea - her child , at the pass 
 they have all come to , knock about as they like . 

 well , he sit down again ; he stay a quarter of an hour and then he 
 stay long , and during this time his appreciation of what she have in 
 her mind gather force . she show he that precious quantity clearly 
 enough , though she show it by no clumsy , no voluntary art . it look 
 out of her sombre , conscious eye and quaver in she preoccupy , 
 perfunctory tone . she take an extravagant interest in his future 
 proceeding , the probable succession of event in his career , the 
 different honour he would be likely to come in for , the salary attach 
 to his actual appointment , the salary attach to the appointment that 
 would follow - they would be sure to , would not   they ? - and what he might 
 reasonably expect to save . oh he must save - Lady Agnes be an advocate 
 of save ; and he must take tremendous pain and get on and be clever 
 and fiercely ambitious : he must make himself indispensable and rise to 
 the top . she be urgent and suggestive and sympathetic ; she throw 
 herself into the vision of his achievement and emolument as if to 
 appease a little the sore hunger with which Nick 's treachery have leave 
 she . this be touch to her nephew , who do not   remain unmoved even at 
 those more importunate moment when , as she fall into silence , fidget 
 feverishly with a morsel of fancy - work she have pluck from a table , her 
 whole presence become an intense , repress appeal to he . what that 
 appeal would have be have it be utter be : " oh Peter , take little 
 Biddy ; oh my dear young friend , understand your interest at the same 
 time that you understand mine ; be kind and reasonable and clever ; save 
 I all further anxiety and tribulation and accept my lovely , faultless 
 child from my hand . " 

 that be what Lady Agnes have always mean , more or less , that be what 
 Grace have mean , and they mean it with singular lucidity on the present 
 occasion , Lady Agnes mean it so much that from one moment to another 
 he scarce know what she might do ; and Grace mean it so much that she 
 have rush away in a hansom to fetch her sister from the studio . grace , 
 however , be a fool , for Biddy certainly would not   come . the news of his 
 promotion have start they off , add point to their idea of his being 
 an excellent match ; bring home to they sharply the sense that if he 
 be go away to strange country he must take Biddy with he - that 
 something at all event must be settle about Biddy before he go . they 
 have suddenly begin to throb , poor thing , with alarm at the ebbing 
 hour . 

 strangely enough the perception of all this have not   the effect of 
 throw he on the defensive and still less that of make he wish to 
 bolt . when once he have make sure what be in the air he recognise a 
 propriety , a real felicity in it ; could not   deny that he be in certain 
 way a good match , since it be quite probable he would go far ; and be 
 even generous enough - as he have no fear of be materially drag to 
 the altar - to enter into the conception that he might offer some balm to 
 a mother who have have a horrid disappointment . the feasibility of 
 marry Biddy be not exactly augment by the idea that his do so 
 would be a great offset to what Nick have make Lady Agnes suffer ; but at 
 least Peter do not   dislike his strenuous aunt so much as to wish to 
 punish she for her nature . he be not afraid of she , whatever she might 
 do ; and though unable to grasp the practical relevancy of Biddy 's being 
 produce on the instant be willing to linger half an hour on the chance 
 of successful production . 

 there be meanwhile , moreover , a certain contagion in Lady Agnes 's 
 appeal - it make he appeal sensibly to himself , since indeed , as it be 
 time to say , the glass of our young man 's spirit have be polish for 
 that reflexion . it be only at this moment really that he become 
 inwardly candid . while make up his mind that his only safety be in 
 flight and take the strong measure of a request for help toward it , he 
 be yet very conscious that another and probably still more effectual 
 safeguard - especially if the two should be conjoin - lie in the hollow 
 of his hand . his sister 's word in Paris have come back to he and have 
 seem still wise than when utter : " she will save you disappointment ; 
 you would know the bad that can happen to you , and it would not   be bad . " 
 Julia have put it into a nutshell - Biddy would probably save he 
 disappointment . and then she be - well , she be Biddy . Peter know 
 well what that be since the hour he have spend with she in Rosedale 
 Road . but he have brush away the sense of it , though aware that in 
 do so he take only half - measure and be even guilty of a sort of 
 fraud upon himself . if he be sincere in wish to put a gulf between 
 his future and that sad expanse of his past and present over which 
 Miriam have cast her shadow there be a very simple way to do so . he have 
 dodge this way , dishonestly fix on another which , take alone , be 
 far from be so good ; but Lady Agnes bring he back to it . she hold 
 he in well - nigh confused contemplation of it , during which the safety , 
 as Julia have call it , of the remedy work upon he as he would not 
 have believe beforehand , and not least to the effect of sweeten , of 
 prettily colour , the pill . it would be simple and it would deal with 
 all his problem ; it would put an end to all alternative , which , as 
 alternative be otherwise put an end to he , would be an excellent 
 thing . it would settle the whole question of his future , and it be high 
 time this should be settle . 

 Peter take two cup of coffee while he make out his future with Lady 
 Agnes , but though he drink they slowly he have finish they before Biddy 
 turn up . he stay three - quarter of an hour , say to himself she 
 would not   come - why should she come ? Lady Agnes stoop to no avowal ; she 
 really stoop , so far as bald word go , to no part of the business ; 
 but she make he fix the next day save one for come to dinner , and her 
 repeat declaration that there would be no one else , not another 
 creature but themselves , have almost the force of the supply form for a 
 promise to pay . in give his word that he would come without fail , and 
 not write the next day to throw they over for some function he should 
 choose to dub obligatory , he feel quite as if he be put his name 
 to such a document . he go away at half - past three ; Biddy of course 
 have not   come , and he have be sure she would not . he could not   imagine what 
 Grace 's idea have be , nor what pretext she have put forward to her 
 sister . whatever these thing Biddy have see through they and hat 
 they . Peter could but like she the more for that . 




 XL 


 Lady Agnes would doubtless have do well , in her own interest or in 
 that of her child , to have secure his company for the very next 
 evening . this she have indeed attempt , but her application of she 
 thought have miscarry , Peter bethink himself that he be importantly 
 engage . her ladyship , moreover , could not   presume to answer for Nick , 
 since after all they must of course have Nick , though , to tell the 
 truth , the hideous truth , she and her son be scarcely on term . Peter 
 insist on Nick , wish particularly to see he , and give his hostess 
 notice that he would make each of they forgive everything to the other . 
 she return that all her son have to forgive be she love he more 
 than her life , and she would have challenge Peter , have he allow it , 
 on the general ground of the comparative dignity of the two art of 
 painting portrait and govern nation . our friend decline the 
 challenge : the most he do be to intimate that he perhaps see Nick more 
 vividly as a painter than as a governor . later he remember vaguely 
 something his aunt have say about their be a govern family . 

 he be go , by what he could ascertain , to a very queer climate and 
 have many preparation to make . he give his good attention to these , and 
 for a couple of hour after leave Lady Agnes rummage London for book 
 from which he might extract information about his new habitat . it make 
 apparently no great figure in literature , and Peter could reflect that 
 he be perhaps destine to find a salutary distraction in himself 
 fill the void with a volume of impression . after he have resign 
 himself to necessary ignorance he go into the Park . he treat himself 
 to an afternoon or two there when he happen to drop upon London in 
 summer - it refresh his sense of the british interest he would have to 
 stand up for . moreover , he have be hide more or less , and now all 
 that be change and this be the simple way not to hide . he meet a 
 host of friend , make his situation as public as possible and accept 
 on the spot a great many invitation ; all subject , however , to the 
 mental reservation that he should allow none of they to interfere with 
 his be present the first night of Miriam 's new venture . he be go 
 to the equator to get away from she , but to repudiate the past with some 
 decency of form he must show an affected interest , if he could muster 
 none other , in an occasion that mean so much for she . the least 
 intimate of her associate would do that , and Peter remember how , at 
 the expense of good manner , he have stay away from her first 
 appearance on any stage at all . he would have be shock have he find 
 himself oblige to go back to Paris without give she at the imminent 
 crisis the personal countenance she have so good a right to expect . 

 it be nearly eight o'clock when he go to Great Stanhope Street to 
 dress for dinner and learn that a note await he on the hall - table 
 and which bear the mark of hasty despatch have come three or four hour 
 before . it exhibit the signature of Miriam Rooth and let he know that 
 she positively expect he at the theatre by eleven o'clock the next 
 morning , for which hour a dress - rehearsal of the revive play have be 
 hurriedly project , the first night be now definitely fix for the 
 impending Saturday . she count on his attendance at both ceremony , 
 but with particular reason for wish to see he in the morning . " I 
 want you to see and judge and tell I , " she say , " for my mind be like a 
 flog horse - it will not   give another kick . " it be for the Saturday he 
 have make Lady Agnes his promise ; he have think of the possibility of 
 the play in do so , but have rest in the faith that , from valid 
 symptom , this complication would not occur till the following week . he 
 decide nothing on the spot as to the conflict of occupation - it be 
 enough to send Miriam three word to the effect that he would soon 
 perish than fail she on the morrow . 

 he go to the theatre in the morning , and the episode prove curious 
 and instructive . though there be twenty people in the stall it bear 
 little resemblance to those rĂ pĂ tition gĂ nă rale to which , in Paris , 
 his love of the drama have often attract he and which , take place at 
 night , in the theatre close to the public , be virtually first 
 performance with invite spectator . they be to his sense always 
 settle and stately , rehearsal of the premiere even more than 
 rehearsal of the play . the present occasion be less august ; it be not 
 so much a concert as a confusion of sound , and it take audible and at 
 time disputatious counsel with itself . it be rough and frank and 
 spasmodic , but be lively and vivid and , in spite of the serious 
 character of the piece , often exceedingly droll : while it give 
 Sherringham , oddly enough , a more present sense than ever of bend 
 over the hiss , smoking , sputter caldron in which a palatable 
 performance be stew . he look into the gross darkness that may result 
 from excess of light ; that is , he understand how knock up , on the eve 
 of production , every one concern in the preparation of a piece might 
 be , with nerve overstretch and glass blur , await the test 
 and the response , the echo to be give back by the big , receptive , 
 artless , stupid , delightful public . Peter 's interest have be great in 
 advance , and as Miriam since his arrival have take he much into her 
 confidence he know what she intend to do and have discuss a hundred 
 point with she . they have differ about some of they and she have always 
 say : " ah but wait till you see how I shall do it at the time ! " that be 
 usually her principal reason and her most convincing argument . she have 
 make some change at the last hour - she be go to do several thing 
 in another way . but she want a touchstone , want a fresh ear , and , as 
 she tell Sherringham when he go behind after the first act , that be 
 why she have insist on this private trial , to which a few fresh ear 
 be to be admit . they do not   want to allow it she , the theatre 
 people , they be such a parcel of donkey ; but as to what she mean in 
 general to insist on she have give they a hint she flatter herself 
 they would not   soon forget . 

 she speak as if she have have a great battle with her fellow - worker and 
 have rout they utterly . it be not the first time he have hear her talk 
 as if such a life as hers could only be a fight life and of her frank 
 measure of the fine us of a faculty for make a row . she rejoice she 
 possess this faculty , for she know what to do with it ; and though 
 there might be a certain swagger in take such a stand in advance when 
 one have do the infinitely little she have yet do , she nevertheless 
 trust to the future to show how right she should have be in 
 believe a pack of idiot would never hold out against she and would 
 know they could not   afford to . her assumption of course be that she 
 fight for the light and the right , for the good way and the thorough , 
 for do a thing properly if one do it at all . what she have really 
 want be the theatre close for a night and the dress - rehearsal , put 
 on for a few people , give instead of Yolande . that she have not get , 
 but she would have it the next time . she speak as if her triumph behind 
 the scene as well as before would go by leap and bound , and he could 
 perfectly see , for the time , that she would drive her coadjutor in 
 front of she like sheep . her tone be the sort of thing that would have 
 strike one as preposterous if one have not   believe in she ; but if one do 
 so believe it only seem throw in with the other gift . how be she 
 go to act that night and what could be say for such a hateful way of 
 do thing ? she thrust on poor Peter question he be all unable to 
 answer ; she abound in superlative and tremendously strong objection . 
 he have a sharp vision than usual of the queer fate , for a peaceable 
 man , of be involve in a life of so violent a rhythm : one might as 
 well be hook to a Catharine - wheel and whiz round in flame and smoke . 

 it have only be for five minute , in the wing , amid jostle and 
 shuffling and shoving , that they hold this conference . Miriam , splendid 
 in a brocaded anachronism , a false dress of the beginning of the 
 century , and excited and appealing , imperious , reckless and 
 good - humour , full of exaggerated proposition , supreme determination 
 and comic irrelevancy , show as radiant a young head as the stage have 
 ever see . other people quickly surround she , and Peter see that 
 though , she want , as she say , a fresh ear and a fresh eye she be 
 liable to rap out to those who possess these advantage that they 
 do not   know what they be talk about . it be rather hard for her 
 victim - Basil Dashwood let he into this , wonderfully paint and in a 
 dress even more beautiful than Miriam 's , that of a young dandy under 
 Charles the Second : if you be not in the business you be one kind 
 of donkey and if you be in the business you be another kind . Peter 
 note with a certain chagrin that Gabriel Nash have fail ; he prefer 
 to base his annoyance on that ground when the girl , after the remark 
 just quote from Dashwood , laugh and say that at any rate the 
 thing would do because it would just have to do , thrust vindictively but 
 familiarly into the young actor 's face a magnificent feather fan . " be not 
 he too lovely , " she ask , " and do not   he know how to do it ? " Dashwood 
 have the sense of costume even more than Peter have infer or suppose 
 he mind , inasmuch as it now appear he have go profoundly into the 
 question of what the lead lady be to wear . he have draw pattern and 
 hunt up stuff , have help she to try on her clothe , have bristle 
 with idea and pin . it would not have be quite clear , Peter 's ground 
 for resent Nash 's cynical absence ; it may even be think singular he 
 should have miss he . at any rate he flush a little when their young 
 woman , of whom he inquire whether she have not   invite she old and 
 dear friend , make answer : " oh he say he do not   like the 
 kitchen - fire - he only want the pudding ! " it would have take the 
 kitchen - fire to account at that point for the red of Sherringham 's 
 cheek ; and he be indeed uncomfortably heat by help to handle , as 
 he phrase it , the saucepan . 

 this he feel so much after he have return to his seat , which he forbear 
 to quit again till the curtain have fall on the last act , that in spite 
 of the high beauty of that part of the performance of which Miriam 
 carry the weight there be moment when his relief overflow into 
 gasp , as if he have be scramble up the bank of a torrent after an 
 immersion . the girl herself , out in the open of her field to win , be of 
 the incorruptible faith : she have be saturate to good purpose with the 
 great spirit of Madame CarrĂ . that be conspicuous while the play go 
 on and she guard the whole march with fag piety and passion . 
 Sherringham have never like the piece itself ; he hold that as barbarous 
 in form and false in feel it do little honour to the british 
 theatre ; he despise many of the speech , pity Miriam for have to 
 utter they , and consider that , light by that sort of candle , the 
 path of fame might very well lead nowhere . 

 when the ordeal be over he go behind again , where in the 
 rose - coloured satin of the silly issue the heroine of the occasion say 
 to he : " Fancy my have to drag through that other stuff to - night - the 
 brute ! " he be vague about the person designate in this allusion , but 
 he let it pass : he have at the moment a kind of detached foreboding of 
 the way any gentleman familiarly connect with she in the future would 
 probably form the habit of let objurgation and some other thing 
 pass . this have become indeed now a frequent state of mind with he ; the 
 instant he be before she , near she , next she , he find himself a 
 helpless subject of the spell which , so far at least as he be 
 concern , she put forth by contact and of which the potency be 
 punctual and absolute : the fit come on , as he say , exactly as some 
 esteemed express - train on a great line bang at a give moment into the 
 station . at a distance he partly recover himself - that be the 
 encouragement for go to the shaky republic ; but as soon as he enter 
 her presence his life strike he as a thing disconnect from his will . 
 it be as if he himself have be one thing and his behaviour another ; he 
 have shin view of this difference , draw as they might be from the 
 come year - little illustrative scene in which he see himself in 
 strange attitude of resignation , always rather sad and still and with a 
 slightly bent head . such image should not have be inspire , but it 
 be a fact that they be something to go upon . the gentleman with the 
 bent head have evidently give up something that be dear to he , but it 
 be exactly because he have get his price that he be there . " come and 
 see I three or four hour hence , " Miriam say - " come , that be , about 
 six . I shall rest till then , but I want particularly to talk with you . 
 there will be no one else - not the tip of any tiresome nose . you will do 
 I good . " so of course he drive up at six . 




 XLI 


 " I do not   know ; I have not   the least idea ; I do not   care ; do not   ask 
 I ! " - it be so he meet some immediate appeal of her artistic egotism , 
 some challenge of his impression of she at this and that moment . had not 
 she frankly well give up such and such a point and return to their 
 first idea , the one they have talk over so much ? Peter reply to this 
 that he disown all idea ; that at any rate he should never have 
 another as long as he live , and that , so help he heaven , they have 
 worry that hard bone more than enough . 

 " you be tired of I - yes , already , " she say sadly and kindly . they be 
 alone , her mother have not peep out and she have prepare herself to 
 return to the Strand . " however , it do not   matter and of course your 
 head 's full of other thing . you must think I ravenously 
 selfish - perpetually chatter about my vulgar shop . what will you have 
 when one be a vulgar shop - girl ? you use to like it , but then you be not 
 an ambassador . " 

 " what do you know about my be a minister ? " he ask , lean back in 
 his chair and show sombre eye . sometimes he hold her handsomer on 
 the stage than off , and sometimes he reverse that judgement . the former 
 of these conviction have hold his mind in the morning , and it be now 
 punctually follow by the other . as soon as she step on the board 
 a great and special alteration usually take place in she - she be in 
 focus and in her frame ; yet there be hour too in which she wear her 
 world 's face before the audience , just as there be hour when she wear 
 her stage face in the world . she take up either mask as it suit she 
 humour . to - day he be see each in its order and feel each the 
 good . " I should know very little if I wait for you to tell I - that be 
 very certain , " Miriam return . " it be in the paper that you have   get a 
 high appointment , but I do not   read the paper unless there be something 
 in they about myself . next week I shall devour they and think they , no 
 doubt , inane . it be Basil tell I this afternoon of your promotion - he 
 have see it announce somewhere , I be delighted if it give you more 
 money and more advantage , but do not   expect I to be glad that you be 
 go away to some distant , disgusting country . " 

 " the matter have only just be settle and we have   each be busy with our 
 own affair . but even if you have not   give I these opportunity , " Peter 
 go on , " I should have try to see you to - day , to tell you my news and 
 take leave of you . " 

 " take leave ? be not   you come to - morrow ? " 

 " oh yes , I shall see you through that . but I shall rush away the very 
 moment it be over . " 

 " I shall be much well then - really I shall , " the girl say . 

 " the well you be the bad you be . " 

 she return his frown with a beautiful charity . " if it would do you any 
 good I would be bad . " 

 " the bad you be the well you be ! " Peter laugh . " you be a 
 devouring demon . " 

 " not a bit ! it be you . " 

 " it be I ? I like that . " 

 " it be you who make trouble , who be sore and suspicious and supersubtle , 
 not take thing as they come and for what they be , but twist they 
 into misery and falsity . oh I have   watch you enough , my dear friend , and 
 I have   be sorry for you - and sorry as well for myself ; for I be not so 
 take up with myself , in the low greedy sense , as you think . I be not 
 such a base creature . I be capable of gratitude , I be capable of 
 affection . one may live in paint and tinsel , but one be not   absolutely 
 without a soul . yes , I have   get one , " the girl go on , " though I do smear 
 my face and grin at myself in the glass and practise my intonation . if 
 what you be go to do be good for you I be very glad . if it lead to 
 good thing , to honour and fortune and greatness , I be enchant . if it 
 mean your be away always , for ever and ever , of course that be 
 serious . you know it - I need not   tell you - I regard you as I really do not 
 regard any one else . I have   a confidence in you - ah it be a luxury ! you be 
 a gentleman , mon bon - ah you be a gentleman ! it be just that . and then 
 you see , you understand , and that be a luxury too . you be a luxury 
 altogether , dear clever Mr. Sherringham . your be where I shall never 
 see you be not   a thing I shall enjoy ; I know that from the separation of 
 these last month - after our beautiful life in Paris , the good thing 
 that ever happen to I or that ever will . but if it be your career , if 
 it be your happiness - well , I can miss you and hold my tongue . I can be 
 disintereste - I can ! " 

 " what do you want I to come for ? " he ask , all attentive and 
 motionless . the same impression , the old impression , be with he again ; 
 the sense that if she be sincere it be sincerity of execution , if she 
 be genuine it be the genuineness of do it well . she do it so well 
 now that this very fact be charming and touching . in claim from he 
 at the theatre this hour of the afternoon she have want honestly   the 
 more as she have not see he at home for several day   to go over with 
 he once again , on the eve of the great night - it would be for her 
 second creation the critic would lie so in wait ; the first success 
 might have be a fluke - some of her recurrent doubt : know from 
 experience of what good counsel he often be , how he could give a 
 worrying question its ' settler " at the last . then she have hear from 
 Dashwood of the change in his situation , and that have really from one 
 moment to the other make she think sympathetically of his 
 preoccupation - lead her open - handedly to drop her own . she be sorry to 
 lose he and eager to let he know how good a friend she be conscious 
 he have be to she . but the expression of this be already , at the end 
 of a minute , a strange bedevilment : she begin to listen to herself , to 
 speak dramatically , to represent . she utter the thing she feel as if 
 they be snatch of old play - book , and really feel they the more 
 because they sound so well . this , however , do not   prevent their really 
 be as good feeling as those of anybody else , and at the moment her 
 friend , to still a rise emotion - which he know he should not 
 still - articulate the challenge I have just record , she have for his 
 sensibility , at any rate , the truth of gentleness and generosity . 

 " there be something the matter with you , my dear - you be jealous , " Miriam 
 say . " you be jealous of poor Mr. Dormer . that be an example of the way 
 you tangle everything up . Lord , he will not   hurt you , nor I either ! " 

 " he can not   hurt I , certainly , " Peter return , " and neither can you ; for 
 I have   a nice little heart of stone and a smart new breastplate of iron . 
 the interest I take in you be something quite extraordinary ; but the 
 most extraordinary thing in it be that it be perfectly prepared to 
 tolerate the interest of other . " 

 " the interest of other need not   trouble it much ! " Miriam declare . " if 
 Mr. Dormer have break off his marriage to such an awfully fine 
 woman - for she be that , your swell of a sister - it be not   for a rant 
 wretch like I . he be kind to I because that be his nature and he notice 
 I because that be his business ; but he be away up in the cloud - a 
 thousand mile over my head . he have get something ' on , ' as they say ; 
 he be in love with an idea . I think it be a shocking bad one , but that be 
 his own affair . he be quite exaltă   ; live on nectar and ambrosia - what 
 he have to spare for we poor crawl thing on earth be only a few dry 
 crumb . I do not   even ask he to come to rehearsal . besides , he think 
 you be in love with I and that it would not   be honourable to cut in . 
 he be capable of that - be not   it charming ? " 

 " if he be to relent and give up his scruple would you marry he ? " 
 Peter ask . 

 " Mercy , how you chatter about ' marry ' ! " the girl laugh . " C'est la 
 maladie anglaise - you have   all get it on the brain . " 

 " why I put it that way to please you , " he explain . " you complain to 
 I last year precisely that this be not what seem generally want . " 

 " oh last year ! " - she make nothing of that . then differently , " yes , it be 
 very tiresome ! " she concede . 

 " you tell I , moreover , in Paris more than once that you would not   listen 
 to anything but that . " 

 " well , " she declare , " I will not , but I shall wait till I find a husband 
 who be charming enough and bad enough . one who will beat I and swindle I 
 and spend my money on other woman - that be the sort of man for I . Mr. 
 Dormer , delightful as he be , do not   come up to that . " 

 " you will marry Basil Dashwood . " he speak it with conviction . 

 " oh ' marry ' ? - call it marry if you like . that be what poor mother 
 threaten I with - she live in dread of it . " 

 " to this hour , " he mention , " I have not   manage to make out what your 
 mother want . she have so many idea , as Madame CarrĂ   say . " 

 " she want I to be some sort of tremendous creature - all her idea be 
 reducible to that . what make the muddle be that she be not   clear about 
 the creature she want most . a great actress or a great lady - sometimes 
 she incline for one and sometimes for the other , but on the whole 
 persuade herself that a great actress , if she will cultivate the right 
 people , may be a great lady . when I tell she that will not   do and that a 
 great actress can never be anything but a great vagabond , then the dear 
 old thing have tantrum , and we have scene - the most grotesque : they would 
 make the fortune , for a subject , of some play - write rascal , if he have 
 the wit to guess they ; which , luckily for we perhaps , he never will . she 
 usually wind up by protest - devinez un peu quoi ! " Miriam add . 
 and as her companion profess his complete inability to divine : " by 
 declare that rather than take it that way I must marry you . " 

 " she be shrewd than I think , " Peter return . " it be the last of 
 vanity to talk about , but I may state in pass that if you would marry 
 I you should be the great of all possible lady . " 

 she have a beautiful , comical gape . " Lord o ' mercy , my dear fellow , what 
 natural capacity have I for that ? " 

 " you be artist enough for anything . I shall be a great diplomatist : my 
 resolution 's firmly take , I be infinitely clever than you have the 
 least idea of , and you shall be , " he go on , " a great diplomatist 's 
 wife . " 

 " and the demon , the devil , the devourer and destroyer , that you be so 
 fond of talk about : what , in such a position , do you do with that 
 element of my nature ? Ou le fourrez - vous ? " she cry as with a real 
 anxiety . 

 " I will look after it , I will keep it under . rather perhaps I should say 
 I will bribe it and amuse it ; I will gorge it with earthly grandeur . " 

 " that be well , " say Miriam ; " for a demon that be keep under be a shabby 
 little demon . do not   let us be shabby . " then she add : " do you really go 
 away the beginning of next week ? " 

 " Monday night if possible . " 

 " ah that be but to Paris . before you go to your new post they must give 
 you an interval here . " 

 " I shall not   take it - I be so tremendously keen for my duty . I shall 
 insist on go soon . oh , " he go on , " I shall be concentrate now . " 

 " I will come and act there . " she meet it all - she be amuse and amusing . 
 " I have   already forget what it be I want to discuss with you , " she 
 say - " it be some trumpery stuff . what I want to say now be only one 
 thing : that it be not in the least true that because my life pitch I 
 in every direction and mix I up with all sort of people - or rather 
 with one sort mainly , poor dear ! - I have not   a decent character , I 
 have not   common honesty . your sympathy , your generosity , your patience , 
 your precious suggestion , our dear sweet day last summer in Paris , I 
 shall never forget . you be the well - you be different from all the 
 other . think of I as you please and make profane joke about my mating 
 with a disguised ' Arty ' - I shall think of you only in one way . I have   a 
 great respect for you . with all my heart I hope you will be a great 
 diplomatist . God bless you , dear clever man . " 

 she get up as she speak and in so do glance at the clock - a movement 
 that somehow only add to the noble gravity of her discourse : she be 
 consider his time so much more than her own . Sherringham , at this , 
 rise too , take out his watch and stand a moment with his eye bent 
 upon it , though without in the least see what the needle mark . 
 " you will have to go , to reach the theatre at your usual hour , will not   you ? 
 let I not keep you . that is , let I keep you only long enough just to 
 say this , once for all , as I shall never speak of it again . I be go 
 away to save myself , " he frankly say , plant before she and seek 
 her eye with his own . " I ought to go , no doubt , in silence , in decorum , 
 in virtuous submission to hard necessity - without ask for credit or 
 sympathy , without provoke any sort of scene or call attention to my 
 fortitude . but I can not   - upon my soul I can not . I can go , I can see it 
 through , but I can not   hold my tongue . I want you to know all about it , so 
 that over there , when I be bored to death , I shall at least have the 
 exasperatingly vain consolation of feeling that you do know - and that it 
 do neither you nor I any good ! " 

 he pause a moment ; on which , as quite vague , she appeal . " that I ' do 
 know ' what ? " 

 " that I have   a consume passion for you and that it be impossible . " 

 " oh impossible , my friend ! " she sigh , but with a quickness in her 
 assent . 

 " very good ; it interfere , the gratification of it would interfere 
 fatally , with the ambition of each of we . our ambition be inferior and 
 odious , but we be tie fast to they . " 

 " ah why be not   we simple ? " she quaver as if all touch by it . " why 
 be not   we of the people - comme tout le monde - just a man and a girl 
 like each other ? " 

 he wait a little - she be so tenderly mocking , so sweetly ambiguous . 
 " because we be precious ass ! however , I be simple enough , after all , 
 to care for you as I have   never care for any human creature . you have , as 
 it happen , a personal charm for I that no one have ever approach , and 
 from the top of your splendid head to the sole of your theatrical shoe 
  I could go down on my face - there , abjectly - and kiss it !   every inch 
 of you be dear and delightful to I . therefore good - bye . " 

 she take this in with wide eye : he have put the matter in a way that 
 strike she . for a moment , all the same , he be afraid she would reply as 
 on the confess experience of so many such tribute , handsome as this 
 one be . but she be too much move - the pure colour that have rise to 
 her face show it - to have recourse to this particular facility . she 
 be move even to the glimmer of tear , though she give he her hand 
 with a smile . " I be so glad you have   say all that , for from you I know 
 what it mean . certainly it be well for you to go away . of course it be 
 all wrong , be not   it ? - but that be the only thing it can be : therefore 
 it be all right , be not   it ? some day when we be both great people we will 
 talk these thing over ; then we shall be quiet , we shall be rich , we 
 shall be at peace - let we hope so at least - and well friend than 
 other about we will know . " she pause , smile still , and then say 
 while he hold her hand : " do not , do not   come to - morrow night . " 

 with this she attempt to draw her hand away , as if everything be 
 settle and over ; but the effect of her movement be that , as he hold 
 she tight , he be simply draw toward she and close to she . the effect 
 of this , in turn , be that , release she only to possess she the more 
 completely , he seize she in his arm and , breathe deeply " I love you , 
 you know , " clasp she in a long embrace . his demonstration and her 
 conscious sufferance , almost equally liberal , so sustain themselves 
 that the door of the room have time to open slowly before either have 
 take notice . Mrs. Rooth , who have not peep in before , peep in now , 
 become in this manner witness of an incident she could scarce have 
 count on . the unexpected indeed have for Mrs. Rooth never be an 
 insuperable element in thing ; it be her position in general to be too 
 acquaint with all the passion for any crude surprise . as the other 
 turn round they see she stand there and smile , and hear her ejaculate 
 with wise indulgence : " oh you extravagant child ! " 

 Miriam brush off her tear , quickly but unconfusedly . " he be go 
 away , the wretch ; he be bid we farewell . " 

 Peter - it be perhaps a result of his acute agitation - laugh out at 
 the " us "   he have already laugh at the charge of puerility , and Mrs. 
 Rooth go on : " go away ? ah then I must have one too ! " she hold out 
 both her hand , and Sherringham , step forward to take they , kiss 
 she respectfully on each cheek , in the foreign manner , while she 
 continue : " our dear old friend - our kind , gallant gentleman ! " 

 " the gallant gentleman have be promote to a great post - the proper 
 reward of his gallantry , " Miriam say . " he be go out as minister to 
 some impossible place - where be it ? " 

 " as minister - how very charming ! we be get on . " and their 
 companion languish up at he with a world of approval . 

 " oh well enough . one must take what one can get , " he answer . 

 " you will get everything now , I be sure , shall not   you ? " Mrs. Rooth ask with 
 an inflexion that call back to he comically - the source of the sound 
 be so different - the very vibration he have hear the day before from 
 Lady Agnes . 

 " he be go to glory and he will forget all about we - forget he have ever 
 know such low people . so we shall never see he again , and it be well 
 so . good - bye , good - bye , " Miriam repeat ; " the brougham must be there , 
 but I will not   take you . I want to talk to mother about you , and we shall 
 say thing not fit for you to hear . oh I will let you know what we 
 lose - do not   be afraid , " she add to Mrs. Rooth . " he be the rise star 
 of diplomacy . " 

 " I know it from the first - I know how thing turn out for such people as 
 you ! " cry the old woman , gaze fondly at Sherringham . " but you do not 
 mean to say you be not come to - morrow night ? " 

 " do not   - do not ; it be great folly , " Miriam interpose ; " and it be quite 
 needless , since you see I to - day . " 

 Peter turn from the mother to the daughter , the former of whom break 
 out to the latter : " oh you dear rogue , to say one have see you yet ! 
 you know how you will come up to it - you will be beyond everything . " 

 " yes , I shall be there - certainly , " Peter say , at the door , to Mrs. 
 Rooth . 

 " oh you dreadful goose ! " Miriam call after he . but he go out 
 without look round at she . 




 BOOK SEVENTH 




 XLII 


 Nick Dormer have for the hour quite take up his abode at his studio , 
 where Biddy usually arrive after breakfast to give he news of the 
 state of affair in Calcutta Gardens and where many letter and 
 telegram be now address he . among such missive , on the morning of 
 the Saturday on which Peter Sherringham have promise to dine at the 
 other house , be a note from Miriam Rooth , inform Nick that if he 
 should not   telegraph to put she off she would turn up about half - past 
 eleven , probably with her mother , for just one more sitting . she add 
 that it be a nervous day for she and that she could not   keep still , so 
 that it would really be very kind to let she come to he as a refuge . 
 she wish to stay away from the theatre , where everything be now 
 settle - or so much the bad for the other if it be not   - till the 
 evening ; in spite of which she should if leave to herself be sure to go 
 there . it would keep she quiet and soothe she to sit - he could keep she 
 quiet   he be such a blessing that way !   at any time . therefore she 
 would give he two or three hour - or rather she would herself ask for 
 they - if he do not   positively turn she from the door . 

 it have not be definite to Nick that he want another sitting at all 
 for the slight work , as he hold it to be , that Miriam have already help 
 he to achieve . he regard this work as a mere light wind - fall of the 
 shake tree : he have make what he could of it and would have be 
 embarrassed to make more . if it be not finish this be because it be 
 not finishable ; at any rate he have say all he have to say in that 
 particular phrase . the young man , in truth , be not just now in the 
 high spirit ; his imagination have within two or three day become 
 conscious of a check that he try to explain by the idea of a natural 
 reaction . any decision or violent turn , any need of a new sharp choice 
 in one 's career , be upsetting , and , exaggerate that importance and 
 one 's own as little as one would , a deal of flurry could not   help 
 attend , especially in the face of so much scandal , the horrid act , 
 odious to one 's modesty at the good , of change one 's clothe in the 
 marketplace . that make life not at all positively pleasant , yet 
 decidedly thrilling , for the hour ; and it be well enough till the 
 thrill abate . when this occur , as it inevitably would , the romance 
 and the glow of the adventure be exchange for the chill and the 
 prose . it be to these latter element he have wake up pretty wide on 
 this particular morning ; and the prospect be not appreciably fresher 
 from the fact that he have warn himself in advance it would be dull . he 
 have in fact know how dull it would be , but now he would have time to 
 learn even well . a reaction be a reaction , but it be not after all a 
 catastrophe . it would be a feature of his very freedom that he should 
 ask himself if he have not   make a great mistake ; this privilege would 
 doubtless even remain within the limit of its nature in expose he to 
 hour of intimate conviction of his madness . but he would live to 
 retract his retractation - this be the first thing to bear in mind . 

 he be absorb , even while he dress , in the effort to achieve 
 intelligibly to himself some such revolution when , by the first post , 
 Miriam 's note arrive . at first it do little to help his agility - it 
 make he , see her esthetic faith as so much strong and simple than 
 his own , wonder how he should keep with she at her high level . ambition , 
 in she , be always on the rush , and she be not a person to conceive 
 that other might in bad moment listen for the trumpet in vain . it 
 would never have occur to she that only the day before he have spend a 
 part of the afternoon quite at the bottom of the hill . he have in fact 
 turn into the National Gallery and have wander about there for more 
 than an hour , and it be just while he do so that the immitigable 
 recoil have begin perversely to make itself feel . the perversity be all 
 the great from the fact that if the experience be depress this be 
 not because he have be discourage beyond measure by the sight of the 
 grand thing that have be do - thing so much grander than any that 
 would ever bear his signature . that variation he be duly acquaint 
 with and should know in abundance again . what have happen to he , as he 
 pass on this occasion from Titian to Rubens and from Gainsborough to 
 Rembrandt , be that he find himself call the whole exhibit art 
 into question . what be it after all at the good and why have people 
 give it so high a place ? its weakness , its limit break upon he ; 
 tacitly blaspheme he look with a lustreless eye at the palpable , 
 polished , " tone " object design for suspension on hook . that is , he 
 blaspheme if it be blasphemy to feel that as bear on the energy 
 of man they be a poor and secondary show . the human force produce 
 they be so far from one of the great ; their place be a small place 
 and their connexion with the heroic life casual and slight . they 
 represent so little great idea , and it be great idea that keep the 
 world from chaos . he have incontestably be in much close relation with 
 they a few month before than he be to - day : it make up a great deal 
 for what be false and hollow , what be merely personal , in " politic " 
 that , be the idea great or small , they could at their good so 
 directly deal with it . the love of it have really be much of the time 
 at the bottom of his impulse to follow they up ; though this be not what 
 he have most talk of with his political friend or even with Julia . no , 
 political as Julia be , he have not confer with her much about the 
 idea . however , this might have be his own fault quite as much as her , 
 and she in fact take such thing , such enthusiasm , for grant - there 
 be an immense deal in every way that she take for grant . on the other 
 hand , he have often put forward this bright side of the care for the 
 public weal in his discussion with Gabriel Nash , to the end , it be 
 true , of make that worthy scoff aloud at what he be pleased to term 
 his hypocrisy . Gabriel maintain precisely that there be more idea , 
 more of those that man live by , in a single room of the National 
 Gallery than in all the statute of Parliament . Nick have reply to this 
 more than once that the determination of what man do live by be 
 require ; to which Nash have retort   and it be very rarely that he 
 quote Scripture   that it be at any rate not by bread and bean alone . 
 the statute of Parliament give he bread and bean tout au plus . 

 Nick have at present no pretension of try this question over again : he 
 remind himself that his ambiguity be subjective , as the philosopher 
 say ; the result of a mood which in due course would be at the mercy of 
 another mood . it make he curse , and cursing , as a finality , lack 
 firmness - one have to drive in post somewhere under . the great time 
 to do one 's work be when it do not   seem worth do , for then one give 
 it a brilliant chance , that of resist the stiff test of all - the 
 test of strike one as too bad . to do the most when there would be the 
 least to be get by it be to be most in the spirit of high production . 
 one thing at any rate be certain , Nick reflect : nothing on earth 
 would induce he to change back again - not even if this twilight of the 
 soul should last for the rest of his day . he harden himself in his 
 posture with a good conscience which , have they have a glimpse of it , 
 would have make he still more divert to those who already think 
 he so ; and now , by a happy chance , Miriam suddenly supply the bridge 
 correct the gap in his continuity . if he have make his sketch it be a 
 proof he have do she , and that he have do she flash upon he as a 
 sign that she would be still more feasible . art be do - it come 
 back to that - which politic in most case be not . he thus , to pursue 
 our image , plant his support in the dimness beneath all cursing , and 
 on the platform so improvise be able , in his relief , to dance . he send 
 out a telegram to Balaklava Place request his beautiful sitter by no 
 manner of mean to fail he . when his servant come back it be to usher 
 into the studio Peter Sherringham , whom the man have apparently find at 
 the door . 

 the hour be so early for general commerce that Nick immediately guess 
 his visitor have come on some rare errand ; but this inference yield to 
 the reflexion that Peter might after all only wish to make up by present 
 zeal for not have be near he before . he forget that , as he have 
 subsequently learn from Biddy , their foreign , or all but foreign , 
 cousin have spend an hour in Rosedale Road , miss he there but pull 
 out Miriam 's portrait , the day of his own last visit to beauclere . these 
 young man be not on a ceremonious footing and it be not in Nick 's 
 nature to keep a record of civility render or omit ; nevertheless 
 he have be vaguely conscious that during a stay in London elastic 
 enough on Peter 's part he and his kinsman have foregather less than of 
 yore . it be indeed an absorbing moment in the career of each , but even 
 while recognise such a truth Nick judge it not impossible that 
 Julia 's brother might have take upon himself to resent some 
 supposition failure of consideration for that lady ; though this indeed 
 would have be stupid and the newly appoint minister   to he have 
 forget where   do not   often make mistake . Nick hold that as he have 
 treat Julia with studious generosity she have nothing whatever to visit 
 on he - wherefore Peter have still less . it be at any rate none of that 
 gentleman 's business . there be only two abatement to dispose in a 
 few frank word of all this : one of they Nick 's general hatred of 
 talk of his private affair   a reluctance in which he and Peter be 
 well match ; and the other a truth involve more of a confession - the 
 subtle truth that the most definite and even most soothing result of the 
 collapse of his engagement be , as happen , an unprecedented 
 consciousness of freedom . Nick 's observation be of a different sort 
 from his cousin 's ; he note much less the sign of the hour and keep 
 throughout a loose register of life ; nevertheless , just as one of our 
 young man have during these day in London find the air people with 
 personal influence , the concussion of human atom , so the other , though 
 only ask to live without too many question and work without too many 
 rub , to be glad and sorry in short on easy term , have become aware of a 
 certain social tightness , of the fact that life be crowded and passion 
 restless , accident and community inevitable . everybody with whom one have 
 relation have other relation too , and even indifference be a mixture 
 and detachment a compromise . the only wisdom be to consent to the 
 loss , if necessary , of everything but one 's temper and to the ruin , if 
 necessary , of everything but one 's work . it must be add that Peter 's 
 relative take precaution against irritation perhaps in excess of the 
 danger , as depart traveller about to whiz through foreign country 
 mouth in phrase - book combination of word they will never use . he be 
 at home in clear air and dislike to struggle either for breath or for 
 light . he have a dim sense that Peter feel some discomfort from he and 
 might have come now to tell he so ; in which case he should be sorry for 
 the sufferer in various way . but as soon as that aspirant begin to 
 speak suspicion revert to mere ancient kindness , and this in spite 
 of the fact that his speech have a slightly exaggerated promptitude , 
 like the promptitude of business , which might have denote 
 self - consciousness . to Nick it quickly appear well to be glad than 
 to be sorry : this simple argument be more than sufficient to make he 
 glad Peter be there . 

 " my dear fellow , it be an unpardonable hour , be not   it ? I be not   even sure 
 you would be up , yet have to risk it , because my hour be number . I be 
 go away to - morrow , " Peter go on ; " I have   a thousand thing to do . 
 I have   have no talk with you this time such as we use to have of old   it be 
 an irreparable loss , but it be your fault , you know , and as I have   get to 
 rush about all day I think I would just catch you before any one else 
 do . " 

 " some one have already catch I , but there be plenty of time , " Nick 
 return . 

 Peter all but ask a question - it fall short . " I see , I see . I be sorry 
 to say I have   only a few minute at well . " 

 " man of crush responsibility , you have   come to humiliate I ! " his 
 companion cry . " I know all about it . " 

 " it be more than I do then . that be not what I have   come for , but I shall be 
 delighted if I humiliate you a little by the way . I have   two thing in 
 mind , and I will mention the most difficult first . I come here the other 
 day - the day after my arrival in town . " 

 " ah yes , so you do ; it be very good of you " - Nick remember . " I ought 
 to have return your visit or leave a card or write my name - to have 
 do something in Great Stanhope Street , ought not   I ? you have not   get this 
 new thing then , or I would have ' call . ' " 

 Peter eye he a moment . " I say , what be the matter with you ? be I really 
 unforgivable for have take that liberty ? " 

 " what liberty ? " Nick look now quite innocent of care , and indeed his 
 visitor 's allusion be not promptly clear . he be think for the 
 instant all of Biddy , of whom and whose secret inclination Grace have 
 insist on talk to he . they be none of his business , and if he 
 would not   for the world have let the girl herself suspect he have violent 
 light on what be most screen and curtain in she , much less would 
 he have make Peter a clumsy present of this knowledge . grace have a queer 
 theory that Peter treat Biddy badly - treat they all somehow badly ; 
 but Grace 's zeal   she have plenty of it , though she affect all sort of 
 fine indifference   almost always take the form of she be unusually 
 wrong . Nick want to do only what Biddy would thank he for , and he 
 know very well what she would not . she wish he and Peter to be great 
 friend , and the only obstacle to this be that Peter be too much of a 
 diplomatist . Peter make he for an instant think of she and of the hour 
 they have lately spend together in the studio in his absence - an hour of 
 which Biddy have give he a history full of item and omission ; and 
 this in turn bring Nick 's imagination back to his visitor 's own side 
 of the matter . that general human complexity of which the sense have 
 lately increase with he , and to which it be owe that any thread one 
 might take hold of would probably be the extremely wrong end of 
 something , be illustrate by the fact that while poor Biddy be 
 think of Peter it be ten to one poor Peter be think of Miriam 
 Rooth . all of which dance before Nick 's intellectual vision for a space 
 briefer than my too numerous word . 

 " I pitch into your treasure - I rummage among your canvas , " Peter 
 say . " Biddy have nothing whatever to do with it - she maintain an 
 attitude of irreproachable reserve . it have be on my conscience all 
 these day and I ought to have do penance before . I have   be put it 
 off partly because I be so ashamed of my indiscretion . Que voulez - vous , 
 my dear chap ? my provocation be great . I hear you have be paint 
 Miss Rooth , so that I could not   restrain my curiosity . I simply go into 
 that corner and strike out there - a trifle wildly no doubt . I drag 
 the young lady to the light - your sister turn pale as she see I . it 
 be a good deal like break open one of your letter , be not   it ? 
 however , I assure you it be all right , for I congratulate you both on 
 your style and on your correspondent . " 

 " you be as clever , as witty , as humorous as ever , old boy , " Nick 
 pronounce , go himself into the corner designate by his companion 
 and lay his hand on the same canvas . " your curiosity be the high 
 possible tribute to my little attempt and your sympathy set I right 
 with myself . there she be again , " Nick go on , thrust the picture 
 into an empty frame ; " you shall see she whether you wish to or not . " 

 " right with yourself ? you do not   mean to say you have   be wrong ! " Peter 
 return , stand opposite the portrait . 

 " oh I do not   know . I have   be kick up such a row . anything be well 
 than a row . " 

 " she be awfully good - she be awfully true , " say Peter . " you have   do more 
 to she since the other day . you have   put in several thing . " 

 " yes , but I have   work distractedly . I have   not altogether conform to the 
 good rule about be off with the old love . " 

 " with the old love ? " - and the visitor look hard at the picture . 

 " before you be on with the new ! " Nick have no soon utter these word 
 than he colour : it occur to he his friend would probably infer an 
 allusion to Julia . he therefore add quickly : " it be not   so easy to 
 cease to represent an affectionate constituency . really most of my time 
 for a fortnight have be give to letter - writing . they have   all be 
 unexpectedly charming . I should have think they would have loathe and 
 despise I . but not a bit of it ; they cling to I fondly - they struggle 
 with I tenderly . I have   be down to talk with they about it , and we have 
 pass the most sociable , delightful hour . I have   designate my 
 successor ; I have   feel a good deal like the Emperor Charles the Fifth when 
 about to retire to the monastery of Yuste . the more I have   see of they in 
 this way the more I have   like they , and they declare it have be the same 
 with themselves about I . we spend our time assure each other we 
 have not   begin to know each other till now . in short it be all wonderfully 
 jolly , but it be not   business . C'est magnifique , mais ce n'est pas la 
 guerre . " 

 " they be not so charming as they might be if they do not   offer to keep 
 you and let you paint . " 

 " they do , almost - it be fantastic , " say Nick . " remember they have not 
 yet see a daub of my brush . " 

 " well , I be sorry for you ; we live in too enlighten an age , " Peter 
 return . " you can not   suffer for art - that grand romance be over . your 
 experience be interesting ; it seem to show that at the tremendous pitch 
 of civilisation we have   reach you can not   suffer from anything but 
 hunger . " 

 " I shall doubtless , " Nick allow , " do that enough to make up for the 
 rest . " 

 " never , never , when you paint so well as this . " 

 " oh come , you be too good to be true , " Nick say . " but where do you 
 learn that one 's larder be full in proportion as one 's work 's fine ? " 

 Peter waive this curious point - he only continue to look at the 
 picture ; after which he roundly bring out : " I will give you your price 
 for it on the spot . " 

 " ah you be so magnanimous that you shall have it for nothing ! " and Nick , 
 touch to gratitude , pass his arm into his visitor 's . 

 Peter have a pause . " why do you call I magnanimous ? " 

 " oh bless my soul , it be her - I forget ! " laugh Nick , fail in his 
 turn to answer the other 's inquiry . " but you shall have another . " 

 " Another ? be you go to do another ? " 

 " this very morning . that is , I shall begin it . I have   hear from she ; 
 she be come to sit - a short time hence . " 

 Peter turn away a little at this , release himself , and , as if the 
 movement have be an effect of his host 's word , look at his watch 
 earnestly to dissipate that appearance . he fall back to consider the 
 work from far off . " the more you do she the well - she have all the 
 quality of a great model . from that point of view it be a pity she have 
 another trade : she might make so good a thing of this one . but how 
 shall you do she again ? " he ask ingenuously . 

 " oh I can scarcely say ; we will arrange something ; we will talk it over . 
 it be extraordinary how well she enter into what one want : she know 
 more than one do one 's self . she be not , as you frenchman say , the 
 first comer . however , you know all about that , since you invent she , 
 do not   you ? that be what she say ; she be awfully sweet on you , " Nick 
 kindly pursue . " what I ought to do be to try something as different as 
 possible from that thing ; not the sibyl , the muse , the tremendous 
 creature , but the charming woman , the person one know , differently 
 arrange as she appear en ville , she call it . I will do something 
 really serious and send it to you out there with my respect . it will 
 remind you of home and perhaps a little even of I . if she know it be 
 for you she will throw herself into it in the right spirit . leave it to 
 we , my dear fellow ; we will turn out something splendid . " 

 " it be jolly to hear you , but I shall send you a cheque , " say Peter very 
 stoutly . 

 " I suppose it be all right in your position , but you be too proud , " his 
 kinsman answer . 

 " what do you mean by my position ? " 

 " your exaltation , your high connexion with the country , your treating 
 with sovereign power as the representative of a sovereign power . be not 
 that what they call them ? " 

 Peter , who have turn round again , listen to this with his eye fix 
 on Nick 's face while he once more draw forth his watch . " Brute ! " he 
 exclaim familiarly , at the same time drop his eye on the watch . 
 " when do you say you expect your sitter ? " 

 " oh we have   plenty of time ; do not   be afraid of let I see you agitate 
 by her presence . " 

 " Brute ! " Peter again ejaculate . 

 this friendly personal note clear the air , make their communication 
 close . " stay with I and talk to I , " say Nick ; " I daresay it be good 
 for I . it may be the last time I shall see you without have before 
 anything else to koo - too . " 

 " Beast ! " his kinsman once more , and a little helplessly , throw off ; 
 though next go on : " have not   you something more to show I then - some 
 other fruit of your genius ? " 

 " must I bribe you by set my sign - board in a row ? you know what I have 
 do ; by which I mean of course you know what I have not . my genius , as 
 you be so good as to call it , have hitherto be dreadfully sterile . I have 
 have no time , no opportunity , no continuity . I must go and sit down in a 
 corner and learn my alphabet . that thing be not   good ; what I shall do for 
 you will not   be good . do not   protest , my dear fellow ; nothing will be fit to 
 look at for a long time . " after which poor Nick wind up : " and think of 
 my ridiculous age ! as the good people say   or do not   they say it ? , it be 
 a rum go . it will not   be amusing . " 

 " ah you be so clever you will get on fast , " Peter return , try to 
 think how he could most richly defy the injunction not to protest . 

 " I mean it will not   be amusing for other , " say Nick , unperturbe by this 
 levity . " they want result , and small blame to they . " 

 " well , whatever you do , do not   talk like Mr. Gabriel Nash , " Peter go 
 on . " sometimes I think you be just go to . " 

 Nick star a moment . " ah he never would have say that ' they want 
 result , the damned ass ' - that would have be more in his key . " 

 " it be the difference of a nuance ! and be you extraordinarily happy ? " 
 Peter add as his host now oblige he by arrange half - a - dozen 
 canvas so that he could look at they . 

 " not so much so , doubtless , as the artistic life ought to make one : 
 because all one 's people be not so infatuated as one 's elector . but 
 little by little I be learn the charm of pig - headedness . " 

 " your mother 's very bad , " Peter allow - " I lunch with her day before 
 yesterday . " 

 " yes , I know , I know " - Nick have such reason to know ; " but it be too late , 
 too late . I must just peg away here and not mind . I have   after all a great 
 advantage in my life . " 

 his companion wait impartially to hear . " and that would be - ? " 

 " well , know what I want to do . that be everything , you know . " 

 " it be an advantage , however , that you have   only just come in for , be not 
 it ? " 

 " yes , but the delay and the probation only make I prize it the more . 
 I have   get it now ; and it make up for the absence of some other thing . " 

 again Peter have a pause . " that sound a little flat , " he remark at 
 last . 

 " it depend on what you compare it with . it have more point than I 
 sometimes find in the House of Commons . " 

 " oh I never think I should like that ! " 

 there be another drop during which Nick move about the room turn up 
 old sketch to see if he have anything more to show , while his visitor 
 continue to look at the unfinished and in some case , as seem , 
 unpromise production already expose . they be far less interesting 
 than the portrait of Miriam Rooth and , it would have appear , less 
 significant of ability . for that particular effort Nick 's talent have 
 take an inspire flight . so much Peter think , as he have think it 
 intensely before ; but the word he presently utter have no visible 
 connexion with it . they only consist of the abrupt inquiry ; " have you 
 hear anything from Julia ? " 

 " not a syllable . have you ? " 

 " dear no ; she never write to I . " 

 " but will not   she on the occasion of your promotion ? " 

 " I daresay not , " say Peter ; and this be the only reference to Mrs. 
 Dallow that pass between her brother and her late intended . it leave a 
 slight stir of the air which Peter proceed to allay by an allusion 
 comparatively speak more relevant . he express disappointment that 
 Biddy should not   have come in , have have an idea she be always in 
 Rosedale Road of a morning . that be the other branch of his present 
 errand - the wish to see she and give she a message for Lady Agnes , upon 
 whom , at so early an hour , he have not presume to intrude in Calcutta 
 Gardens . Nick reply that Biddy do in point of fact almost always turn 
 up , and for the most part early : she come to wish he good - morning and 
 start he for the day . she be a devoted electra , lay a cool , heal 
 hand on a distracted , perspire Orestes . he remind Peter , however , 
 that he would have a chance of see she that evening , and of see 
 Lady Agnes ; for be not   he to do they the honour of dining in Calcutta 
 Gardens ? Biddy , the day before , have arrive full of that excitement . 
 Peter explain that this be exactly the sad subject of his actual 
  dĂ marche : the project of the dinner in Calcutta Gardens have , to his 
 exceeding regret , fall to piece . the fact be   do not   Nick know it ? 
 the night have be suddenly and perversely fix for Miriam 's premiere , 
 and he be under a definite engagement with she not to stay away from 
 it . to add to the bore of the thing he be oblige to return to Paris 
 the very next morning . he be quite awfully sorry , for he have promise 
 Lady Agnes : he do not   understand then about Miriam 's affair , in regard 
 to which he have give a previous pledge . he be more grieved than he 
 could say , but he could never fail Miss Rooth : he have profess from the 
 first an interest in she which he must live up to a little more . this 
 be his last chance - he have not   be near she at the try time of she 
 first braving of the public . and the second night of the play would not 
 do - it must be the first or nothing . besides , he could not   wait over till 
 Monday . 

 while Peter recite all his hindrance Nick be occupy in rub with 
 a cloth a palette he have just scrap . " I see what you mean - I be very 
 sorry too . I be sorry you can not   give my mother this joy - I give she so 
 little . " 

 " my dear fellow , you might give she a little more ! " it come to Peter to 
 say . " it be rather too much to expect I to make up for your 
 omission ! " 

 Nick look at he with a moment 's fixedness while he polish the 
 palette ; and for that moment he feel the temptation to reply : " there be a 
 way you could do that , to a considerable extent - I think you guess 
 it - which would not   be intrinsically disagreeable . " but the impulse 
 pass without express itself in speech , and he simply bring out ; 
 " you can make this all clear to Biddy when she come , and she will make it 
 clear to my mother . " 

 " poor little Biddy ! " Peter mentally sigh , think of the girl with 
 that job before she ; but what he articulate be that this be exactly 
 why he have come to the studio . he have inflict his company on Lady 
 Agnes the previous Thursday and have partake of a meal with she , but have 
 not see Biddy though he have wait for she , have hop immensely she would 
 come in . now he would wait again - dear Bid be thoroughly worth it . 

 " Patience , patience then - you have   always I ! " say Nick ; to which he 
 subjoin : " if it be a question of go to the play I scarcely see why 
 you should not   dine at my mother 's all the same . People go to the play 
 after dinner . " 

 " yes , but it would not   be fair , it would not   be decent : it be a case when I 
 must be in my seat from the rise of the curtain . " Peter , about this , be 
 thoroughly lucid . " I should force your mother to dine an hour early 
 than usual and then in return for her courtesy should go off to my 
 entertainment at eight o'clock , leave she and Grace and Biddy 
 languish there . I wish I have propose in time that they should go 
 with I , " he continue not very ingenuously . 

 " you might do that still , " Nick suggest . 

 " oh at this time of day it would be impossible to get a box . " 

 " I will speak to Miss Rooth about it if you like when she come , " smile 
 Nick . 

 " no , it would not   do , " say Peter , turn away and look once more at 
 his watch . he make tacitly the addition that still less than ask Lady 
 Agnes for his convenience to dine early would this be decent , would it 
 be thinkable . his take Biddy the night he din with she and with Miss 
 Tressilian have be something very like a violation of those 
 propriety . he could not   say that , however , to the girl 's brother , who 
 remark in a moment that it be all right , since Peter 's action leave 
 he his own freedom . 

 " your own freedom ? " - and Peter 's question make he turn . 

 " why you see now I can go to the theatre myself . " 

 " certainly ; I have not   think of that . you would naturally have be go . " 

 " I give it up for the prospect of your company at home . " 

 " upon my word you be too good - I do not   deserve such sacrifice , " say 
 Peter , who read in his kinsman 's face that this be not a figure of 
 speech but the absolute truth . " do not   it , however , occur to you that , 
 as it would turn out , I might - I even naturally would - myself be 
 go ? " he put forth . 

 Nick break into a laugh . " it would have occur to I if I understand a 
 little well - ! " but he pause , as still too amused . 

 " if you understand a little well what ? " 

 " your situation , simply . " 

 Peter look at he a moment . " Dine with I to - night by ourselves and at 
 a club . we will go to the theatre together and then you will understand it . " 

 " with pleasure , with pleasure : we will have a jolly evening , " say Nick . 

 " call it jolly if you like . when do you say she be come ? " Peter 
 ask . 

 " Biddy ? oh probably , as I tell you , at any moment . " 

 " I mean the great Miriam , " Peter amend . 

 " the great Miriam , if she be punctual , will be here in about forty 
 minute . " 

 " and will she be likely to find your sister ? " 

 " that will depend , my dear fellow , on whether my sister remain to see 
 she . " 

 " exactly ; but the point be whether you will allow she to remain , be not   it ? " 

 Nick look slightly mystified . " why should not   she do as she like ? " 

 " in that case she will probably go . " 

 " yes , unless she stay . " 

 " do not   let she , " Peter drop ; ' send she away . " and to explain this he 
 add : " it do not   seem exactly the right sort of thing , fresh young 
 creature like Bid meeting des femmes de thĂ Ă tre . " his explanation , in 
 turn , strike he as require another clause ; so he go on : " at least 
 it be not   think the right sort of thing abroad , and even in England my 
 foreign idea stick to I . " 

 even with this amplification , however , his plea evidently still have for 
 his companion a flaw ; which , after he have consider it a moment , Nick 
 expose in the simple word : " why , you originally introduce they in 
 Paris , Biddy and Miss Rooth . do not   they meet at your room and 
 fraternise , and be not   that much more ' abroad ' than this ? " 

 " so they do , but my hand have be force and she do not   like it , " Peter 
 answer , suspect that for a diplomatist he look foolish . 

 " Miss Rooth do not   like it ? " Nick persist . 

 " that I confess I have   forget . besides , she be not   an actress then . 
 what I mean be that Biddy be not   particularly pleased with she . " 

 " why she think her wonderful - praise she to the side . I remember 
 that . " 

 " she do not   like she as a woman ; she praise she as an actress . " 

 " I think you say she be not   an actress then , " Nick return . 

 Peter have a pause . " oh Biddy think so . she have see she since , 
 moreover . I take she the other night , and her curiosity 's satisfied . " 

 " it be not of any consequence , and if there be a reason for it I will bundle 
 she off directly , " Nick make haste to say . " but the great Miriam seem 
 such a kind , good person . " 

 " so she be , charming , charming , " - and his visitor look hard at he . 

 " here come Biddy now , " Nick go on . " I hear she at the door : you can 
 warn she yourself . " 

 " it be not   a question of ' warning ' - that be not in the least my idea . but 
 I will take Biddy away , " say Peter . 

 " that will be still more energetic . " 

 " no , it will be simply more selfish - I like her company . " Peter have 
 turn as if to go to the door and meet the girl ; but he quickly check 
 himself , linger in the middle of the room , and the next instant Biddy 
 have come in . when she see he there she also stop . 




 XLIII 


 " come on boldly , my dear , " say Nick . " Peter 's bored to death wait 
 for you . " 

 " ah he be come to say he will not   dine with we to - night ! " Biddy stand with 
 her hand on the latch . 

 " I leave town to - morrow : I have   everything to do ; I be break - hearted ; it be 
 impossible " - Peter make of it again such a case as he could . " please 
 make my peace with your mother - I be ashamed of not have write to she 
 last night . " 

 she close the door and come in while her brother say to she , " how in 
 the world do you guess it ? " 

 " I see it in the Morning Post . " and she keep her eye on their 
 kinsman . 

 " in the Morning Post ? " he vaguely echo . 

 " I see there be to be a first night at that theatre , the one you take we 
 to . so I say , ' oh he will go there . ' " 

 " yes , I have   get to do that too , " Peter admit . 

 " she be go to sit to I again this morning , his wonderful actress - she 
 have make an appointment : so you see I be get on , " Nick pursue to his 
 sister . 

 " oh I be so glad - she be so splendid ! " the girl look away from her 
 cousin now , but not , though it seem to fill the place , at the 
 triumphant portrait of Miriam Rooth . 

 " I be delighted you have   come in . I have wait for you , " Peter hasten 
 to declare to she , though conscious that this be in the condition 
 meagre . 

 " be not   you come to see we again ? " 

 " I be in despair , but I shall really not have time . therefore it be a 
 blessing not to have miss you here . " 

 " I be very glad , " say Biddy . then she add : " and you be go to 
 America - to stay a long time ? " 

 " till I be send to some well place . " 

 " and will that well place be as far away ? " 

 " oh Biddy , it would not   be well then , " say Peter . 

 " do you mean they will give you something to do at home ? " 

 " hardly that . but I have   a tremendous lot to do at home to - day . " for the 
 twentieth time Peter refer to his watch . 

 she turn to her brother , who have admonish she that she might bid he 
 good - morning . she kiss he and he ask what the news would be in 
 Calcutta Gardens ; to which she make answer : " the only news be of course 
 the great preparation they be make , poor dear , for Peter . Mamma 
 think you must have have such a nasty dinner the other day , " the girl 
 continue to the guest of that romantic occasion . 

 " Faithless Peter ! " say Nick , begin to whistle and to arrange a 
 canvas in anticipation of Miriam 's arrival . 

 " Dear Biddy , thank your star you be not in my horrid profession , " 
 protest the personage so designated . " one 's bowl about like a 
 cricket - ball , unable to answer for one 's freedom or one 's comfort from 
 one moment to another . " 

 " oh ours be the true profession - Biddy 's and mine , " Nick break out , 
 set up his canvas ; " the career of liberty and peace , of charming 
 long morning spend in a still north light and in the contemplation , I 
 may even say in the company , of the amiable and the beautiful . " 

 " that certainty 's the case when Biddy come to see you , " Peter return . 

 Biddy smile at he . " I come every day . anch'io son pittore ! I encourage 
 Nick awfully . " 

 " it be a pity I be not a martyr - she would bravely perish with I , " Nick say . 

 " you be - you be a martyr - when people say such odious thing ! " the girl 
 cry . " they do say they . I have   hear many more than I have   repeat to 
 you . " 

 " it be you yourself then , indignant and loyal , who be the martyr , " 
 observe Peter , who want greatly to be kind to she . 

 " oh I do not   care ! " - but she throw herself , flushed and charming , into a 
 straight appeal to he . " do not   you think one can do as much good by 
 paint great work of art as by - as by what papa use to do ? do not   you 
 think art 's necessary to the happiness , to the greatness of a people ? 
 do not   you think it be manly and honourable ? do you think a passion for 
 it be a thing to be ashamed of ? do not   you think the artist - the 
 conscientious , the serious one - be as distinguish a member of society 
 as any one else ? " 

 Peter and Nick look at each other and laugh at the way she have get 
 up her subject , and Nick ask their kinsman if she do not   express it 
 all in perfection . " I delight in general in artist , but I delight still 
 more in their defender , " Peter make reply , perhaps a little meagrely , 
 to Biddy . 

 " ah do not   attack I if you be wise ! " Nick say . 

 " one 's tempt to when it make Biddy so fine . " 

 " well , that be the way she encourage I : it be meat and drink to I , " 
 Nick go on . " at the same time I be bind to say there be a little 
 whistling in the dark in it . " 

 " in the dark ? " his sister demand . 

 " the obscurity , my dear child , of your own aspiration , your mysterious 
 ambition and esthetic view . be not   there some heavyish shadow there ? " 

 " why I never care for politic . " 

 " no , but you care for life , you care for society , and you have   choose 
 the path of solitude and concentration . " 

 " you horrid boy ! " say Biddy . 

 " give it up , that arduous steep - give it up and come out with I , " Peter 
 interpose . 

 " come out with you ? " 

 " let we walk a little or even drive a little . let we at any rate talk a 
 little . " 

 " I think you have so much to do , " Biddy candidly object . 

 " so I have , but why should not   you do a part of it with I ? would there 
 be any harm ? I be go to some tiresome shop - you will cheer the frugal 
 hour . " 

 the girl hesitate , then turn to Nick . " would there be any harm ? " 

 " oh it be none of his business ! " Peter protest . 

 " he have well take you home to your mother . " 

 " I be go home - I shall not   stay here to - day , " Biddy go on . then to 
 Peter : " I come in a hansom , but I shall walk back . come that way with 
 I . " 

 " with pleasure . but I shall not be able to go in , " Peter add . 

 " oh that be no matter , " say the girl . " good - bye , Nick . " 

 " you understand then that we dine together - at seven sharp . would not   a 
 club , as I say , be good ? " Peter , before go , inquire of Nick . he 
 suggest far which club it should be ; and his word lead Biddy , who 
 have direct her step toward the door , to turn a moment as with a 
 reproachful question - whether it be for this Peter have give up 
 Calcutta Gardens . but her impulse , if impulse it be , have no sequel 
 save so far as it be a sequel that Peter freely explain to she , after 
 Nick have assent to his condition , that her brother too have a desire 
 to go to Miss Rooth 's first night and have already promise to accompany 
 he . 

 " oh that be perfect ; it will be so good for he - will not   it ? - if he be go 
 to paint she again , " Biddy respond . 

 " I think there be nothing so good for he as that he happen to have such 
 a sister as you , " Peter declare as they go out . he hear at the same 
 time the sound of a carriage stopping , and before Biddy , who be in 
 front of he , open the door of the house have be able to say to 
 himself , " what a bore - there be Miriam ! " the open door show he that 
 truth - this young lady in the act of alight from the brougham 
 provide by Basil Dashwood 's thrifty zeal . her mother follow she , and 
 both the new visitor exclaim and rejoice , in their demonstrative 
 way , as their eye fall on their value friend . the door have close 
 behind Peter , but he instantly and violently ring , so that they should 
 be admit with as little delay as possible , while he stand 
 disconcert , and fear he show it , by the prompt occurrence of an 
 encounter he have particularly seek to avert . it minister , moreover , 
 a little to this sensibility that Miriam appear to have come somewhat 
 before her time . the incident promise , however , to pass off in a fine 
 florid way . before he know it both the lady have take possession of 
 Biddy , who look at they with comparative coldness , temper indeed by 
 a faint glow of apprehension , and Miriam have break out : 

 " we know you , we know you ; we see you in Paris , and you come to my 
 theatre a short time ago with Mr. Sherringham ! " 

 " we know your mother , Lady Agnes Dormer . I hope her ladyship 's very 
 well , " say Mrs. Rooth , who have never strike Peter as a more 
 objectionable old woman . 

 " you offer to do a head of I or something or other : do not   you tell 
 I you work in clay ? I daresay you have   forget all about it , but I 
 should be delighted , " Miriam pursue with the rich urbanity . Peter 
 be not concerned with her mother 's pervasiveness , though he do not   like 
 Biddy to see even that ; but he hop his companion would take the 
 overcharge benevolence of the young actress in the spirit in which , 
 rather to his surprise , it evidently be offer . " I have   sit to your 
 clever brother many time , " say Miriam ; " I be go to sit again . I 
 daresay you have   see what we have   do - he be too delightful . si vous 
 saviez comme cela I repose ! " she add , turn for a moment to Peter . 
 then she continue , smile at Biddy ; " only he ought not   to have throw 
 up such prospect , you know . I have   an idea I be not   nice to you that day 
 in Paris - I be nervous and scared and perverse . I remember perfectly ; I 
  be odious . but I be well now - you would see if you be to know I . I be 
 not a bad sort - really I be not . but you must have your own friend . 
 happy they - you look so charming ! immensely like Mr. Dormer , especially 
 about the eye ; be not   she , mamma ? " 

 " she come of a beautiful Norman race - the fine , purest strain , " the 
 old woman simper . " Mr. Dormer 's sometimes so good as to come and see 
 we - we be always at home on Sunday ; and if some day you find courage to 
 come with he you might perhaps find it pleasant , though very different 
 of course from the circle in which you habitually move . " 

 Biddy murmur a vague recognition of these wonderful civility , and 
 Miriam comment : " different , yes ; but we be all right , you know . do 
 come , " she add . then turn to Sherringham : " remember what I tell 
 you - I do not   expect you to - night . " 

 " oh I understand ; I shall come , " - and Peter know he grow red . 

 " it will be idiotic . keep he , keep he away - do not   let he , " Miriam 
 insist to Biddy ; with which , as Nick 's portal now be gap , she 
 draw her mother away . 

 Peter , at this , walk off briskly with Biddy , drop as he do so : 
 " she be too fantastic ! " 

 " yes , but so tremendously good - look . I shall ask Nick to take I 
 there , " the girl say after a moment . 

 " well , she will do you no harm . they be all right , as she say . it be the 
 world of art - you be stand up so for art just now . " 

 " oh I be not   think so much of that kind , " she demur . 

 " there be only one kind - it be all the same thing . if one sort 's good the 
 other be . " 

 Biddy walk along a moment . " be she serious ? be she conscientious ? " 

 " she have the making of a great artist , " Peter opine . 

 " I be glad to hear you think a woman can be one . " 

 " in that line there have never be any doubt about it . " 

 " and only in that line ? " 

 " I mean on the stage in general , dramatic or lyric . it be as the actress 
 that the woman produce the most complete and satisfactory artistic 
 result . " 

 " and only as the actress ? " 

 he weigh it . " yes , there be another art in which she be not bad . " 

 " which one do you mean ? " ask Biddy . 

 " that of be charming and good , that of be indispensable to man . " 

 " oh that be not   an art . " 

 " then you leave she only the stage . take it if you like in the wide 
 sense . " 

 Biddy appear to reflect a moment , as to judge what sense this might 
 be . but she find none that be wide enough , for she cry the next 
 minute : " do you mean to say there be nothing for a woman but to be an 
 actress ? " 

 " never in my life . I only say that that be the good thing for a woman to 
 be who find herself irresistibly carry into the practice of the art ; 
 for there her capacity for they have most application and her incapacity 
 for they least . but at the same time I strongly recommend she not to be 
 an artist if she can possibly help it . it be a devil of a life . " 

 " oh I know ; man want woman not to be anything . " 

 " it be a poor little refuge they try to take from the overwhelming 
 consciousness that you be in very fact everything . " 

 " everything ? " and the girl give a toss . " that be the kind of thing you 
 say to keep we quiet . " 

 " Dear Biddy , you see how well we succeed ! " laugh Peter . 

 to which she reply by ask irrelevantly : " why be it so necessary for 
 you to go to the theatre to - night if Miss Rooth do not   want you to ? " 

 " my dear child , she do want I to . but that have nothing to do with 
 it . " 

 " why then do she say that she do not ? " 

 " oh because she mean just the contrary . " 

 " be she so false then - be she so vulgar ? " 

 " she speak a special language ; practically it be not   false , because it 
 render her thought and those who know she understand it . " 

 " but she do not   use it only to those who know she , " Biddy return , 
 ' since she ask I , who have so little the honour of her acquaintance , 
 to keep you away to - night . how be I to know that she mean by that that 
 I be to urge you on to go ? " 

 he be on the point of replying , " because you have   my word for it " ; but he 
 shrink in fact from give his word - he have some fine scruple - and 
 seek to relieve his embarrassment by a general tribute . " Dear Biddy , 
 you be delightfully acute : you be quite as clever as Miss Rooth . " he 
 feel , however , that this be scarcely adequate and he continue : " the 
 truth be that its be important for I to go be a matter quite 
 independent of that young lady 's wish it or not wish it . there 
 happen to be a definite intrinsic propriety in it which determine the 
 thing and which it would take I long to explain . " 

 " I see . but fancy your ' explain ' to I : you make I feel so 
 indiscreet ! " the girl cry quickly - an exclamation which touch he 
 because he be not aware that , quick as it have be , she have still have 
 time to be strike first - though she would not   for the world have 
 express it - with the oddity of such a duty at such a season . in fact 
 that oddity , during a silence of some minute , come back to Peter 
 himself : the note have be force - it sound almost ignobly frivolous 
 from a man on the eve of proceed to a high diplomatic post . the 
 effect of this , none the less , be not to make he break out with " Hang 
 it , I will keep my engagement to your mother ! " but to fill he with 
 the wish to shorten his present strain by take Biddy the rest of the 
 way in a cab . he be uncomfortable , and there be hansom about that he 
 look at wistfully . while he be so occupy his companion take up the 
 talk by an abrupt appeal . 

 " why do she say that Nick ought not   to have resign his seat ? " 

 " oh I do not   know . it strike she so . it do not   matter much . " 

 but Biddy keep it up . " if she be an artist herself why do not   she like 
 people to go in for art , especially when Nick have give his time to 
 paint she so beautifully ? why do she come there so often if she 
 disapprove of what he have do ? " 

 " oh Miriam 's disapproval - it do not   count ; it be a manner of speak . " 

 " of speak untruth , do you mean ? do she think just the reverse - be 
 that the way she talk about everything ? " 

 " we always admire most what we can do least , " Peter bring forth ; " and 
 Miriam of course be not   political . she rank painter more or less with 
 her own profession , about which already , new as she be to it , she have no 
 illusion . they be all artist ; it be the same general sort of thing . she 
 prefer man of the world - man of action . " 

 " be that the reason she like you ? " Biddy mildly mock . 

 " ah she do not   like I - could not   you see it ? " 

 the girl at first say nothing ; then she ask : " be that why she let 
 you call she ' Miriam ' ? " 

 " oh I do not , to her face . " 

 " ah only to mine ! " laugh Biddy . 

 " one say that as one say ' Rachel ' of her great predecessor . " 

 " except that she be not   so great , quite yet , be she ? " 

 " far from it ; she be the fresh of novice - she have scarcely be four 
 month on the stage . but no novice have ever be such an adept . she will 
 go very fast , " Peter pursue , " and I daresay that before long she will be 
 magnificent . " 

 " what a pity you will not see that ! " Biddy sigh after a pause . 

 " not see it ? " 

 " if you be thousand of mile away . " 

 " it be a pity , " Peter say ; " and since you mention it I do not   mind 
 frankly tell you - throw myself on your mercy , as it be - that 
 that be why I make such a point of a rare occasion like to - night . I have   a 
 weakness for the drama that , as you perhaps know , I have   never conceal , 
 and this impression will probably have to last I in some barren spot 
 for many , many year . " 

 " I understand - I understand . I hope therefore it will be charming . " and 
 the girl walk fast . 

 " just as some other charming impression will have to last , " Peter 
 add , conscious of keep up with she by some effort . she seem 
 almost to be run away from he , an impression that lead he to 
 suggest , after they have proceed a little far without more word , 
 that if she be in a hurry they have perhaps well take a cab . her face 
 be strange and touch to he as she turn it to make answer : 

 " oh I be not in the least in a hurry and I really think I have well 
 walk . " 

 " we will walk then by all mean ! " Peter say with slightly exaggerated 
 gaiety ; in pursuance of which they go on a hundred yard . Biddy keep 
 the same pace ; yet it be scarcely a surprise to he that she should 
 suddenly stop with the exclamation : 

 " after all , though I be not in a hurry I be tired ! I have well have a 
 cab ; please call that one , " she add , look about she . 

 they be in a straight , blank , ugly street , where the small , cheap , 
 grey - face house have no expression save that of a rueful , unconsoled 
 acknowledgment of the universal want of identity . they would have 
 constitute a " terrace " if they could , but they have dolefully give it 
 up . even a hansom that loiter across the end of the vista turn a 
 sceptical back upon it , so that Sherringham have to lift his voice in a 
 loud appeal . he stand with Biddy watch the cab approach they . " this 
 be one of the charming thing you will remember , " she say , turn she 
 eye to the general dreariness from the particular figure of the 
 vehicle , which be antiquated and clumsy . before he could reply she have 
 lightly step into the cab ; but as he answer , " most assuredly it 
 be , " and prepare to follow she she quickly close the apron . 

 " I must go alone ; you have   lot of thing to do - it be all right " ; and 
 through the aperture in the roof she give the driver her address . she 
 have speak with decision , and Peter fully feel now that she wish to 
 get away from he . her eye betray it , as well as her voice , in a 
 look , a strange , wander ray that as he stand there with his hand on 
 the cab he have time to take from she . " good - bye , Peter , " she smile ; and 
 as the thing begin to rumble away he utter the same tepid , ridiculous 
 farewell . 




 XLIV 


 at the entrance of Miriam and her mother Nick , in the studio , have 
 stop whistle , but he be still gay enough to receive they with 
 every appearance of warmth . he think it a poor place , ungarnished , 
 untapestried , a bare , almost grim workshop , with all its revelation and 
 honour still to come . but his visitor smile on it a good deal in the 
 same way in which they have smile on Bridget Dormer when they meet she at 
 the door : Mrs. Rooth because vague , prudent approbation be the habit of 
 her foolish face - it be ever the least danger ; and Miriam because , as 
 seem , she be genuinely glad to find herself within the wall of which 
 she speak now as her asylum . she break out in this strain to her host 
 almost as soon as she have cross the threshold , commend his 
 circumstance , his condition of work , as infinitely happy than her 
 own . he be quiet , independent , absolute , free to do what he like as he 
 like it , shut up in his little temple with his altar and his divinity ; 
 not hustle about in a mob of people , have to posture and grin to pit 
 and gallery , to square himself at every step with insufferable 
 convention and with the ignorance and vanity of other . he be 
 blissfully alone . 

 " Mercy , how you do abuse your fine profession ! I be sure I never urge 
 you to adopt it ! " Mrs. Rooth cry , in real bewilderment , to her 
 daughter . 

 " she be abuse mine still more the other day , " joke Nick - " tell I 
 I ought to be ashamed of it and of myself . " 

 " oh I never know from one moment to the other - I live with my heart in 
 my mouth , " sigh the old woman . 

 " be not   you quiet about the great thing - about my personal behaviour ? " 
 Miriam smile . " my impropriety be all of the mind . " 

 " I do not   know what you call your personal behaviour , " her mother 
 object . 

 " you would very soon if it be not what it be . " 

 " and I do not   know why you should wish to have it think you have   a wicked 
 mind , " Mrs. Rooth agreeably grumble . 

 " yes , but I do not   see very well how I can make you understand that . at 
 any rate , " Miriam pursue with her grand eye on Nick , " I retract what I 
 say the other day about Mr. Dormer . I have   no wish to quarrel with he on 
 the way he have determine to dispose of his life , because after all it 
 do suit I very well . it rest I , this little devoted corner ; oh it 
 rest I ! it be out of the row and the dust , it be deliciously still and 
 they can not   get at I . ah when art be like this , a la bonne heure ! " and 
 she look round on such a presentment of " art " in a splendid way that 
 produce amusement on the young man 's part at its contrast with the 
 humble fact . Miriam shine upon he as if she like to be the cause of 
 his mirth and go on appeal to he : " you will always let I come here 
 for an hour , will not   you , to take breath - to let the whirlwind pass ? you 
 need not   trouble yourself about I ; I do not   mean to impose on you in the 
 least the necessity of paint I , though if that be a manner of help 
 you to get on you may be sure it will always be open to you . do what you 
 like with I in that respect ; only let I sit here on a high stool , 
 keep well out of your way , and see what you happen to be do . I will 
 tell you my own adventure when you want to hear they . " 

 " the few adventure you have to tell the well , my dear , " say Mrs. 
 Rooth ; " and if Mr. Dormer keep you quiet he will add ten year to my 
 life . " 

 " it all make an interesting comment on Mr. Dormer 's own quietness , on 
 his independence and sweet solitude , " Nick observe . " Miss Rooth have to 
 work with other , which be after all only what Mr. Dormer have to do when 
 he work with Miss Rooth . what do you make of the inevitable sitter ? " 

 " oh , " answer Miriam , " you can say to the inevitable sitter , ' hold your 
 tongue , you brute ! ' " 

 " be not   it a good deal in that manner that I have   hear you address your 
 comrade at the theatre ? " Mrs. Rooth inquire . " that be why my heart be in 
 my mouth . " 

 " yes , but they hit I back ; they reply to I - comme de raison - as I 
 should never think of reply to Mr. Dormer . it be a great advantage to 
 he that when he be peremptory with his model it only make she well , 
 add to her expression of gloomy grandeur . " 

 " we do the gloomy grandeur in the other picture : suppose therefore we 
 try something different in this , " Nick throw off . 

 " it be serious , it be grand , " murmur Mrs. Rooth , who have take up 
 a rapt attitude before the portrait of her daughter . " it make one 
 wonder what she be think of . beautiful , commendable thing - that be 
 what it seem to say . " 

 " what can I be think of but the tremendous wisdom of my mother ? " 
 Miriam return . " I bring she this morning to see that thing - she have 
 only see it in its early stage - and not to presume to advise you 
 about anything else you may be so good as to embark on . she want , or 
 profess she want , terribly to know what you have finally arrive at . 
 she be too impatient to wait till you should send it home . " 

 " ah send it home - send it home ; let we have it always with we ! " Mrs. 
 Rooth engagingly say . " it will keep we up , up , and up on the height , 
 near the star - be always for we a symbol and a reminder ! " 

 " you see I be right , " Miriam go on ; " for she appreciate thoroughly , 
 in her own way , and almost understand . but if she worry or distract 
 you I will send she directly home - I have   keep the carriage there on 
 purpose . I must add that I do not   feel quite safe to - day in let she 
 out of my sight . she be liable to make dash at the theatre and play 
 unconscionable trick there . I shall never again accuse mamma of a want 
 of interest in my profession . her interest to - day exceed even my own . 
 she be all over the place and she have idea - ah but idea ! she be capable 
 of turn up at the theatre at five o'clock this afternoon to demand 
 the repainting of the set in the third act . for myself I have   not a word 
 more to say on the subject - I have   accept every danger , I have   swallow 
 my fate . everything be no doubt wrong , but nothing can possibly be right . 
 let we eat and drink , for to - night we die . if you say so mamma shall go 
 and sit in the carriage , and as there be no mean of fasten the door 
  be there ?   your servant shall keep guard over she . " 

 " just as you be now - be so good as to remain so ; sit just that 
 way - lean back with a smile in your eye and one hand on the sofa 
 beside you and support you a little . I shall stick a flower into the 
 other hand - let it lie in your lap just as it be . keep that thing on 
 your head - it be admirably uncover : do you call such an unconsidered 
 trifle a bonnet ? - and let your head fall back a little . there it 
 be - it be find . this time I shall really do something , and it will be as 
 different as you like from that other crazy job . here we go ! " it be in 
 these irrelevant but earnest word that Nick respond to his sitter 's 
 utter vagary , of which her charming tone and countenance diminish 
 the superficial acerbity . he hold up his hand a moment , to fix she in 
 her limit , and in a few minute have a happy sense of have begin to 
 work . 

 " the smile in her eye - do not   forget the smile in her eye ! " Mrs. Rooth 
 softly chant , turn away and creep about the room . " that will 
 make it so different from the other picture and show the two side of 
 her genius , the wonderful range between they . they will be splendid mate , 
 and though I daresay I shall strike you as greedy you must let I hope 
 you will send this one home too . " 

 she explore the place discreetly and on tiptoe , talk twaddle as she 
 go and bend her head and her eyeglass over various object with an 
 air of imperfect comprehension that do not   prevent Nick 's private recall 
 of the story of her underhand , commercial habit tell by Gabriel Nash at 
 the exhibition in Paris the first time her name have fall on his ear . a 
 queer old woman from whom , if you approach she in the right way , you 
 could buy old pot - it be in this character that she have originally 
 be introduce to he . he have lose sight of it afterwards , but it 
 revive again as his observant eye , at the same time that they follow 
 his active hand , become aware of her instinctive , appraise gesture . 
 there be a moment when he frankly laugh out - there be so little in 
 his poor studio to appraise . Mrs. Rooth 's wandering eyeglass and vague , 
 polite , disappointed , bent back and head make a subject for a sketch on 
 the instant : they give such a sudden pictorial glimpse of the element of 
 race . he find himself see the immemorial Jewess in her hold up a 
 candle in a crammed back shop . there be no candle indeed and his studio 
 be not cram , and it have never occur to he before that she be a 
 grand - daughter of Israel save on the general theory , so stoutly hold by 
 several clever people , that few of we be not under suspicion . the late 
 Rudolf Roth have at least be , and his daughter be visibly her father 's 
 child ; so that , flank by such a pair , good semitic presumption 
 sufficiently crown the mother . receive Miriam 's sharp , satiric 
 shower without shake her shoulder she might at any rate have be the 
 descendant of a tribe long persecute . her blandness be beyond all 
 baiting ; she profess she could be as still as a mouse . Miriam , on the 
 other side of the room , in the tranquil beauty of her attitude - " find " 
 indeed , as Nick have say - watch she a little and then declare she have 
 good have be lock up at home . put aside her free account of the 
 danger to which her mother expose she , it be not   whimsical to imagine 
 that within the limit of that repose from which the Neville - Nugents 
 never wholly depart the eld lady might indeed be a trifle fidgety 
 and have something on her mind . Nick presently mention that it 
 would not   be possible for he to ' send home " his second performance ; and 
 he add , in the exuberance of have already get a little into relation 
 with his work , that perhaps this do not   matter , inasmuch as - if Miriam 
 would give he his time , to say nothing of her own - a third and a fourth 
 masterpiece might also some day very well struggle into the light . his 
 model rise to this without condition , assure he he might count upon 
 she till she grow too old and too ugly and that nothing would make she 
 so happy as that he should paint she as often as Romney have paint the 
 celebrate Lady Hamilton . " Ah Lady Hamilton ! " deprecate Mrs. Rooth ; 
 while Miriam , who have on occasion the candour of a fine acquisitiveness , 
 wish to know what particular reason there might be for his not let 
 they have the picture he be now begin . 

 " why I have   promise it to Peter Sherringham - he have offer I money for 
 it , " Nick reply . " however , he be welcome to it for nothing , poor chap , 
 and I shall be delighted to do the good I can for he . " 

 Mrs. Rooth , still prowl , stop in the middle of the room at this , 
 while her daughter echo : " he offer you money - just as we come in ? " 

 " you meet he then at the door with my sister ? I suppose you have - he be 
 take her home , " Nick explain . 

 " your sister 's a lovely girl - such an aristocratic type ! " breathe Mrs. 
 Rooth . then she add : " I have   a tremendous confession to make to you . " 

 " Mamma 's confession have to be tremendous to correspond with her 
 crime , " say Miriam . " she ask Miss Dormer to come and see we , 
 suggest even that you might bring she some Sunday . I do not   like the 
 way mamma do such thing - too much humility , too many simagrĂ es , 
 after all ; but I also say what I could to be nice to she . your sister 
  be charming - awfully pretty and modest . if you be to press I I 
 should tell you frankly that it seem to I rather a social muddle , this 
 rub shoulder of ' nice girl ' and fill de thĂ Ă tre : I should not 
 think it would do your poor young thing much good . however , it be their 
 own affair , and no doubt there be no more need of their thinking we be 
 bad than we be than of their thinking we be well . the people they 
 live with do not   seem to know the difference - I sometimes make my 
 reflexion about the public one work for . " 

 " ah if you go in for the public 's know difference you be far too 
 particular , " Nick laugh . " D'ou tombez - vous ? as you affect french 
 people say . if you have   anything at stake on that you have simply well 
 not play . " 

 " Dear Mr. Dormer , do not   encourage she to be so dreadful ; for it be 
 dreadful , the way she talk , " Mrs. Rooth break in . " one would think we 
 be not   respectable - one would think I have never know what I have   know 
 and be what I have   be . " 

 " what one would think , beloved mother , be that you be a still great 
 humbug than you be . it be you , on the contrary , who go down on your 
 knee , who pour forth apology about our be vagabond . " 

 " Vagabonds - listen to she ! - after the education I have   give she and our 
 magnificent prospect ! " wail Mrs. Rooth , sink with clasped hand 
 upon the near ottoman . 

 " not after our prospect , if prospect they be : a good deal before they . 
 yes , you have   teach I tongue and I be greatly oblige to you - they no 
 doubt give variety as well as incoherency to my conversation ; and that 
 of people in our line be for the most part notoriously monotonous and 
 shoppy . the gift of tongue be in general the sign of your true 
 adventurer . dear mamma , I have   no low standard - that be the last thing , " 
 Miriam go on . " my weakness be my exalted conception of respectability . 
 ah parlez - moi de Ă a and of the way I understand it ! if I be to go in 
 for be respectable you would see something fine . I be awfully conservative 
 and I know what respectability be , even when I meet people of society on 
 the accidental middle ground of either glower or smirk . I know 
 also what it be not   - it be not   the sweet union of well - breed little girl 
  ' carefully - nurture , ' do not   they call they ?   and paint she - mummer . I 
 should carry it much far than any of these people : I should never 
 look at the like of we ! every hour I live I see that the wisdom of the 
 age be in the experience of dear old Madame CarrĂ   - be in a hundred 
 thing she tell I . she be found on a rock . after that , " Miriam go on 
 to her host , " I can assure you that if you be so good as to bring Miss 
 Dormer to see we we should be angelically careful of she and surround 
 she with every attention and precaution . " 

 " the like of we - the like of we ! " Mrs. Rooth repeat plaintively and 
 with a resentment as vain as a failure to sneeze . " I do not   know what 
 you be talk about and I decline to be turn upside down , I have   my 
 idea as well as you , and I repudiate the charge of false humility . I have 
 be through too many trouble to be proud , and a pleasant , polite 
 manner be the rule of my life even in the day when , God know , I have 
 everything . I have   never change and if with God 's help I have a civil 
 tongue then , I have   a civil tongue now . it be more than you always have , my 
 poor , perverse , passionate child . once a lady always a lady - all the 
 footlight in the world , turn they up as high as you will , make no 
 difference there . and I think people know it , people who know 
 anything - if I may use such an expression - and it be because they know it 
 that I be not afraid to address they in a pleasant way . so I must 
 say - and I call Mr. Dormer to witness , for if he could reason with you a 
 bit about it he might render several people a service - your conduct to 
 Mr. Sherringham simply break my heart , " Mrs. Rooth conclude , take a 
 jump of several step in the fine modern avenue of her argument . 

 Nick be appeal to , but he hang back , draw with a free hand , and 
 while he forbore Miriam take it up . " mother 's good - mother 's very good ; 
 but it be only little by little that you discover how good she be . " this 
 seem to leave he at ease to ask their companion , with the 
 preliminary intimation that what she have just say be very striking , 
 what she mean by her daughter 's conduct to old Peter . before Mrs. Rooth 
 could answer this question , however , Miriam break across with one of her 
 own . " do you mind tell I if you make your sister go off with Mr. 
 Sherringham because you know it be about time for I to turn up ? poor 
 Mr. Dormer , I get you into trouble , do not   I ? " she add quite with 
 tenderness . 

 " into trouble ? " echo Nick , look at her head but not at her eye . 

 " well , we will not   talk about that ! " she return with a rich laugh . 

 he now hasten to say that he have nothing to do with his sister 's 
 leave the studio - she have only come , as it happen , for a moment . she 
 have walk away with Peter Sherringham because they be cousin and old 
 friend : he be to leave England immediately , for a long time , and he 
 have offer she his company go home . Mrs. Rooth shake her head very 
 knowingly over the " long time " Mr. Sherringham would be absent - she 
 plainly have her idea about that ; and she conscientiously relate that 
 in the course of the short conversation they have all have at the door of 
 the house her daughter have remind Miss Dormer of something that have 
 pass between they in Paris on the question of the charming young 
 lady 's model her head . 

 " I do it to make the idea of our meeting less absurd - to put it on the 
 footing of our both be artist . I do not   ask you if she have talent , " 
 say Miriam . 

 " then I need not   tell you , " laugh Nick . 

 " I be sure she have talent and a very refined inspiration . I see something 
 in that corner , cover with a mysterious veil , " Mrs. Rooth insinuate ; 
 which lead Miriam to go on immediately : 

 " have she be try her hand at Mr. Sherringham ? " 

 " when should she try her hand , poor dear young lady ? he be always sit 
 with we , " say Mrs. Rooth . 

 " dear mamma , you exaggerate . he have his moment - when he seem to say 
 his prayer to I ; but we have   have some success in cut they down . Il 
 s'est bien dĂ tachă   ce jour - ci , and I be very happy for he . of course 
 it be an impertinent allusion for I to make ; but I should be so 
 delighted if I could think of he as a little in love with Miss Dormer , " 
 the girl pursue , address Nick . 

 " he be , I think , just a little - just a tiny bit , " her artist allow , 
 work away ; while Mrs. Rooth ejaculate to her daughter 
 simultaneously : 

 " how can you ask such fantastic question when you know he be die for 
  you ? " 

 " oh dying ! - he be die very hard ! " cry Miriam . " Mr. Sherringham 's a 
 man of whom I can not   speak with too much esteem and affection and who may 
 be destine to perish by some horrid fever   which God forbid !   in the 
 unpleasant country he be go to . but he will not   have catch his fever 
 from your humble servant . " 

 " you may kill he even while you remain in perfect health yourself , " 
 say Nick ; " and since we be talk of the matter I do not   see the harm 
 of my confessing that he strike I as far go - oh as very bad indeed . " 

 " and yet he be in love with your sister ? - je n'y suis plus . " 

 " he try to be , for he see that as regard you there be difficulty . 
 he would like to put his hand on some nice girl who would be an antidote to his 
 poison . " 

 " difficulty be a mild name for they ; poison even be a mild name for 
 the ill he suffer from . the principal difficulty be that he do not 
 know what the devil he want . the next be that I do not   either - or what 
 the devil I want myself . I only know what I do not   want , " Miriam keep on 
 brightly and as if utter some happy , beneficent truth . " I do not   want 
 a person who take thing even less simply than I do myself . Mr. 
 Sherringham , poor man , must be very uncomfortable , for one side of he be 
 in a perpetual row with the other side . he be try to serve God and 
 Mammon , and I do not   know how God will come off . what I like in you be 
 that you have   definitely let Mammon go - it be the only decent way . that be 
 my earnest conviction , and yet they call we people light . dear Mr. 
 Sherringham have tremendous ambition - tremendous riguardi , as we use 
 to say in Italy . he want to enjoy every comfort and to save every 
 appearance , and all without make a scrap of a sacrifice . he expect 
 other - I , for instance - to make all the sacrifice . merci , much as I 
 esteem he and much as I owe he ! I do not   know how he ever come to stray 
 at all into our bold , bad , downright Bohemia : it be a cruel trick for 
 fortune to play he . he can not   keep out of it , he be perpetually make 
 dash across the border , and yet as soon as he get here he be on pin 
 and needle . there be another in whose position - if I be in it - I 
 would not   look at the like of we ! " 

 " I do not   know much about the matter , " Nick bring out after some intent 
 smudging , " but I have   an idea Peter think he have make or at least be 
 make sacrifice . " 

 " so much the well - you must encourage he , you must help he . " 

 " I do not   know what my daughter be talk about , " Mrs. Rooth 
 contribute - ' she be much too paradoxical for my plain mind . but there be 
 one way to encourage Mr. Sherringham - there be one way to help he ; and 
 perhaps it will not   be a bad way for a gentleman of your good nature that 
 it will help I at the same time . can not   I look to you , dear Mr. Dormer , 
 to see that he do come to the theatre to - night - that he do not   feel 
 himself oblige to stay away ? " 

 " what danger be there of his stay away ? " Nick ask . 

 " if he be bent on sacrifice that be a very good one to begin with , " 
 Miriam observe . 

 " that be the mad , bad way she talk to he - she have forbid the dear 
 unhappy gentleman the house ! " her mother cry . " she bring it up to 
 he just now at the door - before Miss Dormer : such very odd form ! she 
 pretend to impose her command upon he . " 

 " oh he will be there - we be go to dine together , " say Nick . and when 
 Miriam ask he what that have to do with it he go on : " why we have 
 arrange it ; I be go , and he will not   let I go alone . " 

 " you be go ? I send you no place , " his sitter object . 

 " yes , but I have   get one . why do not   you , after all I have   do for you ? " 

 she beautifully think of it . " because I be so good . no matter , " she 
 add , " if Mr. Sherringham come I will not   act . " 

 " will not   you act for I ? " 

 " she will act like an angel , " Mrs. Rooth protest . " she might do , she 
 might be , anything in all the world ; but she will not   take common pain . " 

 " of one thing there be no doubt , " say Miriam : " that compare with the 
 rest of we - poor passionless creature - mamma do know what she want . " 

 " and what be that ? " Nick inquire , chalk on . 

 " she want everything . " 

 " never , never - I be much more humble , " retort the old woman ; upon 
 which her daughter request she to give then to Mr. Dormer , who be a 
 reasonable man and an excellent judge , a general idea of the scope of 
 her desire . 

 as , however , Mrs. Rooth , sigh and deprecating , be not quick to 
 acquit herself , the girl try a short cut to the truth with the abrupt 
 demand : " do you believe for a single moment he would marry I ? " 

 " why he have propose to you - you have   tell I yourself - a dozen time . " 

 " propose what to I ? " Miriam ring out . " I have   tell you that neither a 
 dozen time nor once , because I have   never understand . he have make 
 wonderful speech , but have never be serious . " 

 " you tell I he have be in the seventh heaven of devotion , especially 
 that night we go to the foyer of the FranĂ ais , " Mrs. Rooth insist . 

 " do you call the seventh heaven of devotion serious ? he be in love with 
 I , je le veux bien ; he be so poison - Mr. Dormer vividly put it - as 
 to require a strong antidote ; but he have never speak to I as if he 
 really expect I to listen to he , and he be the more of a gentleman 
 from that fact . he know we have not   a square foot of common ground - that 
 a grasshopper can not   set up a house with a fish . so he have take care to 
 say to I only more than he can possibly mean . that make it stand just 
 for nothing . " 

 " do he say more than he can possibly mean when he take formal leave of 
 you yesterday - for ever and ever ? " the old woman cry . 

 on which Nick re - enforce she . " and do not   you call that - his taking 
 formal leave - a sacrifice ? " 

 " oh he take it all back , his sacrifice , before he leave the house . " 

 " then have that no meaning ? " demand Mrs. Rooth . 

 " none that I can make out , " say her daughter . 

 " ah I have   no patience with you : you can be stupid when you will - you can 
 be even that too ! " the poor lady groan . 

 " what mamma wish I to understand and to practise be the particular 
 way to be artful with Mr. Sherringham , " say Miriam . " there be 
 doubtless depth of wisdom and virtue in it . but I see only one 
 art - that of be perfectly honest . " 

 " I like to hear you talk - it make you live , bring you out , " Nick 
 contentedly drop . " and you sit beautifully still . all I want to say 
 be please continue to do so : remain exactly as you be - it be rather 
 important - for the next ten minute . " 

 " we be wash our dirty linen before you , but it be all right , " the girl 
 return , " because it show you what sort of people we be , and that be 
 what you need to know . do not   make I vague and arrange and fine in this 
 new view , " she continue : " make I characteristic and real ; make life , 
 with all its horrid fact and truth , stick out of I . I wish you could 
 put mother in too ; make we live there side by side and tell our little 
 story . ' the wonderful actress and her still more wonderful mamma ' - do not 
 you think that be an awfully good subject ? " 

 Mrs. Rooth , at this , cry shame on her daughter 's wanton humour , 
 profess that she herself would never accept so much from Nick 's good 
 nature , and Miriam settle it that at any rate he be some day and in 
 some way to do her mother , really do she , and so make she , as one of 
 the funniest person that ever be , live on through the age . 

 " she do not   believe Mr. Sherringham want to marry I any more than you 
 do , " the girl , take up her dispute again after a moment , represent 
 to Nick ; " but she believe - how indeed can I tell you what she 
 believe ? - that I can work it so well , if you understand , that in the 
 fulness of time I shall hold he in a vice . I be to keep he along for 
 the present , but not to listen to he , for if I listen to he I shall 
 lose he . it be ingenious , it be complicated ; but I daresay you follow 
 I . " 

 " do not   move - do not   move , " say Nick . " pardon a poor clumsy beginner . " 

 " no , I shall explain quietly . somehow - here it be very complicated and 
 you must not   lose the thread - I shall be an actress and make a tremendous 
 lot of money , and somehow too   I suppose a little later   I shall become 
 an ambassadress and be the favourite of court . so you see it will all 
 be delightful . only I shall have to go very straight . Mamma remind I 
 of a story I once hear about the mother of a young lady who be in 
 receipt of much civility from the pretender to a crown , which indeed he , 
 and the young lady too , afterwards more or less wear . the old countess 
 watch the course of event and give her daughter the clever advice : 
 ' Tiens bon , ma fille , and you shall sit upon a throne . ' Mamma wish 
 I to tenir bon - she apparently think there be a danger I may not   - so 
 that if I do not   sit upon a throne I shall at least parade at the foot of 
 one . and if before that , for ten year , I pile up the money , they will 
 forgive I the way I have   make it . I should hope so , if I have   tenu bon ! 
 only ten year be a good while to hold out , be not   it ? if it be not   Mr. 
 Sherringham it will be some one else . Mr. Sherringham have the great 
 merit of be a bird in the hand . I be to keep he along , I be to be 
 still more diplomatic than even he can be . " 

 Mrs. Rooth listen to her daughter with an air of assumed reprobation 
 which melt , before the girl have do , into a divert , complacent 
 smile - the gratification of find herself the proprietress of so much 
 wit and irony and grace . Miriam 's account of her mother 's view be a 
 scene of comedy , and there be instinctive art in the way she add 
 touch to touch and make point upon point . she be so quiet , to oblige 
 her painter , that only her fine lip move - all her expression be in 
 their charming utterance . Mrs. Rooth , after the first flutter of a less 
 cynical spirit , consent to be sacrifice to an effect of the really 
 high order she have now be educate to recognise ; so that she scarce 
 hesitate , when Miriam have cease speaking , before she titter out with 
 the fond indulgence : ' comă dienne ! ' and she seem to appeal to 
 their companion . " be not   she fascinating ? that be the way she do for 
 you ! " 

 " it be rather cruel , be not   it , " say Miriam , " to deprive people of the 
 luxury of call one an actress as they would call one a liar ? I represent , 
 but I represent truly . " 

 " Mr. Sherringham would marry you to - morrow - there be no question of ten 
 year ! " cry Mrs. Rooth with a comicality of plainness . 

 Miriam smile at Nick , deprecate his horror of such talk . " be not   it 
 droll , the way she can not   get it out of her head ? " then turn almost 
 coaxingly to the old woman : " voyon , look about you : they do not   marry 
 we like that . " 

 " but they do - cela se voit tous les jour . ask Mr. Dormer . " 

 " oh never ! it would be as if I ask he to give we a practical proof . " 

 " I shall never prove anything by marry any one , " Nick say . " for I 
 that question be over . " 

 Miriam rest kind eye on he . " dear I , how you must hate I ! " and 
 before he have time to reply she go on to her mother : " People marry 
 they to make they leave the stage ; which prove exactly what I say . " 

 " ah they offer they the fine position , " reason Mrs. Rooth . 

 " do you want I to leave it then ? " 

 " oh you can manage if you will ! " 

 " the only manage I know anything about be to do my work . if I manage 
 that decently I shall pull through . " 

 " but , dearest , may our work not be of many sort ? " 

 " I only know one , " say Miriam . 

 at this her mother get up with a sigh . " I see you do wish to drive I 
 into the street . " 

 " Mamma 's bewildered - there be so many path she want to follow , there 
 be so many bundle of hay . as I tell you , she wish to gobble they 
 all , " the girl pursue . then she add : " yes , go and take the carriage ; 
 take a turn round the Park - you always delight in that - and come back 
 for I in an hour . " 

 " I be too vex with you ; the air will do I good , " say Mrs. Rooth . but 
 before she go she address Nick : " I have   your assurance that you will 
 bring he then to - night ? " 

 " bring Peter ? I do not   think I shall have to drag he , " Nick return . 
 " but you must do I the justice to remember that if I should resort to 
 force I should do something that be not particularly in my interest - I 
 should be magnanimous . " 

 " we must always be that , must not   we ? " moralise Mrs. Rooth . 

 " how could it affect your interest ? " Miriam ask less abstractedly . 

 " yes , as you say , " her mother muse at their host , " the question of 
 marriage have cease to exist for you . " 

 " Mamma go straight at it ! " laugh the girl , get up while Nick 
 rub his canvas before answer . Miriam go to mamma and settle 
 her bonnet and mantle in preparation for her drive , then stand a moment 
 with a filial arm about she and as if wait for their friend 's 
 explanation . this , however , when it come halt visibly . 

 " why you say a while ago that if Peter be there you would not   act . " 

 " I will act for he , " smile Miriam , inconsequently caress her 
 mother . 

 " it do not   matter whom it be for ! " Mrs. Rooth declare sagaciously . 

 " take your drive and relax your mind , " say the girl , kiss she . " come 
 for I in an hour ; not later - but not soon . " she go with she to the 
 door , bundle she out , close it behind she and come back to the 
 position she have quit . " this be the peace I want ! " she gratefully 
 cry as she settle into it . 




 XLV 


 Peter Sherringham say so little during the performance that his 
 companion be strike by his dumbness , especially as Miriam 's acting 
 seem to Nick magnificent . he hold his breath while she be on the 
 stage - she give the whole thing , include the spectator 's emotion , such 
 a lift . she have not carry out her fantastic menace of not exert 
 herself , and , as Mrs. Rooth have say , it little matter for whom she 
 act . Nick be conscious in watch she that she go through it all 
 for herself , for the idea that possess she and that she render with 
 extraordinary breadth . she could not   open the door a part of the way to 
 it and let it simply peep in ; if it enter at all it must enter in full 
 procession and occupy the premise in state . 

 this be what have happen on an occasion which , as the less tormented 
 of our young man feel in his stall , grow large with each throb of the 
 responsive house ; till by the time the play be half over it appear to 
 stretch out wide arm to the future . Nick have often hear more applause , 
 but have never hear more attention , since they be all charm and 
 hush together and success seem to be sit down with they . there 
 have be of course plenty of announcement - the newspaper have abound 
 and the art of the manager have take the free license ; but it be 
 easy to feel a fine , universal consensus and to recognise everywhere 
 the light spring of hope . People snatch their eye from the stage an 
 instant to look at each other , all eager to hand on the torch pass to 
 they by the actress over the footlight . it be a part of the impression 
 that she be now only show to the full , for this time she have verse 
 to deal with and she make it unexpectedly exquisite . she be beauty , 
 melody , truth ; she be passion and persuasion and tenderness . she catch 
 up the obstreperous play in soothe , entwine arm and , seem to 
 tread the air in the flutter of her robe , carry it into the high 
 place of poetry , of art , of style . and she have such tone of nature , 
 such concealment of art , such effusion of life , that the whole scene 
 glow with the colour she communicate , and the house , pervade with 
 rosy fire , glow back at the scene . Nick look round in the interval ; 
 he feel excited and flush - the night have turn to a feast of 
 fraternity and he expect to see people embrace each other . the crowd , 
 the agitation , the triumph , the surprise , the signal and rumour , the 
 heated air , his associate , near he , point out other figure who 
 presumably be celebrate but whom he have never hear of , all amuse 
 he and banish every impulse to question or to compare . Miriam be as 
 happy as some right sensation - she would have feed the memory with deep 
 draught . 

 one of the thing that amuse he or at least help to fill his 
 attention be Peter 's attitude , which apparently do not   exclude 
 criticism - rather indeed mainly imply it . this admirer never take his 
 eye off the actress , but he make no remark about she and never stir 
 out of his chair . Nick have have from the first a plan of go round to 
 speak to she , but as his companion evidently mean not to move he 
 scruple at be more forward . during their brief dinner together - they 
 be determine not to be late - Peter have be silent , quite recklessly 
 grave , but also , his kinsman judge , full of the wish to make it clear 
 he be calm . in his seat he be calm than ever and have an air even of 
 try to suggest that his attendance , preoccupy as he be with deep 
 solemnity , be more or less mechanical , the result of a conception of 
 duty , a habit of courtesy . when during a scene in the second act - a 
 scene from which Miriam be absent - Nick observe to he that one might 
 judge from his reserve that he be not   pleased he reply after a moment : 
 " I have   be look for her mistake . " and when Nick make answer to this 
 that he certainly would not   find they he say again in an odd tone : " no , 
 I shall not   find they - I shall not   find they . " it might have seem that since 
 the girl 's performance be a dazzle success he regard his evening as 
 rather a failure . 

 after the third act Nick say candidly : " my dear fellow , how can you sit 
 here ? be not   you go to speak to she ? " 

 to which Peter reply inscrutably : " Lord , no , never again . I bid she 
 good - bye yesterday . she know what I think of her form . it be very good , 
 but she carry it a little too far . besides , she do not   want I to 
 come , and it be therefore more discreet to keep away from she . " 

 " surely it be not   an hour for discretion ! " Nick cry . " excuse I at any 
 rate for five minute . " 

 he go behind and reappear only as the curtain be rise on the 
 fourth act ; and in the interval between the fourth and the fifth he go 
 again for a short time . Peter be personally detach , but he 
 consent to listen to his companion 's vivid account of the state of 
 thing on the stage , where the elation of victory have light up the 
 place . the strain be over , the ship in port - they be all wipe their 
 face and grin . Miriam - yes , positively - be grin too , and she 
 have not   ask a question about Peter nor send he a message . they be 
 kiss all round and dance for joy . they be on the eve , bad luck , 
 of a tremendous run . Peter groan irrepressibly for this ; it be , save 
 for a slight sign a moment later , the only vibration cause in he by 
 his cousin 's report . there be but one voice of regret that they have not 
 put on the piece early , as the end of the season would interrupt the 
 run . there be but one voice too about the fourth act - it be believe 
 all London would rush to see the fourth act . the crowd about she be a 
 dozen deep and Miriam in the midst of it all charming ; she be receive 
 in the ugly place after the fashion of royalty , almost as hedge with 
 the famous " divinity , " yet with a smile and a word for each . she be 
 really like a young queen on her accession . when she see he , Nick , she 
 have kiss her hand to he over the head of the courtier . Nick 's 
 artless comment on this be that she have such pretty manner . it make 
 Peter laugh - apparently at his friend 's conception of the manner of a 
 young queen . Mrs. Rooth , with a dozen shawl on her arm , be as red as 
 the kitchen - fire , but you could not   tell if Miriam be red or pale : she 
 be so cleverly , finely make up - perhaps a little too much . dashwood of 
 course be greatly to the fore , but you have not   to mention his own 
 performance to he : he take it all handsomely and would not   hear of 
 anything but that her fortune be make . he do not   say much indeed , but 
 evidently have idea about her fortune ; he nod significant thing and 
 whistle inimitable sound - " Heuh , heuh ! " he be perfectly satisfied ; 
 moreover , he look far ahead than any one . 

 it be on come back to his place after the fourth act that Nick put 
 in , for his companion 's benefit , most of these touch in his sketch of 
 the situation . if Peter have continue to look for Miriam 's mistake he 
 have not   yet find they : the fourth act , bristle with danger , put a 
 premium on every sort of cheap effect , have round itself without a 
 flaw . sit there alone while Nick be away he have leisure to meditate 
 on the wonder of this - on the art with which the girl have separate 
 passion from violence , fill the whole place and never scream ; for 
 it have often seem to he in London of old that the yell of theatrical 
 emotion ring through the shrink night like the voice of the Sunday 
 newsboy . Miriam have never be more present to he than at this hour ; 
 but she be inextricably transmute - present essentially as the romantic 
 heroine she represent . his state of mind be of the strange and he 
 be conscious of its strangeness , just as he be conscious in his very 
 person of a lapse of resistance which liken itself absurdly to 
 liberation . he feel weak at the same time that he feel inspire , and he 
 feel inspire at the same time that he know , or believe he know , that 
 his face be a blank . he see thing as a shin confusion , and yet 
 somehow something monstrously definite keep surge out of they . Miriam 
 be a beautiful , actual , fictive , impossible young woman of a past age , 
 an undiscoverable country , who speak in blank verse and overflow with 
 metaphor , who be exalt and heroic beyond all human convenience and 
 who yet be irresistibly real and relate to one 's own affair . but that 
 reality be a part of her spectator 's joy , and she be not change back 
 to the common by his perception of the magnificent trick of art with 
 which it be connect . before his kinsman rejoin he Peter , take a 
 visit - card from his pocket , have write on it in pencil a few word 
 in a foreign tongue ; but as at that moment he see Nick come in he 
 immediately put it out of view . 

 the last thing before the curtain rise on the fifth act that young man 
 mention his have bring a message from Basil Dashwood , who hop 
 they both , on leave the theatre , would come to supper with he in 
 company with Miriam and her mother and several other : he have prepare a 
 little informal banquet in honour of so famous a night . at this , while 
 the curtain be about to rise , Peter immediately take out his card again 
 and add something - he write the fine small hand you could see . Nick 
 ask he what he be do , and he wait but an instant . " it be a word 
 to say I can not   come . " 

 " to Dashwood ? oh I shall go , " say Nick . 

 " well , I hope you will enjoy it ! " his companion reply in a tone which 
 come back to he afterwards . 

 when the curtain fall on the last act the people stay , stand up in 
 their place for acclamation . the applause shake the house - the recall 
 become a clamour , the relief from a long tension . this be in any 
 performance a moment Peter detest , but he stand for an instant beside 
 Nick , who clap , to his cousin 's diplomatic sense , after the fashion 
 of a school - boy at the pantomime . there be a veritable roar while the 
 curtain draw back at the side most remove from our pair . Peter could 
 see Basil Dashwood hold it , make a passage for the male " juvenile 
 lead , " who have Miriam in tow . Nick redouble his effort ; hear the 
 plaudit swell ; see the bow of the lead gentleman , who be hot and 
 fat ; see Miriam , personally conduct and close to the footlight , grow 
 bright and big and more swaying ; and then become aware that his own 
 comrade have with extreme agility slip out of the stall . Nick have 
 already lose sight of he - he have apparently take but a minute to 
 escape from the house ; and wonder at his quit he without a 
 farewell if he be to leave England on the morrow and they be not to 
 meet at the hospitable Dashwood 's . he wonder even what Peter be " up 
 to , " since , as he have assure he , there be no question of his go 
 round to Miriam . he wait to see this young lady reappear three time , 
 drag Dashwood behind she at the second with a friendly arm , to whom , 
 in turn , be hook Miss Fanny Rover , the actress entrust in the piece 
 with the inevitable comic relief . he go out slowly with the crowd and 
 at the door look again for Peter , who strike he as deficient for once 
 in finish . he could not   know that in another direction and while he be 
 help the house to " rise " at its heroine , his kinsman have be 
 particularly explicit . 

 on reach the lobby Peter have pounce on a small boy in button , who 
 seem superfluously connect with a desolate refreshment - room and , 
 from the tip of his toe , be peep at the stage through the glaze 
 hole in the door of a box . into one of the child 's hand he thrust the 
 card he have draw again from his waistcoat and into the other the 
 large silver coin he could find in the same receptacle , while he bend 
 over he with word of adjuration - word the little page try to help 
 himself to apprehend by instantly attempt to peruse the other word 
 write on the card . 

 " that be no use - it be italian , " say Peter ; " only carry it round to Miss 
 Rooth without a minute 's delay . place it in her hand and she will give you 
 some object - a bracelet , a glove , or a flower - to bring I back as a 
 sign that she have receive it . I shall be outside ; bring I there what 
 she give you and you shall have another shilling - only fly ! " 

 his small messenger sound he a moment with the sharp face of London 
 wage - earning , and still more of London tip - earning , infancy , and 
 vanish as swiftly as a slave of the Arabian Nights . while he wait in 
 the lobby the audience begin to pour out , and before the urchin have 
 come back to he he be clap on the shoulder by Nick . 

 " I be glad I have not   lose you , but why do not   you stay to give she a 
 hand ? " 

 " give she a hand ? I hat it . " 

 " my dear man , I do not   follow you , " Nick say . " if you will not   come to 
 Dashwood 's supper I fear our way do not   lie together . " 

 " thank he very much ; say I have   to get up at an unnatural hour . " to this 
 Peter add : " I think I ought to tell you she may not be there . " 

 " Miss Rooth ? why it be all for she . " 

 " I be wait for a word from she - she may change her mind . " 

 Nick show his interest . " for you ? what then have you propose ? " 

 " I have   propose marriage , " say Peter in a strange voice . 

 " I say - ! " Nick break out ; and at the same moment Peter 's messenger 
 squeeze through the press and stand before he . 

 " she have give I nothing , sir , " the boy announce ; " but she say I be to 
 say ' all right ! ' " 

 Nick 's stare widen . " you have   propose through he ? " 

 " Aye , and she accept . good - night ! " - on which , turn away , Peter 
 bound into a hansom . he say something to the driver through the roof , 
 and Nick 's eye follow the cab as it start off . this young man be 
 mystify , be even amuse ; especially when the youth in button , 
 plant there and wonder too , bring forth : 

 " please sir , he tell I he would give I a shilling and he've   forget it . " 

 " oh I can not   pay you for that ! " Nick laugh . but he fish out a dole , 
 though he be vex at the injury to the supper . 




 XLVI 


 Peter meanwhile roll away through the summer night to Saint John 's 
 Wood . he have put the pressure of strong word on his young friend , 
 entreat she to drive home immediately , return there without any one , 
 without even her mother . he wish to see she alone and for a purpose he 
 would fully and satisfactorily explain - could not   she trust he ? he 
 besought she to remember his own situation and throw over her supper , 
 throw over everything . he would wait for she with unspeakable impatience 
 in Balaklava Place . 

 he do so , when he get there , but it have take half an hour . 
 Interminable seem his lonely vigil in Miss Lumley 's drawing - room , 
 where the character of the original proprietress come out to he more 
 than ever before in a kind of afterglow of old sociability , a vulgar , 
 ghostly reference . the numerous candle have be light for he , and 
 Mrs. Rooth 's familiar fiction lay about ; but his nerve forbid he the 
 solace of a chair and a book . he walk up and down , think and 
 listening , and as the long window , the balmy air permitting , stand open 
 to the garden , he pass several time in and out . a carriage appear 
 to stop at the gate - then there be nothing ; he hear the rare rattle of 
 wheel and the far - off hum of London . his impatience be overwrought , 
 and though he know this it persist ; it would have be no easy matter 
 for Miriam to break away from the flock of her felicitator . still less 
 simple be it doubtless for she to leave poor Dashwood with his supper 
 on his hand . perhaps she would bring Dashwood with she , bring he to 
 time she ; she be capable of play he - that be , of play her 
 Majesty 's new representative to the small far - off state , or even of 
 play they both - that trick . perhaps the little wretch in 
 button - Peter remember now the neglect shilling - only pretend to 
 go round with his card , have come back with an invent answer . but how 
 could he know , since presumably he could not   read Italian , that his 
 answer would fit the message ? Peter be sorry now that he himself have 
 not go round , not snatch Miriam bodily away , make sure of she and of 
 what he want of she . 

 when forty minute have elapse he regard it as prove that she 
 would not   come , and , ask himself what he should do , determine to 
 drive off again and seize she at her comrade 's feast . then he remember 
 how Nick have mention that this entertainment be not to be hold at the 
 young actor 's lodging but at some tavern or restaurant the name of 
 which he have not heed . suddenly , however , Peter become aware with joy 
 that this name do not   matter , for there be something at the garden door 
 at last . he rush out before she have have time to ring , and see as she 
 step from the carriage that she be alone . now that she be there , 
 that he have this evidence she have listen to he and trust he , all 
 his impatience and bitterness give way and a flood of plead 
 tenderness take their place in the first word he speak to she . it be 
 far " dearer " of she than he have any right to dream , but she be the good 
 and kind creature - this show it - as well as the most wonderful . he 
 be really not off his head with his contradictory way ; no , before 
 heaven he be not , and he would explain , he would make everything clear . 
 everything be change . 

 she stop short in the little dusky garden , look at he in the 
 light of the open window . then she call back to the coachman - they have 
 leave the garden door open - " wait for I , mind ; I shall want you again . " 

 " what be the matter - will not   you stay ? " Peter ask . " be you go out 
 again at this absurd hour ? I will not   hurt you , " he gently urge . and he 
 go back and close the garden door . he want to say to the coachman , 
 " it be no matter - please drive away . " at the same time he would not   for 
 the world have do anything offensive to she . 

 " I have   come because I think it well to - night , as thing have turn 
 out , to do the thing you ask I , whatever it may be , " she have already 
 begin . " that be probably what you calculate I would think , eh ? what this 
 evening have be you have   see , and I must allow that your hand be in it . 
 that you know for yourself - that you doubtless feel as you sit there . 
 but I confess I do not   imagine what you want of I here now , " she add . 
 she have remain stand in the path . 

 Peter feel the irony of she " now " and how it make a fool of he , but he 
 have be prepare for this and for much bad . he have beg she not to 
 think he a fool , but in truth at present he care little if she do . 
 very likely he be - in spite of his plea that everything be change : he 
 care little even himself . however , he speak in the tone of intense 
 reason and of the full disposition to satisfy she . this lucidity only 
 take still more from the dignity of his change of front : his separation 
 from she the day before have have such pretension to be lucid . but the 
 explanation and the justification be in the very fact , the fact that 
 have complete possession of he . he name it when he reply to she : 
 " I have   simply overrate my strength . " 

 " oh I know - I know ! that be why I entreat you not to come ! " Miriam 
 groan . she turn away lamenting , and for a moment he think she 
 would retreat to her carriage . but he pass his hand into her arm , to 
 draw she forward , and after an instant feel her yield . 

 " the fact be we must have this thing out , " he say . then he add as he 
 make she go into the house , bend over she , " the failure of my 
 strength - that be just the reason of my coming . " 

 she break into her laugh at these word , as she enter the 
 drawing - room , and it make they sound pompous in their false wisdom . she 
 fling off , as a good - natured tribute to the image of their have the 
 thing out , a white shawl that have be wrap round she . she be still 
 paint and bedizen , in the splendid dress of her climax , so that she 
 seem protect and alienate by the character she have be act . 
 " whatever it be you want - when I understand - you will be very brief , will not 
 you ? do you know I have   give up a charming supper for you ? Mamma have go 
 there . I have   promise to go back to they . " 

 " you be an angel not to have let she come with you . I be sure she want 
 to , " Peter make reply . 

 " oh she be all right , but she be nervous . " then the girl add : " could not 
 she keep you away after all ? " 

 " whom be you talk about ? " Biddy Dormer be as absent from his mind 
 as if she have never exist . 

 " the charming thing you be with this morning . be she so afraid of 
 oblige I ? oh she would be so good for you ! " 

 " do not   speak of that , " Peter gravely say . " I be in perfect good faith 
 yesterday when I take leave of you . I be - I be . but I can not   - I can not : 
 you be too unutterably dear to I . " 

 " oh do not   - please do not ! " Miriam wail at this . she stand before the 
 fireless chimney - piece with one of her hand on it . " if it be only to say 
 that , do not   you know , what be the use ? " 

 " it be not   only to say that . I have   a plan , a perfect plan : the whole thing 
 lie clear before I . " 

 " and what be the whole thing ? " 

 he have to make an effort . " you say your mother 's nervous . ah if you know 
 how nervous I be ! " 

 " well , I be not . go on . " 

 " give it up - give it up ! " Peter stammer . 

 " give it up ? " she fix he like a mild Medusa . 

 " I will marry you to - morrow if you will renounce ; and in return for the 
 sacrifice you make for I I will do more for you than ever be do for a 
 woman before . " 

 " renounce after to - night ? do you call that a plan ? " she ask . " those 
 be old word and very foolish one - you want something of that sort a 
 year ago . " 

 " oh I flutter round the idea at that time ; we be talk in the air . 
 I do not   really believe I could make you see it then , and certainly you 
 do not   see it . my own future , moreover , be not   definite to I . I do not 
 know what I could offer you . but these last month have make a 
 difference - I do know now . now what I say be deliberate - it be deeply 
 meditate . I simply can not   live without you , and I hold that together we 
 may do great thing . " 

 she seem to wonder . " what sort of thing ? " 

 " the thing of my profession , of my life , the thing one do for one 's 
 country , the responsibility and the honour of great affair ; deeply 
 fascinating when one be immerse in they , and more exciting really - put 
 they even at that - than the excitement of the theatre . care for I only 
 a little and you will see what they be , they will take hold of you . believe 
 I , believe I , " Peter plead ; " every fibre of my be tremble in 
 what I say to you . " 

 " you admit yesterday it would not   do , " she make answer . " where be 
 the fibre of your be then ? " 

 " they throb in I even more than now , and I be try , like an ass , 
 not to feel they . where be this evening yesterday - where be the 
 madden hour I have   just spend ? ah you be the perfection of 
 perfection , and as I sit there to - night you teach I what I really 
 want . " 

 " the perfection of perfection ? " the girl echo with the strange 
 smile . 

 " I need not   try to tell you : you must have feel to - night with such 
 rapture what you be , what you can do . how can I give that up ? " he 
 piteously go on . 

 " how can I , my poor friend ? I like your plan and your 
 responsibility and your great affair , as you call they . voyon , 
 they be infantile . I have   just show that I be a perfection of perfection : 
 therefore it be just the moment to ' renounce , ' as you gracefully say ? oh 
 I be sure , I be sure ! " and Miriam pause , rest eye at once light 
 and trouble on he as in the effort to think of some arrangement that 
 would help he out of his absurdity . " I be sure , I mean , that if you 
 do come your poor , dear , dot brain would be quite confused , " she 
 presently pursue . " I can not   be a muff in public just for you , 
  pourtant . dear I , why do you like we so much ? " 

 " like you ? I loathe you ! " 

 " Je le vois parbleu bien ! " she lightly return . " I mean why do you 
 feel we , judge we , understand we so well ? I please you because you see , 
 because you know ; and then for that very reason of my pleasing you must 
 adapt I to your convenience , you must take I over , as they say . you 
 admire I as an artist and therefore want to put I into a box in which 
 the artist will breathe she last . ah be reasonable ; you must let she 
 live ! " 

 " let she live ? as if I could prevent her living ! " Peter cry with 
 unmistakable conviction . " even if I do wish how could I prevent a 
 spirit like yours from express itself ? do not   talk about my putting 
 you in a box , for , dear child , I be take you out of one , " he all 
 persuasively explain . " the artist be irrepressible , eternal ; she will be 
 in everything you be and in everything you do , and you will go about with 
 she triumphantly exert your power , charm the world , carry 
 everything before you . " 

 Miriam 's colour rise , through all her artificial surface , at this all 
 but convincing appeal , and she ask whimsically : " shall you like that ? " 

 " like my wife to be the most brilliant woman in Europe ? I think I can do 
 with it . " 

 " be not   you afraid of I ? " 

 " not a bit . " 

 " Bravely say . how little you know I after all ! " sigh the girl . 

 " I tell the truth , " Peter ardently go on ; " and you must do I the 
 justice to admit that I have   take the time to dig deep into my feeling . 
 I be not an infatuated boy ; I have   live , I have   have experience , I have 
 observe ; in short I know what I mean and what I want . it be not   a thing 
 to reason about ; it be simply a need that consume I . I have   put it on 
 starvation diet , but that be no use - really , it be no use , Miriam , " the 
 young man declare with a ring that speak enough of his sincerity . " it 
 be no question of my trusting you ; it be simply a question of your 
 trust I . you be all right , as I have   hear you say yourself ; you be 
 frank , spontaneous , generous ; you be a magnificent creature . just 
 quietly marry I and I will manage you . " 

 " ' Manage ' I ? " the girl 's inflexion be droll ; it make he change 
 colour . 

 " I mean I will give you a large life than the large you can get in any 
 other way . the stage be great , no doubt , but the world 's great . it be a 
 big theatre than any of those place in the Strand . we will go in for 
 reality instead of fable , and you will do they far well than you do 
 the fable . " 

 Miriam have listen attentively , but her face that could so show thing 
 show her despair at his perverted ingenuity . " Pardon my say it 
 after your delightful tribute to my worth , " she return in a moment , 
 " but I have   never listen to anything quite so grandly unreal . you think 
 so well of I that humility itself ought to keep I silent ; nevertheless 
 I must utter a few shabby word of sense . I be a magnificent creature 
 on the stage - well and good ; it be what I want to be and it be charming to 
 see such evidence that I succeed . but off the stage , woe betide we both , 
 I should lose all my advantage . the fact 's so patent that it seem to 
 I I be very good - natured even to discuss it with you . " 

 " be you on the stage now , pray ? ah Miriam , if it be not   for the 
 respect I owe you ! " her companion wail . 

 " if it be not   for that I should not   have come here to meet you . my gift 
 be the thing that take you : could there be a well proof than that 
 it be to - night 's display of it that have bring you to this unreason ? 
 it be indeed a misfortune that you be so sensitive to our poor art , 
 since they play such trick with your power to see thing as they be . 
 without my share of they I should be a dull , empty , third - rate woman , 
 and yet that be the fate you ask I to face and insanely pretend you be 
 ready to face yourself . " 

 " without it - without it ? " Sherringham cry . " your own sophistry 's 
 infinitely bad than mine . I should like to see you without it for the 
 fiftieth part of a second . what I ask you to give up be the dusty board 
 of the play - house and the flare footlight , but not the very essence 
 of your being . your ' gift , ' your genius , be yourself , and it be because 
 it be yourself that I yearn for you . if it have be a thing you could 
 leave behind by the easy dodge of step off the stage I would never 
 have look at you a second time . do not   talk to I as if I be a 
 simpleton - with your own false simplification ! you be make to charm 
 and console , to represent beauty and harmony and variety to miserable 
 human being ; and the daily life of man be the theatre for that - not a 
 vulgar shop with a turnstile that be open only once in the twenty - four 
 hour . ' without it , ' verily ! " Peter proceed with a still , deep heat 
 that keep down in a manner his rise scorn and exasperate passion . 
 " please let I know the first time you be without your face , without 
 your voice , your step , your exquisite spirit , the turn of your head and 
 the wonder of your look ! " 

 Miriam at this move away from he with a port that resemble what she 
 sometimes show on the stage when she turn her young back upon the 
 footlight and then after a few step grandly sweep round again . this 
 evolution she perform - it be over in an instant - on the present 
 occasion ; even to stop short with her eye upon he and her head 
 admirably erect . " surely it be strange , " she say , " the way the other 
 solution never occur to you . " 

 " the other solution ? " 

 " that you should stay on the stage . " 

 " I do not   understand you , " her friend gloome . 

 " stay on my stage . come off your own . " 

 for a little he say nothing ; then : " you mean that if I will do that 
 you will have I ? " 

 " I mean that if it be to occur to you to offer I a little sacrifice 
 on your own side it might place the matter in a slightly more attractive 
 light . " 

 " continue to let you act - as my wife ? " he appeal . " be it a real 
 condition ? be I to understand that those be your term ? " 

 " I may say so without fear , because you will never accept they . " 

 " would you accept they from I ? " he demand ; " accept the manly , the 
 professional sacrifice , see I throw up my work , my prospect - of course 
 I should have to do that - and simply become your appendage ? " 

 she raise her arm for a prodigious fall . " my dear fellow , you invite 
 I with the good conscience in the world to become your . " 

 " the case be not equal . you would make of I the husband of an actress . I 
 should make of you the wife of an ambassador . " 

 " the husband of an actress , c'est bientĂ t dit , in that tone of scorn ! 
 if you be consistent , " say Miriam , all lucid and hard , " it ought to be 
 a proud position for you . " 

 " what do you mean , if I be consistent ? " 

 " have not   you always insist on the beauty and interest of our art and 
 the greatness of our mission ? have not   you almost come to blow with poor 
 Gabriel Nash about it ? what do all that mean if you will not   face the 
 first consequence of your theory ? either it be an enlighten 
 conviction or it be an empty pretence . if you be only talk 
 against time I be glad to know it , " she roll out with a darken eye . 
 " the well the cause , it seem to I , the well the deed ; and if the 
 theatre be important to the ' human spirit , ' as you use to say so 
 charmingly , and if into the bargain you have   the pull of be so fond of 
 I , I do not   see why it should be monstrous of you to give we your 
 service in an intelligent , indirect way . of course if you be not 
 serious we need not   talk at all ; but if you be , with your conception of 
 what the actor can do , why be it so base to come to the actor 's aid , 
 take one devotion with another ? if I be so fine I be worth look after 
 a bit , and the place where I be fine be the place to look after I ! " 

 he have a long pause again , take she in as it seem to he he have 
 never do . " you be never fine than at this minute , in the deep 
 domesticity of private life . I have   no conception whatever of what the 
 actor can do , and no theory whatever about the importance of the 
 theatre . any infatuation of that sort have completely drop from I , 
 and for all I care the theatre may go to the dog - which I judge it 
 altogether probably will ! " 

 " you be dishonest , you be ungrateful , you be false ! " Miriam flash . " it 
 be the theatre bring you here - if it have not   be for the theatre I 
 never would have look at you . it be in the name of the theatre you 
 first make love to I ; it be to the theatre you owe every advantage that , 
 so far as I be concern , you possess . " 

 " I seem to possess a great many ! " poor Peter derisively groan . 

 " you might avail yourself well of those you have ! you make I angry , 
 but I want to be fair , " say the shin creature , " and I can not   be 
 unless you be . you be not fair , nor candid , nor honourable , when you 
 swallow your word and abjure your faith , when you throw over old 
 friend and old memory for a selfish purpose . " 

 " ' selfish purpose ' be , in your own convenient idiom , bientĂ t dit , " 
 Peter promptly answer . " I suppose you consider that if I truly 
 esteem you I should be ashamed to deprive the world of the light of 
 your genius . perhaps my esteem be not   of the right quality - there be 
 different kind , be not   there ? at any rate I have   explain to you that I 
 propose to deprive the world of nothing at all . you shall be celebrate , 
  allez ! " 

 " vain word , vain word , my dear ! " and she turn off again in her 
 impatience . " I know of course , " she add quickly , " that to befool 
 yourself with such twaddle you must be pretty bad . " 

 " yes , I be pretty bad , " he admit , look at her dismally . " what do 
 you do with the declaration you make I the other day - the day I find 
 my cousin here - that you would take I if I should come to you as one who 
 have rise high ? " 

 Miriam think of it . " I remember - the chaff about the honour , the 
 order , the star and garter . my poor foolish friend , do not   be so 
 painfully literal . do not   you know a joke when you see it ? it be to 
 worry your cousin , be not   it ? but it do not   in the least succeed . " 

 " why should you wish to worry my cousin ? " 

 " because he be so provoking ! " she instantly answer ; after which she 
 laugh as if for she fall too simply into the trap he have lay . 
 " surely , at all event , I have my freedom no less than I have it now . 
 pray what explanation should I have owe you and in what fear of you 
 should I have go ? however , that have nothing to do with it . say I do 
 tell you that we might arrange it on the day you should come to I 
 cover with glory in the shape of little tinkling medal : why should 
 you anticipate that transaction by so many year and knock I down such 
 a long time in advance ? where be the glory , please , and where be the 
 medal ? " 

 " dearest girl , be I not go to strange part - a capital 
 promotion - next month , " he insistently demand , " and can not   you trust I 
 enough to believe I speak with a real appreciation of the fact   that 
 I be not lie to you in short   when I tell you I have   my foot in the 
 stirrup ? the glory 's dawning . I ' m all right too . " 

 " what you propose to I , then , be to accompany you tout bonnement to 
 your new post . what you propose to I be to pack up and start ? " 

 " you put it in a nutshell . " but Peter 's smile be strained . 

 " you be touch - it have its charm . but you can not   get anything in any of 
 the Americas , you know . I be assure there be no medal to be pick up 
 in those part - which be therefore ' strange ' indeed . that be why the 
 diplomatic body hate they all . " 

 " they be on the way , they be on the way ! " - he could only feverishly 
 hammer . " the people here do not   keep we long in disagreeable place 
 unless we want to stay . there be one thing you can get anywhere if you have 
 ability , and nowhere if you have   not , and in the disagreeable place 
 generally more than in the other ; and that - since it be the element of 
 the question we be discuss - be simply success . it be odious to be put 
 on one 's swagger , but I protest against be treat as if I have 
 nothing to offer - to offer a person who have such glory of her own . I be 
 not a little presumptuous ass ; I be a man accomplish and determine , 
 and the omen be on my side . " Peter falter a moment and then with a 
 queer expression go on : " remember , after all , that , strictly speak , 
 your glory be also still in the future . " an exclamation at these 
 word burst from Miriam 's lip , but her companion resume quickly : " ask 
 my official superior , ask any of my colleague , if they consider I have 
 nothing to offer . " 

 he have an idea as he cease speak that she be on the point of 
 break out with some strong word of resentment at his allusion to the 
 contingent nature of her prospect . but it only deepen his wound to 
 hear she say with extraordinary mildness : " it be perfectly true that my 
 glory be still to come , that I may fizzle out and that my little 
 success of to - day be perhaps a mere flash in the pan . stranger thing 
 have be - something of that sort happen every day . but do not   we talk 
 too much of that part of it ? " she ask with a weary patience that be 
 noble in its effect . " surely it be vulgar to think only of the noise 
 one be go to make - especially when one remember how utterly bete 
 most of the people will be among whom one make it . it be not   to my 
 possible glory I cling ; it be simply to my idea , even if it be destine 
 to betray I and sink I . I like it well than anything else - a 
 thousand time well   I be sorry to have to put it in such a way   than 
 toss up my head as the fine lady of a little coterie . " 

 " a little coterie ? I do not   know what you be talk about ! " - for this at 
 least Peter could fight . 

 " a big coterie , then ! it be only that at the good . a nasty , prim , 
 ' official ' woman who be perch on her little local pedestal and think 
 she be a queen for ever because she be ridiculous for an hour ! oh you 
 need not   tell I , I have   see they abroad - the dreary female - and could 
 imitate they here . I could do one for you on the spot if I be not   so 
 tired . it be scarcely worth mention perhaps all this while - but I be 
 ready to drop . " she pick up the white mantle she have toss off , 
 fling it round she with her usual amplitude of gesture . " they be 
 wait for I and I confess I be hungry . if I do not   hurry they will eat up 
 all the nice thing . do not   say I have not   be oblige , and come back 
 when you be well . good - night . " 

 " I quite agree with you that we have   talk too much about the vulgar side 
 of our question , " Peter return , walk round to get between she and 
 the french window by which she apparently have a view of leave the 
 room . " that be because I have   want to bribe you . Bribery 's almost always 
 vulgar . " 

 " yes , you should do well . merci ! there be a cab : some of they have 
 come for I . I must go , " she add , listen for a sound that reach 
 she from the road . 

 Peter listen too , make out no cab . " believe I , it be not   wise to 
 turn your back on such an affection as mine and on such a confidence , " 
 he break out again , speak almost in a warning tone - there be a touch 
 of superior sternness in it , as of a rebuke for real folly , but it be 
 mean to be tender - and stop she within a few foot of the window . 
 " such thing be the most precious that life have to give we , " he add 
 all but didactically . 

 she have listen once more for a little ; then she appear to give up 
 the idea of the cab . the reader need hardly be tell that at this stage 
 of her youthful history the right way for her lover to take she would not 
 have be to picture himself as act for her high good . " I like 
 your call the feeling with which I inspire you confidence , " she 
 presently say ; and the deep note of the few word have something of the 
 distant mutter of thunder . 

 " what be it , then , when I offer you everything I have , everything I be , 
 everything I shall ever be ? " 

 she seem to measure he as for the possible success of an attempt to 
 pass he . but she remain where she be . " I be sorry for you , yes , but 
 I be also rather ashamed . " 

 " ashamed of I ? " 

 " a brave offer to see I through - that be what I should call confidence . 
 you say to - day that you hate the theatre - and do you know what have make 
 you do it ? the fact that it have too large a place in your mind to let 
 you disown it and throw it over with a good conscience . it have a deep 
 fascination for you , and yet you be not strong enough to do so 
 enlightened and public a thing as take up with it in my person . you be 
 ashamed of yourself for that , as all your constant high claim for it 
 be on record ; so you blaspheme against it to try and cover your retreat 
 and your treachery and straighten out your personal situation . but it 
 will not   do , dear Mr. Sherringham - it will not   do at all , " Miriam proceed 
 with a triumphant , almost judicial lucidity which make her companion 
 stare ; " you have not   the small excuse of stupidity , and your 
 perversity be no excuse whatever . leave she alone altogether - a poor 
 girl who be make her way - or else come frankly to help she , to give she 
 the benefit of your wisdom . do not   lock she up for life under the 
 pretence of do her good . what do one most good be to see a little 
 honesty . you be the good judge , the good critic , the good observer , the 
 good believer , that I have   ever come across : you be committed to it by 
 everything you have   say to I for a twelvemonth , by the whole turn of 
 your mind , by the way you have   follow we up , all of we , from far back . 
 if an art 's noble and beneficent one should not   be afraid to offer it 
 one 's arm . your cousin be not : he can make sacrifice . " 

 " my cousin ? " Peter amazedly echo . " why , be not   it only the other day 
 you be throw his sacrifice in his tooth ? " 

 under this imputation on her straightness Miriam flinch but for an 
 instant . " I do that to worry you , " she smile . 

 " why should you wish to worry I if you care so little about I ? " 

 " care little about you ? have not   I tell you often , do not   I tell you 
 yesterday , how much I care ? ai not   I show it now by spend half the 
 night here with you - give myself away to all those cynic - take all 
 this trouble to persuade you to hold up your head and have the courage 
 of your opinion ? " 

 " you invent my opinion for your convenience , " say Peter all undaunted . 
 " as long ago as the night I introduce you , in Paris , to Mademoiselle 
 Voisin , you accuse I of look down on those who practise your art . I 
 remember how you come down on I because I do not   take your friend 
 Dashwood seriously enough . perhaps I do not ; but if already at that time 
 I be so wide of the mark you can scarcely accuse I of treachery now . " 

 " I do not   remember , but I daresay you be right , " Miriam coldly meditate . 
 " what I accuse you of then be probably simply what I reproach you with 
 now - the germ at least of your deplorable weakness . you consider that we 
 do awfully valuable work , and yet you would not   for the world let people 
 suppose you really take our side . if your position be even at that time 
 so false , so much the bad for you , that be all . oh it be refresh , " 
 his formidable friend exclaim after a pause during which Peter seem 
 to himself to taste the full bitterness of despair , so baffled and 
 cheapen he intimately feel - " oh it be refreshing to see a man burn his 
 ship in a cause that appeal to he , give up something precious for it 
 and break with horrid timidity and snobbery ! it be the most beautiful 
 sight in the world . " 

 Poor Peter , sore as he be , and with the cold breath of failure in his 
 face , nevertheless burst out laugh at this fine irony . " you be 
 magnificent , you give I at this moment the fine possible illustration 
 of what you mean by burn one 's ship . verily , verily there be no one 
 like you : talk of timidity , talk of refreshment ! if I have any talent for 
 it I would go on the stage to - morrow , so as to spend my life with you the 
 well . " 

 " if you will do that I will be your wife the day after your first 
 appearance . that would be really respectable , " Miriam say . 

 " unfortunately I have   no talent . " 

 " that would only make it the more respectable . " 

 " you be just like poor Nick , " Peter return - " you have   take to imitate 
 Gabriel Nash . do not   you see that it be only if it be a question of my 
 go on the stage myself that there would be a certain fitness in your 
 contrast I invidiously with Nick and in my giving up one career for 
 another ? but simply to stand in the wing and hold your shawl and your 
 smell - bottle - ! " he conclude mournfully , as if he have cease to 
 debate . 

 " hold my shawl and my smell - bottle be a mere detail , represent 
 a very small part of the whole precious service , the protection and 
 encouragement , for which a woman in my position might be indebted to a 
 man interested in her work and as accomplish and determine as you 
 very justly describe yourself . " 

 " and would it be your idea that such a man should live on the money 
 earn by an exhibition of the person of his still more accomplished and 
 still more determined wife ? " 

 " why not if they work together - if there be something of his spirit and 
 his support in everything she do ? " Miriam demand . " Je vous 
 attendais with the famous ' person ' ; of course that be the great stick 
 they beat we with . yes , we show it for money , those of we who have 
 anything decent to show , and some no doubt who have not , which be the 
 real scandal . what will you have ? it be only the envelope of the idea , 
 it be only our machinery , which ought to be concede to we ; and in 
 proportion as the idea take hold of we do we become unconscious of the 
 clumsy body . poor old ' person ' - if you know what we think of it ! if 
 you do not   forget it that be your own affair : it show you be dense before 
 the idea . " 

 " that I ' m dense ? " - and Peter appeal to their lamplit solitude , the 
 favouring , intimate night that only witness his defeat , as if this 
 outrage have be all that be want . 

 " I mean the public be - the public who pay we . after all , they expect we 
 to look at they too , who be not half so well worth it . if you should 
 see some of the creature who have the face to plant themselves there in 
 the stall before one for three mortal hour ! I daresay it would be 
 simple to have no body , but we be all in the same box , and it would 
 be a great injustice to the idea , and we be all show ourselves all 
 the while ; only some of we be not worth pay . " 

 " you be extraordinarily droll , but somehow I can not   laugh at you , " he 
 say , his handsome face draw by his pain to a contraction sufficiently 
 attest the fact . " do you remember the second time I ever see you - the 
 day you recite at my place ? " he abruptly ask ; a good deal as if he 
 be take from his quiver an arrow which , if it be the last , be also 
 one of the sharp . 

 " perfectly , and what an idiot I be , though it be only yesterday ! " 

 " you express to I then a deep detestation of the sort of 
 self - exposure to which the profession you be take up would commit 
 you . if you compare yourself to a contortionist at a country fair I be 
 only take my cue from you . " 

 " I do not   know what I may have say then , " reply Miriam , whose steady 
 flight be not arrest by this ineffectual bolt ; " I be no doubt 
 already wonderful for talk of thing I know nothing about . I be only 
 on the brink of the stream and I perhaps think the water cold than 
 it be . one warm it a bit one 's self when once one be in . of course I be a 
 contortionist and of course there be a hateful side , but do not   you see 
 how that very fact put a price on every compensation , on the help of 
 those who be ready to insist on the other side , the grand one , and 
 especially on the sympathy of the person who be ready to insist most and 
 to keep before we the great thing , the element that make up for 
 everything ? " 

 " the element - ? " Peter question with a vagueness that be pardonably 
 exaggerated . " do you mean your success ? " 

 " I mean what you have   so often be eloquent about , " she return with an 
 indulgent shrug - " the way we simply stir people 's soul . ah there be 
 where life can help we , " she break out with a change of tone , " there be 
 where human relation and affection can help we ; love and faith and joy 
 and suffering and experience - I do not   know what to call them ! they 
 suggest thing , they light they up and sanctify they , as you may say ; 
 they make they appear worth do . " she become radiant a while , as if 
 with a splendid vision ; then melt into still another accent , which 
 seem all nature and harmony and charity , she proceed : " I must tell 
 you that in the matter of what we can do for each other I have a 
 tremendously high ideal . I go in for closeness of union , for identity of 
 interest . a true marriage , as they call it , must do one a lot of good ! " 

 he stand there look at she for a time during which her eye 
 sustain his penetration without a relent gleam , some lapse of 
 cruelty or of paradox . but with a passionate , inarticulate sound he 
 turn away , to remain , on the edge of the window , his hand in his 
 pocket , gaze defeatedly , doggedly , into the featureless night , into 
 the little black garden which have nothing to give he but a familiar 
 smell of damp . the warm darkness have no relief for he , and Miriam 's 
 histrionic hardness fling he back against a fifth - rate world , against a 
 bedim , star - puncture nature which have no consolation - the bleared , 
 irresponsive eye of the London firmament . for the brief space of his 
 glaring at these thing he dumbly and helplessly rag . what he want 
 be something that be not in that thick prospect . what be the 
 meaning of this sudden , offensive importunity of " art , " this senseless , 
 mocking catch , like some irritate chorus of conspirator in a bad 
 opera , in which her voice be so incongruously conjoin with Nick 's and 
 in which Biddy 's sweet little pipe have not scruple still more 
 bewilderingly to mingle ? art might yield to damnation : what commission 
 after all have he ever give it to well he or bother he ? if the 
 pointless groan in which Peter exhale a part of his humiliation have 
 be translate into word , these word would have be as heavily 
 charge with a genuine british mistrust of the uncanny principle as if 
 the poor fellow speak they have never quit his island . several 
 acquire perception have strike a deep root in he , but an immemorial , 
 compact formation lie deeply still . he try at the present hour to rest 
 on it spiritually , but find it inelastic ; and at the very moment when 
 most conscious of this absence of the rebound or of any tolerable ease 
 he feel his vision solicit by an object which , as he immediately 
 guess , could only add to the complication of thing . 

 an undefined shape hover before he in the garden , halfway between the 
 gate and the house ; it remain outside of the broad shaft of lamplight 
 project from the window . it waver for a moment after it have become 
 aware of his observation and then whisk round the corner of the lodge . 
 this characteristic movement so effectually dispel the mystery - it 
 could only be Mrs. Rooth who resort to such conspicuous 
 secrecy - that , to feel the game up and his interview over , he have no 
 need to see the figure reappear on second thought and dodge about in 
 the dusk with a sportive , vexatious vagueness . evidently Miriam 's 
 warning of a few minute before have be found : a cab have deposit 
 her anxious mother at the garden door . Mrs. Rooth have enter with 
 precaution ; she have approach the house and retreat ; she have efface 
 herself - have peer and wait and listen . maternal solicitude and 
 muddle calculation have draw she from a feast as yet too imperfectly 
 commemorative . the heroine of the occasion of course have be 
 intolerably miss , so that the old woman have both oblige the company 
 and quiet her own nerve by jump insistently into a hansom and 
 rattle up to Saint John 's Wood to reclaim the absentee . but if she have 
 wish to be in time she have also desire not to be impertinent , and 
 would have be still more embarrassed to say what she aspire to 
 promote than to phrase what she have propose to hinder . she want to 
 abstain tastefully , to interfere felicitously , and , more generally and 
 justifiably - the small hour have come - to see what her young charge 
 be " up to . " she would probably have gather that they be 
 quarrel , and she appear now to be motion to Peter to know if it 
 be over . he take no notice of her signal , if signal they be ; he 
 only feel that before he make way for the poor , odious lady there be 
 one small spark he might strike from Miriam 's flint . 

 without let her guess that her mother be on the premise he turn 
 again to his companion , half - expect she would have take her chance 
 to regard their discussion as more than terminate and by the other 
 egress flit away from he in silence . but she be still there ; she be 
 in the act of approach he with a manifest intention of kindness , and 
 she look indeed , to his surprise , like an angel of mercy . 

 " do not   let we part so harshly , " she say - " with your try to make I 
 feel as if I be merely disoblige . it be no use talk - we only hurt 
 each other . let we hold our tongue like decent people and go about our 
 business . it be not   as if you have not   any cure - when you have   such a capital 
 one . try it , try it , my dear friend - you will see ! I wish you the high 
 promotion and the quick - every success and every reward . when you have 
 get they all , some day , and I have   become a great swell too , we will meet on 
 that solid basis and you will be glad I have   be dreadful now . " 

 " surely before I leave you I have   a right to ask you this , " he answer , 
 hold fast in both his own the cool hand of farewell she have choose 
 finally to torment he with . " be you ready to follow up by a definite 
 promise your imply assurance that I have   a remedy ? " 

 " a definite promise ? " Miriam benignly gaze - it be the perfection of 
 indirectness . " I do not   ' imply ' that you have   a remedy . I declare it on the 
 house - top . that delightful girl - " 

 " I be not talk of any delightful girl but you ! " he break in with a 
 voice that , as he afterwards learn , strike Mrs. Rooth 's ear in the 
 garden with affright . " I simply hold you , under pain of be convict 
 of the gross prevarication , to the strict sense of what you say ten 
 minute ago . " 

 " ah I have   say so many thing ! one have to do that to get rid of you . you 
 rather hurt my hand , " she add - and jerk it away in a manner show 
 that if she be an angel of mercy her mercy be partly for herself . 

 " as I understand you , then , I may have some hope if I do renounce my 
 profession ? " Peter pursue . " if I break with everything , my prospect , 
 my study , my training , my emolument , my past and my future , the 
 service of my country and the ambition of my life , and engage to take up 
 instead the business of watch your interest so far as I may learn 
 how and minister to your triumph so far as may in I lie - if after 
 further reflexion I decide to go through these preliminary , have I 
 your word that I may definitely look to you to reward I with your 
 precious hand ? " 

 " I do not   think you have   any right to put the question to I now , " she 
 return with a promptitude partly produce perhaps by the clear - cut 
 form his solemn speech have give - there be a charm in the sound of 
 it - to each item of his enumeration . " the case be so very contingent , so 
 dependent on what you ingeniously call your further reflexion . while you 
 really reserve everything you ask I to commit myself . if it be a 
 question of further reflexion why do you drag I up here ? and then , " 
 she add , " I be so far from wish you to take any such monstrous 
 step . " 

 " monstrous you call it ? just now you say it would be sublime . " 

 " Sublime if it be do with spontaneity , with passion ; ridiculous if it be 
 do ' after further reflexion . ' as you say , perfectly , a while ago , it 
 be not   a thing to reason about . " 

 " ah what a help you would be to I in diplomacy ! " Peter yearningly cry . 
 " will you give I a year to consider ? " 

 " would you trust I for a year ? " 

 " why not , if I be ready to trust you for life ? " 

 " oh I should not   be free then , bad luck . and how much you seem to take 
 for grant one must like you ! " 

 " remember , " he could immediately say , " that you have   make a great point of 
 your like I . would not   you do so still more if I be heroic ? " 

 she show he , for all her high impatience now , the interest of a long 
 look . " I think I should pity you in such a cause . give it all to she ; 
 do not   throw away a real happiness ! " 

 " ah you can not   back out of your position with a few vague and even rather 
 impertinent word ! " Peter protest . " you accuse I of swallow my 
 opinion , but you swallow your pledge . you have   paint in heavenly 
 colour the sacrifice I be talk of , and now you must take the 
 consequence . " 

 " the consequence ? " 

 " why my come back in a year to square you . " 

 " ah you be a bore ! " - she let he have it at last . " come back when you 
 like . I do not   wonder you have   grow desperate , but fancy I then ! " she 
 add as she look past he at a new interlocutor . 

 " yes , but if he will square you ! " Peter hear Mrs. Rooth 's voice respond 
 all persuasively behind he . she have steal up to the window now , have 
 pass the threshold , be in the room , but her daughter have not be 
 startle . " what be it he want to do , dear ? " she continue to Miriam . 

 " to induce I to marry he if he will go upon the stage . he will practise 
 over there - where he be go - and then come back and appear . be not   it 
 too dreadful ? talk he out of it , stay with he , soothe he ! " the girl 
 hurry on . " you will find some drink and some biscuit in the 
 cupboard - keep he with you , pacify he , give he his little supper . 
 meanwhile I will go to mine ; I will take the brougham ; do not   follow ! " 

 with which word Miriam bound into the garden , her white drapery 
 shin for an instant in the darkness before she disappear . Peter 
 look about he to pick up his hat , but while he do so hear the bang 
 of the gate and the quick carriage get into motion . Mrs. Rooth appear 
 to sway violently and in oppose direction : that of the impulse to rush 
 after Miriam and that of the extraordinary possibility to which the 
 young lady have allude . she be in doubt , yet at a venture , detain 
 he with a maternal touch , she twinkle up at their visitor like an 
 insinuate glow - worm . " I be so glad you come . " 

 " I be not . I have   get nothing by it , " Peter say as he find his hat . 

 " oh it be so beautiful ! " she declare . 

 " the play - yes , wonderful . I be afraid it be too late for I to avail 
 myself of the privilege your daughter offer I . good - night . " 

 " ah it be a pity ; will not   you take anything ? " ask Mrs. Rooth . " when I 
 hear your voice so high I be scared and hang back . " but before he 
 could reply she add : " be you really think of the stage ? " 

 " it come to the same thing . " 

 " do you mean you have   propose ? " 

 " oh unmistakably . " 

 " and what do she say ? " 

 " why you hear : she say I be an ass . " 

 " ah the little wretch ! " laugh Mrs. Rooth . " leave she to I . I will help 
 you . but you be mad . give up nothing - least of all your advantage . " 

 " I will not   give up your daughter , " say Peter , reflect that if this be 
 cheap it be at any rate good enough for Mrs. Rooth . he mend it a 
 little indeed by add darkly : " but you can not   make she take I . " 

 " I can prevent she take any one else . " 

 " oh can you ? " Peter cry with more scepticism than ceremony . 

 " you will see - you will see . " he pass into the garden , but , after she have 
 blow out the candle and draw the window to , Mrs. Rooth go with he . 
 " all you have   get to do be to be yourself - to be true to your fine 
 position , " she explain as they proceed . " trust I with the 
 rest - trust I and be quiet . " 

 " how can one be quiet after this magnificent evening ? " 

 " yes , but it be just that ! " pant the eager old woman . " it have launch 
 she so on this sea of danger that to make up for the loss of the old 
 security   do not   you know ?   we must take a still firm hold . " 

 " Aye , of what ? " Peter ask as Mrs. Rooth 's comfort become vague while 
 she stop with he at the garden door . 

 " ah you know : of the real life , of the true anchor ! " her hansom be 
 wait for she and she add : " I keep it , you see ; but a little 
 extravagance on the night one 's fortune have come ! - " 

 Peter star . yes , there be people whose fortune have come ; but he 
 manage to stammer : " be you follow she again ? " 

 " for you - for you ! " and she clamber into the vehicle . from the seat , 
 enticingly , she offer he the place beside she . " will not   you come too ? I 
 know he invite you . " Peter decline with a quick gesture and as he 
 turn away he hear she call after he , to cheer he on his lonely 
 walk : " I shall keep this up ; I shall never lose sight of she ! " 




 BOOK eighth 




 XLVII 


 when Mrs. Dallow return to London just before London break up the fact 
 be immediately know in Calcutta Gardens and be promptly communicate 
 to Nick Dormer by his sister Bridget . he have learn it in no other 
 way - he have have no correspondence with Julia during her absence . he 
 gather that his mother and sister be not ignorant of her 
 whereabouts - he never mention her name to they - but as to this he be 
 not sure if the source of their information have be the Morning Post 
 or a casual letter receive by the inscrutable Biddy . he know Biddy have 
 some epistolary commerce with Julia ; he have an impression grace 
 occasionally exchange letter with Mrs. Gresham . Biddy , however , who , 
 as he be also well aware , be always study what he would like , 
 forbore to talk to he about the absent mistress of Harsh beyond once 
 drop the remark that she have go from Florence to Venice and be 
 enjoy gondola and sunset too much to leave they . Nick 's comment on 
 this be that she be a happy woman to have such a go at Titian and 
 Tintoret : as he speak , and for some time afterwards , the sense of how he 
 himself should enjoy a like " go " make he ache with ineffectual longing . 

 he have forbid himself at the present to think of absence , not only 
 because it would be inconvenient and expensive , but because it would be 
 a kind of retreat from the enemy , a concession to difficulty . the enemy 
 be no particular person and no particular body of person : not his 
 mother ; not Mr. Carteret , who , as he hear from the doctor at Beauclere , 
 linger on , sink and sink till his vitality appear to have the 
 vertical depth of a gold - mine ; not his pacified constituent , who have 
 find a healthy diversion in return another Liberal wholly without 
 Mrs. Dallow 's aid   she have not participate even to the extent of a 
 responsive telegram in the election ; not his late colleague in the 
 House , nor the bite satirist of the newspaper , nor the brilliant 
 woman he take down at dinner - party - there be only one sense in which 
 he ever take they down ; not in short his friend , his foe , his private 
 thought , the periodical phantom of his shocked father : the enemy be 
 simply the general awkwardness of his situation . this awkwardness be 
 connect with the sense of responsibility so greatly deprecate by 
 Gabriel Nash , Gabriel who have cease to roam of late on purpose to miss 
 as few scene as possible of the drama , rapidly grow dull ala , of 
 his friend 's destiny ; but that compromising relation scarcely draw the 
 soreness from it . the public flurry produce by his collapse have only 
 be large enough to mark the flatness of our young man 's position when 
 it be over . to have have a few joke crack audibly at your expense 
 be not   an ordeal worth talk of ; the hard thing about it be merely 
 that there have not be enough of they to yield a proportion of good 
 one . Nick have feel in fine the benefit of live in an age and in a 
 society where number and pressure have , for the individual figure , 
 especially when it be a zero , compensation almost equal to their 
 cruelty . 

 no , the pinch for his conscience after a few week have pass be simply 
 an acute mistrust of the superficiality of performance into which the 
 desire to justify himself might hurry he . that desire be passionate 
 as regard Julia Dallow ; it be ardent also as regard his mother ; and , 
 to make it absolutely uncomfortable , it be complicated with the 
 conviction that neither of they would know his justification even when 
 she should see it . they probably could not   know it if they would , and 
 very certainly would not   if they could . he assure himself , however , that 
 this limitation would not   matter ; it be their affair - his own be simply 
 to have the right sort of thing to show . the work he be now attempt 
 be not   the right sort of thing , though doubtless Julia , for instance , 
 would dislike it almost as much as if it be . the two portrait of 
 Miriam , after the first exhilaration of his find himself at large , 
 fill he with no private glee ; they be not in the direction in which 
 he wish for the present really to move . there be moment when he 
 feel almost angry , though of course he hold his tongue , when by the few 
 person who see they they be pronounce wonderfully clever . that they 
 be wonderfully clever be just the detestable thing in they , so active 
 have that cleverness be in make they seem well than they be . 
 there be people to whom he would have be ashamed to show they , and 
 these be the people whom it would give he most pleasure some day to 
 please . not only have he many an hour of disgust at his actual work , but 
 he think he see as in an ugly revelation that nature have curse he 
 with an odious facility and that the lesson of his life , the stern 
 and wholesomest , would be to keep out of the trap it have lay for he . 
 he have fall into this trap on the threshold and have only scramble out 
 with his honour . he have a talent for appearance , and that be the fatal 
 thing ; he have a damnable suppleness and a gift of immediate response , a 
 readiness to oblige , that make he seem to take up cause which he 
 really leave lie , enable he to learn enough about they in an hour to 
 have all the air of have convert they to his use . many people use 
 they - that be the only thing to be say - who have take they in much 
 less . he be at all event too clever by half , since this pernicious 
 overflow have wreck most of his attempt . he have assume a virtue and 
 enjoy assume it , and the assumption have cheat his father and his 
 mother and his affianced wife and his rich benefactor and the candid 
 burgess of Harsh and the cynical reporter of the newspaper . his 
 enthusiasm have be but young curiosity , his speech have be young 
 agility , his profession and adhesion have be like postage - stamp 
 without glue : the head be all right , but they would not   stick . he stand 
 ready now to wring the neck of the irrepressible vice that certainly 
 would tend to nothing so much as to get he into further trouble . his 
 only real justification would be to turn patience - his own of 
 course - inside out ; yet if there should be a way to misread that recipe 
 his humbug genius could be trust infallibly to discover it . cheap 
 and easy result would dangle before he , little amateurish 
 conspicuitie at exhibition help by his history ; put it in his 
 power to triumph with a quick " what do you say to that ? " over those he 
 have wound . the fear of this danger be corrosive ; it poison even 
 lawful joy . if he should have a striking picture at the Academy next 
 year it would not   be a crime ; yet he could not   help suspect any 
 condition that would enable he to be strike so soon . in this way he 
 feel quite enough how Gabriel Nash have " have " he whenever rail at his 
 fever for proof , and how inferior as a productive force the desire to 
 win over the ill - dispose might be to the principle of quiet growth . 
 Nash have a foreign manner of lift up his finger and wave it before 
 he , as if to put an end to everything , whenever it become , in 
 conversation or discussion , to any extent a question whether any one 
 would " like " anything . 

 it be presumably in some degree at least a due respect for the 
 principle of quiet growth that keep Nick on the spot at present , make 
 he stick fast to Rosedale Road and Calcutta Gardens and deny himself 
 the simplification of absence . do what he would he could not   despoil 
 himself of the impression that the disagreeable be somehow connect 
 with the salutary , and the " quiet " with the disagreeable , when 
 stubbornly bear ; so he resist a hundred impulse to run away to Paris 
 or to Florence , coarse form of the temptation to persuade himself by 
 material motion that he be launch . he stay in London because it 
 seem to he he be there more conscious of what he have undertake , and 
 he have a horror of shirk the consciousness . one element in it indeed 
 be his note how little convenience he could have find in a foreign 
 journey even have his judgement approve such a subterfuge . the stoppage 
 of his supply from Beauclere have now become an historic fact , with 
 something of the majesty of its class about it : he have have time to see 
 what a difference this would make in his life . his mean be small and 
 he have several old debt , the number of which , as he believe , loom 
 large to his mother 's imagination . he could never tell she she 
 exaggerate , because he tell she nothing of that sort in these day : 
 they have no intimate talk , for an impenetrable partition , a tall , 
 bristle hedge of untrimmed misconception , have spring up between they . 
 Poor Biddy have make a hole in it through which she squeeze from side to 
 side , to keep up communication , at the cost of many rent and 
 scratch ; but Lady Agnes walk straight and stiff , never turn she 
 head , never stop to pluck the least little daisy of consolation . it 
 be in this manner she wish to signify that she have accept she 
 wrong . she drape herself in they as in a roman mantle and have never 
 look so proud and wasted and handsome as now that her eye rest only 
 on ruin . 

 Nick be extremely sorry for she , though he mark as a dreadful want of 
 grace she never set a foot in Rosedale Road - she mention his 
 studio no more than if it have be a private gambling - house or something 
 bad ; sorry because he be well aware that for the hour everything must 
 appear to she to have crumble . the luxury of Broadwood would have to 
 crumble : his mind be very clear about that . Biddy 's prospect have 
 wither to the fine , dreariest dust , and Biddy indeed , take a 
 lesson from her brother 's perversity , seem little disposed to well 
 a bad business . she profess the most peace - make sentiment , but when 
 it come really to do something to brighten up the scene she show 
 herself portentously corrupt . after Peter Sherringham 's heartless flight 
 she have wantonly slight an excellent opportunity to repair her 
 misfortune . Lady Agnes have reason to infer , about the end of June , that 
 young Mr. Grindon , the only son - the other child be girl - of an 
 immensely rich industrial and political baronet in the north , be 
 literally wait for the faint sign . this reason she promptly 
 impart to her young daughter , whose intelligence have to take it in 
 but who have show it no other consideration . Biddy have set her charming 
 face as a stone ; she would have nothing to do with sign , and she , 
 practically speak , wilfully , wickedly refuse a magnificent offer , so 
 that the young man carry his high expectation elsewhere . how much in 
 earnest he have be be prove by the fact that before Goodwood have come 
 and go he be capture by Lady Muriel Macpherson . it be superfluous 
 to insist on the frantic determination to get marry write on such an 
 accident as that . Nick know of this episode only through Grace , and he 
 deplore its have occur in the midst of other disaster . 

 he know or he suspect something more as well - something about his 
 brother Percival which , should it come to light , no phase of their 
 common history would be genial enough to gloss over . it have usually be 
 suppose that Percy 's store of comfort against the ill of life be 
 confine to the infallibility of his rifle . he be not sensitive , and 
 his use of that weapon represent a resource against which common 
 visitation might have spend themselves . it have suddenly come to Nick 's 
 ear , however , that he cultivate a concurrent support in the person of 
 a robust countrywoman , house in an ivied corner of Warwickshire , in 
 whom he have long be interested and whom , without any flourish of 
 magnanimity , he have end by make his wife . the situation of the 
 late bear of the pledge of this affection , a bloom boy - there have 
 be two or three previously - be therefore perfectly regular and of a 
 nature to make a difference in the worldly position , as the phrase run , 
 of his moneyless uncle . if there be degree in the absolute and Percy 
 have an heir - other , moreover , supposedly follow - Nick would have to 
 regard himself as still more moneyless than before . his brother 's last 
 step be doubtless , give the case , to be commend ; but such 
 discovery be enliven only when make in other family , and Lady 
 Agnes would scarcely enjoy learn to what tune she have become a 
 grandmother . 

 Nick forbore from delicacy to intimate to Biddy that he think it a 
 pity she could not   care for Mr. Grindon ; but he have a private sense that 
 if she have be capable of such a feat it would have lighten a little 
 the weight he himself have to carry . he bear she a slight grudge , which 
 last till Julia Dallow come back ; when the circumstance of the girl 's 
 be summon immediately down to Harsh create a diversion that be 
 perhaps after all only fanciful . Biddy , as we know , entertain a 
 theory , which Nick have find occasion to combat , that Mrs. Dallow have 
 not treat he perfectly well ; therefore in go to harsh the very 
 first time that relative hold out a hand to she so jealous a little 
 sister must have recognise a special inducement . the inducement might 
 have be that the relative have comfort for she , that she be act by 
 her cousin 's direct advice , that they be still in close communion on 
 the question of the offer Biddy be not to accept , that in short 
 Peter 's sister have take upon herself to see that their young friend 
 should remain free for the day of the fugitive 's inevitable return . once 
 or twice indeed Nick wonder if Julia have herself be visit , in a 
 large sense , by the thought of retrace her step - if she wish to 
 draw out her young friend 's opinion as to how she might do that 
 gracefully . during the few day she be in town Nick have see she twice 
 in Great Stanhope Street , but neither time alone . she have say to he on 
 one of these occasion in her odd , explosive way : " I should have think 
 you would have go away somewhere - it must be such a bore . " of course she 
 firmly believe he be stay for Miriam , which he really be not ; and 
 probably she have write this false impression off to Peter , who , still 
 more probably , would prefer to regard it as just . Nick be stay for 
 Miriam only in the sense that he should very glad of the money he might 
 receive for the portrait he be engage in painting . that money would be 
 a great convenience to he in spite of the obstructive ground Miriam have 
 take in pretend - she have blow half a gale about it - that he have 
 have no right to dispose of such a production without her consent . his 
 answer to this be simply that the purchaser be so little of a stranger 
 that it do not   go , so to speak , out of the family , out of her . it 
 do not   matter , Miriam 's retort that if Mr. Sherringham have formerly be 
 no stranger he be utterly one now , so that nothing would ever less 
 delight he than to see her hat image on his wall . he would back out 
 of the bargain and Nick be leave with the picture on his hand . Nick 
 jeered at this shallow theory and when she come to sit the question 
 serve as well as another to sprinkle their familiar silence with 
 chaff . he already know something , as we have see , of the condition in 
 which his distracted kinsman have leave England ; and this connect 
 itself , in casual meditation , with some of the calculation imputable to 
 Julia and to Biddy . there have naturally be a sequel to the queer 
 behaviour perceptible in Peter , at the theatre , on the eve of his 
 departure - a sequel light by a word of Miriam 's in the course of she 
 first sit to Nick after her great night . " Fancy " - so this 
 observation run - " fancy the dear man find time in the press of all 
 his last duty to ask I to marry he ! " 

 " he tell I you have find time in the press of all yours to say you 
 would , " Nick reply . and this be pretty much all that have pass on 
 the subject between they - save of course she immediately make clear 
 that Peter have grossly misinform he . what have happen be that she 
 have say she would do nothing of the sort . she profess a desire not to 
 be confront again with this obnoxious theme , and Nick easily fall in 
 with it - quite from his own settle inclination not to handle that kind 
 of subject with she . if Julia have false idea about he , and if Peter 
 have they too , his part of the business be to take the simple course 
 to establish the falsity . there be difficulty indeed attach even 
 to the simple course , but there would be a difficulty the less if one 
 should forbear to meddle in promiscuous talk with the general , 
 suggestive topic of intimate union . it be certain that in these day 
 Nick cultivate the practice of forbearance for which he do not 
 receive , for which perhaps he never would receive , due credit . 

 he have be convince for some time that one of the next thing he 
 should hear would be that Julia Dallow have arrange to marry either Mr. 
 Macgeorge or some other master of multitude . he could think of that 
 now , he find - think of it with resignation even when Julia , before his 
 eye , look so handsomely forgetful that her appearance have to be take 
 as refer still more to their original intimacy than to his 
 comparatively superficial offence . what make this accomplishment of his 
 own remarkable be that there be something else he think of quite as 
 much - the fact that he have only to see she again to feel by how great a 
 charm she have in the old day take possession of he . this charm 
 operate apparently in a very direct , primitive way : her presence 
 diffuse it and fully establish it , but her absence leave comparatively 
 little of it behind . it dwelt in the very fact of her person - it be 
 something she happen physically to be ; yet - consider that the 
 question be of something very like loveliness - its envelope of 
 association , of memory and recurrence , have no great destiny . she 
 pack it up and take it away with she quite as if she have be a woman 
 who have come to sell a set of lace . the lace be as wonderful as ever 
 when take out of the box , but to admire again their rarity you have to 
 send for the woman . what be above all remarkable for our young man be 
 that Miriam Rooth fetch a fellow , vulgarly speak , very much less 
 than Julia at the time when , be on the spot , Julia do fetch . he 
 could paint Miriam day after day without any agitate blur of vision ; 
 in fact the more he see of she the clear grow the atmosphere through 
 which she blaze , the more her richness become one with that of the 
 flowering work . there be reciprocity and special sympathy in such a 
 relation ; mysterious affinity they use to be call , divination of 
 private congruity . Nick have an unexpressed conviction that if , accord 
 to his defeat desire , he have embark with Mrs. Dallow in this 
 particular quest of a great prize , disaster would have overtake they on 
 the deep water . even with the limited risk indeed disaster have come ; 
 but it be of a different kind and it have the advantage for he that now 
 she could not   reproach and denounce he as the cause of it - could not   do 
 so at least on any ground he be oblige to recognise . she would never 
 know how much he have care for she , how much he care for she still ; 
 inasmuch as the conclusive proof for himself be his conscious 
 reluctance to care for another woman - evidence she positively misread . 
 some day he would doubtless try to do that ; but such a day seem as yet 
 far off , and he have meanwhile no spite , no vindictive impulse , to help 
 he . the soreness that mingle with his liberation , the sense of 
 indignity even , as of a full cup suddenly dash by a blunder hand 
 from his lip , demand certainly a balm ; but it find the balm , for the 
 time , in another passion , not in a rancorous exercise of the same - a 
 passion strong enough to make he forget what a pity it be he be not 
 so form as to care for two woman at once . 

 as soon as Julia return to England he break ground to his mother on 
 the subject of she make the mistress of Broadwood understand that she 
 and the girl now regard their occupancy of that estate as absolutely 
 over . he have already , several week before , pick a little at the arid 
 tract of that indicate surrender , but in the interval the soil appear 
 to have form again to a considerable thickness . it be disagreeable to 
 he to call his parent 's attention to the become course , and 
 especially disagreeable to have to emphasise it and discuss it and 
 perhaps clamour for it . he would have like the whole business to be 
 tacit - a little triumph of silent delicacy . but he find reason to 
 suspect that what in fact would be most tacit be Julia 's certain 
 endurance of any chance failure of that charm . Lady Agnes have a theory 
 that they have virtually - " practically " as she say - give up the place , 
 so that there be no need of make a splash about it ; but Nick 
 discover in the course of an exploration of Biddy 's view more rigorous 
 perhaps than any to which he have ever subject she , that none of their 
 property have be remove from the delightful house - none of the thing 
  there be ever so many thing   heavily plant there when their mother 
 take possession . Lady Agnes be the proprietor of innumerable article 
 of furniture , relic and survival of her former greatness , and move 
 about the world with a train of heterogeneous baggage ; so that her quiet 
 overflow into the spaciousness of Broadwood have have all the luxury of a 
 final subsidence . what Nick have to propose to she now be a dreadful 
 combination , a relapse into the condition she most hat - seaside 
 lodging , bald storehouse in the Marylebone Road , little London room 
 cram with object that catch the dirt and make they stuffy . he be 
 afraid he should really finish she , and he himself be surprised in a 
 degree at his insistence . he would not   have suppose he should have care 
 so much , but he find he do care intensely . he care enough - it say 
 everything - to explain to his mother that her retention of Broadwood 
 would show " practically "   since that be her great word   for the 
 violation of an agreement . Julia have give they the place on the 
 understanding that he be to marry she , and once he be definitely not 
 to marry she they have no right to keep the place . " yes , you make the 
 mess and we pay the penalty ! " the poor lady flash out ; but this be 
 the only overt protest she make - except indeed to contend that their 
 withdrawal would be an act ungracious and offensive to Julia . she look 
 as she have look during the month that succeed his father 's death , 
 but she give a general , a final grim assent to the proposition that , let 
 their kinswoman take it as she would , their own duty be unmistakably 
 clear . 

 it be Grace who be principal representative of the idea that Julia 
 would be outrage by such a step ; she never cease to repeat that she 
 have never hear of anything so " nasty . " Nick would have expect this of 
 Grace , but he feel rather bereft and betray when Biddy murmur to he 
 that she know - that there be really no need of their sacrifice 
 their mother 's comfort to an extravagant scruple . she intimate that if 
 Nick would only consent to their go on with Broadwood as if nothing 
 have happen - or rather as if everything have happen - she would answer 
 for the feeling of the owner . for almost the first time in his life 
 Nick dislike what Biddy say to he , and he give she a sharp rejoinder , 
 a taste of the general opinion that they all have enough to do to answer 
 for themselves . he remember afterwards the way she look at 
 he - startle , even frighten and with rise tear - before turn 
 away . he hold that they should judge well how Julia would take it 
 after they have throw up the place ; and he make it his duty to arrange 
 that his mother should formally advise she , by letter , of their 
 intending to depart at once . Julia could then protest to her heart 's 
 content . Nick be aware that for the most part he do not   pass for 
 practical ; he could imagine why , from his early year , people should 
 have joke he about it . but this time he be determined to rest on a 
 rigid view of thing as they be . he do not   sec his mother 's letter , 
 but he know that it go . he feel she would have be more loyal if she 
 have show it to he , though of course there could be but little question 
 of loyalty now . that it have really be write , however , very much on 
 the line he dictate be clear to he from the subsequent surprise 
 which Lady Agnes 's blankness do not   prevent his divining . 

 Julia acknowledge the offer news , but in unexpected term : she have 
 apparently neither resist nor protest ; she have simply be very glad 
 to get her house back again and have not accuse any of they of 
 nastiness . Nick see no more of her letter than he have see of his 
 mother 's , but he be able to say to Grace - to their parent he be 
 studiously mute - " my poor child , you see after all that we have not 
 kick up such a row . " Grace shake her head and look gloomy and deeply 
 wise , reply that he have no cause to triumph - they be so far from 
 have see the end of it yet . thus he guess that his mother have 
 comply with his wish on the calculation that it would be a mere form , 
 that Julia would entreat they not to be so fantastic and that he himself 
 would then , in the presence of her wound surprise , consent to a quiet 
 continuance , so much in the interest - the air of Broadwood have a 
 purity ! - of the health of all of they . but since Julia jump at their 
 sacrifice he have no chance to be mollify : he have all grossly to 
 persist in have be right . 

 at bottom probably he be a little surprised at Julia 's so prompt 
 assent . literally speak , it be not perfectly graceful . he be sorry 
 his mother have be so deceived , but be sorry still for Biddy 's 
 mistake - it show she might be mistake about other thing . nothing be 
 leave now but for Lady Agnes to say , as she do substantially whenever 
 she see he : " we be to prepare to spend the autumn at worthe then or 
 some other horrible place ? I do not   know their name : it be the only thing 
 we can afford . " there be an implication in this that if he expect she 
 to drag her girl about to country - house in a continuance of the 
 fidgety effort to work they off he must understand at once that she be 
 now too weary and too sad and too sick . she have do she good for they 
 and it have all be vain and cruel - now therefore the poor creature 
 must look out for themselves . to the grossness of Biddy 's misconduct she 
 need not   refer , nor to the golden opportunity that young woman have 
 forfeit by her odious treatment of Mr. Grindon . it be clear that this 
 time Lady Agnes be incurably discourage ; so much so as to fail to 
 glean the dim light from the fact that the girl be really make a 
 long stay at Harsh . Biddy go to and fro two or three time and then in 
 August fairly settle there ; and what her mother mainly see in her 
 absence be the desire to keep out of the way of household reminder of 
 her depravity . in fact , as turn out , Lady Agnes and Grace gather 
 themselves together in the first day of that month for another visit to 
 the very old lady who have be Sir Nicholas 's godmother ; after which 
 they go somewhere else - so that the question of Worthing have not 
 immediately to be face . 

 Nick stay on in London with the obsession of work hum in his ear ; 
 he be joyfully conscious that for three or four month , in the empty 
 Babylon , he would have ample store of time . but toward the end of 
 August he get a letter from Grace in which she speak of her situation 
 and of her mother 's in a manner that seem to impose on he the doing 
 of something tactful . they be pay a third visit - he know that in 
 Calcutta Gardens lady' - maid have be to and fro with box , 
 replenishment of wardrobes - and yet somehow the outlook for the autumn 
 be dark . grace do not   say it in so many word , but what he read between 
 the line be that they have no more invitation . what , therefore , in 
 pity 's name be to become of they ? People like they well enough when 
 Biddy be with they , but they do not   care for her mother and she , that 
 prospect tout pur , and Biddy be coope up indefinitely with Julia . 
 this be not the manner in which Grace have anciently allude to her 
 sister 's happy visit at Harsh , and the change of tone make Nick wince 
 with a sense of all that have collapse . Biddy be a little fish worth 
 landing in short , scantly as she seem disposed to bite , and Grace 's 
 rude probity could admit that she herself be not . 

 Nick have an inspiration : by way of do something tactful he go down 
 to Brighton and take lodging , for several week , in the general 
 interest , the very quiet and sunniest he could find . this he intend 
 as a kindly surprise , a reminder of how he have his mother 's and sister ' 
 comfort at heart , how he could exert himself and save they trouble . but 
 he have no soon conclude his bargain - it be a more costly one than he 
 have at first calculate - than he be bewilder and befog to learn 
 that the person on whose behalf he have so exert himself be to pass 
 the autumn at Broadwood with Julia . that daughter of privilege have take 
 the place into familiar use again and be now correct their former 
 surprise at her crude indifference - this be infinitely characteristic 
 of Julia - by invite they to share it with she . Nick wonder vaguely 
 what she be " up to " ; but when his mother treat herself to the line 
 irony of address he an elaborately humble request for his consent to 
 their accept the merciful refuge - she repeat this expression three 
 time - he reply that she might do exactly as she like : he would only 
 mention that he should not   feel himself at liberty to come and see she 
 there . this condition prove apparently to Lady Agnes 's mind no 
 hindrance , and she and her daughter be presently reinstate in the 
 very apartment they have learn so to love . this time in fact it be 
 even well than before - they have still few expense . the expense 
 be Nick 's : he have to pay a forfeit to the landlady at Brighton for 
 back out of his contract . he say nothing to his mother about that 
 bungle business - he be literally afraid ; but a sad event just then 
 remind he afresh how little it be the moment for squander money . 
 Mr. Carteret draw his last breath ; quite painlessly it seem , as the 
 closing scene be describe at beauclere when the young man go down to 
 the funeral . two or three week later the content of his will be make 
 public in the Illustrated London News , where it definitely appear 
 that he leave a very large fortune , not a penny of which be to go to 
 Nick . the provision for Mr. Chayter 's decline year be remarkably 
 handsome . 




 XLVIII 


 Miriam have mount at a bind , in her new part , several step in the 
 ladder of fame , and at the climax of the London season this fact be 
 bring home to she from hour to hour . it produce a thousand 
 solicitation and entanglement , and she rapidly learn that to be 
 celebrate take up almost as much of one 's own time as of other 
 people 's . even though , as she boast , she have reduce to a science the 
 practice of " work " her mother - she make use of the good lady socially 
 to the utmost , push she perpetually into the breach - there be many a 
 juncture at which it be clear that she could not   too much disoblige 
 without hurt her cause . she make almost an income out of the 
 photographer - their appreciation of she as a subject know no 
 bound - and she supply the newspaper with column of characteristic 
 copy . to the gentleman who seek speech of she on behalf of these 
 organ she pour forth , vindictively , flood of unscrupulous romance ; 
 she tell they all different tale , and , as her mother tell they other 
 more marvellous yet , publicity be cleverly catch by rival version , 
 which surpass each other in authenticity . the whole case be 
 remarkable , be unique ; for if the girl be advertise by the 
 bewilderment of her reader she seem to every sceptic , on his go to 
 see she , as fine as if he have discover she for himself . she be still 
 accommodate enough , however , from time to time , to find an hour to 
 come and sit to Nick Dormer , and he help himself far by go to 
 her theatre whenever he could . he be conscious Julia Dallow would 
 probably hear of this and triumph with a fresh sense of how right she 
 have be ; but the reflexion only make he sigh resignedly , so true it 
 strike he as be that there be some thing explanation can never 
 well , can never touch . 

 Miriam bring Basil Dashwood once to see her portrait , and Basil , who 
 commend it in general , direct his criticism mainly to two 
 point - its not yet be finish and its not have go into that 
 year 's Academy . the young actor audibly pant ; he feel the short breath 
 of Miriam 's rapidity , the quick beat of her success , and , look at 
 everything now from the standpoint of that speculation , could scarcely 
 contain his impatience at the painter 's clumsy slowness . he think the 
 latter 's second attempt much well than his first , but somehow it ought 
 by that time to be shin in the eye of the public . he put it to their 
 friend with an air of acuteness - he have those felicity - that in every 
 great crisis there be nothing like strike while the iron be hot . he 
 even betray the conviction that by put on a spurt Nick might wind 
 up the job and still get the Academy people to take he in . Basil know 
 some of they ; he all but offer to speak to they - the case be so 
 exceptional ; he have no doubt he could get something do . against the 
 appropriation of the work by Peter Sherringham he explicitly and loudly 
 protest , in spite of the homely recommendation of silence from 
 Miriam ; and it be indeed easy to guess how such an arrangement would 
 interfere with his own conception of the eventual right place for the 
 two portrait - the vestibule of the theatre , where every one go in 
 and out would see they suspend face to face and surround by 
 photograph , artistically dispose , of the young actress in a variety of 
 character . Dashwood show superiority in his jump to the contention 
 that so exhibit the picture would really help to draw . consider 
 the virtue he attribute to Miriam the idea be exempt from narrow 
 prejudice . 

 moreover , though a trifle feverish , he be really genial ; he repeat 
 more than once , " yes , my dear sir , you have   do it this time . " this be a 
 favourite formula with he ; when some allusion be make to the girl 's 
 success he greet it also with a comfortable " this time she have do 
 it . " there be ever a hint of fine judgement and far calculation in his 
 tone . it appear before he go that this time even he himself have do 
 it - he have take up something that would really answer . he tell Nick 
 more about Miriam , more certainly about her outlook at that moment , than 
 she herself have communicate , contribute strongly to our young man 's 
 impression that one by one every gage of a great career be be 
 drop into her cup . Nick himself taste of success vicariously for the 
 hour . Miriam let her comrade talk only to contradict he , and 
 contradict he only to show how indifferently she could do it . she 
 treat he as if she have nothing more to learn about his folly , but as 
 if it have take intimate friendship to reveal to she the full extent of 
 it . Nick do not   mind her intimate friendship , but he end by dislike 
 Dashwood , who give on his nerve - a circumstance poor Julia , have it come 
 to her knowledge , would doubtless have find deplorably significant . 
 Miriam be more pleased with herself than ever : she now make no scruple 
 of admit that she enjoy all her advantage . she have a full 
 vision of how successful success could be ; she take everything as it 
 come - din out every Sunday and even go into the country till the 
 Monday morning ; keep a hundred distinguish name on her lip and 
 abound in strange tale of the people who be make up to she . she 
 strike Nick as less strenuous than she have be hitherto , as make even 
 an aggressive show of inevitable laxity ; but he be conscious of no 
 obligation to rebuke she for it - the less as he have a dim vision that 
 some effect of that sort , some irritation of his curiosity , be what she 
 desire to produce . she would perhaps have like , for reason well know 
 to herself , to look as if she be throw herself away , not be able 
 to do anything else . he could not   talk to she as if he take a deep 
 interest in her career , because in fact he do not ; she remain to he 
 primarily and essentially a pictorial object , with the nature of whose 
 vicissitude he be concern - put common charity and his personal 
 good nature of course aside - only so far as they have something to say in 
 her face . how could he know in advance what turn of her experience , 
 twist of her life , would say most ? - so possible be it even that 
 complete failure or some incalculable perversion   innumerable be the 
 queer trap that might be set for she   would only make she for his 
 particular purpose more precious . 

 when she have leave he at any rate , the day she come with Basil Dashwood , 
 and still more on a later occasion , that of his turn back to his work 
 after put she into her carriage , and otherwise bare - headedly 
 manifesting , the last time , for that year apparently , that he be to see 
 she - when she have leave he it occur to he in the light of her quick 
 distinction that there be deep difference in the famous artistic 
 life . Miriam be already in a glow of glory - which , moreover , be 
 probably but a faint spark in relation to the blaze to come ; and as he 
 close the door on she and take up his palette to rub it with a dirty 
 cloth the little room in which his own battle be practically to be 
 fight look woefully cold and grey and mean . it be lonely and yet at 
 the same time be people with unfriendly shadow - so thick he foresee 
 they gather in winter twilight to come - the dull condition , the 
 long patience , the less immediate and less personal joy . his late 
 beginning be there and his waste youth , the mistake that would still 
 bring forth child after their image , the sedentary solitude , the grey 
 mediocrity , the poor explanation , the effect of foolishness he dread 
 even from afar of in have to ask people to wait , and wait long , and 
 wait again , for a fruition which to their sense at least might well 
 prove a grotesque anti - climax . he yearn enough over it , however it 
 should figure , to feel that this possible pertinacity might enter into 
 comparison even with such a productive force as Miriam 's . that be after 
 all in his bare studio the most collective dim presence , the one that 
 keep he company well as he sit there and that make it the right place , 
 however wrong - the sense that it be to the thing in itself he be 
 attach . this be Miriam 's case too , but the sharp contrast , which she 
 show he she also feel , be in the number of other thing she get with 
 the thing in itself . 

 I hasten to add that our young man have hour when this last mystic value 
 strike he as require for its full operation no adjunct whatever - as 
 be in its own splendour a summary of all adjunct and apology . I 
 have relate that the great collection , the National Gallery and the 
 Museum , be sometimes rather a series of dead surface to he ; but the 
 sketch I have attempt of he will have be inadequate if it fail to 
 suggest that there be other day when , as he stroll through they , he 
 pluck right and leave perfect nosegay of reassurance . bend as he be 
 on work in the modern , which speak to he with a thousand voice , he 
 judge it well for long period not to haunt the early master , 
 whose condition have be so different - later he come to see that it 
 do not   matter much , especially if one keep away ; but he be liable to 
 accidental deflexion from this theory , liable in particular to feel the 
 sanctity of the great portrait of the past . these be the thing the 
 most inspiring , in the sense that while generation , while world have 
 come and go , they seem far most to prevail and survive and testify . 
 as he stand before they the perfection of their survival often strike 
 he as the supreme eloquence , the virtue that include all other , 
 thank to the language of art , the rich and most universal . empire 
 and system and conquest have roll over the globe and every kind of 
 greatness have rise and pass away , but the beauty of the great 
 picture have know nothing of death or change , and the tragic century 
 have only sweeten their freshness . the same face , the same figure 
 look out at different world , know so many secret the particular 
 world do not , and when they join hand they make the indestructible 
 thread on which the pearl of history be string . 

 Miriam notify her artist that her theatre be to close on the tenth of 
 August , immediately after which she be to start , with the company , on a 
 tremendous tour of the province . they be to make a lot of money , but 
 they be to have no holiday , and she do not   want one ; she only want 
 to keep at it and make the most of her limit opportunity for 
 practice ; inasmuch as at that rate , play but two part a year - and 
 such part : she despise they ! - she should not   have master the 
 rudiment of her trade before decrepitude would compel she to lay it by . 
 the first time she come to the studio after her visit with Dashwood she 
 spring up abruptly at the end of half an hour , say she could sit no 
 more - she have have enough and to spare of it . she be visibly restless 
 and preoccupy , and though Nick have not wait till now to note that 
 she have more mood in her list than he have tint on his palette he have 
 never yet see her sensibility at this particular pitch . it strike he 
 rather as a waste of passion , but he be ready to let she go . she look 
 round the place as if suddenly tired of it and then say mechanically , 
 in a heartless London way , while she smooth down her glove , " so 
 you be just go to stay on ? " after he have confess that this be his 
 dark purpose she continue in the same casual , talk - making manner : " I 
 daresay it be the good thing for you . you be just go to grind , eh ? " 

 " I see before I an eternity of grind . " 

 " all alone by yourself in this dull little hole ? you will be 
 conscientious , you will be virtuous . " 

 " oh my solitude will be mitigate - I shall have model and people . " 

 " what people - what model ? " Miriam ask as she arrange her hat before 
 the glass . 

 " well , no one so good as you . " 

 " that be a prospect ! " the girl laugh - " for all the good you have   get out 
 of I ! " 

 " you be no judge of that quantity , " say Nick , " and even I can not   measure 
 it just yet . have I be rather a bore and a brute ? I can easily believe 
 it ; I have not   talk to you - I have not   amuse you as I might . the truth 
 be that take people 's likeness be a very absorbing , inhuman 
 occupation . you can not   do much to they besides . " 

 " yes , it be a cruel honour to pay they . " 

 " Cruel - that be too much , " he object . 

 " I mean it be one you should not   confer on those you like , for when it be 
 over it be over : it kill your interest in they . after you have   finish 
 they you do not   like they any more at all . " 

 " surely I like you , " Nick return , sit tilt back before his 
 picture with his hand in his pocket . 

 " we have   do very well : it be something not to have quarrel " - and she 
 smile at he now , seem more " in " it . " I would not   have have you slight 
 your work - I would not   have have you do it badly . but there be no fear of 
 that for you , " she go on . " you be the real thing and the rare bird . I 
 have not   live with you this way without see that : you be the sincere 
 artist so much more than I. No , no , do not   protest , " she add with one 
 of her sudden , fine transition to a deep tone . " you will do thing that 
 will hand on your name when my screeching be happily over . only you do 
 seem to I , I confess , rather high and dry here - I speak from the point 
 of view of your comfort and of my personal interest in you . you strike 
 I as kind of lonely , as the Americans say - rather cut off and isolate 
 in your grandeur . have not   you any confreres - fellow - artist and people 
 of that sort ? do not   they come near you ? " 

 " I do not   know they much , " Nick humbly confess . " I have   always be 
 afraid of they , and how can they take I seriously ? " 

 " well , I ' ve   get confrere , and sometimes I wish I have not ! but do 
 your sister never come near you any more , " she ask , " or be it only the 
 fear of meet I ? " 

 he be aware of his mother 's theory that Biddy be constantly bundle 
 home from Rosedale Road at the approach of improper person : she be as 
 angry at this as if she would not   have be more so have her child 
 suffer exposure ; but the explanation he give his present visitor be 
 nearer the truth . he remind she that he have already tell she - he have 
 be careful to do this , so as not to let it appear she be 
 avoid - that his sister be now most of the time in the country , 
 stay with an hospitable relation . 

 " oh yes , " the girl rejoin to this , " with Mr. Sherringham 's sister , 
 Mrs. - what be her name ? I always forget . " and when he have pronounce the 
 word with a reluctance he doubtless fail sufficiently to conceal - he 
 hat to talk of Julia by any name and do not   know what business Miriam 
 have with she - she go on : " that be the one - the beauty , the wonderful 
 beauty . I shall never forget how handsome she look the day she find 
 I here . I do not   in the least resemble she , but I should like to have a 
 try at that type some day in a comedy of manner . but who the devil will 
 write I a comedy of manner ? there it be ! the danger would be , no 
 doubt , that I should push she a la charge . " 

 Nick listen to these remark in silence , say to himself that if she 
 should have the bad taste - which she seem tremble on the brink 
 of - to make an allusion to what have pass between the lady in question 
 and himself he should dislike she beyond remedy . it would show he she 
 be a coarse creature after all . her good genius interpose , however , as 
 against this hard penalty , and she quickly , for the moment at least , 
 whisk away from the topic , demand , since they speak of comrade and 
 visitor , what have become of Gabriel Nash , whom she have not   hear of for 
 so many day . 

 " I think he be tired of I , " say Nick ; " he have not   be near I either . 
 but after all it be natural - he have see I through . " 

 " seen you through ? do you mean , " she laugh , ' see through you ? why 
 you have   only just begin . " 

 " precisely , and at bottom he do not   like to see I begin . he be afraid I 
 shall do something . " 

 she wonder - as with the interest of that . " do you mean he be jealous ? " 

 " not in the least , for from the moment one do anything one cease to 
 compete with he . it leave he the field more clear . but that be just 
 the discomfort for he - he feel , as you say just now , kind of lonely : 
 he feel rather abandon and even , I think , a little betray . so far 
 from be jealous he yearn for I and regret I . the only thing he 
 really take seriously be to speculate and understand , to talk about the 
 reason and the essence of thing : the people who do that be the 
 high . the application , the consequence , the vulgar little effect , 
 belong to a low plane , for which one must doubtless be tolerant and 
 indulgent , but which be after all an affair of comparative accident and 
 trifle . indeed he will probably tell I frankly the next time I see he 
 that he can not   but feel that to come down to small question of 
 action - to the small prudence and compromise and simplification of 
 practice - be for the superior person really a fatal descent . one may be 
 inoffensive and even commendable after it , but one can scarcely pretend 
 to be interesting . ' il en faut comme Ă a , ' but one do not   haunt they . 
 he will do his good for I ; he will come back again , but he will come back 
 sad , and finally he will fade away altogether . Hell go off to Granada or 
 somewhere . " 

 " the simplification of practice ? " cry Miriam . " why they be just 
 precisely the most blessed thing on earth . what should we do without 
 they ? " 

 " what indeed ? " Nick echo . " but if we need they it be because we be not 
 superior person . we be awful Philistines . " 

 " I will be one with you , " the girl smile . " Poor Nash be not   worth 
 talk about . what be it but a small question of action when he 
 preach to you , as I know he do , to give up your seat ? " 

 " yes , he have a weakness for give up - he will go with you as far as that . 
 but I be not give up any more , you see . I be peg away , and that be 
 gross . " 

 " he be an idiot - n'en parlon plus ! " she drop , gather up her 
 parasol but linger . 

 " ah I stick to he , " Nick say . " he help I at a difficult time . " 

 " you ought to be ashamed to confess it . " 

 " oh you be a Philistine ! " Nick return . 

 " certainly I be , " she declare , go toward the door - " if it make I 
 one to be sorry , awfully sorry and even rather angry , that I have not 
 before I a period of the same sort of unsociable peg away that you 
 have . for want of it I shall never really be good . however , if you do not 
 tell people I have   say so they will never know . your condition be far 
 well than mine and far more respectable : you can do as many thing as 
 you like in patient obscurity while I be pitchfork into the melĂ e and 
 into the most improbable fame - all on the back of a solitary cheval de 
 bataille , a poor break - wind screw . I read it clear that I shall be 
 condemn for the great part of the rest of my day - do you see 
 that ? - to play the stuff I be act now . I be study Juliet and I want 
 awfully to do she , but really I be mortally afraid lest , make a success 
 of she , I should find myself in such a box . perhaps the brute would 
 want Juliet for ever instead of my present part . you see amid what 
 delightful alternative one move . what I long for most I never shall 
 have have - five quiet year of hard all - round work in a perfect company , 
 with a manager more perfect still , play five hundred thing and never 
 be hear of at all . I may be too particular , but that be what I should 
 have like . I think I be disgusting with my successful crudity . it be 
 discouraging ; it make one not care much what happen . what be the use , 
 in such an age , of be good ? " 

 " good ? your haughty claim , " Nick laugh , " be that you be bad . " 

 " I mean good , you know - there be other way . do not   be stupid . " and 
 Miriam tap he - he be near she at the door - with her parasol . 

 " I scarcely know what to say to you , " he logically plead , " for 
 certainly it be your fault if you get on so fast . " 

 " I be too clever - I be a humbug . " 

 " that be the way I use to be , " say Nick . 

 she rest her brave eye on he , then turn they over the room slowly ; 
 after which she attach they again , kindly , musingly - rather as if he 
 have be a fine view or an interesting object - to his face . " ah , the 
 pride of that - the sense of purification ! he ' use ' to be forsooth ! poor 
 I ! of course you will say , ' look at the sort of thing I have   undertake to 
 produce compare with the rot you have . ' so it be all right . become great 
 in the proper way and do not   expose I . " she glance back once more at 
 the studio as if to leave it for ever , and give another last look at the 
 unfinished canvas on the easel . she shake her head sadly , " poor Mr. 
 Sherringham - with that ! " she wail . 

 " oh I will finish it - it will be very decent , " Nick say . 

 " finish it by yourself ? " 

 " not necessarily . you will come back and sit when you return to London . " 

 " never , never , never again . " 

 he wonder . " why you have   make I the most profuse offer and promise . " 

 " yes , but they be make in ignorance and I have   back out of they . I be 
 capricious too - faite la part de Ă a . I see it would not   do - I do not 
 know it then . we be too far apart - I be , as you say , a Philistine . " 
 and as he protest with vehemence against this unscrupulous bad faith 
 she add : " you will find other model . Paint Gabriel Nash . " 

 " Gabriel Nash - as a substitute for you ? " 

 " it will be a good way to get rid of he . Paint Mrs. Dallow too , " Miriam 
 go on as she pass out of the door he have open for her - " paint Mrs. 
 Dallow if you wish to eradicate the last possibility of a throb . " 

 it be strange that , since only a moment before he have be in a state 
 of mind to which the superfluity of this reference would have be the 
 clear thing about it , he should now have be move to receive it 
 quickly , naturally , irreflectively , receive it with the question : " the 
 last possibility ? do you mean in she or in I ? " 

 " oh in you . I do not   know anything about ' she . ' " 

 " but that would not   be the effect , " he argue with the same supervene 
 candour . " I believe that if she be to sit to I the usual law would be 
 reverse . " 

 " the usual law ? " 

 " which you cite a while since and of which I recognise the general 
 truth . in the case you speak of , " he say , " I should probably make a 
 shocking picture . " 

 " and fall in love with she again ? then for God 's sake risk the daub ! " 
 Miriam laugh out as she float away to her victoria . 




 XLIX 


 she have guess happily in say to he that to offer to paint Gabriel 
 Nash would be the way to get rid of that visitant . it be with no such 
 invidious purpose indeed that our young man propose to his intermittent 
 friend to sit ; rather , as August be dusty in the London street , he have 
 too little hope that Nash would remain in town at such a time to oblige 
 he . Nick have no wish to get rid of his private philosopher ; he like 
 his philosophy , and though of course premeditate paradox be the light 
 to read he by he yet have frequently and incidentally an inspired 
 unexpectedness . he remain in Rosedale Road the man who most produce 
 by his presence the effect of company . all the other man of Nick 's 
 acquaintance , all his political friend , represent , often very 
 communicatively , their own affair , their own affair alone ; which when 
 they do it well be the most their host could ask of they . but Nash have 
 the rare distinction that he seem somehow to figure his affair , the 
 say host 's , and to show an interest in they unaffected by the ordinary 
 social limitation of capacity . this relegate he to the class of high 
 luxury , and Nick be well aware that we hold our luxury by a fitful 
 and precarious tenure . if a friend without personal eagerness be one of 
 the great of these it would be evident to the simple mind that by 
 the law of distribution of earthly boon such a convenience should be 
 expect to forfeit in duration what it display in intensity . he have 
 never be without a suspicion that Nash be too good to last , though 
 for that matter nothing have yet confirm a vague apprehension that his 
 particular manner of break up or break down would be by his 
 wish to put so fresh a recruit in relation with other disciple . 

 that would practically amount to a catastrophe , Nick feel ; for it be 
 odd that one could both have a great kindness for he and not in the 
 least , when it come to the point , yearn for a view of his personal 
 extension . his originality have always be that he appear to have 
 none ; and if in the first instance he have introduce his bright , young , 
 political prodigy to Miriam and her mother , that be an exception for 
 which Peter Sherringham 's interference have be mainly responsible . all 
 the same , however , it be some time before Nick cease to view it as 
 perhaps on the awkward book that , to complete his education as it be , 
 Gabriel would wish he to converse a little with spirit form by a 
 like tonic discipline . Nick have an instinct , in which there be no 
 consciousness of detriment to Nash , that the pupil , possibly even the 
 imitator , of such a genius would be , as he mentally phrase it , 
 something awful . he could be sure , even Gabriel himself could be sure , 
 of his own reservation , but how could either of they be sure of those 
 of other ? imitation be a fortunate homage only in proportion as it 
 rest on measurement , and there be an indefinable something in Nash 's 
 doctrine that would have be discredit by exaggeration or by zeal . 
 Providence happily appear to have spar it this ordeal ; so that Nick 
 have after month still to remind himself how his friend have never 
 press on his attention the least little group of fellow - mystic , never 
 offer to produce they for his edification . it scarcely matter now 
 that he be just the man to whom the superficial would attribute that 
 sort of tail : it would probably have be hard , for example , to persuade 
 Lady Agnes or Julia Dallow or Peter Sherringham that he be not most at 
 home in some dusky , untidy , dimly - imagine suburb of " culture , " a region 
 people by unpleasant phrasemonger who think he a gentleman and who 
 have no human use but to be hold up in the comic press - which be , 
 moreover , probably restrain by decorum from touch upon the bad of 
 their aberration . 

 Nick at any rate never run his academy to earth nor so much as skirt 
 the suburb in question ; never catch from the impenetrable background of 
 his life the least reverberation of flit or of flirt , the 
 faint esthetic ululation . there have be moment when he be even 
 move to anxiety by the silence that poor Gabriel 's own faculty of sound 
 make all about he - when at least it reduce to plainer element   the 
 mere bald term of lonely singleness and thrift , of the lean philosophic 
 life   the mystery he could never wholly dissociate from he , the air as 
 of the transient and occasional , the likeness to curl vapour or 
 murmur wind or shift light . it be , for instance , a symbol of this 
 unclassified state , the lack of all position as a name in cite list , 
 that Nick in point of fact have no idea where he live , would not have 
 know how to go and see he or send he a doctor if he have hear he be 
 ill . he have never walk with he to any door of Gabriel 's own , even to 
 pause at the threshold , though indeed Nash have a club , the Anonymous , in 
 some improbable square , of which he might be suspect of be the only 
 member - one have never hear of another - where it be vaguely understand 
 letter would some day or other find he . fortunately he press with 
 no sharpness the spring of pity - his whole " form " be so easy a grasp 
 of the helm of consciousness , which he would never let go . he would 
 never consent to any deformity , but would steer his course straight 
 through the eventual narrow pass and simply go down over the horizon . 

 he in any case turn up Rosedale Road one day after Miriam have leave 
 London ; he have just come back from a fortnight in Brittany , where he have 
 draw refreshment from the tragic sweetness of - well , of everything . he 
 be on his way somewhere else - be go abroad for the autumn but be 
 not particular what he do , profess that he have come back just to get 
 Nick utterly off his mind . " it be very nice , it be very nice ; yes , yes , I 
 see , " he remark , give a little , general , assent sigh as his eye 
 wander over the simple scene - a sigh which for a suspicious ear would 
 have testify to an insidious reaction . 

 Nick 's ear , as we know , be already suspicious ; a fact account for 
 the expectant smile - it indicate the pleasant apprehension of a theory 
 confirm - with which he return : " do you mean my picture be nice ? " 

 " yes , yes , your picture and the whole thing . " 

 " the whole thing ? " 

 " your existence in this little , remote , independent corner of the great 
 city . the disinterestedness of your attitude , the persistence of your 
 effort , the piety , the beauty , in short the edification , of the whole 
 spectacle . " 

 Nick laugh a little ruefully . " how near to have have enough of I you 
 must be when you speak of I as edify ! " Nash change colour slightly 
 at this ; it be the first time in his friend 's remembrance that he have 
 give a sign of embarrassment . " vous allez I lă cher , I see it come ; 
 and who can blame you ? - for I have   cease to be in the least spectacular . 
 I have my little hour ; it be a great deal , for some people do not   even 
 have that . I have   give you your curious case and I have   be generous ; I 
 make the drama last for you as long as I could . you will ' slope , ' my dear 
 fellow - you will quietly slope ; and it will be all right and inevitable , 
 though I shall miss you greatly at first . who know whether without you 
 I should not   still have be ' represent ' Harsh , heaven help I ? you 
 rescue I ; you convert I from a representative into an 
 example - that be a shade well . but do not   I know where you must be when 
 you be reduce to praise my piety ? " 

 " do not   turn I away , " say Nash plaintively ; " give I a cigarette . " 

 " I shall never dream of turn you away ; I shall cherish you till the 
 late possible hour . I be only try to keep myself in tune with the 
 logic of thing . the proof of how I cling be that precisely I want you 
 to sit to I . " 

 " to sit to you ? " with which Nick could fancy his visitor a little blank . 

 " certainly , for after all it be not   much to ask . here we be and the 
 hour 's peculiarly propitious - long light day with no one come near 
 I , so that I have   plenty of time . I have a hope I should have some order : 
 my young sister , whom you know and who be a great optimist , ply I 
 with that vision . in fact we invent together a charming little sordid 
 theory that there might be rather a ' run ' on I from the chatter   such 
 as it be   produce by my take up this line . my sister strike out the 
 idea that a good many of the pretty lady would think I interesting 
 and would want to be do . perhaps they do , but they have   control 
 themselves , for I can not   say the run have commence . they have not   even 
 come to look , but I daresay they do not   yet quite take it in . of course 
 it be a bad time - with every one out of town ; though you know they might 
 send for I to come and do they at home . perhaps they will when they 
 settle down . a portrait - tour of a dozen country - house for the autumn 
 and winter - what do you say to that for the ardent life ? I know I 
 excruciate you , " Nick add , " but do not   you see how it be in my interest 
 to try how much you will still stand ? " 

 Gabriel puff his cigarette with a serenity so perfect that it might 
 have be assume to falsify these word . " Mrs. Dallow will send for 
 you - vous allez voir Ă a , " he say in a moment , brush aside all 
 vagueness . 

 " she will send for I ? " 

 " to paint her portrait ; she will recapture you on that basis . she will get 
 you down to one of the country - house , and it will all go off as 
 charmingly - with sketch in the morning , on day you can not   hunt , and 
 anything you like in the afternoon , and fifteen course in the evening ; 
 there will be bishop and ambassador stay - as if you be a 
 ' well - know , ' awfully clever amateur . take care , take care , for , fickle 
 as you may think I , I can read the future : do not   imagine you have   come to 
 the end of I yet . Mrs. Dallow and your sister , of both of whom I speak 
 with the great respect , be capable of hatch together the most 
 conscientious , delightful plan for you . your difference with the 
 beautiful lady will be patch up and you will each come round a little 
 and meet the other halfway . the beautiful lady will swallow your 
 profession if you will swallow her . she will put up with the palette if 
 you will put up with the country - house . it will be a very unusual one in 
 which you will not   find a good north room where you can paint . you will go 
 about with she and do all her friend , all the bishop and ambassador , 
 and you will eat your cake and have it , and every one , begin with your 
 wife , will forget there be anything queer about you , and everything will 
 be for the good in the good of world ; so that , together - you and 
 she - you will become a great social institution and every one will think 
 she have a delightful husband ; to say nothing of course of your have a 
 delightful wife . ah my dear fellow , you turn pale , and with reason ! " 
 Nash go lucidly on : " that be to pay you for have try to make I let 
 you have it . you have it then there ! I may be a bore " - the emphasis of 
 this , though a mere shade , testify to the first personal resentment 
 Nick have ever hear his visitor express - " I may be a bore , but once in a 
 while I strike a light , I make thing out . then I venture to repeat , 
 ' take care , take care . ' if , as I say , I respect ce dame infinitely 
 it be because they will be act accord to the high wisdom of 
 their sex . that be the sort of thing woman do for a man - the sort of 
 thing they invent when they be exceptionally good and clever . when 
 they be not they do not   do so well ; but it be not for want of try . 
 there be only one thing in the world well than their incomparable 
 charm : it be their abysmal conscience . deep calleth unto deep - the one 's 
 indeed a part of the other . and when they club together , when they 
 earnestly consider , as in the case we be suppose , " Nash continue , 
 " then the whole thing take a lift ; for it be no long the virtue of the 
 individual , it be that of the wondrous sex . " 

 " you be so remarkable that , more than ever , I must paint you , " Nick 
 return , " though I be so agitated by your prophetic word that my hand 
 tremble and I shall doubtless scarcely be able to hold my brush . look 
 how I rattle my easel try to put it into position . I see it all there 
 just as you show it . yes , it will be a droll day , and more modern than 
 anything yet , when the conscience of woman make out good reason for 
 man be not be in love with they . you talk of their goodness and 
 cleverness , and it be certainly much to the point . I do not   know what else 
 they themselves might do with those grace , but I do not   see what man can 
 do with they but be fond of they where he find they . " 

 " oh you will do it - you will do it ! " cry Nash , brightly jubilant . 

 " what be it I shall do ? " 

 " exactly what I just say ; if not next year then the year after , or the 
 year after that . you will go halfway to meet she and she will drag you about 
 and pass you off . you will paint the bishop and become a social 
 institution . that is , you will do it if you do not   take great care . " 

 " I shall , no doubt , and that be why I cling to you . you must still look 
 after I , " Nick go on . " do not   melt away into a mere improbable 
 reminiscence , a delightful , symbolic fable - do not   if you can possibly 
 help it . the trouble be , you see , that you can not   really keep hold very 
 tight , because at bottom it will amuse you much more to see I in 
 another pickle than to find I simply jog down the vista of the 
 year on the straight course . let I at any rate have some sort of 
 sketch of you as a kind of feather from the angel 's wing or a photograph 
 of the ghost - to prove to I in the future that you be once a solid 
 sociable fact , that I do not   invent you , do not   launch you as a deadly 
 hoax . of course I shall be able to say to myself that you can not   have 
 be a fable - otherwise you would have a moral ; but that will not   be enough , 
 because I be not sure you will not   have have one . some day you will peep in 
 here languidly and find I in such an attitude of piety - present my 
 bent back to you as I niggle over some interminable botch - that I shall 
 give cruelly on your nerve and you will just draw away , close the door 
 softly . you will be gentle and considerate about it and spare I , you 
 will not   even make I look round . you will steal off on tiptoe , never , never 
 to return . " 

 Gabriel consent to sit ; he profess he should enjoy it and be glad to 
 give up for it his immediate foreign commerce , so vague to Nick , so 
 definite apparently to himself ; and he come back three time for the 
 purpose . Nick promise himself a deal of interest from this experiment , 
 for with the first hour of it he begin to feel that really as yet , give 
 the condition under which he now study he , he have never at all 
 thoroughly explore his friend . his impression have be that Nash have a 
 head quite fine enough to be a challenge , and that as he sit there day 
 by day all sort of pleasant and paintable thing would come out in his 
 face . this impression be not gainsaid , but the whole tangle grow 
 denser . it strike our young man that he have never see his subject 
 before , and yet somehow this revelation be not produce by the sense of 
 actually see it . what be reveal be the difficulty - what he see 
 be not the measurable mask but the ambiguous meaning . he have take 
 thing for grant which literally be not there , and he find thing 
 there - except that he could not   catch they - which he have not hitherto 
 count in or presume to handle . this baffle effect , eminently in the 
 line of the mystifying , so familiar to Nash , might have be the result 
 of his whimsical volition , have it not appear to our artist , after a 
 few hour of the job , that his sitter be not the one who enjoy it 
 most . he be uncomfortable , at first vaguely and then definitely 
 so - silent , restless , gloomy , dim , as if on the test the homage of a 
 directer attention than he have ever have give he less pleasure than he 
 would have suppose . he have be willing to judge of this in good 
 faith ; but frankly he rather suffer . he be not   cross , but be clearly 
 unhappy , and Nick have never before feel he contract instead of 
 expand . 

 it be all accordingly as if a trap have be lay for he , and our young 
 man ask himself if it be really fair . at the same time there be 
 something richly rare in such a relation between the subject and the 
 artist , and Nick be disposed to go on till he should have to stop for 
 pity or for shame . he catch eventually a glimmer of the truth 
 underlie the strangeness , guess that what upset his friend be 
 simply the reversal , in such a combination , of his usual term of 
 intercourse . he be so accustomed to live upon irony and the 
 interpretation of thing that it be new to he to be himself 
 interpret and - as a gentleman who sit for his portrait be always 
 liable to be - interpret all ironically . from be outside of the 
 universe he be suddenly bring into it , and from the position of a 
 free commentator and critic , an easy amateurish editor of the whole 
 affair , reduce to that of humble ingredient and contributor . it 
 occur afterwards to Nick that he have perhaps bring on a catastrophe 
 by have happen to throw off as they gossip or languish , and not 
 alone without a cruel intention , but with an impulse of genuine 
 solicitude : " but , my dear fellow , what will you do when you be old ? " 

 " Old ? what do you call old ? " Nash have reply bravely enough , but with 
 another perceptible tinge of irritation . " must I really remind you at 
 this time of day that that term have no application to such a condition 
 as mine ? it only belong to you wretche people who have the incurable 
 superstition of ' do ' ; it be the ignoble collapse you prepare for 
 yourself when you cease to be able to do . for I there will be no 
 collapse , no transition , no clumsy readjustment of attitude ; for I 
 shall only be , more and more , with all the accumulation of 
 experience , the long I live . " 

 " oh I be not particular about the term , " say Nick . " if you do not   call it 
 old , the ultimate state , call it weary - call it final . the accumulation 
 of experience be practically accumulation of fatigue . " 

 " I do not   know anything about weariness . I live freshly - it do not 
 fatigue I . " 

 " then you need never die , " Nick declare . 

 " certainly ; I daresay I be indestructible , immortal . " 

 Nick laugh out at this - it would be such fine news to some people . but 
 it be utter with perfect gravity , and it might very well have be in 
 the spirit of that gravity that Nash fail to observe his agreement to 
 sit again the next day . the next and the next and the next pass , but 
 he never come back . 

 true enough , punctuality be not important for a man who feel that he 
 have the command of all time . nevertheless his disappearance " without a 
 trace , " that of a personage in a fairy - tale or a melodrama , make a 
 considerable impression on his friend as the month go on ; so that , 
 though he have never before have the least difficulty about enter into 
 the play of Gabriel 's humour , Nick now recall with a certain fanciful 
 awe the special accent with which he have rank himself among 
 imperishable thing . he wonder a little if he have not   at last , 
 balance always on the stretched tight - rope of his wit , fall over on 
 the wrong side . he have never before , of a truth , be so nearly witless , 
 and would have to have go mad in short to become so singularly simple . 
 perhaps indeed he be act only more than usual in his customary 
 spirit - thoughtfully contribute , for Nick 's enlivenment , a purple rim 
 of mystery to an horizon now so dreadfully let down . the mystery at any 
 rate remain ; another shade of purple in fact be virtually add to 
 it . Nick have the prospect , for the future , of wait to see , all 
 curiously , when Nash would turn up , if ever , and the further 
 diversion - it almost console he for the annoyance of be leave with a 
 second unfinished thing on his hand - of imagining in the portrait he 
 have begin an odd tendency to fade gradually from the canvas . he could not 
 catch it in the act , but he could have ever a suspicion on glance at 
 it that the hand of time be rub it away little by little - for all 
 the world as in some delicate hawthorne tale - and make the surface 
 indistinct and bare of all resemblance to the model . of course the moral 
 of the hawthorne tale would be that his personage would come back in 
 quaint confidence on the day his last project shadow should have 
 vanish . 




 L 


 one day toward the end of March of the following year , in other word 
 more than six month after Mr. Nash 's disappearance , Bridget Dormer come 
 into her brother 's studio and greet he with the effusion that 
 accompany a return from an absence . she have be stay at 
 Broadwood - she have be stay at Harsh . she have various thing to tell 
 he about these episode , about his mother , about Grace , about her small 
 subterraneous self , and about Percy 's have come , just before , over to 
 Broadwood for two day ; the long visit with which , almost since they 
 could remember , the head of the family have honour their common parent . 
 Nick note indeed that this demonstration have apparently be take as a 
 great favour , and Biddy loyally testify to the fact that her elder 
 brother be awfully jolly and that his presence have be a pretext for 
 tremendous fun . Nick accordingly ask she what have pass about his 
 marriage - what their mother have say to he . 

 " oh nothing , " she reply ; and Percy have say nothing to Lady Agnes and 
 not a word to herself . this partly explain , for his junior , the 
 consequent beatitude - none but cheerful topic have be produce ; but he 
 question the girl far - to a point which lead she to say : " oh I 
 daresay that before long she will write to she . " 

 " who will write to whom ? " 

 " Mamma'll write to Percy 's wife . I be sure he would like it . of course we 
 shall end by go to see she . he be awfully disappointed at what he 
 find in Spain - he do not   find anything . " 

 Biddy speak of his disappointment almost with commiseration , for she be 
 evidently incline this morning to a fresh and kindly view of thing . 
 Nick could share her feeling but so far as be permit by a 
 recognition merely general of what his brother must have look for . it 
 might have be snipe and it might have be bristle boar . Biddy be 
 indeed brief at first about everything , in spite of all the week that 
 have go since their last meeting ; for he quickly enough see she have 
 something behind - something that make her gay and that she want to 
 come to quickly . he be vaguely vex at her being , fresh from 
 Broadwood , so gay as that ; for - it be impossible to shut one 's eye to 
 the fact - what have practically come to pass in regard to that rural 
 retreat be exactly what he have desire to avert . all winter , while it 
 have be take for grant his mother and sister be do what he 
 wish , they have be do precisely what he hat . he hold Biddy 
 perhaps least responsible , and there be no one he could exclusively 
 blame . he wash his hand of the matter and succeed fairly well , for 
 the most part , in forget he be not pleased . Julia herself in truth 
 appear to have be the most active member of the little group unite 
 to make light of his decency . there have be a formal restitution of 
 Broadwood , but the three lady be there more than ever , with the 
 slight difference that they be mainly there with its mistress . Mahomet 
 have decline to go any more to the mountain , so the mountain have 
 virtually come to Mahomet . 

 after their long visit in the autumn Lady Agnes and her girl have come 
 back to town ; but they have go down again for Christmas and Julia have 
 take this occasion to write to Nick that she hop very much he 
 would not   refuse they all his own company for just a little scrap of the 
 supremely sociable time . Nick , after reflexion , judge it well not to 
 refuse , so that he pass , in the event , four day under his cousin 's 
 roof . the " all " prove a great many people , for she have take care to 
 fill the house . she take the large view of hospitality and Nick have 
 never see she so splendid , so free - handed , so gracefully active . she 
 be a perfect mistress of the revel ; she have arrange some ancient 
 bravery for every day and for every night . the Dormers be so much in 
 it , as the phrase be , that after all their discomfiture their fortune 
 seem in an hour to have come back . there have be a moment when , in 
 extemporise charade , Lady Agnes , an elderly figure be require , 
 appear on the point of undertake the part of the housekeeper at a 
 castle , who , drop her h 's , show sheeplike tourist about ; but 
 she waive the opportunity in favour of her daughter Grace . even Grace 
 have a great success ; Grace drop her h 's as with the crash of 
 empire . Nick of course be in the charade and in everything , but Julia 
 be not ; she only invent , direct , lead the applause . when nothing 
 else be forward Nick ' sketch " the whole company : they follow he 
 about , they waylay he on staircase , clamour to be allow to sit . 
 he oblige they so far as he could , all save Julia , who do not   clamour ; 
 and , grow rather red , he think of Gabriel Nash while he bent over 
 the paper . early in the new year he go abroad for six week , but only 
 as far as Paris . it be a new Paris for he then ; a Paris of the Rue 
 Bonaparte and three or four professional friend - he have more of these 
 there than in London ; a Paris of studio and study and model , of 
 research and revelation , comparison and contrast , of strong 
 impression and long discussion and rather uncomfortable economy , 
 small cafă s , bad fire and the general sense of be twenty again . 

 while he be away his mother and sister - Lady Agnes now sometimes write 
 to he - return to London for a month , and before he be again 
 establish in Rosedale Road they go back for a third course of 
 Broadwood . after they have be there five day - and this be the salt of 
 the whole feast - Julia take herself off to Harsh , leave they in 
 undisturbed possession . they have remain so - they would not   come up to 
 town till after Easter . the trick be play , and Biddy , as I have 
 mention , be now very content . her brother presently learn , however , 
 that the reason of this be not wholly the success of the trick ; unless 
 indeed her further ground be only a continuation of it . she be not in 
 London as a forerunner of her mother ; she be not even as yet in 
 Calcutta Gardens . she have come to spend a week with Florry Tressilian , 
 who have lately take the dear little flat in a charming new place , 
 just put up , on the other side of the Park , with all kind of lift and 
 tube and electricity . florry have be awfully nice to she - have be 
 with they ever so long at Broadwood while the flat be be paint and 
 prepare - and mamma have then let she , let Biddy , promise to come to she , 
 when everything be ready , so that they might have a happy old maid ' 
  for they be , old maid now !   house - warm together . if Florry 
 could by this time do without a chaperon - she have two latchkey and go 
 alone on the top of omnibus , and her name be in the Red Book - she be 
 enough of a duenna for another girl . Biddy refer with sweet cynical 
 eye to the fine happy stride she have thus take in the direction of 
 enlighten spinsterhood ; and Nick hang his head , immensely abash and 
 humiliate , for , modern as he have fatuously suppose himself , there be 
 evidently current more modern yet . 

 it so happen that on this particular morning he have draw out of a 
 corner his interrupted study of Gabriel Nash ; on no further 
 curiosity - he have only be look round the room in a rummaging 
 spirit - than to see how much or how little of it remain . it have become 
 to his view so dim an adumbration - he be sure of this , and it press 
 some spring of melancholy mirth - that it do not   seem worth put away , 
 and he leave it lean against a table as if it have be a blank canvas 
 or a " preparation " to be paint over . in this posture it attract 
 Biddy 's attention , for on a second glance it show distinguishable 
 feature . she have not see it before and now ask whom it might 
 represent , remark also that she could almost guess , yet not quite : 
 she have know the original but could not   name he . 

 " six month ago , for a few day , it represent Gabriel Nash , " Nick 
 reply . " but it be not   anybody or anything now . " 

 " six month ago ? what be the matter with it and why do not   you go on ? " 

 " what be the matter with it be more than I can tell you . but I can not   go 
 on because I have   lose my model . " 

 she have an almost hopeful stare . " be he beautifully dead ? " 

 her brother laugh out at the candid cheerfulness , hopefulness almost , 
 with which this inquiry break from she . " he be only dead to I . he have 
 go away . " 

 " where have he go ? " 

 " I have not   the least idea . " 

 " why , have you quarrel ? " - Biddy shine again . 

 " quarrel ? for what do you take we ? Docs the nightingale quarrel with 
 the moon ? " 

 " I need not   ask which of you be the moon , " she say . 

 " of course I be the nightingale . but , more literally , " Nick continue , 
 " Nash have melt back into the element - he be part of the great air of 
 the world . " and then as even with this lucidity he see the girl still 
 mystify : " I have   a notion he have go to India and at the present moment 
 be recline on a bank of flower in the vale of Cashmere . " 

 Biddy have a pause , after which she drop : " Julia will be glad - she 
 dislike he so . " 

 " if she dislike he why should she be glad he be so enviably place ? " 

 " I mean about his go away . she will be glad of that . " 

 " my poor incorrigible child , " Nick cry , " what have Julia to do with 
 it ? " 

 " she have more to do with thing than you think , " Biddy return with all 
 her bravery . yet she have no soon utter the word than she 
 perceptibly blush . hereupon , to attenuate the foolishness of her 
 blush - only it have the opposite effect - she add : " she think he have 
 be a bad element in your life . " 

 Nick emit a long strange sound . " she think perhaps , but she do not 
 think enough ; otherwise she would arrive at this well thought - that she 
 know nothing whatever about my life . " 

 " ah brother , " the girl plead with solemn eye , " you do not   imagine what 
 an interest she take in it . she have tell I many time - she have talk 
 lot to I about it . " Biddy pause and then go on , an anxious little 
 smile shin through her gravity as if from a cautious wonder as to how 
 much he would take : " she have a conviction it be Mr. Nash who make 
 trouble between you . " 

 " good of little sister , " Nick pronounce , " those be thoroughly 
 second - rate idea , the result of a perfectly superficial view . excuse my 
 possibly priggish tone , but they really attribute to my dear detach 
 friend a part he be quite incapable of play . he can neither make 
 trouble nor take trouble ; no trouble could ever either have come out of 
 he or have get into he . moreover , " our young man continue , " if Julia 
 have talk to you so much about the matter there be no harm in my talking 
 to you a little . when she throw I over in an hour it be on a perfectly 
 definite occasion . that occasion be the presence in my studio of a 
 dishevel , an abandon actress . " 

 " oh Nick , she have not throw you over ! " Biddy protest . " she have 
 not - I have   proof . " 

 he feel at this direct denial a certain stir of indignation and look 
 at the girl with momentary sternness . " have she send you here to tell I 
 this ? what do you mean by proof ? " 

 Biddy 's eye , at these question , meet her brother 's with a strange 
 expression , and for a few second , while she look entreatingly into 
 they , she waver there with part lip and vaguely stretch out her 
 hand . the next minute she have burst into tear - she be sob on his 
 breast . he say " Hallo ! " and soothe she ; but it be very quickly over . 
 then she tell he what she mean by her proof and what she have have on 
 her mind ever since her present arrival . it be a message from Julia , 
 but not to say - not to say what he have question she about just before ; 
 though indeed , more familiar now that he have his arm round she , she 
 boldly express the hope it might in the end come to the same thing . 
 Julia simply want to know - - she have instruct she to sound he 
 discreetly - if Nick would undertake her portrait ; and she wind up this 
 experiment in ' sound " by the statement that their beautiful kinswoman 
 be die to sit . 

 " die to sit ? " echo Nick , whose turn it be this time to feel his 
 colour rise . 

 " at any moment you like after Easter , when she come up . she want a 
 full - length and your very good , your most splendid work . " 

 Nick star , not care that he have blush . " be she serious ? " 

 " ah Nick - serious ! " Biddy reason tenderly . she come near again and 
 he think she again about to weep . he take she by the shoulder , 
 look into her eye . 

 " it be all right if she know I be . but why do not   she come like any 
 one else ? I do not   refuse people ! " 

 " Nick , dearest Nick ! " she go on , her eye conscious and plead . he 
 look into they intently - as well as she could he play at sound - and 
 for a moment , between these young person , the air be light by the 
 glimmer of mutual searching and suppress confession . Nick read deep 
 and then , suddenly release his sister , turn away . she do not   see his 
 face in that movement , but an observer to whom it have be present 
 might have fancy it denote a foreboding that be not exactly a dread , 
 yet be not exclusively a joy . 

 the first thing he make out in the room , when he could distinguish , be 
 Gabriel Nash 's portrait , which suddenly fill he with an unreasone 
 rancour . he seize it and turn it about , jam it back into its 
 corner with its face against the wall . this small diversion might have 
 serve to carry off the embarrassment with which he have finally avert 
 himself from Biddy . the embarrassment , however , be all his own ; none of 
 it be reflect in the way she resume , after a silence in which she 
 have follow his disposal of the picture : 

 " if she be so eager to come here - for it be here she want to sit , not in 
 Great Stanhope Street , never ! - how can she prove well that she do not 
 care a bit if she meet Miss Rooth ? " 

 " she will not   meet Miss Rooth , " Nick reply rather dryly . 

 " oh I be sorry ! " say Biddy . she be as frank as if she have achieve a 
 virtual victory , and seem to regret the loss of a chance for Julia to 
 show an equal mildness . her tone make her brother laugh , but she go on 
 with confidence : " she think it be Mr. Nash who make Miss Rooth come . " 

 " so he do , by the way , " say Nick . 

 " well then , be not   that make trouble ? " 

 " I think you admit there be no harm in her be here . " 

 " yes , but he hop there would be . " 

 " Poor Nash 's hope ! " Nick laugh . " my dear child , it would take a 
 cleverer head than you or I , or even Julia , who must have invent that 
 wise theory , to say what they be . however , let we agree that even if 
 they be perfectly fiendish my good sense have be a match for they . " 

 " oh Nick , that be delightful ! " chant Biddy . then she add : " do you 
 mean she do not   come any more ? " 

 " the dishevel actress ? she have not   be near I for month . " 

 " but she be in London - she be always act ? I have   be away so much I have 
 scarcely observe , " Biddy explain with a slight change of note . 

 " the same silly part , poor creature , for nearly a year . it appear that 
 that be ' success ' - in her profession . I see she in the character several 
 time last summer , but have not   set foot in her theatre since . " 

 Biddy take this in ; then she suggest ; " Peter would not   have like 
 that . " 

 " oh Peter 's like - ! " Nick at his easel , begin to work , conveniently 
 sigh . 

 " I mean she act the same part for a year . " 

 " I be sure I do not   know ; he have never write I a word . " 

 " nor I either , " Biddy return . 

 there be another short silence , during which Nick brush at a panel . 
 it end in his presently say : " there be one thing certainly Peter 
  would like - that be simply to be here to - night . it be a great 
 night - another great night - for the abandon one . she be to act Juliet 
 for the first time . " 

 " ah how I should like to see she ! " the girl cry . 

 Nick glance at she ; she sit watch he . " she have send I a stall ; I 
 wish she have send I two . I should have be delighted to take you . " 

 " do not   you think you could get another ? " Biddy quaver . 

 " they must be in tremendous demand . but who know after all ? " Nick 
 add , at the same moment look round . " here be a chance - here be quite 
 an extraordinary chance ! " 

 his servant have open the door and be usher in a lady whose 
 identity be indeed justly reflect in those word . " Miss Rooth ! " the 
 man announce ; but he be catch up by a gentleman who come next and who 
 exclaim , laugh and with a gesture gracefully corrective : " no , 
 no - no long Miss Rooth ! " 

 Miriam enter the place with her charming familiar grandeur - enter 
 very much as she might have appear , as she appear every night , early 
 in her first act , at the back of the stage , by the immemorial middle 
 door . she might exactly now have be present herself to the house , 
 take easy possession , repeat old movement , look from one to the 
 other of the actor before the footlight . the rich " good - morning " she 
 throw into the air , hold out her right hand to Biddy and then give 
 she leave to Nick - as she might have give it to her own brother - have 
 nothing to tell of interval or alienation . she strike Biddy as still 
 more terrible in her splendid practice than when she have see she 
 before - the practice and the splendour have now something almost royal . 
 the girl have have occasion to make her curtsey to majesty and 
 highness , but the flutter those effigy produce be nothing to the 
 way in which at the approach of this young lady the agitated air seem 
 to recognise something supreme . so the deep mild eye she bent on Biddy 
 be not soothe , though for that matter evidently intend to soothe . 
 Biddy wonder Nick could have get so used to she - he joke at she as 
 she loom - and later in the day , still under the great impression of 
 this incident , she even wonder that Peter could have full an impunity . 
 it be true that Peter apparently do not   quite feel one . 

 " you never come - you never come , " Miriam say to she kindly and sadly ; 
 and Biddy , recognise the allusion , the invitation to visit the actress 
 at home , have to explain how much she have be absent from London and 
 then even that her brother have not   propose to take she . 

 " very true - he have not   come himself . what be he do now ? " ask Miss 
 Rooth , stand near her young friend but look at Nick , who have 
 immediately engage in conversation with his other visitor , a gentleman 
 whose face come back to the girl . she have see this gentleman on the 
 stage with the great performer - that be it , the night Peter take she to 
 the theatre with Florry Tressilian . oh that Nick would only do something 
 of that sort now ! this desire , quicken by the presence of the strange , 
 expressive woman , by the way she scatter sweet syllable as if she 
 be touch the piano - key , combine with other thing to make our 
 young lady 's head swim - other thing too mingle to name , admiration and 
 fear and dim divination and purposeless pride and curiosity and 
 resistance , the impulse to go away and the determination to   as she 
 would have like fondly to fancy it   " hold her ground . " the actress 
 court she with a wondrous voice - what be the matter with the actress 
 and what do she want ? - and Biddy try in return to give an idea of 
 what Nick be do . not succeed very well she be about to appeal to 
 her brother , but Miriam stop she with the remark that it do not 
 signify ; besides , Dashwood be tell Nick something - something they 
 want he to know . " we be in a great excitement - he have take a 
 theatre , " Miriam add . 

 " take a theatre ? " Biddy be vague . 

 " we be go to set up for ourselves . he be go to do for I 
 altogether . it have all be arrange only within a day or two . it 
 remain to be see how it will answer , " Miriam smile . Biddy murmur 
 some friendly hope , and the shin presence go on : " do you know why 
 I have   break in here to - day after a long absence - interrupt your poor 
 brother so basely , take up his precious time ? it be because I be so 
 nervous . " 

 " about your first night ? " Biddy risk . 

 " do you know about that - be you come ? " Miriam have catch at it . 

 " no , I be not come - I have not   a place . " 

 " will you come if I send you one ? " 

 " oh but really it be too beautiful of you ! " breathe the girl . 

 " you shall have a box ; your brother shall bring you . they can not   squeeze 
 in a pin , I be tell ; but I have   keep a box , I will manage it . only if I do , 
 you know , mind you positively come ! " she sound it as the high of 
 favour , rest her hand on Biddy 's . 

 " do not   be afraid . and may I bring a friend - the friend with whom I be 
 stay ? " 

 Miriam now just gloome . " do you mean Mrs. Dallow ? " 

 " no , no - Miss Tressilian . she put I up , she have get a flat . do you 
 ever see a flat ? " ask Biddy expansively . " my cousin be not in London . " 
 Miriam reply that she might bring whom she like and Biddy break out 
 to her brother : " fancy what kindness , Nick : we be to have a box to - night 
 and you be to take I ! " 

 Nick turn to she a face of levity which strike she even at the time as 
 too cynically free , but which she understand when the fine sense of it 
 subsequently recur to she . Mr. Dashwood interpose with the remark 
 that it be all very well to talk about box , but that he do not   see 
 how at that time of day the miracle be to be work . 

 " you have not   keep one as I tell you ? " Miriam demand . 

 " as you tell I , my dear ? tell the lamb to keep its tender mutton 
 from the wolf ! " 

 " you shall have one : we will arrange it , " Miriam go on to Biddy . 

 " let I qualify that statement a little , Miss Dormer , " say Basil 
 Dashwood . " we will arrange it if it be humanly possible . " 

 " we will arrange it even if it be inhumanly I m possible - that be just the 
 point , " Miriam declare to the girl . " do not   talk about trouble - what be 
 he mean for but to take it ? Cela s'annonce bien , you see , " she 
 continue to Nick : " do not   it look as if we should pull beautifully 
 together ? " and as he answer that he heartily congratulate she - he be 
 immensely interested in what he have be tell - she exclaim after 
 rest her eye on he a moment : " what will you have ? it seem 
 simple ! it be clear there have to be some one . " she explain far 
 to Nick what have lead she to come in at that moment , while Dashwood 
 approach Biddy with a civil assurance that they would see , they would 
 leave no stone unturne , though he would not have take upon himself to 
 promise . 

 Miriam remind Nick of the blessing he have be to she nearly a year 
 before , on her other first night , when she be all impatient and on 
 edge ; how he have let she come and sit there for hour - help she to 
 possess her soul till the evening and to keep out of harm 's way . the 
 case be the same at present , with the aggravation indeed that he would 
 understand - Dashwood 's nerve as well as her own : Dashwood 's be a 
 great deal bad than her . everything be ready for Juliet ; they have 
 be rehearse for five month - it have keep she from go mad from the 
 treadmill of the other piece - and he , Nick , have occur to she again , 
 in the last intolerable hour , as the friend in need , the salutary 
 stop - gap , no matter how much she worry he . she should not   be turn 
 out ? Biddy break away from Basil Dashwood : she must go , she must hurry 
 off to Miss Tressilian with her news . florry might make some other 
 stupid engagement for the evening : she must be warn in time . the girl 
 take a flushed , excited leave after have receive a renewal of 
 Miriam 's pledge and even hear she say to Nick that he must now give 
 back the seat already send he - they should be sure to have another use 
 for it . 




 LI 


 that night at the theatre and in the box - the miracle have be work , 
 the treasure find - Nick Dormer point out to his two companion the 
 stall he have relinquish , which be close in front ; note how oddly it 
 remain during the whole of the first act vacant . the house be beyond 
 everything , the actress beyond any one ; though to describe again so 
 famous an occasion - it have be describe repeatedly by other 
 reporter - be not in the compass of the closing word of a history 
 already too sustained . it be enough to say that these great hour mark 
 an era in contemporary art and that for those who have a spectator 's 
 share in they the word " revelation , " " incarnation , " " acclamation , " 
 " demonstration , " " ovation " - to name only a few , and all accompany by 
 the word " extraordinary " - acquire a new force . Miriam 's Juliet be an 
 exquisite image of young passion and young despair , express in the 
 true , divinest music that have ever pour from tragic lip . the great 
 childish audience , gap at her point , expand there before she like 
 a lap to catch flower . 

 during the first interval our three friend in the box have plenty to 
 talk about , and they be so occupy with it that for some time they 
 fail to observe a gentleman who have at last come into the empty stall 
 near the front . this discovery be presently formulate by Miss 
 Tressilian in the cheerful exclamation : " only fancy - there be Mr. 
 Sherringham ! " this of course immediately become a high wonder - a wonder 
 for Nick and Biddy , who have not hear of his return ; and the prodigy be 
 quicken by the fact that he give no sign of look for they or even 
 at they . have take possession of his place he sit very still in it , 
 star straight before he at the curtain . his abrupt reappearance hold 
 the seed of anxiety both for Biddy and for Nick , so that it be mainly 
 Miss Tressilian who have freedom of mind to throw off the theory that he 
 have come back that very hour - have arrive from a long journey . could not 
 they see how strange he be and how brown , how burn and how red , how 
 tired and how worn ? they all inspect he , though Biddy decline Miss 
 Tressilian 's glass ; but he be evidently indifferent to notice and 
 finally Biddy , lean back in her chair , drop the fantastic word : 

 " he have come home to marry Juliet ! " 

 Nick glance at she and then reply : " what a disaster - to make such a 
 journey as that and to be late for the fair ! " 

 " late for the fair ? " 

 " why she be married - these three day . they do it very quietly ; Miriam 
 say because her mother hat it and hop it will not   be much know ! all 
 the same she be Basil Dashwood 's wed wife - he have come in just in time 
 to take the receipt for Juliet . it be a good thing , no doubt , for there 
 be at least two fortune to be make out of she , and he will give up the 
 stage . " Nick explain to Miss Tressilian , who have inquire , that the 
 gentleman in question be the actor who be play Mercutio , and he 
 ask Biddy if she have not   know that this be what they be tell he 
 in Rosedale Road that morning . she reply that she have understand 
 nothing but that she be to be where she be , and she sink considerably 
 behind the drapery of the box . from this cover she be able to launch , 
 creditably enough , the exclamation : 

 " poor , poor Peter ! " 

 Nick get up and stand look at poor , poor Peter . " he ought to come 
 round and speak to we , but if he do not   see we I suppose he do not . " 
 he quit the box as to go to the restore exile , and I may add that as 
 soon as he have do so Florence Tressilian bound over to the dusk in 
 which Biddy have nestle . what pass immediately between these young 
 lady need not   concern we : it be sufficient to mention that two minute 
 later Miss Tressilian break out : 

 " look at he , dearest ; he be turn his head this way ! " 

 " thank you , I do not   care to watch his turn , " say Biddy ; and she 
 doubtless demean herself in the high spirit of these word . it 
 nevertheless happen that directly afterwards she have certain knowledge 
 of his have glance at his watch as if to judge how soon the curtain 
 would rise again , as well as of his have then jump up and pass 
 quickly out of his place . the curtain have rise again without his 
 reappearing and without Nick 's returning . indeed by the time Nick 
 slip in a good deal of the third act be over ; and even then , even 
 when the curtain descend , Peter have not come back . Nick sit down in 
 silence to watch the stage , to which the breathless attention of his 
 companion seem attach , though Biddy after a moment throw round at 
 he a single quick look . at the end of the act they be all occupy 
 with the recall , the applause and the responsive loveliness of Juliet 
 as she be lead out - Mercutio have to give she up to Romeo - and even for a 
 few minute after the deafen roar have subside nothing be say among 
 the three . at last Nick begin : 

 " it be quite true he have just arrive ; he be in Great Stanhope Street . 
 they have   give he several week , to make up for the uncomfortable way 
 they bundle he off - to get there in time for some special business 
 that have suddenly to be go into - when he first go out : he tell I 
 they even then promise that . he get into Southampton only a few hour 
 ago , rush up by the first train he could catch and come off here 
 without any dinner . " 

 " Fancy ! " say Miss Tressilian ; while Biddy more generally ask if Peter 
 might be in good health and appear to have be happy . Nick reply 
 that he describe his post as beastly but do not   seem to have suffer 
 from it . he be to be in England probably a month , he be awfully brown , 
 he send his love to Biddy . Miss Tressilian look at his empty stall and 
 be of the opinion that it would be more to the point if he be to come 
 in to see she . 

 " oh he will turn up ; we have a goodish talk in the lobby where he meet I . I 
 think he go out somewhere . " 

 " how odd to come so many thousand mile for this and then not to stay ! " 
 Biddy flute . 

 " do he come on purpose for this ? " Miss Tressilian ask . 

 " perhaps he be go out to get his dinner ! " joke Biddy . 

 her friend suggest that he might be behind the scene , but Nick cast 
 doubt ; whereupon Biddy ask if he himself be not go round . at 
 this moment the curtain rise ; Nick say he would go in the next 
 interval . as soon as it come he quit the box , remain absent while 
 it last . 

 all this time , in the house , there be no sign of Peter . Nick reappear 
 only as the fourth act be begin and utter no word to his 
 companion till it be over . then , after a further delay produce by 
 renew vociferous proof of the personal victory win , he depict his 
 visit to the stage and the wonderful sight of Miriam on the field of 
 battle . Miss Tressilian inquire if he have find Mr. Sherringham with 
 she ; to which he reply that , save across the footlight , she have not 
 be in touch with he . at this a soft exclamation break from Biddy . 
 " Poor Peter ! where be he , then ? " 

 Nick seem to falter . " he be walk the street . " 

 " walk the street ? " 

 " I do not   know - I give it up ! " our young man reply ; and his tone , for 
 some minute , reduce his companion to silence . but a little later 
 Biddy say : 

 " be it for he this morning she want that place - when she ask you 
 to give yours back ? " 

 " for he exactly . it be very odd she have just manage to keep it - for all 
 the good use he make of it ! she tell I just now that she hear from 
 he , at his post , a short time ago , to the effect that he have see in a 
 newspaper a statement she be go to do Juliet and that he firmly 
 intend , though the way and mean be not clear to he - his leave of 
 absence have not   yet come out and he could not   be sure when it would 
 come - to be present on her first night ; whereby she must do he the 
 service to provide he a place . she think this a speech rather in the 
 air , so that in the midst of all her care she take no particular pain 
 about the matter . she have an idea she have really do with he for a 
 long time . but this afternoon what do he do but telegraph to she from 
 Southampton that he keep his appointment and count on she for a stall ? 
 unless she have get back mine she would not   have be able to help he . 
 when she be in Rosedale Road this morning she have not   receive his 
 telegram ; but his promise , his threat , whatever it be , come back to 
 she : she have a vague foreboding and think that on the chance she have 
 well hold something ready . when she get home she find his telegram , 
 and she tell I he be the first person she see in the house , through 
 her fright when she come on in the second act . it appear she be 
 terrify this time , and it last half through the play . " 

 " she must be rather annoyed at his have go away , " Miss Tressilian 
 observe . 

 " annoyed ? I be not so sure ! " laugh Nick . 

 " ah here he come back ! " cry Biddy , behind her fan , while the absentee 
 edge into his seat in time for the fifth act . he stand there a moment , 
 first look round the theatre ; then he turn his eye to the box 
 occupy by his relative , smile and wave his hand . 

 " after that he will surely come and see you , " say Miss Tressilian . 

 " we shall see he as we go out , " Biddy return : " he must lose no more 
 time . " 

 Nick look at he with a glass , then exclaim : " well , I be glad he have 
 pull himself together ! " 

 " why what be the matter with he - if he be not   disappoint of his seat ? " 
 Miss Tressilian demand . 

 " the matter with he be that a couple of hour ago he have a great 
 shock . " 

 " a great shock ? " 

 " I may as well mention it at last , " Nick go on . " I have to say 
 something to he in the lobby there when we meet - something I be pretty 
 sure he could not   like . I let he have it full in the face - it seem to 
 I well and wiser . I let he know that Juliet 's married . " 

 " do not   he know it ? " ask Biddy , who , with her face raise , have 
 listen in deep stillness to every word that fall from her brother . 

 " how should he have know it ? it have only just take place , and they have 
 be so clever , for reason of their own - those people move among a lot 
 of consideration that be absolutely foreign to we - about keep it 
 out of the paper . they put in a lot of lie and they leave out the real 
 thing . " 

 " you do not   mean to say Mr. Sherringham want to marry she ! " Miss 
 Tressilian gasp . 

 " do not   ask I what he want - I daresay we shall never know . one thing 's 
 very certain - that he do not   like my news , dear old Peter , and that I 
 shall not   soon forget the look in his face as he turn away from I and 
 slip out into the street . he be too much upset - he could not   trust 
 himself to come back ; he have to walk about - he try to walk it off . " 

 " let we hope , then , he have walk it off ! " 

 " ah poor fellow - he could not   hold out to the end ; he have have to come 
 back and look at she once more . he know she will be sublime in these last 
 scene . " 

 " be he so much in love with she as that ? what difference do it make 
 for an actress if she be mar - ? " but in this rash inquiry Miss 
 Tressilian suddenly check herself . 

 " we shall probably never know how much he have be in love with she , nor 
 what difference it make . we shall never know exactly what he come back 
 for , nor why he could not   stand it out there any long without relief , 
 nor why he scramble down here all but straight from the station , nor 
 why after all , for the last two hour , he have be roam the street . 
 and it do not   matter , for it be none of our business . but I be sorry for 
 he - she be go to be sublime , " Nick add . the curtain be rise on 
 the tragic climax of the play . 

 Miriam Rooth be sublime ; yet it may be confide to the reader that 
 during these supreme scene Bridget Dormer direct her eye less to the 
 inspire actress than to a figure in the stall who sit with his own 
 gaze fasten to the stage . it may far be intimate that Peter 
 Sherringham , though he see but a fragment of the performance , read 
 clear , at the last , in the intense light of genius with which this 
 fragment be charge , that even so after all he have be reward for 
 his formidable journey . the great trouble of his infatuation subside , 
 leave behind it something appreciably deep and pure . this pacification 
 be far from take place at once , but it be help on , unexpectedly to 
 he - it begin to work at least - the very next night he see the play , 
 through the whole of which he then sit . he feel somehow recall to the 
 real by the very felicity of this experience , the supreme exhibition 
 itself . he begin to come back as from a far - off province of his history 
 where miserable madness have reign . he have be baffle , he have get his 
 answer ; it must last he - that be plain . he do not   fully accept it the 
 first week or the second ; but he accept it soon than he could have 
 suppose have he know what it be to be when he pace at night , under 
 the southern star , the deck of the ship bear he to England . 

 it have be , as we know , Miss Tressilian 's view , and even Biddy 's , that 
 evening , that Peter Sherringham would join they as they leave the 
 theatre . this view , however , be not confirm by the event , for our 
 troubled gentleman vanish utterly - disappointingly crude behaviour on 
 the part of a young diplomatist who have distinguish himself - before 
 any one could put a hand on he . and he fail to make up for his 
 crudity by come to see any one the next day , or even the next . indeed 
 many day elapse and very little would have be know about he have it 
 not be that , in the country , Mrs. Dallow know . what Mrs. Dallow know 
 be eventually know to Biddy Dormer ; and in this way it could be 
 establish in his favour that he have remain some extraordinarily 
 small number of day in London , have almost directly go over to Paris 
 to see his old chief . he come back from Paris - Biddy learn this not 
 from Julia , but in a much more immediate way : she know it by his 
 press the little electric button at the door of Florence Tressilian 's 
 flat one day when the good Florence be out and she herself be at home . 
 he make on this occasion a very long visit . the good Florence know it 
 not much later , you may be sure - and how he have get their address from 
 Nick - and she take an extravagant pleasure in it . Mr. Sherringham have 
 never be to see she - the like of she - in his life : therefore it be 
 clear what have make he begin . when he have once begin he keep it up , and 
 Miss Tressilian 's pleasure grow . 

 good as she be , she could remember without the slight relent what 
 Nick Dormer have repeat to they at the theatre about the dreary side of 
 Peter 's present post . however , she be not bind to make a stand at this 
 if person more nearly concerned , Lady Agnes and the girl herself , 
 do not   mind it . how little they mind it , and Grace and Julia Dallow 
 and even Nick , be prove in the course of a meeting that take place at 
 Harsh during the Easter holiday . the mistress of that seat have a small 
 and intimate party to celebrate her brother 's betrothal . the two lady 
 come over from Broadwood ; even Nick , for two day , go back to his old 
 hunting - ground , and Miss Tressilian relinquish for as long a time the 
 delight of her newly arrange flat . Peter Sherringham obtain an 
 extension of leave , so that he might go back to his legation with a 
 wife . fortunately , as it turn out , Biddy 's ordeal , in the more or less 
 torrid zone , be not cruelly prolong , for the pair have already 
 receive a superior appointment . it be Lady Agnes 's proud opinion that 
 her daughter be even now shape their destiny . I say " even now , " for 
 these fact bring I very close to contemporary history . during those 
 two day at Harsh Nick arrange with the former mistress of his fate the 
 condition , as they might be call , under which she should sit to he ; 
 and every one will remember in how recent an exhibition general 
 attention be attract , as the newspaper say in describe the 
 private view , to the noble portrait of a lady which be the final 
 outcome of that arrangement . Gabriel Nash have be at many a private 
 view , but he be not at that one . 

 these matter be highly recent , however , as I say ; so that in glancing 
 about the little circle of the interest I have try to evoke I be 
 suddenly warn by a sharp sense of modernness . this render it 
 difficult to I , for instance , in take leave of our wonderful Miriam , 
 to do much more than allude to the general impression that her 
 remarkable career be even yet only in its early prime . Basil Dashwood 
 have get his theatre , and his wife - people know now she be his 
 wife - have add three or four new part to her repertory ; but every one 
 be agree that both in public and in private she have a great deal more 
 to show . this be equally true of Nick Dormer , in regard to whom I may 
 finally say that his friend Nash 's prediction about his reunion with 
 Mrs. Dallow have not up to this time be justify . on the other hand , 
 I must not omit to add , this lady have not , at the late account , 
 marry Mr. Macgeorge . it be very true there have be a rumour that Mr. 
 Macgeorge be worried about she - have even cease at all fondly to believe 
 in she . 
