"captain COURAGEOUS " 
 a story of the grand bank 
 by 
 Rudyard Kipling 
 to 
 JAMES CONLAND , M.D. , 
 Brattleboro , Vermont 
 I plough the land with horse , 
 but my heart be ill at ease , 
 for the old sea - fare man 
 come to I now and then , 
 with their saga of the sea . 
 Longfellow . 
 CHAPTER I 
 the weather door of the smoking - room have be leave open to the North 
 Atlantic fog , as the big liner roll and lift , whistle to warn the 
 fishing - fleet . 
 " that Cheyne boy be the big nuisance aboard , " say a man in a frieze 
 overcoat , shut the door with a bang . " he be not   want here . he be 
 too fresh . " 
 a white - haired German reach for a sandwich , and grunt between 
 bite : " I know der breed . Ameriga be full of dot kind . I dell you you 
 should imbort rope ' end free under your dariff . " 
 " Pshaw ! there be not   any real harm to he . he be more to be pity than 
 anything , " a man from New York drawl , as he lie at full length along 
 the cushion under the wet skylight . " they have   drag he around from 
 hotel to hotel ever since he be a kid . I be talk to his mother 
 this morning . she be a lovely lady , but she do not   pretend to manage he . 
 he be go to Europe to finish his education . " 
 " education be not   begin yet . " this be a Philadelphian , curl up in a 
 corner . " that boy get two hundred a month pocket - money , he tell I . he 
 be not   sixteen either . " 
 " railroad , his father , aind't it ? " say the German . 
 " Yep . that and mine and lumber and shipping . build one place at San 
 Diego , the old man have ; another at Los Angeles ; own half a dozen 
 railroad , half the lumber on the Pacific slope , and let his wife 
 spend the money , " the Philadelphian go on lazily . " the West do not 
 suit she , she say . she just track around with the boy and her nerve , 
 try to find out what will amuse he , I guess . Florida , Adirondacks , 
 Lakewood , Hot Springs , New York , and round again . he be not   much more 
 than a second - hand hotel clerk now . when he be finish in Europe he will 
 be a holy terror . " 
 " what be the matter with the old man attend to he personally ? " say 
 a voice from the frieze ulster . 
 " old man 's pile up the rock . ' do not   want to be disturb , I guess . 
 he will find out his error a few year from now . ' pity , because there be a 
 heap of good in the boy if you could get at it . " 
 " Mit a rope 's end ; mit a rope 's end ! " growl the German . 
 once more the door bang , and a slight , slim - build boy perhaps fifteen 
 year old , a half - smoke cigarette hang from one corner of his 
 mouth , lean in over the high footway . his pasty yellow complexion do 
 not show well on a person of his year , and his look be a mixture of 
 irresolution , bravado , and very cheap smartness . he be dress in a 
 cherry - colour blazer , knickerbocker , red stocking , and bicycle 
 shoe , with a red flannel cap at the back of the head . after whistle 
 between his tooth , as he eye the company , he say in a loud , high 
 voice : " say , it be thick outside . you can hear the fish - boat squawk 
 all around we . say , would not   it be great if we run down one ? " 
 " shut the door , Harvey , " say the New Yorker . " shut the door and stay 
 outside . you be not want here . " 
 " who will stop I ? " he answer , deliberately . " do you pay for my 
 passage , Mister Martin ? ' guess I have   as good right here as the next man . " 
 he pick up some dice from a checkerboard and begin throw , right 
 hand against left . 
 " say , gen'elman , this be deader'n mud . can not   we make a game of poker 
 between we ? " 
 there be no answer , and he puff his cigarette , swing his leg , and 
 drum on the table with rather dirty finger . then he pull out a 
 roll of bill as if to count they . 
 " how be your mamma this afternoon ? " a man say . " I do not   see she at 
 lunch . " 
 " in her state - room , I guess . she be ' most always sick on the ocean . I be 
 go to give the stewardess fifteen dollar for look after she . I 
 do not   go down more ' n I can avoid . it make I feel mysterious to pass 
 that butler's - pantry place . say , this be the first time I have   be on 
 the ocean . " 
 " oh , do not   apologize , Harvey . " 
 " who be apologize ? this be the first time I have   cross the ocean , 
 gen'elmen , and , except the first day , I have not   be sick one little 
 bit . no , sir ! " he bring down his fist with a triumphant bang , wet 
 his finger , and go on count the bill . 
 " oh , you be a high - grade machine , with the writing in plain sight , " the 
 Philadelphian yawn . " you will blossom into a credit to your country if 
 you do not   take care . " 
 " I know it . I be an American - first , last , and all the time . I will show 
 them that when I strike Europe . Piff ! my cig be out . I can not   smoke the 
 truck the steward sell . any gen'elman get a real turkish cig on he ? " 
 the chief engineer enter for a moment , red , smiling , and wet . " say , 
 Mac , " cry Harvey cheerfully , " how be we hit it ? " 
 " vara much in the ordinary way , " be the grave reply . " the young be as 
 polite as ever to their elder , an ' their elder be e'en tryin ' to 
 appreciate it . " 
 a low chuckle come from a corner . the german open his cigar - case and 
 hand a skinny black cigar to Harvey . 
 " dot be der broper apparatus to smoke , my young friendt , " he say . " you 
 vill dry it ? yes ? den you vill be efer so happy . " 
 Harvey light the unlovely thing with a flourish : he feel that he be 
 get on in grownup society . 
 " it would take more ' n this to keel I over , " he say , ignorant that he 
 be light that terrible article , a Wheeling ' stogie ' . 
 " dot we shall bresently see , " say the German . " where be we now , Mr. 
 Mactonal ' ? " 
 " just there or thereabout , Mr. Schaefer , " say the engineer . " we will be 
 on the Grand Bank to - night ; but in a general way o ' speakin ' , we be all 
 among the fishing - fleet now . we have   shave three dory an ' near scalp 
 the boom off a frenchman since noon , an ' that be close sailing ' , ye may 
 say . " 
 " you like my cigar , eh ? " the German ask , for Harvey 's eye be full 
 of tear . 
 " fine , full flavor , " he answer through shut tooth . " guess we have 
 slow down a little , have not   we ? I will skip out and see what the log 
 say . " 
 " I might if I vha you , " say the German . 
 Harvey stagger over the wet deck to the near rail . he be very 
 unhappy ; but he see the deck - steward lash chair together , and , 
 since he have boast before the man that he be never seasick , his 
 pride make he go aft to the second - saloon deck at the stern , which be 
 finish in a turtle - back . the deck be desert , and he crawl to the 
 extreme end of it , near the flag - pole . there he double up in limp 
 agony , for the Wheeling ' stogie " join with the surge and jar of the 
 screw to sieve out his soul . his head swell ; spark of fire dance 
 before his eye ; his body seem to lose weight , while his heel 
 waver in the breeze . he be faint from seasickness , and a roll of 
 the ship tilt he over the rail on to the smooth lip of the 
 turtle - back . then a low , gray mother - wave swing out of the fog , tuck 
 Harvey under one arm , so to speak , and pull he off and away to 
 leeward ; the great green close over he , and he go quietly to sleep . 
 he be rouse by the sound of a dinner - horn such as they use to blow 
 at a summer - school he have once attend in the Adirondacks . slowly he 
 remember that he be Harvey Cheyne , drown and dead in mid - ocean , 
 but be too weak to fit thing together . a new smell fill his 
 nostril ; wet and clammy chill run down his back , and he be 
 helplessly full of salt water . when he open his eye , he perceive 
 that he be still on the top of the sea , for it be run round he 
 in silver - colour hill , and he be lie on a pile of half - dead fish , 
 look at a broad human back clothe in a blue jersey . 
 " it be no good , " think the boy . " I be dead , sure enough , and this thing 
 be in charge . " 
 he groan , and the figure turn its head , show a pair of little 
 gold ring half hide in curly black hair . 
 " aha ! you feel some pretty well now ? " it say . " lie still so : we trim 
 well . " 
 with a swift jerk he scull the flickering boat - head on to a foamless 
 sea that lift she twenty full foot , only to slide she into a glassy 
 pit beyond . but this mountain - climbing do not interrupt blue - jersey 's 
 talk . " fine good job , I say , that I catch you . eh , wha - at ? well good 
 job , I say , your boat not catch I . how you come to fall out ? " 
 " I be sick , " say harvey ; ' sick , and could not   help it . " 
 " just in time I blow my horn , and your boat she yaw a little . then I 
 see you come all down . eh , wha - at ? I think you be cut into bait by 
 the screw , but you dreeft - dreeft to I , and I make a big fish of you . 
 so you shall not die this time . " 
 " where be I ? " say Harvey , who could not see that life be particularly 
 safe where he lay . 
 " you be with I in the dory - Manuel my name , and I come from schooner 
 ' we be here ' of Gloucester . I live to Gloucester . by - and - by we get 
 supper . eh , wha - at ? " 
 he seem to have two pair of hand and a head of cast - iron , for , not 
 content with blow through a big conch - shell , he must need stand up 
 to it , sway with the sway of the flat - bottom dory , and send a 
 grinding , thuttere shriek through the fog . how long this 
 entertainment last , Harvey could not remember , for he lie back 
 terrify at the sight of the smoking swell . he fancy he hear a gun 
 and a horn and shout . something big than the dory , but quite as 
 lively , loom alongside . several voice talk at once ; he be drop 
 into a dark , heaving hole , where man in oilskin give he a hot drink 
 and take off his clothe , and he fall asleep . 
 when he wake he listen for the first breakfast - bell on the steamer , 
 wonder why his state - room have grow so small . turn , he look 
 into a narrow , triangular cave , light by a lamp hang against a huge 
 square beam . a three - cornered table within arm 's reach run from the 
 angle of the bow to the foremast . at the after end , behind a well - use 
 Plymouth stove , sit a boy about his own age , with a flat red face and a 
 pair of twinkle gray eye . he be dress in a blue jersey and high 
 rubber boot . several pair of the same sort of foot - wear , an old cap , 
 and some wear - out woollen sock lie on the floor , and black and yellow 
 oilskin sway to and fro beside the bunk . the place be pack as 
 full of smell as a bale be of cotton . the oilskin have a peculiarly 
 thick flavor of their own which make a sort of background to the smell 
 of fried fish , burn grease , paint , pepper , and stale tobacco ; but 
 these , again , be all hoop together by one encircle smell of ship 
 and salt water . Harvey see with disgust that there be no sheet on 
 his bed - place . he be lie on a piece of dingy tick full of lump 
 and nubble . then , too , the boat 's motion be not that of a steamer . 
 she be neither slide nor roll , but rather wriggle herself about 
 in a silly , aimless way , like a colt at the end of a halter . 
 Water - noise run by close to his ear , and beam creak and whine 
 about he . all these thing make he grunt despairingly and think of 
 his mother . 
 " Feelin ' well ? " say the boy , with a grin . " hev some coffee ? " he 
 bring a tin cup full and sweeten it with molasse . 
 " be not   there milk ? " say Harvey , look round the dark double tier of 
 bunk as if he expect to find a cow there . 
 " well , no , " say the boy . " Ner there be not   likely to be till ' baout 
 mid - September . ' tain't   bad coffee . I make it . " 
 Harvey drink in silence , and the boy hand he a plate full of piece 
 of crisp fry pork , which he eat ravenously . 
 " I have   dry your clothe . guess they have   shrink some , " say the boy . 
 " they be not   our style much - none of them . twist round an ' see if you be 
 hurt any . " 
 Harvey stretch himself in every direction , but could not report any 
 injury . 
 " that be good , " the boy say heartily . " fix yerself an ' go on deck . Dad 
 want to see you . I be his son , - Dan , they call I , - an ' I be cook 's 
 helper an ' everything else aboard that be too dirty for the man . there 
 be not   no boy here ' cep ' I sence Otto go overboard - an ' he be only a 
 Dutchy , an ' twenty year old at that . how would you come to fall off in a 
 dead flat ca'am ? " 
 " ' twasn't   a calm , " say Harvey , sulkily . " it be a gale , and I be 
 seasick . guess I must have roll over the rail . " 
 " there be a little common swell yes'day an ' last night , " say the boy . 
 " but ef thet 's your notion of a gale - - " he whistle . " you will know 
 more ' fore you be through . hurry ! Dad 's waitin ' . " 
 like many other unfortunate young people , Harvey have never in all his 
 life receive a direct order - never , at least , without long , and 
 sometimes tearful , explanation of the advantage of obedience and the 
 reason for the request . Mrs. Cheyne live in fear of break his 
 spirit , which , perhaps , be the reason that she herself walk on the 
 edge of nervous prostration . he could not see why he should be expect 
 to hurry for any man 's pleasure , and say so . " your dad can come down 
 here if he be so anxious to talk to I . I want he to take I to New 
 York right away . it will pay he . " 
 Dan open his eye as the size and beauty of this joke dawn on he . 
 " Say , Dad ! " he shout up the foc'sle hatch , " he say you kin slip down 
 an ' see he ef you be anxious that way . ' hear , Dad ? " 
 the answer come back in the deep voice Harvey have ever hear from a 
 human chest : " Quit foolin ' , Dan , and send he to I . " 
 Dan snigger , and throw Harvey his warped bicycle shoe . there be 
 something in the tone on the deck that make the boy dissemble his 
 extreme rage and console himself with the thought of gradually 
 unfold the tale of his own and his father 's wealth on the voyage 
 home . this rescue would certainly make he a hero among his friend for 
 life . he hoist himself on deck up a perpendicular ladder , and 
 stumble aft , over a score of obstruction , to where a small , 
 thick - set , clean - shaven man with gray eyebrow sit on a step that lead 
 up to the quarter - deck . the swell have pass in the night , leave a 
 long , oily sea , dot round the horizon with the sail of a dozen 
 fishing - boat . between they lie little black speck , show where the 
 dory be out fish . the schooner , with a triangular riding - sail on 
 the mainmast , play easily at anchor , and except for the man by the 
 cabin - roof - " house " they call it - she be desert . 
 " Mornin ' - good afternoon , I should say . you have   nigh slep ' the clock 
 round , young feller , " be the greeting . 
 " Mornin ' , " say Harvey . he do not like be call " young feller " ; 
 and , as one rescue from drown , expect sympathy . his mother 
 suffer agony whenever he get his foot wet ; but this mariner do not 
 seem excited . 
 " Naow let us hear all abaout it . it be quite providential , first an ' 
 last , fer all concerned . what might be your name ? where from   we 
 mistrust it be Noo York , an ' where baound   we mistrust it be Europe ? " 
 Harvey give his name , the name of the steamer , and a short history of 
 the accident , wind up with a demand to be take back immediately to 
 New York , where his father would pay anything any one choose to name . 
 " H'm , " say the shaven man , quite unmove by the end of Harvey 's 
 speech . " I can not   say we think special of any man , or boy even , that 
 fall overboard from that kind o ' packet in a flat ca'am . Least of all 
 when his excuse be that he be seasick . " 
 " Excuse ! " cry Harvey . " d'you suppose I would fall overboard into your 
 dirty little boat for fun ? " 
 " not knowin ' what your notion o ' fun may be , I can not   rightly say , 
 young feller . but if I be you , I would not   call the boat which , under 
 Providence , be the mean o ' savin ' ye , name . in the first place , it be 
 blame irreligious . in the second , it be annoyin ' to my feelin 's - an ' I be 
 Disko Troop o ' the ' we be here ' o ' Gloucester , which you do not   seem 
 rightly to know . " 
 " I do not   know and I do not   care , " say Harvey . " I be grateful enough for 
 be save and all that , of course ! but I want you to understand that 
 the soon you take I back to New York the well it will pay you . " 
 " Meanin ' - haow ? " Troop raise one shaggy eyebrow over a suspiciously 
 mild blue eye . 
 " dollar and cent , " say Harvey , delight to think that he be make 
 an impression . " cold dollar and cent . " he thrust a hand into a 
 pocket , and throw out his stomach a little , which be his way of be 
 grand . " you have   do the good day 's work you ever do in your life when 
 you pull I in . I be all the son Harvey Cheyne have . " 
 " he be bin favour , " say Disko , dryly . 
 " and if you do not   know who Harvey Cheyne be , you do not   know 
 much - that be all . now turn she around and let us hurry . " 
 Harvey have a notion that the great part of America be fill with 
 people discuss and envy his father 's dollar . 
 " Mebbe I do , an ' mebbe I do not . take a reef in your stummick , young 
 feller . it be full o ' my vittle . " 
 Harvey hear a chuckle from Dan , who be pretend to be busy by the 
 stump - foremast , and blood rush to his face . " we will pay for that too , " 
 he say . " when do you suppose we shall get to New York ? " 
 " I do not   use Noo York any . Ner Boston . we may see Eastern Point about 
 September ; an ' your pa - I be real sorry I hain't   heerd tell of he - may 
 give I ten dollar efter all your talk . then o ' course he may not . " 
 " ten dollar ! why , see here , I - " Harvey dive into his pocket for the 
 wad of bill . all he bring up be a soggy packet of cigarette . 
 " not lawful currency ; an ' bad for the lung . heave them overboard , young 
 feller , and try agin . " 
 " it be be steal ! " cry Harvey , hotly . 
 " you will hev to wait till you see your pa to reward I , then ? " 
 " a hundred and thirty - four dollar - all steal , " say Harvey , hunt 
 wildly through his pocket . " give they back . " 
 a curious change flit across old Troop 's hard face . " what might you 
 have be do at your time o ' life with one hundred an ' thirty - four 
 dollar , young feller ? " 
 " it be part of my pocket - money - for a month . " this Harvey think 
 would be a knock - down blow , and it be - indirectly . 
 " oh ! one hundred and thirty - four dollar be only part of his 
 pocket - money - for one month only ! you do not   remember hittin ' anything 
 when you fall over , do you ? crack agin a stanchion , le 's say . old man 
 Hasken o ' the East Wind " - Troop seem to be talk to himself - " he 
 trip on a hatch an ' butt the mainmast with his head - hardish . 
 ' baout three week afterwards , old man Hasken he would hev it that the 
 " East Wind " be a commerce - destroyin ' man - o'-war , an ' so he declare 
 war on Sable Island because it be Bridish , an ' the shoal run aout too 
 far . they sew he up in a bed - bag , his head an ' foot appearin ' , fer 
 the rest o ' the trip , an ' now he be to home in Essex playin ' with little 
 rag doll . " 
 Harvey choke with rage , but Troop go on consolingly : " we be sorry 
 fer you . we be very sorry fer you - an ' so young . we will not   say no more 
 abaout the money , I guess . " 
 " ' course you will not . you stole it . " 
 " suit yourself . we steal it ef it be any comfort to you . Naow , abaout 
 go back . Allowin ' we could do it , which we can not , you be not   in no 
 fit state to go back to your home , an ' we have   jest come on to the Banks , 
 workin ' fer our bread . we do not   see the ha'af of a hundred dollar a 
 month , let alone pocket - money ; an ' with good luck we will be ashore again 
 somewhere abaout the first week o ' September . " 
 " but - but it be May now , and I can not   stay here do nothing just 
 because you want to fish . I can not , I tell you ! " 
 " right an ' jest ; jest an ' right . no one ask you to do nothing . there be 
 a heap as you can do , for Otto he go overboard on Le Have . I mistrust 
 he lose his grip in a gale we f'und there . anyways , he never come back 
 to deny it . you have   turn up , plain , plumb providential for all 
 concern . I mistrust , though , there be ruther few thing you kin do . 
 ai not   thet so ? " 
 " I can make it lively for you and your crowd when we get ashore , " say 
 Harvey , with a vicious nod , murmur vague threat about " piracy , " at 
 which troop almost - not quite - smile . 
 " Excep ' talk . I would forgot that . you be not   ask to talk more'n you have   a 
 mind to aboard the ' we be here ' . keep your eye open , an ' help Dan to 
 do ez he be bid , an ' sechlike , an ' I will give you - you be not   wuth it , but 
 I will give - ten an ' a ha'af a month ; say thirty - five at the end o ' the 
 trip . a little work will ease up your head , and you kin tell we all 
 abaout your dad an ' your ma an ' your money afterwards . " 
 " she be on the steamer , " say Harvey , his eye fill with tear . " take 
 I to New York at once . " 
 " poor woman - poor woman ! when she have you back she will forgit it all , 
 though . there be eight of we on the ' we be here ' , an ' ef we go back 
 naow - it be more'n a thousand mile - we would lose the season . the man they 
 would not   hev it , allowin ' I be agreeable . " 
 " but my father would make it all right . " 
 " he would try . I do not   doubt he would try , " say troop ; " but a whole season 's 
 catch be eight man 's bread ; an ' you will be well in your health when 
 you see he in the fall . go forward an ' help Dan . it be ten an ' a ha'af 
 a month , e I say , an ' o ' course , all f'und , same e the rest o ' we . " 
 " do you mean I be to clean pot and pan and thing ? " say Harvey . 
 " An ' other thing . you have   no call to shout , young feller . " 
 " I will not ! my father will give you enough to buy this dirty little 
 fish - kettle " - Harvey stamp on the deck - " ten time over , if you take 
 I to New York safe ; and - and - you be in a hundred and thirty by I , 
 anyhow . " 
 " Haow ? " say Troop , the iron face darken . 
 " how ? you know how , well enough . on top of all that , you want I to do 
 menial work " - Harvey be very proud of that adjective - " till the Fall . 
 I tell you I will not . you hear ? " 
 Troop regard the top of the mainmast with deep interest for a while , 
 as Harvey harangue fiercely all around he . 
 " Hsh ! " he say at last . " I be figurin ' out my responsibility in my own 
 mind . it be a matter o ' jedgment . " 
 Dan steal up and pluck Harvey by the elbow . " do not   go to tamperin ' 
 with Dad any more , " he plead . " you have   call he a thief two or three 
 time over , an ' he do not   take that from any livin ' bein ' . " 
 " I will not ! " harvey almost shriek , disregard the advice , and still 
 Troop meditate . 
 " seem kinder unneighbourly , " he say at last , his eye travel down 
 to Harvey . " I - do not   blame you , not a mite , young feeler , nor you will not 
 blame I when the bile 's out o ' your systim . be sure you sense what I 
 say ? ten an ' a ha'af fer second boy on the schooner - an ' all find - fer 
 to teach you an ' fer the sake o ' your health . yes or no ? " 
 " no ! " say Harvey . " take I back to New York or I will see you - " 
 he do not exactly remember what follow . he be lie in the 
 scupper , hold on to a nose that bleed while Troop look down on he 
 serenely . 
 " Dan , " he say to his son , " I be sot agin this young feeler when I 
 first see he on account o ' hasty jedgment . never you be lead astray by 
 hasty jedgment , Dan . Naow I be sorry for he , because he be clear 
 distracted in his upper work . he be not   responsible fer the name he be 
 give I , nor fer his other statement - nor fer jumpin ' overboard , which 
 I be abaout ha'af convince he do . you be gentle with he , Dan , ' r I will 
 give you twice what I have   give he . they hemmeridge clear the head . 
 let he sluice it off ! " 
 Troop go down solemnly into the cabin , where he and the old man 
 bunk , leave Dan to comfort the luckless heir to thirty million . 
 CHAPTER II 
 " I warn ye , " say Dan , as the drop fall thick and fast on the dark , 
 oil planking . " Dad be not   noway hasty , but you fair earn it . Pshaw ! 
 there be no sense takin ' on so . " harvey 's shoulder be rise and 
 fall in spasm of dry sobbing . " I know the feelin ' . first time Dad 
 lay I out be the last - and that be my first trip . make ye feel 
 sickish an ' lonesome . I know . " 
 " it do , " moan Harvey . " that man be either crazy or drunk , and - and I 
 can not   do anything . " 
 " do not   say that to Dad , " whisper Dan . " he be set agin all liquor , 
 an ' - well , he tell I you be the madman . what in creation make you 
 call he a thief ? he be my dad . " 
 Harvey sit up , mop his nose , and tell the story of the miss wad 
 of bill . " I be not crazy , " he wind up . " only - your father have never 
 see more than a five - dollar bill at a time , and my father could buy up 
 this boat once a week and never miss it . " 
 " you do not   know what the ' we be here 's ' worth . your dad must hev a pile 
 o ' money . how do he git it ? Dad sez loony can not   shake out a straight 
 yarn . go ahead . " 
 " in gold mine and thing , West . " 
 " I have   read o ' that kind o ' business . out West , too ? do he go around 
 with a pistol on a trick - pony , same ez the circus ? they call that the 
 Wild West , and I have   hear that their spur an ' bridle be solid 
 silver . " 
 " you be a chump ! " say Harvey , amuse in spite of himself . " my father 
 have not   any use for pony . when he want to ride he take his car . " 
 " Haow ? lobster - car ? " 
 " no . his own private car , of course . you have   see a private car some 
 time in your life ? " 
 " Slatin Beeman he hez one , " say Dan , cautiously . " I see she at the 
 Union Depot in Boston , with three nigger hoggin ' her run . " ,   Dan mean 
 clean the window .   " but Slatin Beeman he own ' baout every railroad 
 on Long Island , they say , an ' they say he be buy ' baout ha'af Noo 
 Hampshire an ' run a line fence around she , an ' fill she up with lion 
 an ' tiger an ' bear an ' buffalo an ' crocodile an ' such all . Slatin 
 Beeman he be a millionaire . I have   see his car . yes ? " 
 " well , my father 's what they call a multi - millionaire , and he have two 
 private car . one 's name for I , the ' harvey ' , and one for my mother , 
 the ' Constance ' . " 
 " hold on , " say Dan . " Dad do not   ever let I swear , but I guess you can . 
 ' fore we go ahead , I want you to say hope you may die if you be lyin ' . " 
 " of course , " say Harvey . 
 " the be not   ' niff . say , ' hope I may die if I be not   speak ' truth . " ' 
 " Hope I may die right here , " say Harvey , " if every word I have   speak 
 be not   the cold truth . " 
 " hundred an ' thirty - four dollar an ' all ? " say Dan . " I hear ye 
 talkin ' to Dad , an ' I ha'af look you would be swallere up , same 's Jonah . " 
 Harvey protest himself red in the face . Dan be a shrewd young person 
 along his own line , and ten minute ' questioning convince he that 
 Harvey be not lie - much . besides , he have bind himself by the most 
 terrible oath know to boyhood , and yet he sit , alive , with a red - ended 
 nose , in the scupper , recounting marvel upon marvel . 
 " Gosh ! " say Dan at last from the very bottom of his soul when Harvey 
 have complete an inventory of the car name in his honour . then a grin 
 of mischievous delight overspread his broad face . " I believe you , 
 Harvey . Dad be make a mistake fer once in his life . " 
 " he have , sure , " say Harvey , who be meditate an early revenge . 
 " he will be mad clear through . Dad jest hat to be mistook in his 
 jedgment . " Dan lie back and slap his thigh . " oh , Harvey , do not   you 
 spile the catch by lettin ' on . " 
 " I do not   want to be knock down again . I will get even with he , though . " 
 " never hear any man ever get even with dad . but he would knock ye down 
 again sure . the more he be mistook the more he would do it . but gold - mine 
 and pistol - " 
 " I never say a word about pistol , " harvey cut in , for he be on his 
 oath . 
 " Thet 's so ; no more you do . two private car , then , one name fer you 
 an ' one fer she ; an ' two hundred dollar a month pocket - money , all 
 knock into the scupper fer not workin ' fer ten an ' a ha'af a month ! 
 it be the top haul o ' the season . " he explode with noiseless chuckle . 
 " then I be right ? " say Harvey , who think he have find a sympathiser . 
 " you be wrong ; the wrong kind o ' wrong ! you take right hold an ' 
 pitch in ' longside o ' I , or you will catch it , an ' I will catch it fer 
 backin ' you up . Dad always give I double help 'cause I be his son , 
 an ' he hat favourin ' folk . ' guess you be kind mad at dad . I have   be 
 that way time an ' again . but dad be a mighty jest man ; all the fleet 
 say so . " 
 " look like justice , this , do not   it ? " Harvey point to his outraged 
 nose . 
 " Thet 's nothing . let the shore blood outer you . Dad do it for yer 
 health . say , though , I can not   have dealin 's with a man that think I or 
 dad or any one on the ' we be here be ' a thief . we be not   any common 
 wharf - end crowd by any manner o ' mean . we be fisherman , an ' we have 
 ship together for six year an ' more . do not   you make any mistake on 
 that ! I tell ye dad do not   let I swear . he call them vain oath , and 
 pound I ; but ef I could say what you say ' baout your pap an ' his 
 fixin 's , I would say that ' baout your dollar . I dunno what be in your 
 pocket when I dry your kit , fer I do not   look to see ; but I would say , 
 use the very same word ez you use jest now , neither I nor dad - an ' 
 we be the only two that teche you after you be bring aboard - know 
 anythin ' ' baout the money . Thet 's my say . Naow ? " 
 the bloodletting have certainly clear Harvey 's brain , and maybe the 
 loneliness of the sea have something to do with it . " that be all right , " 
 he say . then he look down confusedly . " ' seem to I that for a 
 fellow just save from drown I have not   be over and above grateful , 
 Dan . " 
 " well , you be shake up and silly , " say Dan . " anyway , there be only 
 dad an ' I aboard to see it . the cook he do not   count . " 
 " I might have think about lose the bill that way , " Harvey say , 
 half to himself , " instead of call everybody in sight a thief . 
 where be your father ? " 
 " in the cabin . what d ' you want o ' he again ? " 
 " you will see , " say Harvey , and he step , rather groggily , for his 
 head be still sing , to the cabin step where the little ship 's 
 clock hang in plain sight of the wheel . Troop , in the 
 chocolate - and - yellow paint cabin , be busy with a note - book and an 
 enormous black pencil which he suck hard from time to time . 
 " I have not   act quite right , " say Harvey , surprised at his own 
 meekness . 
 " what be wrong naow ? " say the skipper . " walk into Dan , hev ye ? " 
 " no ; it be about you . " 
 " I be here to listen . " 
 " well , I - I be here to take thing back , " say Harvey very quickly . 
 " when a man 's save from drown - - " he gulp . 
 " Ey ? you will make a man yet ef you go on this way . " 
 " he ought not   begin by call people name . " 
 " Jest an ' right - right an ' jest , " say Troop , with the ghost of a dry 
 smile . 
 " so I be here to say I be sorry . " another big gulp . 
 Troop heave himself slowly off the locker he be sit on and hold 
 out an eleven - inch hand . " I mistrust ' twould do you sight o ' good ; 
 an ' this show I be not   mistook in my jedgment . " a smothered chuckle 
 on deck catch his ear . " I be very seldom mistook in my jedgment . " the 
 eleven - inch hand close on Harvey 's , numb it to the elbow . " we will 
 put a little more gristle to that ' fore we have   do with you , young 
 feller ; an ' I do not   think any bad of ye fer anythin ' the be go by . 
 you be not   fairly responsible . go right abaout your business an ' you 
 will not   take no hurt . " 
 " you be white , " say Dan , as Harvey regain the deck , flush to the 
 tip of his ear . 
 " I do not   feel it , " say he . 
 " I do not   mean that way . I hear what Dad say . when Dad allow he 
 do not   think the bad of any man , Dad 's give himself away . he hat to 
 be mistake in his jedgment too . Ho ! ho ! Onct Dad have a jedgment , he would 
 soon dip his colour to the British than change it . I be glad it be 
 settle right eend up . Dad be right when he say he can not   take you back . 
 it be all the livin ' we make here - fishin ' . the men'll be back like 
 shark after a dead whale in ha'af an hour . " 
 " what for ? " say Harvey . 
 " Supper , o ' course . do not   your stummick tell you ? you have   a heap to 
 learn . " 
 " guess I have , " say Harvey , dolefully , look at the tangle of rope 
 and block overhead . 
 " she be a daisy , " say Dan , enthusiastically , misunderstand the look . 
 " wait till our mainsail 's bent , an ' she walk home with all her salt 
 wet . there be some work first , though . " he point down into the 
 darkness of the open main - hatch between the two mast . 
 " what be that for ? it be all empty , " say Harvey . 
 " you an ' I an ' a few more hev get to fill it , " say Dan . " that be where 
 the fish go . " 
 " alive ? " say Harvey . 
 " well , no . they be so 's to be ruther dead - an ' flat - an ' salt . there be 
 a hundred hogshead o ' salt in the bin , an ' we hain't   more'n cover 
 our dunnage to now . " 
 " where be the fish , though ? " 
 " ' in the sea they say , in the boat we pray , ' " say Dan , quote a 
 fisherman 's proverb . " you come in last night with ' baout forty of them . " 
 he point to a sort of wooden pen just in front of the quarter - deck . 
 " you an ' I we will sluice that out when they be through . ' send we will hev 
 full pen to - night ! I have   see she down ha'af a foot with fish waitin ' 
 to clean , an ' we stand to the table till we be splittin ' ourselve 
 instid o ' they , we be so sleepy . yes , they be comm ' in naow . " Dan 
 look over the low bulwark at half a dozen dory row towards they 
 over the shin , silky sea . 
 " I have   never see the sea from so low down , " say Harvey . " it be fine . " 
 the low sun make the water all purple and pinkish , with golden light 
 on the barrel of the long swell , and blue and green mackerel shade 
 in the hollow . each schooner in sight seem to be pull her dory 
 towards she by invisible string , and the little black figure in the 
 tiny boat pull like clockwork toy . 
 " they have   strike on good , " say Dan , between his half - shut eye . " Manuel 
 hain't   room fer another fish . low ez a lily - pad in still water , Aeneid 
 he ? " 
 " which be Manuel ? I do not   see how you can tell them ' way off , as you do . " 
 " last boat to the south'ard . he fund you last night , " say Dan , 
 pointing . " Manuel row Portugoosey ; ye can not   mistake he . east o ' 
 he - he be a heap better'n he row - be Pennsylvania . load with 
 saleratus , by the look of he . east o ' him - see how pretty they string 
 out all along - with the humpy shoulder , be Long Jack . he be a Galway 
 man inhabitin ' South Boston , where they all live mostly , an ' mostly 
 they Galway man be good in a boat . north , away yonder - you will hear he 
 tune up in a minute be Tom Platt . Man - o'-war 's man he be on the old 
 Ohio first of our navy , he say , to go araound the Horn . he never talk 
 of much else , ' cept when he sing , but he have fair fishin ' luck . there ! 
 what do I tell you ? " 
 a melodious bellow stole across the water from the northern dory . 
 Harvey hear something about somebody 's hand and foot be cold , and 
 then : 
 " bring forth the chart , the doleful chart , 
 see where they mounting meet ! 
 the cloud be thick around their head , 
 the mist around their foot . " 
 " full boat , " say Dan , with a chuckle . " if he give we ' o Captain ' it be 
 topping ' too ! " 
 the bellow continue : 
 " and naow to thee , o Capting , 
 most earnestly I pray , 
 that they shall never bury I 
 in church or cloister gray . " 
 " double game for Tom Platt . he will tell you all about the old Ohio 
 tomorrow . ' see that blue dory behind he ? he be my uncle , - Dad 's own 
 brother , - an ' ef there be any bad luck loose on the bank she will fetch 
 up agin Uncle Salters , sure . look how tender he be rowin ' . I will lay my 
 wage and share he be the only man sting up to - day - an ' he be sting up 
 good . " 
 " what will ste he ? " say Harvey , get interested . 
 " strawberry , mostly . pumpkin , sometimes , an ' sometimes lemon an ' 
 cucumber . yes , he be sting up from his elbow down . that man 's luck 's 
 perfectly paralyzin ' . Naow we will take a - holt o ' the tackle an ' hist 
 them in . be it true what you tell I jest now , that you never do a 
 hand 's turn o ' work in all your bear life ? must feel kind awful , 
 do not   it ? " 
 " I be go to try to work , anyway , " Harvey reply stoutly . " only it be 
 all dead new . " 
 " Lay a - holt o ' that tackle , then . behind ye ! " 
 Harvey grab at a rope and long iron hook dangle from one of the 
 stay of the mainmast , while Dan pull down another that run from 
 something he call a " topping - lift , " as Manuel draw alongside in his 
 load dory . the Portuguese smile a brilliant smile that Harvey 
 learn to know well later , and with a short - handle fork begin to 
 throw fish into the pen on deck . " two hundred and thirty - one , " he 
 shout . 
 " give he the hook , " say Dan , and Harvey run it into Manuel 's hand . 
 he slip it through a loop of rope at the dory 's bow , catch Dan 's 
 tackle , hook it to the stern - becket , and clamber into the schooner . 
 " pull ! " shout Dan , and Harvey pull , astonish to find how easily 
 the dory rise . 
 " hold on , she do not   nest in the crosstree ! " Dan laugh ; and harvey 
 hold on , for the boat lie in the air above his head . 
 " low away , " Dan shout , and as Harvey lower , Dan sway the light 
 boat with one hand till it land softly just behind the mainmast . 
 " they do not   weigh nothing empty . Thet be right smart fer a passenger . 
 there be more trick to it in a sea - way . " 
 " ah ha ! " say Manuel , hold out a brown hand . " you be some pretty 
 well now ? this time last night the fish they fish for you . now you fish 
 for fish . eh , wha - at ? " 
 " I be - I be ever so grateful , " Harvey stammer , and his unfortunate hand 
 steal to his pocket once more , but he remember that he have no money 
 to offer . when he know Manuel well the mere thought of the mistake he 
 might have make would cover he with hot , uneasy blush in his bunk . 
 " there be no to be thankful for to I ! " say Manuel . " how shall I leave 
 you dreeft , dreeft all around the bank ? now you be a fisherman eh , 
 wha - at ? ouh ! auh ! " he bend backward and forward stiffly from the hip 
 to get the kink out of himself . 
 " I have not clean boat to - day . too busy . they strike on queek . Danny , 
 my son , clean for I . " 
 Harvey move forward at once . here be something he could do for the 
 man who have save his life . 
 Dan throw he a swab , and he lean over the dory , mop up the slime 
 clumsily , but with great good - will . " hike out the foot - board ; they 
 slide in they groove , " say Dan . " swab them an ' lie them down . never let 
 a foot - board jam . Ye may want she bad some day . here be Long Jack . " 
 a stream of glitter fish fly into the pen from a dory alongside . 
 " Manuel , you take the tackle . I will fix the table . harvey , clear 
 Manuel 's boat . long Jack 's nestin ' on the top of she . " 
 Harvey look up from his swabbing at the bottom of another dory just 
 above his head . 
 " Jest like the injian puzzle - box , be not   they ? " say Dan , as the one 
 boat drop into the other . 
 " take to ut like a duck to water , " say Long Jack , a grizzly - chin , 
 long - lipped Galway man , bend to and fro exactly as Manuel have do . 
 Disko in the cabin growl up the hatchway , and they could hear he 
 suck his pencil . 
 " Wan hunder an ' forty - nine an ' a half - bad luck to ye , Discobolus ! " say 
 Long Jack . " I be murderin ' meself to fill your pockut . slate ut for a 
 bad catch . the Portugee have bate I . " 
 Whack come another dory alongside , and more fish shoot into the pen . 
 " two hundred and three . let us look at the passenger ! " the speaker be 
 even large than the Galway man , and his face be make curious by a 
 purple Cut run slant - way from his left eye to the right corner of 
 his mouth . 
 not know what else to do , Harvey swab each dory as it come down , 
 pull out the foot - board , and lay they in the bottom of the boat . 
 " he be catch on good , " say the scarred man , who be Toni Platt , 
 watch he critically . " there be two way o ' do everything . one 's 
 fisher - fashion - any end first an ' a slippery hitch over all - an ' the 
 other 's - " 
 " what we do on the old Ohio ! " Dan interrupt , brush into the knot 
 of man with a long board on leg . " get out o ' here , Tom Platt , an ' 
 leave I fix the table . " 
 he jam one end of the board into two nick in the bulwark , kick 
 out the leg , and duck just in time to avoid a swing blow from the 
 man - o'-war 's man . 
 " An ' they do that on the Ohio , too , Danny . see ? " say Tom Platt , 
 laugh . 
 " guess they be swivel - eye , then , fer it do not   git home , and I know 
 who will find his boot on the main - truck ef he do not   leave we alone . 
 Haul ahead ! I be busy , can not   ye see ? " 
 " Danny , ye lie on the cable an ' sleep all day , " say Long Jack . " you be 
 the hoight av impidence , an ' I be persuade ye'll corrupt our supercargo 
 in a week . " 
 " his name 's harvey , " say Dan , wave two strangely shape knife , " an ' 
 he will be worth five of any Sou ' Boston clam - digger ' fore long . " he lay 
 the knife tastefully on the table , cock his head on one side , and 
 admire the effect . 
 " I think it be forty - two , " say a small voice overside , and there be a 
 roar of laughter as another voice answer , " then my luck 's turn fer 
 onct , ' caze I be forty - five , though I be sting outer all shape . " 
 " forty - two or forty - five . I have   lose count , " the small voice say . 
 " it be Penn an ' Uncle Salters caountin ' catch . this beat the circus any 
 day , " say Dan . " Jest look at them ! " 
 " come in - come in ! " roar Long Jack . " it be wet out yondher , child . " 
 " forty - two , ye say . " this be Uncle Salters . 
 " I will count again , then , " the voice reply meekly . the two dory 
 swing together and bunt into the schooner 's side . 
 " patience o ' Jerusalem ! " snap Uncle Salters , back water with a 
 splash . " what poss a farmer like you to set foot in a boat beat I . 
 you have   nigh stove I all up . " 
 " I be sorry , Mr. Salters . I come to sea on account of nervous 
 dyspepsia . you advise I , I think . " 
 " you an ' your nervis dyspepsy be drown in the Whale - hole , " roar 
 Uncle Salters , a fat and tubby little man . " you be comin ' down on I 
 agin . do ye say forty - two or forty - five ? " 
 " I have   forget , Mr. Salters . let us count . " 
 " do not   see as it could be forty - five . I be forty - five , " say Uncle 
 Salters . " you count keerful , Penn . " 
 Disko Troop come out of the cabin . " salter , you pitch your fish in 
 naow at once , " he say in the tone of authority . 
 " do not   spile the catch , Dad , " Dan murmur . " they two be on'y jest 
 beginnin ' . " 
 " Mother av delight ! he be forkin ' they wan by wan , " howl Long Jack , as 
 Uncle Salters get to work laboriously ; the little man in the other dory 
 count a line of notch on the gunwale . 
 " that be last week 's catch , " he say , look up plaintively , his 
 forefinger where he have leave off . 
 Manuel nudge Dan , who dart to the after - tackle , and , lean far 
 overside , slip the hook into the stern - rope as Manuel make she fast 
 forward . the other pull gallantly and swing the boat in - man , fish , 
 and all . 
 " one , two , four - nine , " say Tom Platt , count with a practised eye . 
 " forty - seven . Penn , you be it ! " Dan let the after - tackle run , and slid 
 he out of the stern on to the deck amid a torrent of his own fish . 
 " hold on ! " roar Uncle Salters , bob by the waist . " hold on , I be a 
 bit mixed in my caount . " 
 he have no time to protest , but be hove inboard and treat like 
 " Pennsylvania . " 
 " forty - one , " say Tom Platt . " beat by a farmer , Salters . an ' you sech a 
 sailor , too ! " 
 " ' Tweren't   fair caount , " say he , stumble out of the pen ; " an ' I be 
 sting up all to piece . " 
 his thick hand be puffy and mottled purply white . 
 " some folk will find strawberry - bottom , " say Dan , address the 
 newly risen moon , " ef they hev to dive fer it , seem to I . " 
 " An ' other , " say Uncle Salters , " eat the fat o ' the land in sloth , 
 an ' mock their own blood - kin . " 
 " seat ye ! seat ye ! " a voice Harvey have not hear call from the 
 foc'sle . Disko Troop , Tom Platt , Long Jack , and Salters go forward on 
 the word . little Penn bent above his square deep - sea reel and the 
 tangle cod - line ; Manuel lie down full length on the deck , and Dan 
 drop into the hold , where Harvey hear he bang cask with a 
 hammer . 
 " salt , " he say , return . " soon as we be through supper we git to 
 dressing - down . you will pitch to Dad . Tom Platt an ' Dad they stow 
 together , an ' you will hear them arguin ' . we be second ha'af , you an ' I 
 an ' Manuel an ' Penn - the youth an ' beauty o ' the boat . " 
 " what be the good of that ? " say Harvey . " I be hungry . " 
 " they will be through in a minute . Suff ! she smell good to - night . Dad 
 ship a good cook ef he do suffer with his brother . it be a full catch 
 today , Aeneid it ? " he point at the pen pile high with cod . " what 
 water do ye hev , Manuel ? " 
 " twenty - fife father , " say the Portuguese , sleepily . " they strike on 
 good an ' queek . some day I show you , Harvey . " 
 the moon be begin to walk on the still sea before the eld man 
 come aft . the cook have no need to cry ' second half . " Dan and Manuel 
 be down the hatch and at table ere Tom Platt , last and most 
 deliberate of the elder , have finish wipe his mouth with the back 
 of his hand . Harvey follow Penn , and sit down before a tin pan of 
 cod 's tongue and sound , mix with scrap of pork and fried potato , a 
 loaf of hot bread , and some black and powerful coffee . hungry as they 
 be , they wait while " Pennsylvania " solemnly ask a blessing . then 
 they stoke in silence till Dan draw a breath over his tin cup and 
 demand of Harvey how he feel . 
 " ' most full , but there be just room for another piece . " 
 the cook be a huge , jet - black negro , and , unlike all the negro 
 Harvey have meet , do not talk , content himself with smile and 
 dumb - show invitation to eat more . 
 " see , Harvey , " say Dan , rap with his fork on the table , " it be jest 
 as I say . the young an ' handsome man - like I an ' Pennsy an ' you an ' 
 Manuel - we be second ha'af , an ' we eat when the first ha'af be 
 through . they be the old fish ; an ' they be mean an ' humpy , an ' their 
 stummick have to be humour ; so they come first , which they do not 
 deserve . Aeneid that so , doctor ? " 
 the cook nod . 
 " can not   he talk ? " say Harvey in a whisper . 
 " ' Nough to get along . not much o ' anything we know . his natural 
 tongue 's kind curious . come from the innard of Cape Breton , he 
 do , where the farmer speak homemade Scotch . Cape Breton 's full o ' 
 nigger whose folk run in there durin ' aour war , an ' they talk like 
 farmer - all huffy - chuffy . " 
 " that be not Scotch , " say " Pennsylvania . " " that be Gaelic . so I read 
 in a book . " 
 " penn read a heap . Most of what he say be so - ' cep ' when it come to 
 a caount o ' fish - eh ? " 
 " do your father just let they say how many they have   catch without 
 check they ? " say Harvey . 
 " why , yes . where be the sense of a man lyin ' fer a few old cod ? " 
 " be a man once lie for his catch , " Manuel put in . " lie every day . 
 Fife , ten , twenty - fife more fish than come he say there be . " 
 " where be that ? " say Dan . " none o ' aour folk . " 
 " Frenchman of Anguille . " 
 " ah ! they West Shore Frenchmen do not   caount anyway . stand to reason 
 they can not   caount Ef you run acrost any of their soft hook , Harvey , 
 you will know why , " say Dan , with an awful contempt . 
 " always more and never less , 
 every time we come to dress , " 
 Long Jack roar down the hatch , and the ' second ha'af " scramble up at 
 once . 
 the shadow of the mast and rigging , with the never - furl riding - sail , 
 roll to and fro on the heaving deck in the moonlight ; and the pile of 
 fish by the stern shone like a dump of fluid silver . in the hold there 
 be trampling and rumbling where Disko Troop and Tom Platt move 
 among the salt - bin . Dan pass Harvey a pitchfork , and lead he to the 
 inboard end of the rough table , where Uncle Salters be drum 
 impatiently with a knife - haft . a tub of salt water lie at his foot . 
 " you pitch to Dan an ' Tom Platt down the hatch , an ' take keer Uncle 
 salter do not   cut yer eye out , " say Dan , swing himself into the 
 hold . " I will pass salt below . " 
 Penn and Manuel stand knee deep among cod in the pen , flourish draw 
 knife . Long Jack , a basket at his foot and mitten on his hand , face 
 Uncle Salters at the table , and Harvey star at the pitchfork and the 
 tub . 
 " hi ! " shout Manuel , stoop to the fish , and bring one up with a 
 finger under its gill and a finger in its eye . he lay it on the edge 
 of the pen ; the knife - blade glimmer with a sound of tearing , and the 
 fish , slit from throat to vent , with a nick on either side of the neck , 
 drop at Long Jack 's foot . 
 " Hi ! " say Long Jack , with a scoop of his mittened hand . the cod 's 
 liver drop in the basket . another wrench and scoop send the head and 
 offal flying , and the empty fish slide across to Uncle Salters , who 
 snort fiercely . there be another sound of tearing , the backbone fly 
 over the bulwark , and the fish , headless , gutted , and open , splash 
 in the tub , send the salt water into Harvey 's astonished mouth . 
 after the first yell , the man be silent . the cod move along as 
 though they be alive , and long ere Harvey have cease wonder at the 
 miraculous dexterity of it all , his tub be full . 
 " Pitch ! " grunt Uncle Salters , without turn his head , and harvey 
 pitch the fish by two and three down the hatch . 
 " hi ! pitch them bunchy , " shout Dan . " do not   scatter ! Uncle Salters be 
 the good splitter in the fleet . watch he mind his book ! " 
 indeed , it look a little as though the round uncle be cut 
 magazine page against time . Manuel 's body , cramp over from the hip , 
 stay like a statue ; but his long arm grab the fish without 
 ceasing . Little Penn toil valiantly , but it be easy to see he be 
 weak . once or twice Manuel find time to help he without break the 
 chain of supply , and once Manuel howl because he have catch his 
 finger in a Frenchman 's hook . these hook be make of soft metal , to be 
 rebent after use ; but the cod very often get away with they and be 
 hook again elsewhere ; and that be one of the many reason why the 
 Gloucester boat despise the Frenchmen . 
 down below , the rasp sound of rough salt rub on rough flesh 
 sound like the whirring of a grindstone - steady undertune to the 
 " click - nick " of knife in the pen ; the wrench and shloop of tear head , 
 drop liver , and fly offal ; the " caraaah " of Uncle Salters 's knife 
 scoop away backbone ; and the flap of wet , open body fall into 
 the tub . 
 at the end of an hour Harvey would have give the world to rest ; for 
 fresh , wet cod weigh more than you would think , and his back ache with 
 the steady pitching . but he feel for the first time in his life that he 
 be one of the work gang of man , take pride in the thought , and hold 
 on sullenly . 
 " Knife oh ! " shout Uncle Salters at last . Penn double up , gasp 
 among the fish , Manuel bow back and forth to supple himself , and Long 
 Jack lean over the bulwark . the cook appear , noiseless as a black 
 shadow , collect a mass of backbone and head , and retreat . 
 " blood - end for breakfast an ' head - chowder , " say Long Jack , smacking 
 his lip . 
 " Knife oh ! " repeat Uncle Salters , wave the flat , curved splitter 's 
 weapon . 
 " look by your foot , Harve , " cry Dan below . 
 Harvey see half a dozen knife stick in a cleat in the hatch comb . 
 he deal these around , take over the dull one . 
 " Water ! " say Disko Troop . 
 " scuttle - butt 's for'ard an ' the dipper be alongside . Hurry , Harve , " say 
 Dan . 
 he be back in a minute with a big dipperful of stale brown water which 
 taste like nectar , and loose the jaw of Disko and Tom Platt . 
 " these be cod , " say Disko . " they be not   Damarskus fig , Tom Platt , nor 
 yet silver bar . I have   tell you that ever single time since we have   sail 
 together . " 
 " a matter o ' seven season , " return Tom Platt coolly . " good stowin 's 
 good stowin ' all the same , an ' there be a right an ' a wrong way o ' 
 stowin ' ballast even . if you have ever see four hundred ton o ' iron set 
 into the - " 
 " Hi ! " with a yell from Manuel the work begin again , and never stop 
 till the pen be empty . the instant the last fish be down , Disko Troop 
 roll aft to the cabin with his brother ; Manuel and Long Jack go 
 forward ; Tom Platt only wait long enough to slide home the hatch ere 
 he too disappear . in half a minute Harvey hear deep snore in the 
 cabin , and he be star blankly at Dan and Penn . 
 " I do a little well that time , Danny , " say Penn , whose eyelid be 
 heavy with sleep . " but I think it be my duty to help clean . " 
 " ' would not   hev your conscience fer a thousand quintal , " say Dan . " turn 
 in , Penn . you have   no call to do boy 's work . draw a bucket , Harvey . oh , 
 Penn , dump these in the gurry - butt ' fore you sleep . Kin you keep awake 
 that long ? " 
 Penn take up the heavy basket of fish - liver , empty they into a cask 
 with a hinged top lash by the foc'sle ; then he too drop out of 
 sight in the cabin . 
 " boy clean up after dressin ' down an ' first watch in ca'am weather be 
 boy 's watch on the ' we be here ' . " Dan sluice the pen energetically , 
 unship the table , set it up to dry in the moonlight , run the red 
 knife - blade through a wad of oakum , and begin to sharpen they on a 
 tiny grindstone , as Harvey throw offal and backbone overboard under 
 his direction . 
 at the first splash a silvery - white ghost rise bolt upright from the 
 oily water and sigh a weird whistle sigh . Harvey start back with 
 a shout , but Dan only laugh . 
 " Grampus , " say he . " beggin ' fer fish - head . they up - eend the way when 
 they be hungry . breath on he like the doleful tomb , hain't   he ? " a 
 horrible stench of decay fish fill the air as the pillar of white 
 sank , and the water bubble oilily . " Hain't   ye never see a grampus 
 up - eend before ? you will see them by hundred ' fore ye're through . say , 
 it be good to hev a boy aboard again . Otto be too old , an ' a Dutchy at 
 that . he an ' I we fight consid'ble . ' would not   ha ' keered fer that ef 
 he would he d a christian tongue in his head . Sleepy ? " 
 " dead sleepy , " say Harvey , nod forward . 
 " must not   sleep on watch . rouse up an ' see ef our anchor - light 's bright 
 an ' shinin ' . you be on watch now , Harve . " 
 " Pshaw ! what be to hurt we ? Bright 's day . sn - orrr ! " 
 " Jest when thing happen , Dad say . fine weather 's good sleepin ' , an ' 
 ' fore you know , mebbe , you be cut in two by a liner , an ' seventeen 
 brass - bind officer , all gen'elman , lift their hand to it that your 
 light be aout an ' there be a thick fog . Harve , I have   kinder take to 
 you , but ef you nod onet more I will lay into you with a rope 's end . " 
 the moon , who see many strange thing on the Banks , look down on a 
 slim youth in knickerbocker and a red jersey , stagger around the 
 cluttered deck of a seventy - ton schooner , while behind he , wave a 
 knot rope , walk , after the manner of an executioner , a boy who 
 yawn and nod between the blow he deal . 
 the lashed wheel groan and kick softly , the riding - sail slat a 
 little in the shift of the light wind , the windlass creak , and the 
 miserable procession continue . Harvey expostulate , threaten , 
 whimper , and at last wept outright , while Dan , the word clot on 
 his tongue , speak of the beauty of watchfulness and slash away with 
 the rope 's end , punish the dory as often as he hit Harvey . at last 
 the clock in the cabin strike ten , and upon the tenth stroke little 
 Penn creep on deck . he find two boy in two tumble heap side by side 
 on the main hatch , so deeply asleep that he actually roll they to 
 their berth . 
 CHAPTER III 
 it be the forty - fathom slumber that clear the soul and eye and heart , 
 and send you to breakfast ravening . they empty a big tin dish of 
 juicy fragment of fish - the blood - end the cook have collect 
 overnight . they clean up the plate and pan of the elder mess , who 
 be out fishing , slice pork for the midday meal , swab down the 
 foc'sle , fill the lamp , draw coal and water for the cook , and 
 investigate the fore - hold , where the boat 's store be stack . it 
 be another perfect day - soft , mild , and clear ; and Harvey breathe to 
 the very bottom of his lung . 
 More schooner have creep up in the night , and the long blue sea be 
 full of sail and dory . far away on the horizon , the smoke of some 
 liner , her hull invisible , smudge the blue , and to eastward a big 
 ship 's top - gallant sail , just lifting , make a square nick in it . Disko 
 Troop be smoke by the roof of the cabin - one eye on the craft 
 around , and the other on the little fly at the main - mast - head . 
 " when Dad kerflummoxe that way , " say Dan in a whisper , " he be do 
 some high - line thinkin ' fer all hand . I will lay my wage an ' share we will 
 make berth soon . Dad he know the cod , an ' the Fleet they know Dad 
 know . ' see them comm ' up one by one , lookin ' fer nothing in particular , 
 o ' course , but scrowgin ' on we all the time ? there be the Prince Leboo ; 
 she be a Chat - ham boat . she be crep ' up sence last night . an ' see that 
 big one with a patch in her foresail an ' a new jib ? she be the Carrie 
 Pitman from West Chat - ham . she will not   keep her canvas long onless her 
 luck 's change since last season . she do not   do much ' cep ' drift . there 
 be not   an anchor make will hold she . . . . when the smoke puff up in 
 little ring like that , Dad 's studyin ' the fish . ef we speak to he 
 now , he will git mad . Las ' time I do , he jest take an ' hove a boot at 
 I . " 
 Disko Troop star forward , the pipe between his tooth , with eye that 
 see nothing . as his son say , he be study the fish - pit his 
 knowledge and experience on the bank against the rove cod in his own 
 sea . he accept the presence of the inquisitive schooner on the 
 horizon as a compliment to his power . but now that it be pay , he 
 wish to draw away and make his berth alone , till it be time to go up 
 to the Virgin and fish in the street of that roar town upon the 
 water . so Disko Troop think of recent weather , and gale , current , 
 food - supply , and other domestic arrangement , from the point of view 
 of a twenty - pound cod ; be , in fact , for an hour a cod himself , and 
 look remarkably like one . then he remove the pipe from his tooth . 
 " Dad , " say Dan , " we have   do our chore . can not   we go overside a piece ? 
 it be good catchin ' weather . " 
 " not in that cherry - colour rig ner they ha'af bake brown shoe . give 
 him suthin ' fit to wear . " 
 " Dad 's pleased - that settle it , " say Dan , delightedly , drag 
 harvey into the cabin , while Troop pitch a key down the step . " Dad 
 keep my spare rig where he kin overhaul it , 'cause Ma sez I be 
 keerless . " he rummage through a locker , and in less than three minute 
 Harvey be adorn with fisherman 's rubber boot that come half up his 
 thigh , a heavy blue jersey well darn at the elbow , a pair of 
 nipper , and a sou'wester . 
 " Naow ye look something like , " say Dan . " hurry ! " 
 " keep nigh an ' handy , " say Troop " an ' do not   go visitin ' raound the 
 Fleet . if any one ask you what I be cal'latin ' to do , speak the 
 truth - fer ye do not   know . " 
 a little red dory , label Hattie S. , lie astern of the schooner . Dan 
 haul in the painter , and drop lightly on to the bottom board , 
 while Harvey tumble clumsily after . 
 " that be no way o ' gettin ' into a boat , " say Dan . " ef there be any sea 
 you would go to the bottom , sure . you got to learn to meet she . " 
 Dan fit the thole - pin , take the forward thwart and watch Harvey 's 
 work . the boy have row , in a lady - like fashion , on the Adirondack 
 pond ; but there be a difference between squeaking pin and 
 well - balance ruflock - light scull and stubby , eight - foot sea - oar . 
 they stick in the gentle swell , and Harvey grunt . 
 " short ! row short ! " say Dan . " ef you cramp your oar in any kind o ' sea 
 you be liable to turn she over . ai not   she a daisy ? mine , too . " 
 the little dory be specklessly clean . in her bow lie a tiny anchor , 
 two jug of water , and some seventy fathom of thin , brown dory - roding . 
 a tin dinner - horn rest in cleat just under Harvey 's right hand , 
 beside an ugly - look maul , a short gaff , and a short wooden stick . 
 a couple of line , with very heavy lead and double cod - hook , all 
 neatly coil on square reel , be stick in their place by the gunwale . 
 " where be the sail and mast ? " say Harvey , for his hand be begin 
 to blister . 
 Dan chuckle . " ye do not   sail fishin'-dories much . ye pull ; but ye 
 need not   pull so hard . do not   you wish you own she ? " 
 " well , I guess my father might give I one or two if I ask them , " 
 Harvey reply . he have be too busy to think much of his family till 
 then . 
 " that be so . I forget your dad be a millionaire . you do not   act millionary 
 any , naow . but a dory an ' craft an ' gear " - Dan speak as though she be 
 a whaleboat - " cost a heap . think your dad ' u'd give you one fer - fer a 
 pet like ? " 
 " should not   wonder . it would be ' most the ouly thing I have not   stick he 
 for yet . " 
 " must be an expensive kind kid to home . do not   slitheroo thet way , 
 Harve . Short 's the trick , because no sea 's ever dead still , an ' the 
 swell will - " 
 crack ! the loom of the oar kick Harvey under the chin and knock he 
 backwards . 
 " that be what I be go to say . I he d to learn too , but I be not 
 more than eight year old when I get my schoolin ' . " 
 Harvey regain his seat with ache jaw and a frown . 
 " no good gettin ' mad at thing , Dad say . it be our own fault ef we 
 can not   handle them , he say . Le 's try here . Manuel will give we the water . " 
 the " Portugee " be rock fully a mile away , but when Dan up - end an 
 oar he wave his left arm three time . 
 " Thirty fathom , " say Dan , string a salt clam on to the hook . " over 
 with the doughboy . Bait same 's I do , Harvey , an ' do not   snarl your 
 reel . " 
 Dan 's line be out long before Harvey have master the mystery of 
 bait and heave out the lead . the dory drift along easily . it 
 be not worth while to anchor till they be sure of good ground . 
 " here we come ! " Dan shout , and a shower of spray rattle on Harvey 's 
 shoulder as a big cod flap and kick alongside . " Muckie , Harvey , 
 muckle ! under your hand ! Onick ! " 
 evidently " muckle " could not be the dinner - horn , so Harvey pass over 
 the maul , and Dan scientifically stun the fish before he pull it 
 inboard , and wrench out the hook with the short wooden stick he 
 call a " gob - stick . " then Harvey feel a tug , and pull up zealously . 
 " why , these be strawberry ! " he shout . " look ! " 
 the hook have foul among a bunch of strawberry , red on one side and 
 white on the other - perfect reproduction of the land fruit , except 
 that there be no leaf , and the stem be all pipy and slimy . 
 " do not   tech them . slat them off . do not   - " 
 the warning come too late . Harvey have pick they from the hook , and 
 be admire they . 
 " Ouch ! " he cry , for his finger throb as though he have grasp 
 many nettle . 
 " now ye know what strawberry - bottom mean . nothing ' cep ' fish should be 
 teche with the naked finger , Dad say . slat them off agin the gunnel , 
 an ' bait up , Harve . Lookin ' will not   help any . it be all in the wage . " 
 Harvey smile at the thought of his ten and a half dollar a month , and 
 wonder what his mother would say if she could see he hang over 
 the edge of a fishing - dory in mid - ocean . she suffer agony whenever 
 he go out on Saranac Lake ; and , by the way , Harvey remember 
 distinctly that he use to laugh at her anxiety . suddenly the line 
 flash through his hand , sting even through the " nipper , " the 
 woolen circlet suppose to protect it . 
 " he be a logy . give he room accordin ' to his strength , " cry Dan . 
 " I will help ye . " 
 " no , you will not , " Harvey snap , as he hang on to the line . " it be my 
 first fish . I - be it a whale ? " 
 " Halibut , mebbe . " Dan peer down into the water alongside , and 
 flourish the big " muckle , " ready for all chance . something white and 
 oval flicker and flutter through the green . " I will lay my wage an ' 
 share he be over a hundred . be you so everlastin ' anxious to land he 
 alone ? " 
 Harvey 's knuckle be raw and bleed where they have be hang 
 against the gunwale ; his face be purple - blue between excitement and 
 exertion ; he drip with sweat , and be half - blind from star at 
 the circle sunlit ripple about the swiftly move line . the boy 
 be tired long ere the halibut , who take charge of they and the dory 
 for the next twenty minute . but the big flat fish be gaffe and 
 haul in at last . 
 " Beginner 's luck , " say Dan , wipe his forehead . " he be all of a 
 hundred . " 
 Harvey look at the huge gray - and - mottle creature with unspeakable 
 pride . he have see halibut many time on marble slab ashore , but it 
 have never occur to he to ask how they come inland . now he know ; and 
 every inch of his body ache with fatigue . 
 " Ef Dad be along , " say Dan , haul up , " he would read the sign plain 's 
 print . the fish be runnin ' small an ' small , an ' you have   take ' baout 
 as logy a halibut 's we be apt to find this trip . yesterday 's catch - do 
 ye notice it ? - be all big fish an ' no halibut . Dad he would read they 
 sign right off . Dad say everythin ' on the Banks be sign , an ' can be 
 read wrong er right . Dad 's deeper'n the whale - hole . " 
 even as he speak some one fire a pistol on the ' we be here ' , and a 
 potato - basket be run up in the fore - rigging . 
 " what do I say , naow ? that be the call fer the whole crowd . Dad 's onter 
 something , er he would never break fishin ' this time o ' day . reel up , 
 Harve , an ' we will pull back . " 
 they be to windward of the schooner , just ready to flirt the dory 
 over the still sea , when sound of woe half a mile off lead they to 
 Penn , who be career around a fix point for all the world like a 
 gigantic water - bug . the little man back away and come down again with 
 enormous energy , but at the end of each maneuver his dory swing round 
 and snub herself on her rope . 
 " we will hev to help he , else he will root an ' seed here , " say Dan . 
 " what be the matter ? " say Harvey . this be a new world , where he could 
 not lay down the law to his elder , but have to ask question humbly . 
 and the sea be horribly big and unexcited . 
 " Anchor 's fouled . Penn be always lose them . lose two this trip 
 a'ready - on sandy bottom too - an ' Dad say next one he lose , sure 's 
 fishin ' , he will give he the kelleg . that ' u'd break Penn 's heart . " 
 " what be a ' kelleg ' ? " say Harvey , who have a vague idea it might be some 
 kind of marine torture , like keel - haul in the storybook . 
 " big stone instid of an anchor . you kin see a kelleg ridin ' in the bow 
 fur 's you can see a dory , an ' all the fleet know what it mean . they would 
 guy he dreadful . Penn could not   stand that no more'n a dog with a 
 dipper to his tail . he be so everlastin ' sensitive . hello , Penn ! stick 
 again ? do not   try any more o ' your patent . come up on she , and keep 
 your rodin ' straight up an ' down . " 
 " it do not   move , " say the little man , pant . " it do not   move at 
 all , and instead I try everything . " 
 " what be all this hurrah's - nest for'ard ? " say Dan , point to a wild 
 tangle of spare oar and dory - roding , all mat together by the hand 
 of inexperience . 
 " oh , that , " say Penn proudly , " be a spanish windlass . Mr. Salters 
 show I how to make it ; but even that do not   move she . " 
 Dan bent low over the gunwale to hide a smile , twitch once or twice 
 on the roding , and , behold , the anchor draw at once . 
 " haul up , Penn , " he say laugh , " er she will git stick again . " 
 they leave he regard the weed - hang fluke of the little anchor with 
 big , pathetic blue eye , and thank they profusely . 
 " oh , say , while I think of it , Harve , " say Dan when they be out of 
 ear - shot , " penn be not   quite all caulk . he be not   nowise dangerous , but 
 his mind 's give out . see ? " 
 " be that so , or be it one of your father 's judgment ? " 
 Harvey ask as he bend to his oar . he feel he be learn to handle 
 they more easily . 
 " Dad be not   mistook this time . Penn be a sure enough loony . " 
 " no , he be not   thet exactly , so much ez a harmless ijut . it be this way 
  you be rowin ' quite so , Harve , an ' I tell you 'cause it be right you 
 orter know . he be a moravian preacher once . Jacob Boiler wuz his name , 
 Dad tell I , an ' he live with his wife an ' four child somewhere 
 out Pennsylvania way . well , Penn he take his folk along to a Moravian 
 meetin ' - camp - meetin ' most like - an ' they stay over jest one night in 
 Johns - town . you have   heere talk o ' Johnstown ? " 
 Harvey consider . " yes , I have . but I do not   know why . it stick in my 
 head same as Ashtabula . " 
 " both be big accident - thet 's why , Harve . well , that one single night 
 Penn and his folk be to the hotel Johnstown be wipe out . ' Dam bust 
 an ' flooded she , an ' the house strike adrift an ' bump into each 
 other an ' sunk . I have   see the picture , an ' they be dretful . penn he 
 see his folk drown all'n a heap ' fore he rightly know what be 
 comin ' . his mind give out from that on . he mistrust something he d 
 happen up to Johnstown , but for the poor life of he he could not 
 remember what , an ' he jest drift araound smilin ' an ' wonderin ' . he 
 do not   know what he be , nor yit what he he d bin , an ' thet way he run 
 agin Uncle Salters , who be visitin ' ' n Allegheny City . Ha'af my 
 mother 's folk they live scatter inside o ' Pennsylvania , an ' Uncle 
 Salters he visit araound winter . Uncle Salters he kinder adopt 
 Penn , well knowin ' what his trouble wuz ; an ' he bring he East , an ' 
 he give he work on his farm . ' , why , I hear he call Penn a farmer 
 last night when the boat bump . be your Uncle Salters a farmer ? " 
 " Farmer ! " shout Dan . " there be not   water enough ' tween here an ' 
 hatt'ru to wash the furrer - mold off'n his boot . he be jest everlastin ' 
 farmer . why , Harve , I have   see thet man hitch up a bucket , long towards 
 sundown , an ' set twiddlin ' the spigot to the scuttle - butt same 's ef 
 ' twas a cow 's bag . he be thet much farmer . well , Penn an ' he they run 
 the farm - up Exeter way ' twur . Uncle Salters he sell it this spring to 
 a jay from Boston as want to build a summer - haouse , an ' he get a heap 
 for it . well , they two loony scratch along till , one day , Penn 's 
 church - he have belong to the Moravians - find out where he wuz drift 
 an ' layin ' , an ' write to Uncle Salters . ' never heerd what they say 
 exactly ; but Uncle Salters be mad . he be a ' piscopolian mostly - but he 
 jest let them hev it both side o ' the bow , be if he be a baptist ; an ' 
 sez he warn't   go to give up Penn to any blame moravian connection in 
 Pennsylvania or anywhere else . then he come to Dad , towin ' Penn , - thet 
 be two trip back , - an ' sez he an ' Penn must fish a trip fer their 
 health . ' guess he think the Moravians would not   hunt the Banks fer 
 Jacob Boiler . Dad be agreeable , fer Uncle Salters he have be fishin ' 
 off an ' on fer thirty year , when he warn't   inventin ' patent manure , 
 an ' he take quarter - share in the ' we be here ' ; an ' the trip do Penn 
 so much good , Dad make a habit o ' takin ' he . some day , Dad sez , he will 
 remember his wife an ' kid an ' Johnstown , an ' then , like as not , he will 
 die , Dad sez . do not   ye talk abaout Johnstown ner such thing to Penn , 
 ' r Uncle Salters he will heave ye overboard . " 
 " Poor Penn ! " murmur Harvey . " I should not   ever have think Uncle 
 Salters care for he by the look of them together . " 
 " I like Penn , though ; we all do , " say Dan . " we ought to ha ' give he a 
 tow , but I want to tell ye first . " 
 they be close to the schooner now , the other boat a little behind 
 they . 
 " you need not   heave in the dory till after dinner , " say Troop from 
 the deck . " we will dress daown right off . Fix table , boy ! " 
 " Deeper'n the Whale - deep , " say Dan , with a wink , as he set the gear 
 for dress down . " look at they boat that hev edge up sence mornin ' . 
 they be all waitin ' on Dad . see them , Harve ? " 
 " they be all alike to I . " and indeed to a landsman , the nodding 
 schooner around seem run from the same mold . 
 " they be not , though . that yaller , dirty packet with her bowsprit 
 steeve that way , she be the Hope of Prague . Nick Brady 's her skipper , 
 the mean man on the Banks . we will tell he so when we strike the Main 
 Ledge . ' way off yonder 's the Day 's Eye . the two Jeraulds own she . she be 
 from Harwich ; fastish , too , an ' hez good luck ; but Dad he would find fish 
 in a graveyard . they other three , side along , they be the Margie Smith , 
 Rose , and Edith S. Walen , all from home . ' guess we will see the Abbie M. 
 Deering to - morrer , Dad , will not   we ? they be all slippin ' over from the 
 shaol o ' ' Oueereau . " 
 " you will not   see many boat to - morrow , Danny . " when Troop call his son 
 Danny , it be a sign that the old man be pleased . " boy , we be too 
 crowd , " he go on , address the crew as they clamber inboard . 
 " we will leave them to bait big an ' catch small . " he look at the catch 
 in the pen , and it be curious to see how little and level the fish 
 run . save for Harvey 's halibut , there be nothing over fifteen pound 
 on deck . 
 " I be waitin ' on the weather , " he add . 
 " Ye'll have to make it yourself , Disko , for there be no sign I can see , " 
 say Long Jack , sweep the clear horizon . 
 and yet , half an hour later , as they be dress down , the Bank fog 
 drop on they , " between fish and fish , " as they say . it drive 
 steadily and in wreath , curl and smoke along the colourless 
 water . the man stop dressing - down without a word . long Jack and 
 Uncle Salters slip the windlass brake into their socket , and begin 
 to heave up the anchor ; the windlass jar as the wet hempen cable 
 strain on the barrel . Manuel and Tom Platt give a hand at the last . 
 the anchor come up with a sob , and the riding - sail belly as Troop 
 steady she at the wheel . " up jib and foresail , " say he . 
 " slip them in the smother , " shout Long Jack , make fast the 
 jib - sheet , while the other raise the clack , rattle ring of the 
 foresail ; and the foreboom creak as the ' we be here ' look up into 
 the wind and dive off into blank , whirl white . 
 " there be wind behind this fog , " say Troop . 
 it be wonderful beyond word to Harvey ; and the most wonderful part 
 be that he hear no order except an occasional grunt from Troop , 
 end with , " that be good , my son ! " 
 " never see anchor weigh before ? " say Tom Platt , to Harvey gap at 
 the damp canvas of the foresail . 
 " no . where be we go ? " 
 " fish and make berth , as you will find out ' fore you have   be a week 
 aboard . it be all new to you , but we never know what may come to we . 
 now , take I - Tom Platt - I would never ha ' thought - " 
 " it be well than fourteen dollar a month an ' a bullet in your belly , " 
 say Troop , from the wheel . " ease your jumbo a grind . " 
 " dollar an ' cent well , " return the man - o'-war 's man , do 
 something to a big jib with a wooden spar tie to it . " but we do not 
 think o ' that when we man the windlass - brake on the Miss Jim Buck , 
 I outside Beau - fort Harbor , with Fort Macon heavin ' hot shot at our 
 stern , an ' a livin ' gale atop of all . where be you then , Disko ? " 
 " Jest here , or hereabouts , " Disko reply , " earnin ' my bread on the 
 deep water , an ' dodgin ' Reb privateer . sorry I can not   accommodate you 
 with red - hot shot , Tom Platt ; but I guess we will come aout all right on 
 wind ' fore we see Eastern Point . " 
 there be an incessant slapping and chatter at the bow now , vary by 
 a solid thud and a little spout of spray that clatter down on the 
 foc'sle . the rigging drip clammy drop , and the man lounge along 
 the lee of the house - all save Uncle Salters , who sit stiffly on the 
 main - hatch nursing his sting hand . 
 " guess she would carry stays'l , " say Disko , roll one eye at his brother . 
 " guess she would not   to any sorter profit . what be the sense o ' wastin ' 
 canvas ? " the farmer - sailor reply . 
 the wheel twitch almost imperceptibly in Disko 's hand . a few second 
 later a hiss wave - top slash diagonally across the boat , smote 
 Uncle Salters between the shoulder , and drench he from head to 
 foot . he rise sputtering , and go forward only to catch another . 
 " see Dad chase he all around the deck , " say Dan . " Uncle Salters he 
 think his quarter share 's our canvas . Dad 's put this duckin ' act up on 
 he two trip runnin ' . hi ! that find he where he feed . " Uncle 
 Salters have take refuge by the foremast , but a wave slap he over 
 the knee . Disko 's face be as blank as the circle of the wheel . 
 " guess she would lie easy under stays'l , salter , " say Disko , as though 
 he have see nothing . 
 " set your old kite , then , " roar the victim through a cloud of spray ; 
 " only do not   lay it to I if anything happen . penn , you go below right 
 off an ' git your coffee . you ought to hev more sense than to bum 
 araound on deck this weather . " 
 " now they will swill coffee an ' play checker till the cow come home , " 
 say Dan , as Uncle Salters hustle Penn into the fore - cabin . " ' look to 
 I like be if we would all be do so fer a spell . there be nothing in 
 creation dead - limpsey - idler'n a Banker when she be not   on fish . " 
 " I be glad ye speak , Danny , " cry Long Jack , who have be cast round 
 in search of amusement . " I would dean forgot we have a passenger under that 
 t - wharf hat . there be no idleness for thim that do not   know their rope . 
 pass he along , Tom Platt , an ' we will larn he . " 
 " ' tain't   my trick this time , " grin Dan . " you have   get to go it alone . 
 Dad learn I with a rope 's end . " 
 for an hour Long Jack walk his prey up and down , teaching , as he 
 say , " thing at the sea that ivry man must know , blind , dhrunk , or 
 asleep . " there be not much gear to a seventy - ton schooner with a 
 stump - foremast , but Long Jack have a gift of expression . when he wish 
 to draw Harvey 's attention to the peak - halyard , he dig his knuckle 
 into the back of the boy 's neck and keep he at gaze for half a minute . 
 he emphasize the difference between fore and aft generally by rub 
 Harvey 's nose along a few foot of the boom , and the lead of each rope 
 be fix in Harvey 's mind by the end of the rope itself . 
 the lesson would have be easy have the deck be at all free ; but 
 there appear to be a place on it for everything and anything except a 
 man . Forward lie the windlass and its tackle , with the chain and hemp 
 cable , all very unpleasant to trip over ; the foc'sle stovepipe , and 
 the gurry - butt by the foc'sle hatch to hold the fish - liver . aft of 
 these the foreboom and booby of the main - hatch take all the space that 
 be not need for the pump and dressing - pen . then come the nest of 
 dory lash to ring - bolt by the quarter - deck ; the house , with tub 
 and oddment lash all around it ; and , last , the sixty - foot main - boom 
 in its crutch , split thing length - wise , to duck and dodge under 
 every time . 
 Tom Platt , of course , could not keep his oar out of the business , but 
 range alongside with enormous and unnecessary description of sail 
 and spar on the old Ohio . 
 " niver mind fwhat he say ; attind to I , innocince . Tom Platt , this 
 bally - hoo 's not the Ohio , an ' you be mix the bhoy bad . " 
 " he will be ruin for life , beginnin ' on a fore - an'-after this way , " Tom 
 Platt plead . " give he a chance to know a few leadin ' principle . 
 Sailin be an art , Harvey , as I would show you if I have ye in the fore - top o ' 
 the - " 
 " I know ut . Ye'd talk he dead an ' cowld . Silince , Tom Platt ! now , 
 after all I have   say , how would you reef the foresail , Harve ? take your time 
 answerin ' . " 
 " Haul that in , " say Harvey , point to leeward . 
 " Fwhat ? the North Atlantuc ? " 
 " no , the boom . then run that rope you show I back there - " 
 " that be no way , " Tom Platt burst in . 
 " quiet ! he be larnin ' , an ' have not the name good yet . go on , Harve . " 
 " oh , it be the reef - pennant . I would hook the tackle on to the reef - pennant , 
 and then let down - " 
 " low the sail , child ! low ! " say Tom Platt , in a professional agony . 
 " low the throat and peak halyard , " Harvey go on . those name stick 
 in his head . 
 " Lay your hand on thim , " say Long Jack . 
 Harvey obey . " lower till that rope - loop - on the after - leach - kris - no , 
 it be cringle - till the cringle be down on the boom . then I would tie she 
 up the way you say , and then I would hoist up the peak and throat halyard 
 again . " 
 " you have   forget to pass the tack - earing , but wid time and help ye'll 
 larn . there be good and just reason for ivry rope aboard , or else 
 ' twould be overboard . D'ye follow I ? ' tis dollar an ' cent I be 
 puttin ' into your pocket , ye skinny little supercargo , so that fwhin 
 ye've   fill out ye can ship from Boston to Cuba an ' tell thim Long 
 Jack larn you . now I will chase ye around a piece , callin ' the rope , 
 an ' you will lay your hand on thim as I call . " 
 he begin , and Harvey , who be feel rather tired , walk slowly to 
 the rope name . a rope 's end lick round his rib , and nearly knock 
 the breath out of he . 
 " when you own a boat , " say Tom Platt , with severe eye , " you can walk . 
 till then , take all order at the run . once more - to make sure ! " 
 Harvey be in a glow with the exercise , and this last cut warm he 
 thoroughly . now he be a singularly smart boy , the son of a very clever 
 man and a very sensitive woman , with a fine resolute temper that 
 systematic spoiling have nearly turn to mulish obstinacy . he look at 
 the other man , and see that even Dan do not smile . it be evidently 
 all in the day 's work , though it hurt abominably ; so he swallow the 
 hint with a gulp and a gasp and a grin . the same smartness that lead he 
 to take such advantage of his mother make he very sure that no one on 
 the boat , except , maybe , Penn , would stand the least nonsense . one 
 learn a great deal from a mere tone . long Jack call over half a 
 dozen rope , and Harvey dance over the deck like an eel at ebb - tide , 
 one eye on Tom Platt . 
 " ver ' good . ver ' good don , " say Manuel . " after supper I show you a 
 little schooner I make , with all her rope . so we shall learn . " 
 " fust - class fer - a passenger , " say Dan . " Dad he be jest allow you will 
 be wuth your salt maybe ' fore you be draownde . Thet 's a heap fer Dad . 
 I will learn you more our next watch together . " 
 " Taller ! " grunt Disko , peer through the fog as it smoke over the 
 bow . there be nothing to be see ten foot beyond the surge 
 jib - boom , while alongside roll the endless procession of solemn , pale 
 wave whisper and lip one to the other . 
 " now I will learn you something long Jack can not , " shout Tom Platt , as 
 from a locker by the stern he produce a battered deep - sea lead 
 hollow at one end , smear the hollow from a saucer full of mutton 
 tallow , and go forward . " I will learn you how to fly the Blue Pigeon . 
 Shooo ! " 
 Disko do something to the wheel that check the schooner 's way , while 
 Manuel , with Harvey to help   and a proud boy be Harvey , let down the 
 jib in a lump on the boom . the lead sing a deep droning song as Tom 
 Platt whirl it round and round . 
 " go ahead , man , " say Long Jack , impatiently . " we be not drawin ' 
 twenty - five fut off Fire Island in a fog . there be no trick to ut . " 
 " do not   be jealous , Galway . " the release lead plop into the sea far 
 ahead as the schooner surge slowly forward . 
 " soundin ' be a trick , though , " say Dan , " when your dipsey lead be all 
 the eye you be like to hev for a week . what d'you make it , Dad ? " 
 Disko 's face relax . his skill and honour be involve in the march 
 he have steal on the rest of the Fleet , and he have his reputation as a 
 master artist who know the Banks blindfold . " sixty , mebbe - ef I be any 
 judge , " he reply , with a glance at the tiny compass in the window of 
 the house . 
 " Sixty , " sing out Tom Platt , haul in great wet coil . 
 the schooner gather way once more . " Heave ! " say Disko , after a 
 quarter of an hour . 
 " what d'you make it ? " Dan whisper , and he look at Harvey proudly . 
 but Harvey be too proud of his own performance to be impress just 
 then . 
 " Fifty , " say the father . " I mistrust we be right over the nick o ' 
 Green Bank on old Sixty - Fifty . " 
 " Fifty ! " roar Tom Platt . they could scarcely see he through the fog . 
 " she be bust within a yard - like the shell at Fort Macon . " 
 " bait up , Harve , " say Dan , diving for a line on the reel . 
 the schooner seem to be stray promiscuously through the smother , 
 her headsail banging wildly . the man wait and look at the boy who 
 begin fish . 
 " Heugh ! " Dan 's line twitch on the score and scarred rail . " now haow 
 in thunder do Dad know ? help we here , Harve . it be a big un . 
 Poke - hooked , too . " they haul together , and land a goggle - eye 
 twenty - pound cod . he have take the bait right into his stomach . 
 " why , he be all cover with little crab , " cry Harvey , turn he 
 over . 
 " by the great hook - block , they be lousy already , " say Long Jack . 
 " Disko , ye kape your spare eye under the keel . " 
 Splash go the anchor , and they all heave over the line , each man 
 take his own place at the bulwark . 
 " be they good to eat ? " harvey pant , as he lug in another 
 crab - cover cod . 
 " sure . when they be lousy it be a sign they have   all be herdin ' together 
 by the thousand , and when they take the bait that way they be hungry . 
 never mind how the bait set . they will bite on the bare hook . " 
 " say , this be great ! " Harvey cry , as the fish come in gasp and 
 splash - nearly all poke - hooked , as Dan have say . " why can not   we 
 always fish from the boat instead of from the dory ? " 
 " Allus can , till we begin to dress daown . efter thet , the head and 
 offal ' u'd scare the fish to Fundy . Boatfishin ' be not   reckon 
 progressive , though , unless ye know as much as dad know . guess we will 
 run aout aour trawl to - night . hard on the back , this , than frum the 
 dory , be not   it ? " 
 it be rather back - break work , for in a dory the weight of a cod be 
 water - borne till the last minute , and you be , so to speak , abreast of 
 he ; but the few foot of a schooner 's freeboard make so much extra 
 dead - hauling , and stoop over the bulwark cramp the stomach . but it 
 be wild and furious sport so long as it last ; and a big pile lay 
 aboard when the fish cease bite . 
 " where be Penn and Uncle Salters ? " Harvey ask , slap the slime off 
 his oilskin , and reel up the line in careful imitation of the 
 other . 
 " Git 's coffee and see . " 
 under the yellow glare of the lamp on the pawl - post , the foc'sle table 
 down and open , utterly unconscious of fish or weather , sit the two 
 man , a checker - board between they , Uncle Salters snarl at Penn 's 
 every move . 
 " what be the matter naow ? " say the former , as Harvey , one hand in the 
 leather loop at the head of the ladder , hang shout to the cook . 
 " big fish and lousy - heap and heap , " Harvey reply , quote Long 
 Jack . " how be the game ? " 
 Little Penn 's jaw drop . " ' Tweren't   none o ' his fault , " snap Uncle 
 Salters . " Penn 's deef . " 
 " checker , be not   it ? " say Dan , as Harvey stagger aft with the 
 steaming coffee in a tin pail . " that let we out o ' cleanin ' up 
 to - night . Dad be a jest man . they will have to do it . " 
 " an ' two young feller I know'll bait up a tub or so o ' trawl , while 
 they be cleanin ' , " say Disko , lash the wheel to his taste . 
 " um ! guess I would ruther clean up , Dad . " 
 " do not   doubt it . ye wun't , though . dress daown ! dress daown ! Penn'll 
 pitch while you two bait up . " 
 " why in thunder do not   they blame boy tell we you would strike on ? " say 
 Uncle Salters , shuffle to his place at the table . " this knife 's 
 gum - blunt , Dan . " 
 " ef stickin ' out cable do not   wake ye , guess you would well hire a boy o ' 
 your own , " say Dan , muddle about in the dusk over the tub full of 
 trawl - line lash to windward of the house . " oh , Harve , do not   ye want 
 to slip down an ' git 's bait ? " 
 " bait ez we be , " say Disko . " I mistrust shag - fishin ' will pay well , 
 ez thing go . " 
 that mean the boy would bait with select offal of the cod as the 
 fish be clean - an improvement on paddle bare - handed in the little 
 bait - barrel below . the tub be full of neatly coil line carry a 
 big hook each few foot ; and the testing and baiting of every single 
 hook , with the stowage of the bait line so that it should run clear 
 when shoot from the dory , be a scientific business . Dan manage it in 
 the dark , without look , while Harvey catch his finger on the barb 
 and bewail his fate . but the hook fly through Dan 's finger like 
 tatting on an old maid 's lap . " I help bait up trawl ashore ' fore I 
 could well walk , " he say . " but it be a putterin ' job all the same . oh , 
 Dad ! " this shout towards the hatch , where Disko and Tom Platt be 
 salt . " how many skate you reckon we will need ? " 
 " ' baout three . hurry ! " 
 " there be three hundred fathom to each tub , " Dan explain ; " more'n 
 enough to lay out to - night . ouch ! ' slip up there , I do . " he stick 
 his finger in his mouth . " I tell you , Harve , there be not   money in 
 Gloucester ' u'd hire I to ship on a reg'lar trawler . it may be 
 progressive , but , barrin ' that , it be the putterin' , slimjammest 
 business top of earth . " 
 " I do not   know what this be , if ' tisn't   regular trawling , " say harvey 
 sulkily . " my finger be all cut to frazzle . " 
 " Pshaw ! this be just one o ' Dad 's blame experirnent . he do not   trawl 
 ' less there be mighty good reason fer it . Dad know . Thet 's why he be 
 baitin ' ez he be . we will hev her saggin ' full when we take she up er we 
 will not   see a fin . " 
 Penn and Uncle Salters clean up as Disko have ordain , but the boy 
 profit little . no soon be the tub furnish than Tom Platt and 
 Long Jack , who have be explore the inside of a dory with a lantern , 
 snatch they away , load up the tub and some small , paint 
 trawl - buoy , and hove the boat overboard into what Harvey regard as 
 an exceedingly rough sea . " they will be drown . why , the dory 's load 
 like a freight - car , " he cry . 
 " we will be back , " say Long Jack , " an ' in case you will not be lookin ' for 
 we , we will lay into you both if the trawl 's snarl . " 
 the dory surge up on the crest of a wave , and just when it seem 
 impossible that she could avoid smash against the schooner 's side , 
 slide over the ridge , and be swallow up in the damp dusk . 
 " take ahold here , an ' keep ringin ' steady , " say Dan , pass harvey 
 the lanyard of a bell that hang just behind the windlass . 
 Harvey ring lustily , for he feel two life depend on he . but Disko 
 in the cabin , scrawl in the log - book , do not look like a murderer , 
 and when he go to supper he even smile dryly at the anxious Harvey . 
 " this be not   no weather , " say Dan . " why , you an ' I could set thet 
 trawl ! they have   only go out jest far ' nough so be not to foul our 
 cable . they do not   need no bell reelly . " 
 " Clang ! clang ! clang ! " Harvey keep it up , vary with occasional 
 rub - a - dub , for another half - hour . there be a bellow and a bump 
 alongside . Manuel and Dan race to the hook of the dory - tackle ; Long 
 Jack and Tom Platt arrive on deck together , it seem , one half the 
 North Atlantic at their back , and the dory follow they in the air , 
 land with a clatter . 
 " Nary snarl , " say Tom Platt as he drip . " Danny , you will do yet . " 
 " the pleasure av your comp'ny to the banquit , " say Long Jack , 
 squelch the water from his boot as he caper like an elephant and 
 stick an oil - skin arm into Harvey 's face . " we do be condescend to 
 honour the second half wid our presence . " and off they all four roll 
 to supper , where Harvey stuff himself to the brim on fish - chowder and 
 fried pie , and fall fast asleep just as Manuel produce from a locker 
 a lovely two - foot model of the Lucy Holmes , his first boat , and be 
 go to show Harvey the rope . Harvey never even twiddle his finger 
 as Penn push he into his bunk . 
 " it must be a sad thing - a very sad thing , " say Penn , watch the 
 boy 's face , " for his mother and his father , who think he be dead . to 
 lose a child - to lose a man - child ! " 
 " git out o ' this , Penn , " say Dan . " go aft and finish your game with 
 Uncle Salters . tell Dad I will stand Harve 's watch ef he do not   keer . he be 
 play aout . " 
 " ver ' good boy , " say Manuel , slip out of his boot and 
 disappear into the black shadow of the low bunk . " Expec ' he make 
 good man , Danny . I no see he be any so mad as your parpa he say . eh , 
 wha - at ? " 
 Dan chuckle , but the chuckle end in a snore . 
 it be thick weather outside , with a rise wind , and the eld man 
 stretch their watch . the hour strike clear in the cabin ; the nosing 
 bow slap and scuff with the sea ; the foc'sle stove - pipe hiss 
 and sputter as the spray catch it ; and the boy sleep on , while 
 Disko , Long Jack , Tom Platt , and Uncle Salters , each in turn , stump 
 aft to look at the wheel , forward to see that the anchor hold , or to 
 veer out a little more cable against chafing , with a glance at the dim 
 anchor - light between each round . 
 CHAPTER IV 
 Harvey wake to find the " first half " at breakfast , the foc'sle door 
 draw to a crack , and every square inch of the schooner sing its own 
 tune . the black bulk of the cook balance behind the tiny galley over 
 the glare of the stove , and the pot and pan in the pierce wooden 
 board before it jar and racket to each plunge . up and up the 
 foc'sle climb , yearn and surging and quivering , and then , with a 
 clear , sickle - like swoop , come down into the sea . he could hear the 
 flare bow cut and squelch , and there be a pause ere the divide 
 water come down on the deck above , like a volley of buckshot . follow 
 the woolly sound of the cable in the hawse - hole ; and a grunt and squeal 
 of the windlass ; a yaw , a punt , and a kick , and the ' we be here ' 
 gather herself together to repeat the motion . 
 " now , ashore , " he hear Long Jack say , " ye've   chore , an ' ye must do 
 thim in any weather . here we be well clear of the fleet , an ' we have   no 
 chore - an ' that be a blessin ' . good night , all . " he pass like a big 
 snake from the table to his bunk , and begin to smoke . Tom Platt 
 follow his example ; Uncle Salters , with Penn , fight his way up the 
 ladder to stand his watch , and the cook set for the ' second half . " 
 it come out of its bunk as the other have enter theirs , with a shake 
 and a yawn . it eat till it could eat no more ; and then Manuel fill 
 his pipe with some terrible tobacco , crotche himself between the 
 pawl - post and a forward bunk , cock his foot up on the table , and 
 smile tender and indolent smile at the smoke . Dan lie at length in 
 his bunk , wrestle with a gaudy , gilt - stop accordion , whose tune 
 go up and down with the pitching of the ' we be here ' . the cook , his 
 shoulder against the locker where he keep the fried pie   Dan be fond 
 of fried pie , peel potato , with one eye on the stove in event of 
 too much water find its way down the pipe ; and the general smell and 
 smother be past all description . 
 harvey consider affair , wonder that he be not deathly sick , and 
 crawl into his bunk again , as the softest and safest place , while Dan 
 strike up , " I do not   want to play in your yard , " as accurately as the 
 wild jerk allow . 
 " how long be this for ? " Harvey ask of Manuel . 
 " till she get a little quiet , and we can row to trawl . perhaps 
 to - night . perhaps two day more . you do not like ? eh , wha - at ? " 
 " I should have be crazy sick a week ago , but it do not   seem to upset 
 I now - much . " 
 " that be because we make you fisherman , these day . if I be you , when 
 I come to Gloucester I would give two , three big candle for my good 
 luck . " 
 " give who ? " 
 " to be sure - the Virgin of our Church on the Hill . she be very good to 
 fisherman all the time . that be why so few of we Portugee man ever be 
 drown . " 
 " you be a roman Catholic , then ? " 
 " I be a Madeira man . I be not a Porto Pico boy . shall I be baptist , 
 then ? eh , wha - at ? I always give candle - two , three more when I come to 
 Gloucester . the good Virgin she never forget I , Manuel . " 
 " I do not   sense it that way , " Tom Platt put in from his bunk , his 
 scarred face light up by the glare of a match as he suck at his pipe . 
 " it stand to reason the sea 's the sea ; and you will get jest about 
 what be go , candle or kerosene , fer that matter . " 
 " ' tis a mighty good thing , " say Long Jack , " to have a friend at coort , 
 though . I be o ' Manuel 's way o ' thinkin ' about tin year back I be crew 
 to a Sou ' Boston market - boat . we be off Minot 's Ledge wid a 
 northeaster , butt first , atop of we , thicker'n burgoo . the ould man be 
 dhrunk , his chin waggin ' on the tiller , an ' I sez to myself , ' if iver I 
 stick my boat - huk into t - wharf again , I will show the saint fwhat manner 
 o ' craft they save I out av . ' now , I be here , as ye can well see , an ' 
 the model of the dhirty ould Kathleen , that take I a month to make , I 
 give ut to the priest , an ' he hang ut up forninst the altar . there be 
 more sense in givin ' a model that be by way o ' bein ' a work av art than 
 any candle . ye can buy candle at store , but a model show the good 
 saint ye've   tuk trouble an ' be grateful . " 
 " d'you believe that , irish ? " say Tom Platt , turn on his elbow . 
 " would I do ut if I do not , Ohio ? " 
 " Wa - al , Enoch Fuller he make a model o ' the old Ohio , and she be to 
 Calem museum now . mighty pretty model , too , but I guess Enoch he never 
 do it fer no sacrifice ; an ' the way I take it be - " 
 there be the making of an hour - long discussion of the kind that 
 fisherman love , where the talk run in shout circle and no one 
 prove anything at the end , have not Dan strike up this cheerful rhyme : 
 " up jump the mackerel with his stripe'd back . reef in the mainsail , 
 and haul on the tack ; for it be windy weather - " 
 here Long Jack join in : 
 and it be blowy weather ; 
 when the wind begin to blow , pipe all hand together ! " 
 Dan go on , with a cautious look at Tom Platt , hold the accordion 
 low in the bunk : 
 " up jump the cod with his chuckle - head , 
 go to the main - chain to heave at the lead ; 
 for it be windy weather , " etc . 
 Tom Platt seem to be hunt for something . Dan crouch lower , but 
 sing louder : 
 " up jump the flounder that swim to the ground . 
 Chuckle - head ! chuckle - head ! mind where ye sound ! " 
 Tom Platt 's huge rubber boot whirl across the foc'sle and catch 
 Dan 's uplifted arm . there be war between the man and the boy ever 
 since Dan have discover that the mere whistling of that tune would 
 make he angry as he heave the lead . 
 " Thought I would fetch yer , " say Dan , return the gift with precision . 
 " ef you do not   like my music , git out your fiddle . I be not   go to lie 
 here all day an ' listen to you an ' Long Jack arguin ' ' baout candle . 
 Fiddle , Tom Platt ; or I will learn Harve here the tune ! " 
 Tom Platt lean down to a locker and bring up an old white fiddle . 
 Manuel 's eye glisten , and from somewhere behind the pawl - post he draw 
 out a tiny , guitar - like thing with wire string , which he call a 
 machette . 
 " ' tis a concert , " say Long Jack , beam through the smoke . " a reg'lar 
 Boston concert . " 
 there be a burst of spray as the hatch open , and Disko , in yellow 
 oilskin , descend . 
 " Ye're just in time , Disko . Fwhat 's she do outside ? " 
 " Jest this ! " he drop on to the locker with the push and heave of 
 the ' we be here ' . 
 " we be singin ' to kape our breakfast down . Ye'll lead , av course , 
 Disko , " say Long Jack . 
 " guess there be not   more'n ' baout two old song I know , an ' ye've   heerd 
 they both . " 
 his excuse be cut short by Tom Platt launch into a most dolorous 
 tune , like unto the moaning of wind and the creaking of mast . with 
 his eye fix on the beam above , Disko begin this ancient , ancient 
 ditty , Tom Platt flourish all round he to make the tune and word 
 fit a little : 
 " there be a crack packet - crack packet o ' fame , 
 she hail from Noo York , an ' the Dreadnought 's her name . 
 you may talk o ' your flier - Swallowtail and Black Ball - 
 but the Dreadnought be the packet that can beat they all . 
 " now the Dreadnought she lie in the River Mersey , 
 because of the tug - boat to take she to sea ; 
 but when she be off sounding you shortly will know 
  Chorus . 
 she be the Liverpool packet - Lord , let she go ! 
 " now the Dreadnought she be howlin ' crost the Banks o ' Newfoundland , 
 where the water 's all shallow and the bottom 's all sand . 
 sez all the little fish that swim to and fro : 
  Chorus . 
 ' she be the Liverpool packet - Lord , let she go ! ' " , 
 there be score of verse , for he work the Dreadnought every mile 
 of the way between Liverpool and New York as conscientiously as though 
 he be on her deck , and the accordion pump and the fiddle squeak 
 beside he . Tom Platt follow with something about " the rough and 
 tough McGinn , who would pilot the vessel in . " then they call on 
 Harvey , who feel very flattered , to contribute to the entertainment ; 
 but all that he could remember be some piece of " Skipper Ireson 's 
 Ride " that he have be teach at the camp - school in the Adirondacks . it 
 seem that they might be appropriate to the time and place , but he have 
 no more than mention the title when Disko bring down one foot with 
 a bang , and cry , " do not   go on , young feller . that be a mistaken 
 jedgment - one o ' the bad kind , too , becaze it be catchin ' to the ear . " 
 " I orter ha ' warn you , " say Dan . " Thet allus fetch Dad . " 
 " what be wrong ? " say Harvey , surprised and a little angry . 
 " all you be go to say , " say Disko . " all dead wrong from start to 
 finish , an ' Whittier he be to blame . I have no special call to right any 
 Marblehead man , but ' tweren't   no fault o ' Ireson 's . my father he tell 
 I the tale time an ' again , an ' this be the way ' twuz . " 
 " for the wan hundredth time , " put in Long Jack under his breath 
 " Ben Ireson he be skipper o ' the Betty , young feller , comin ' home frum 
 the Banks - that be before the war of 1812 , but jestice be jestice at 
 all time . they fund the active o ' Portland , an ' Gibbons o ' that town 
 he be her skipper ; they fund her leakin ' off Cape Cod Light . there be 
 a terr'ble gale on , an ' they be gettin ' the Betty home be fast as they 
 could craowd she . well , Ireson he say there warn't   any sense to 
 reskin ' a boat in that sea ; the man they would not   hev it ; and he lay 
 it before they to stay by the Active till the sea run daown a piece . 
 they would not   hev that either , hangin ' araound the Cape in any sech 
 weather , leak or no leak . they jest up stays'l an ' quit , nat'rally 
 takin ' Ireson with them . folk to Marblehead be mad at he not runnin ' 
 the risk , and becaze nex ' day , when the sea be ca'am   they never 
 stop to think o ' that , some of the Active 's folk be take off by a 
 Truro man . they come into Marblehead with their own tale to tell , 
 sayin ' how Ireson have sham his town , an ' so forth an ' so on , an ' 
 Ireson 's man they be scared , seein ' public feelin ' agin ' them , an ' they 
 go back on Ireson , an ' swore he be respons'ble for the hull act . 
 ' Tweren't   the woman neither that tar and feather he - marblehead 
 woman do not   act that way - ' twa a passel o ' man an ' boy , an ' they 
 cart he araound town in an old dory till the bottom fall aout , and 
 Ireson he tell them they would be sorry for it some day . well , the fact 
 come aout later , same 's they usually do , too late to be any way useful 
 to an honest man ; an ' Whittier he come along an ' pick up the slack 
 eend of a lyin ' tale , an ' tar and feather Ben Ireson all over onct 
 more after he be dead . ' twas the only tune Whittier ever slip up , 
 an ' ' tweren't   fair . I whale Dan good when he bring that piece back 
 from school . you do not   know no well , o ' course ; but I have   give you the 
 fact , hereafter an ' evermore to be remember . Ben Ireson be not   no 
 sech kind o ' man as Whittier make aout ; my father he know he well , 
 before an ' after that business , an ' you beware o ' hasty jedgment , 
 young feller . next ! " 
 Harvey have never hear Disko talk so long , and collapse with burning 
 cheek ; but , as Dan say promptly , a boy could only learn what he be 
 teach at school , and life be too short to keep track of every lie 
 along the coast . 
 then Manuel touch the jangling , jarring little machette to a queer 
 tune , and sing something in Portuguese about " Nina , innocente ! " end 
 with a full - handed sweep that bring the song up with a jerk . then 
 Disko oblige with his second song , to an old - fashioned creaky tune , 
 and all join in the chorus . this be one stanza : 
 " now Aprile be over and melt the snow , 
 and outer Noo Bedford we shortly must tow ; 
 yes , out o ' Noo Bedford we shortly must clear , 
 we be the whaler that never see wheat in the ear . " 
 here the fiddle go very softly for a while by itself , and then : 
 " wheat - in - the - ear , my true - love 's posy blowin , 
 wheat - in - the - ear , we be go off to sea ; 
 wheat - in - the - ear , I leave you fit for sowin , 
 when I come back a loaf o ' bread you will be ! " 
 that make Harvey almost weep , though he could not tell why . but it be 
 much bad when the cook drop the potato and hold out his hand 
 for the fiddle . still lean against the locker door , he strike into a 
 tune that be like something very bad but sure to happen whatever you 
 do . after a little he sing , in an unknown tongue , his big chin down on 
 the fiddle - tail , his white eyeball glare in the lamplight . harvey 
 swing out of his bunk to hear well ; and amid the straining of the 
 timber and the wash of the water the tune croon and moan on , like 
 lee surf in a blind fog , till it end with a wail . 
 " Jimmy Christmas ! Thet give I the blue creevle , " say Dan . " what in 
 thunder be it ? " 
 " the song of Fin McCoul , " say the cook , " when he was go to 
 Norway . " his English be not thick , but all clear - cut , as though it 
 come from a phonograph . 
 " Faith , I have   be to Norway , but I do not   make that unwholesim noise . 
 ' tis like some of the old song , though , " say Long Jack , sigh . 
 " do not   let us hev another ' thout something between , " say Dan ; and the 
 accordion strike up a rattle , catchy tune that end : 
 " it be six an ' twenty Sundays sence las ' we see the land , 
 with fifteen hunder quintal , 
 an ' fifteen hunder quintal , 
 ' teen hunder toppin ' quintal , 
 ' Twix ' old ' Queereau an ' Grand ! " 
 " hold on ! " roar Tom Platt . " D'ye want to nail the trip , Dan ? that be 
 Jonah sure , ' less you sing it after all our salt 's wet . " 
 " no , ' tain't , be it , Dad ? not unless you sing the very las ' verse . you 
 can not   learn I anything on Jonahs ! " 
 " what be that ? " say Harvey . " what be a Jonah ? " 
 " a Jonah 's anything that spoil the luck . sometimes it be a 
 man - sometimes it be a boy - or a bucket . I have   know a splittin'-knife 
 Jonah two trip till we be on to she , " say Tom Platt . " there be all 
 sort o ' Jonahs . Jim Bourke be one till he be drown on Georges . I would 
 never ship with Jim Bourke , not if I be starvin ' . there wuz a green 
 dory on the Ezra Flood . Thet be a Jonah , too , the bad sort o ' Jonah . 
 drown four man , she do , an ' use to shine fiery O , night in the 
 nest . " 
 " and you believe that ? " say Harvey , remember what Tom Platt have 
 say about candle and model . " have not   we all get to take what be 
 serve ? " 
 a mutter of dissent run round the bunk . " Outboard , yes ; inboard , 
 thing can happen , " say Disko . " do not   you go makin ' a mock of Jonahs , 
 young feller . " 
 " well , Harve be not   no Jonah . day after we catch he , " Dan cut in , " we 
 have a toppin ' good catch . " 
 the cook throw up his head and laugh suddenly - a queer , thin laugh . 
 he be a most disconcert nigger . 
 " murder ! " say Long Jack . " do not   do that again , doctor . we be not   use 
 to ut . " 
 " what be wrong ? " say Dan . " be not   he our mascot , and do not   they strike 
 on good after we have strike he ? " 
 " oh ! yess , " say the cook . " I know that , but the catch iss not finish 
 yet . " 
 " he be not   go to do we any harm , " say Dan , hotly . " where be ye 
 hintin ' an ' edgin ' to ? he be all right . " 
 " no harm . no . but one day he will be your master , Danny . " 
 " that all ? " say Dan , placidly . " he wun't   - not by a jugful . " 
 " Master ! " say the cook , point to Harvey . " Man ! " and he point to 
 Dan . 
 " that 's news . Haow soon ? " say Dan , with a laugh . 
 " in some year , and I shall see it . Master and man - man and master . " 
 " how in thunder d'ye work that out ? " say Tom Platt . 
 " in my head , where I can see . " 
 " Haow ? " this from all the other at once . 
 " I do not know , but so it will be . " he drop his head , and go on 
 peel the potato , and not another word could they get out of he . 
 " well , " say Dan , " a heap o ' things'll hev to come abaout ' fore Harve 's 
 any master o ' mine ; but I be glad the doctor be not   choosen to mark he 
 for a Jonah . now , I mistrust Uncle Salters fer the Jonerest Jonah in 
 the Fleet regardin ' his own special luck . dunno ef it be spreadin ' 
 same 's smallpox . he ought to be on the Carrie Pitman . that boat 's her 
 own Jonah , sure - crew an ' gear make no differ to her driftin ' . Jiminy 
 Christmas ! she will etch loose in a flat ca'am . " 
 " we be well clear o ' the Fleet , anyway , " say Disko . " Carrie Pitman an ' 
 all . " there be a rapping on the deck . 
 " Uncle Salters have catch his luck , " say Dan as his father depart . 
 " it be blow clear , " Disko cry , and all the foc'sle tumble up for a 
 bit of fresh air . the fog have go , but a sullen sea run in great 
 roller behind it . the ' we be here ' slid , as it be , into long , sunk 
 avenue and ditch which feel quite sheltered and homelike if they 
 would only stay still ; but they change without rest or mercy , and 
 fling up the schooner to crown one peak of a thousand gray hill , while 
 the wind hoot through her rigging as she zigzag down the slope . 
 far away a sea would burst into a sheet of foam , and the other would 
 follow suit as at a signal , till Harvey 's eye swam with the vision of 
 interlace white and gray . four or five Mother Carey 's chicken 
 storm round in circle , shriek as they sweep past the bow . a 
 rain - squall or two stray aimlessly over the hopeless waste , run down 
 ' wind and back again , and melt away . 
 " seem to I I see something flicker jest naow over yonder , " say Uncle 
 Salters , point to the northeast . 
 " can not   be any of the fleet , " say Disko , peer under his eyebrow , a 
 hand on the foc'sle gangway as the solid bow hatchete into the 
 trough . " Sea 's oilin ' over dretful fast . Danny , do not   you want to skip 
 up a piece an ' see how aour trawl - buoy lay ? " 
 Danny , in his big boot , trot rather than climb up the main 
 rigging   this consume Harvey with envy , hitch himself around the 
 reeling cross - tree , and let his eye rove till it catch the tiny black 
 buoy - flag on the shoulder of a mile - away swell . 
 " she be all right , " he hail . " Sail O ! dead to the no'th'ard , corain ' 
 down like smoke ! Schooner she be , too . ' " 
 they wait yet another half - hour , the sky clearing in patch , with a 
 flicker of sickly sun from time to time that make patch of 
 olive - green water . then a stump - foremast lift , duck , and 
 disappear , to be follow on the next wave by a high stern with 
 old - fashioned wooden snail's - horn davit . the snail be red - tan . 
 " Frenchmen ! " shout Dan . " no , ' tain't , neither . Daad ! " 
 " that be no French , " say Disko . " salter , your blame luck hold 
 tighter'n a screw in a keg - head . " 
 " I have   eye . it be Uncle Abishai . " 
 " you can not   nowise tell fer sure . " 
 " the head - king of all Jonahs , " groan Tom Platt . " oh , Salters , 
 salter , why be not   you abe an ' asleep ? " 
 " how could I tell ? " say poor salter , as the schooner swing up . 
 she might have be the very Flying Dutchman , so foul , draggle , and 
 unkempt be every rope and stick aboard . her old - style quarterdeck be 
 some or five foot high , and her rigging fly knot and tangle like 
 weed at a wharf - end . she be run before the wind - yawing 
 frightfully - her staysail let down to act as a sort of extra 
 foresail , - ' scandalize , " they call it , - and her foreboom guy out 
 over the side . her bowsprit cock up like an old - fashioned frigate 's ; 
 her jib - boom have be fish and splice and nail and clamp beyond 
 further repair ; and as she hove herself forward , and sit down on her 
 broad tail , she look for all the world like a blouzy , frouzy , bad old 
 woman sneer at a decent girl . 
 " that be Abishal , " say Salters . " full o ' gin an ' judique man , an ' the 
 judgment o ' Providence layin ' fer he an ' never takin ' good holt he be 
 run in to bait , Miquelon way . " 
 " he will run she under , " say Long Jack . " that be no rig fer this weather . " 
 " not he , ' r he'd'a do it long ago , " Disko reply . " look 's if he 
 cal'late to run we under . ai not   she daown by the head more ' n natural , 
 Tom Platt ? " 
 " ef it be his style o ' loadin ' she she be not   safe , " say the sailor 
 slowly . " ef she be spew her oakum he would well git to his pump mighty 
 quick . " 
 the creature thresh up , wear round with a clatter and raffle , and lay 
 head to wind within ear - shot . 
 a gray - beard wag over the bulwark , and a thick voice yell 
 something Harvey could not understand . but Disko 's face darken . " he would 
 resk every stick he hez to carry bad news . say we be in fer a shift o ' 
 wind . he be in fer bad . abishal ! Abi - shal ! " he wave his arm up and 
 down with the gesture of a man at the pump , and point forward . the 
 crew mock he and laugh . 
 " Jounce ye , an ' strip ye an ' trip ye ! " yell Uncle Abishal . " a livin ' 
 gale - a livin ' gale . yab ! cast up fer your last trip , all you 
 Gloucester haddock . you will not   see Gloucester no more , no more ! " 
 " crazy full - as usual , " say Tom Platt . " wish he have not   spy we , 
 though . " 
 she drift out of hearing while the gray - head yell something about a 
 dance at the Bay of Bulls and a dead man in the foc'sle . harvey 
 shudder . he have see the sloven till deck and the savage - eyed crew . 
 " An ' that be a fine little floatin ' hell fer she draught , " say Long 
 Jack . " I wondher what mischief he be be at ashore . " 
 " he be a trawler , " Dan explain to Harvey , " an ' he run in fer bait all 
 along the coast . oh , no , not home , he do not   go . he deal along the 
 south an ' east shore up yonder . " he nod in the direction of the 
 pitiless newfoundland beach . " Dad will not   never take I ashore there . 
 they be a mighty tough crowd - an ' Abishal 's the tough . you see his 
 boat ? well , she be nigh seventy year old , they say ; the last o ' the old 
 Marblehead heel - tapper . they do not   make they quarterdeck any more . 
 Abishal do not   use Marblehead , though . he be not   want there . he jes ' 
 drif 's araound , in debt , trawlin ' an ' cussin ' like you have   hear . bin a 
 Jonah fer year an ' year , he hez . ' git liquor frum the Feecamp boat 
 fer makin ' spell an ' selling wind an ' such truck . crazy , I guess . " 
 " ' Twon't   be any use underrunnin ' the trawl to - night , " say Tom Platt , 
 with quiet despair . " he come alongside special to cuss we . I would give my 
 wage an ' share to see he at the gangway o ' the old Ohio ' fore we quit 
 floggin ' . Jest abaout six dozen , an ' Sam Mocatta layin ' them on 
 criss - cross ! " 
 the disheveled " heel - tapper " dance drunkenly down wind , and all eye 
 follow she . suddenly the cook cry in his phonograph voice : " it wass 
 his own death make he speak so ! he iss fey - fey , I tell you ! look ! " 
 she sail into a patch of watery sunshine three or four mile distant . 
 the patch dull and fade out , and even as the light pass so do the 
 schooner . she drop into a hollow and - be not . 
 " run under , by the Great Hook - Block ! " shout Disko , jumping aft . 
 " drunk or sober , we have   get to help them . heave short and break she out ! 
 Smart ! " 
 Harvey be throw on the deck by the shock that follow the setting of 
 the jib and foresail , for they hove short on the cable , and to save 
 time , jerk the anchor bodily from the bottom , heave in as they 
 move away . this be a bit of brute force seldom resort to except in 
 matter of life and death , and the little ' we be here ' complain like 
 a human . they run down to where Abishal 's craft have vanish ; find two 
 or three trawl - tub , a gin - bottle , and a stove - in dory , but nothing 
 more . " let them go , " say Disko , though no one have hint at pick 
 they up . " I would not   hev a match that belong to Abishai aboard . guess 
 she run clear under . must ha ' be spewin ' her oakum fer a week , an ' 
 they never think to pump she . that be one more boat go along o ' 
 leavin ' port all hand drunk . " 
 " glory be ! " say Long Jack . " we would ha ' be oblige to help them if they 
 be top o ' water . " 
 " ' thinkin ' o ' that myself , " say Tom Platt . 
 " Fey ! fey ! " say the cook , roll his eye . " he haas take his own 
 luck with he . " 
 " ver ' good thing , I think , to tell the Fleet when we see . eh , wha - at ? " 
 say Manuel . " if you runna that way before the ' wind , and she work open 
 her seam - " he throw out his hand with an indescribable gesture , 
 while Penn sit down on the house and sob at the sheer horror and 
 pity of it all . harvey could not realize that he have see death on the 
 open water , but he feel very sick . then Dan go up the cross - tree , 
 and Disko steer they back to within sight of their own trawl - buoy 
 just before the fog blanket the sea once again . 
 " we go mighty quick hereabout when we do go , " be all he say to 
 Harvey . " you think on that fer a spell , young feller . that be liquor . " 
 " after dinner it be calm enough to fish from the deck , - Penn and 
 Uncle Salters be very zealous this time , - and the catch be large and 
 large fish . 
 " Abishal have shorely take his luck with he , " say Salters . " the wind 
 hain't   back ner riz ner nothing . how abaout the trawl ? I despise 
 superstition , anyway . " 
 Tom Platt insist that they have much well haul the thing and make a 
 new berth . but the cook say : " the luck iss in two piece . you will 
 find it so when you look . I know . " this so tickle Long Jack that he 
 overbore Tom Platt and the two go out together . 
 underrunne a trawl mean pull it in on one side of the dory , 
 pick off the fish , rebaite the hook , and pass they back to the 
 sea again - something like pin and unpin linen on a wash - line . 
 it be a lengthy business and rather dangerous , for the long , sag 
 line may twitch a boat under in a flash . but when they hear , " and naow 
 to thee , o Capting , " boom out of the fog , the crew of the ' we be 
 here ' take heart . the dory swirl alongside well load , Tom Platt 
 yelling for Manuel to act as relief - boat . 
 " the luck 's cut square in two piece , " say Long Jack , fork in the 
 fish , while Harvey stand open - mouthed at the skill with which the 
 plunge dory be save from destruction . " one half be jest punkin . 
 Tom Platt want to haul she an ' ha ' do wid ut ; but I say , " I will 
 back the doctor that have the second sight , an ' the other half come up 
 sag full o ' big uns . hurry , Man'nle , an ' bring be a tub o ' bait . 
 there 's luck afloat to - night . " 
 the fish bit at the newly bait hook from which their brother have 
 just be take , and Tom Platt and Long Jack move methodically up and 
 down the length of the trawl , the boat 's nose surge under the wet 
 line of hook , strip the sea - cucumber that they call pumpkin , 
 slat off the fresh - catch cod against the gunwale , rebaiting , and 
 load Manuel 's dory till dusk . 
 " I will take no risk , " say Disko then - " not with he floatin ' around so 
 near . Abishal will not   sink fer a week . heave in the dory an ' we will 
 dress daown after supper . " 
 that be a mighty dressing - down , attend by three or four blow 
 grampus . it last till nine o'clock , and Disko be thrice hear to 
 chuckle as Harvey pitch the split fish into the hold . 
 " say , you be haulin ' ahead dretful fast , " say Dan , when they ground 
 the knife after the man have turn in . " there be something of a sea 
 to - night , an ' I hain't   hear you make no remark on it . " 
 " too busy , " Harvey reply , test a blade 's edge . " come to think of 
 it , she be a high - kicker . " 
 the little schooner be gambol all around her anchor among the 
 silver - tip wave . back with a start of affected surprise at the 
 sight of the strained cable , she pounce on it like a kitten , while the 
 spray of her descent burst through the hawse - hole with the report of a 
 gun . shake her head , she would say : " well , I be sorry I can not   stay any 
 long with you . I be go north , " and would sidle off , halt 
 suddenly with a dramatic rattle of her rigging . " as I be just go to 
 observe , " she would begin , as gravely as a drunken man address a 
 lamp - post . the rest of the sentence   she act her word in dumb - show , 
 of course   be lose in a fit of the fidget , when she behave like a 
 puppy chew a string , a clumsy woman in a side - saddle , a hen with she 
 head cut off , or a cow sting by a hornet , exactly as the whim of the 
 sea take she . 
 " see her sayin ' her piece . she be Patrick Henry naow , " say Dan . 
 she swing sideways on a roller , and gesticulate with her jib - boom from 
 port to starboard . 
 " but - ez - fer I , give I liberty - er give I - death ! " 
 wop ! she sit down in the moon - path on the water , courtesye with a 
 flourish of pride impressive enough have not the wheel - gear snigger 
 mockingly in its box . 
 Harvey laugh aloud . " why , it be just as if she be alive , " he say . 
 " she be as stiddy as a haouse an ' as dry as a herrin ' , " say Dan 
 enthusiastically , as he be sling across the deck in a batter of spray . 
 " fend them off an ' fend them off , an ' ' do not   ye come anigh I , ' she 
 sez . look at her - jest look at she ! sake ! you should see one o ' they 
 toothpicks histin ' up her anchor on her spike outer fifteen - fathom 
 water . " 
 " what be a toothpick , Dan ? " 
 " they new haddocker an ' herrin'-boat . Fine be a yacht forward , with 
 yacht stern to them , an ' spike bowsprit , an ' a haouse that ' u'd take 
 our hold . I have   hear that Burgess himself he make the model fer three 
 or four of them . Dad 's sot agin them on account o ' their pitchin ' an ' 
 joltin ' , but there be heap o ' money in them . Dad can find fish , but he 
 be not   no way progressive - he do not   go with the march o ' the time . 
 they be chock - full o ' labour - savin ' jig an ' sech all . ' ever seed the 
 Elector o ' Gloucester ? she be a daisy , ef she be a toothpick . " 
 " what do they cost , Dan ? " 
 " hill o ' dollar . fifteen thousand , p'haps ; more , mebbe . there be 
 gold - leaf an ' everything you kin think of . " then to himself , half under 
 his breath , " guess I would call her Hattie S. , too . " 
 CHAPTER V 
 that be the first of many talk with Dan , who tell Harvey why he would 
 transfer his dory 's name to the imaginary Burgess - model haddocker . 
 Harvey hear a good deal about the real Hattie at Gloucester ; see a 
 lock of her hair - which Dan , find fair word of no avail , have 
 " hooked " as she sit in front of he at school that winter - and a 
 photograph . Hattie be about fourteen year old , with an awful contempt 
 for boy , and have be trample on Dan 's heart through the winter . all 
 this be reveal under oath of solemn secrecy on moonlit deck , in the 
 dead dark , or in choke fog ; the whine wheel behind they , the 
 climbing deck before , and without , the unresting , clamorous sea . once , 
 of course , as the boy come to know each other , there be a fight , 
 which rag from bow to stern till Penn come up and separate they , but 
 promise not to tell Disko , who think fight on watch rather worse 
 than sleep . Harvey be no match for Dan physically , but it say a 
 great deal for his new training that he take his defeat and do not try 
 to get even with his conqueror by underhand method . 
 that be after he have be cure of a string of boil between his 
 elbow and wrist , where the wet jersey and oilskin cut into the 
 flesh . the salt water sting they unpleasantly , but when they be ripe 
 Dan treat they with Disko 's razor , and assure Harvey that now he be 
 a " blooded Banker " ; the affliction of gurry - sore be the mark of the 
 caste that claim he . 
 since he be a boy and very busy , he do not bother his head with too 
 much thinking . he be exceedingly sorry for his mother , and often 
 long to see she and above all to tell she of this wonderful new life , 
 and how brilliantly he be acquit himself in it . otherwise he 
 prefer not to wonder too much how she be bear the shock of his 
 suppose death . but one day , as he stand on the foc'sle ladder , guy 
 the cook , who have accuse he and Dan of hook fried pie , it 
 occur to he that this be a vast improvement on be snub by 
 stranger in the smoking - room of a hire liner . 
 he be a recognize part of the scheme of thing on the we be here ; have 
 his place at the table and among the bunk ; and could hold his own in 
 the long talk on stormy day , when the other be always ready to 
 listen to what they call his " fairy - tale " of his life ashore . it do 
 not take he more than two day and a quarter to feel that if he speak 
 of his own life - it seem very far away - no one except Dan   and even 
 Dan 's belief be sorely try   credit he . so he invent a friend , a 
 boy he have hear of , who drive a miniature four - pony drag in Toledo , 
 Ohio , and order five suit of clothe at a time and lead thing call 
 " german " at party where the old girl be not quite fifteen , but 
 all the present be solid silver . salter protest that this kind of 
 yarn be desperately wicked , if not indeed positively blasphemous , but 
 he listen as greedily as the other ; and their criticism at the end 
 give Harvey entirely new notion on " german , " clothe , cigarette with 
 gold - leaf tip , ring , watch , scent , small dinner - party , champagne , 
 card - playing , and hotel accommodation . little by little he change his 
 tone when speak of his " friend , " whom Long Jack have christen " the 
 Crazy Kid , " " the Gilt - edged Baby , " " the Suckin ' Vanderpoop , " and other 
 pet name ; and with his sea - boot foot cock up on the table would 
 even invent history about silk pajama and specially import 
 neckwear , to the " friend 's " discredit . Harvey be a very adaptable 
 person , with a keen eye and ear for every face and tone about he . 
 before long he know where Disko keep the old greencrusted quadrant that 
 they call the " hog - yoke " - under the bed - bag in his bunk . when he take 
 the sun , and with the help of " The Old Farmer 's " almanac find the 
 latitude , Harvey would jump down into the cabin and scratch the 
 reckoning and date with a nail on the rust of the stove - pipe . now , the 
 chief engineer of the liner could have do no more , and no engineer of 
 thirty year ' service could have assume one half of the 
 ancient - mariner air with which harvey , first careful to spit over the 
 side , make public the schooner 's position for that day , and then and 
 not till then relieve Disko of the quadrant . there be an etiquette in 
 all these thing . 
 the say " hog - yoke , " an Eldridge chart , the farming almanac , Blunt 's 
 " Coast Pilot , " and Bowditch 's " Navigator " be all the weapon Disko 
 need to guide he , except the deep - sea lead that be his spare eye . 
 Harvey nearly slew Penn with it when Tom Platt teach he first how to 
 " fly the blue pigeon " ; and , though his strength be not equal to 
 continuous sound in any sort of a sea , for calm weather with a 
 seven - pound lead on shoal water Disko use he freely . as Dan say : 
 " ' tain't   soundin 's dad want . it be sample . grease she up good , Harve . " 
 Harvey would tallow the cup at the end , and carefully bring the sand , 
 shell , sludge , or whatever it might be , to Disko , who finger and 
 smell it and give judgment as have be say , when Disko think of cod 
 he think as a cod ; and by some long - test mixture of instinct and 
 experience , move the we be here from berth to berth , always with the 
 fish , as a blindfold chess - player move on the unseen board . 
 but Disko 's board be the Grand Bank - a triangle two hundred and fifty 
 mile on each side - a waste of wallow sea , cloak with dank fog , 
 vex with gale , harry with drift ice , score by the track of 
 the reckless liner , and dot with the sail of the fishing - fleet . 
 for day they work in fog - Harvey at the bell - till , grow familiar 
 with the thick air , he go out with Tom Platt , his heart rather in 
 his mouth . but the fog would not lift , and the fish be bite , and no 
 one can stay helplessly afraid for six hour at a time . Harvey devote 
 himself to his line and the gaff or gob - stick as Tom Platt call for 
 they ; and they row back to the schooner guide by the bell and Tom 's 
 instinct ; Manuel 's conch sound thin and faint beside they . but it 
 be an unearthly experience , and , for the first time in a month , Harvey 
 dream of the shifting , smoking floor of water round the dory , the 
 line that stray away into nothing , and the air above that melt on 
 the sea below ten foot from his strain eye . a few day later he be 
 out with Manuel on what should have be forty - fathom bottom , but the 
 whole length of the roding run out , and still the anchor find nothing , 
 and Harvey grow mortally afraid , for that his last touch with earth be 
 lose . " whale - hole , " say Manuel , haul in . " that be good joke on 
 Disko . come ! " and he row to the schooner to find Tom Platt and the 
 other jeer at the skipper because , for once , he have lead they to the 
 edge of the barren Whale - deep , the blank hole of the Grand Bank . they 
 make another berth through the fog , and that time the hair of Harvey 's 
 head stand up when he go out in Manuel 's dory . a whiteness move in 
 the whiteness of the fog with a breath like the breath of the grave , 
 and there be a roaring , a plunging , and spouting . it be his first 
 introduction to the dread summer berg of the bank , and he cower in 
 the bottom of the boat while Manuel laugh . there be day , though , 
 clear and soft and warm , when it seem a sin to do anything but loaf 
 over the hand - line and spank the drift ' sun - scald " with an oar ; 
 and there be day of light air , when Harvey be teach how to steer 
 the schooner from one berth to another . 
 it thrill through he when he first feel the keel answer to his band 
 on the spoke and slide over the long hollow as the foresail scythe 
 back and forth against the blue sky . that be magnificent , in spite of 
 Disko say that it would break a snake 's back to follow his wake . 
 but , as usual , pride run before a fall . they be sail on the wind 
 with the staysail - an old one , luckily - set , and Harvey jam she 
 right into it to show Dan how completely he have master the art . the 
 foresail go over with a bang , and the foregaff stab and rip 
 through the staysail , which be , of course , prevent from go over 
 by the mainstay . they lower the wreck in awful silence , and harvey 
 spend his leisure hour for the next few day under Tom Platt 's lee , 
 learn to use a needle and palm . Dan hoot with joy , for , as he 
 say , he have make the very same blunder himself in his early day . 
 Boylike , Harvey imitate all the man by turn , till he have combine 
 Disko 's peculiar stoop at the wheel , Long Jack 's swing overhand when 
 the line be haul , Manuel 's round - shoulder but effective stroke 
 in a dory , and Tom Platt 's generous Ohio stride along the deck . 
 " ' tis beautiful to see how he take to ut , " say Long Jack , when Harvey 
 be look out by the windlass one thick noon . " I will lay my wage an ' 
 share ' tis more'n half play - actin ' to he , an ' he consate himself he be 
 a bowld mariner . watch his little bit av a back now ! " 
 " that be the way we all begin , " say Tom Platt . " the boy they make 
 believe all the time till they have   cheat ' emselve into bein ' man , an ' 
 so till they die - pretendin ' an ' pretendin ' . I do it on the old Ohio , 
 I know . stand my first watch - harbor - watch - feelin ' finer'n Farragut . 
 Dan 's full o ' the same kind o ' notion . see them now , actin ' to be 
 genewine moss - back - very hair a rope - yarn an ' blood Stockholm tar . " he 
 speak down the cabin stair . " guess you be mistook in your judgment 
 fer once , Disko . what in Rome make ye tell we all here the kid be 
 crazy ? " 
 " he wuz , " Disko reply . " crazy ez a loon when he come aboard ; but I will 
 say he be sober up consid'ble sence . I cure he . " 
 " he yarn good , " say Tom Platt . " t'other night he tell we abaout a kid 
 of his own size steerin ' a cunnin ' little rig an ' four pony up an ' 
 down Toledo , Ohio , I think ' twas , an ' givin ' supper to a crowd o ' 
 sim'lar kid . Cur'us kind o ' fairy - tale , but blame interestin ' . he 
 know score of them . " 
 " guess he strike them outen his own head , " Disko call from the cabin , 
 where he be busy with the logbook . " stand to reason that sort be all 
 make up . it do not   take in no one but Dan , an ' he laugh at it . I have 
 hear he , behind my back . " 
 " Yever hear what Sim'on Peter Ca'houn say when they whack up a match 
 ' twix ' his sister Hitty an ' Lorin ' Jerauld , an ' the boy put up that 
 joke on he daown to george ? " drawl Uncle Salters , who be dripping 
 peaceably under the lee of the starboard dory - nest . 
 Tom Platt puff at his pipe in scornful silence : he be a Cape Cod 
 man , and have not know that tale more than twenty year . Uncle Salters 
 go on with a rasp chuckie : 
 " Sim'on Peter Ca'houn he say , an ' he be jest right , abaout Lorin ' , 
 ' Ha'af on the taown , ' he say , ' an ' t'other ha'af blame fool ; an ' they 
 tell I she be married a ' ich man . ' Sim'on Peter Ca'houn he hedn't   no 
 roof to his mouth , an ' talk that way . " 
 " he do not   talk any Pennsylvania Dutch , " Tom Platt reply . " you would 
 well leave a Cape man to tell that tale . the Ca'houns be gypsy 
 frum ' way back . " 
 " Wal , I do not   profess to be any elocutionist , " salter say . " I be 
 comin ' to the moral o ' thing . that be jest abaout what aour harve be ! 
 Ha'af on the taown , an ' t'other ha'af blame fool ; an ' there be some'll 
 believe he be a rich man . yah ! " 
 " do ye ever think how sweet ' twould be to sail wid a full crew o ' 
 salterse ? " say Long Jack . " Ha'af in the furrer an ' other ha'af in the 
 muck - heap , as Ca'houn do not say , an ' make out he be a fisherman ! " 
 a little laugh go round at Salters 's expense . 
 Disko hold his tongue , and work over the log - book that he keep in a 
 hatchet - face , square hand ; this be the kind of thing that run on , 
 page after soiled page : 
 " July 17 . this day thick fog and few fish . make berth to northward . so 
 end this day . 
 " July 18 . this day come in with thick fog . catch a few fish . 
 " July 19 . this day come in with light breeze from N.E. and fine 
 weather . make a berth to eastward . catch plenty fish . 
 " July 20 . this , the Sabbath , come in with fog and light wind . so end 
 this day . total fish catch this week , 3,478 . " 
 they never work on Sundays , but shave , and wash themselves if it 
 be fine , and Pennsylvania sing hymn . once or twice he suggest 
 that , if ft be not an impertinence , he think he could preach a 
 little . Uncle Salters nearly jump down his throat at the mere notion , 
 remind he that he be not a preacher and must not   think of such 
 thing . " we would hev he rememberin ' Johns - town next , " salter explain , 
 " an ' what would happen then ? " so they compromise on his reading aloud 
 from a book call " Josephus . " it be an old leather - bind volume , 
 smelling of a hundred voyage , very solid and very like the Bible , but 
 enliven with account of battle and siege ; and they read it nearly 
 from cover to cover . otherwise Penn be a silent little body . he would 
 not utter a word for three day on end sometimes , though he play 
 checker , listen to the song , and laugh at the story . when they 
 try to stir he up , he would answer : " I do not   wish to seem 
 unneighbourly , but it be because I have nothing to say . my head feel 
 quite empty . I have   almost forget my name . " he would turn to Uncle 
 Salters with an expectant smile . 
 " why , Pennsylvania Pratt , " salter would shout " you will fergit I next ! " 
 " no - never , " Penn would say , shut his lip firmly . " Pennsylvania 
 Pratt , of course , " he would repeat over and over . sometimes it be 
 Uncle Salters who forget , and tell he he be Haskins or Rich or 
 McVitty ; but Penn be equally content - till next time . 
 he be always very tender with Harvey , whom he pity both as a lost 
 child and as a lunatic ; and when Salters see that Penn like the boy , 
 he relax , too . salter be not an amiable person   he esteem it his 
 business to keep the boy in order ; and the first time harvey , in fear 
 and tremble , on a still day , manage to shin up to the main - truck 
  Dan be behind he ready to help , he esteem it his duty to hang 
 Salters 's big sea - boot up there - a sight of shame and derision to the 
 near schooner . with Disko , Harvey take no liberty ; not even when 
 the old man drop direct order , and treat he , like the rest of 
 the crew , to " do not   you want to do so and so ? " and " guess you would 
 well , " and so forth . there be something about the clean - shaven lip 
 and the pucker corner of the eye that be mightily sober to 
 young blood . 
 Disko show he the meaning of the thumbed and prick chart , which , 
 he say , lay over any government publication whatsoever ; lead he , 
 pencil in hand , from berth to berth over the whole string of bank - Le 
 have , Western , Banquereau , St. Pierre , Green , and Grand - talk " cod " 
 meantime . teach he , too , the principle on which the " hog - yoke " be 
 work . 
 in this Harvey excel Dan , for he have inherit a head for figure , 
 and the notion of steal information from one glimpse of the sullen 
 Bank sun appeal to all his keen wit . for other sea - matter his age 
 handicap he . as Disko say , he should have begin when he be ten . 
 Dan could bait up trawl or lie his hand on any rope in the dark ; and at 
 a pinch , when Uncle Salters have a gurry - score on his palm , could dress 
 down by sense of touch . he could steer in anything short of half a gale 
 from the feel of the wind on his face , humour the ' we be here ' just 
 when she need it . these thing he do as automatically as he skip 
 about the rigging , or make his dory a part of his own will and body . 
 but he could not communicate his knowledge to Harvey . 
 still there be a good deal of general information fly about the 
 schooner on stormy day , when they lie up in the foc'sle or sit on the 
 cabin locker , while spare eye - bolt , lead , and ring roll and 
 rattle in the pause of the talk . Disko speak of whale voyage in 
 the Fifties ; of great she - whales slay beside their young ; of death 
 agony on the black tossing sea , and blood that spurt forty foot in 
 the air ; of boat smash to splinter ; of patent rocket that go off 
 wrong - end - first and bombard the trembling crew ; of cut - in and 
 boiling - down , and that terrible " nip " of ' 71 , when twelve hundred man 
 be make homeless on the ice in three day - wonderful tale , all true . 
 but more wonderful still be his story of the cod , and how they 
 argue and reason on their private business deep down below the 
 keel . 
 Long Jack 's taste run more to the supernatural . he hold they silent 
 with ghastly story of the " Yo - hoe " on Monomoy Beach , that mock and 
 terrify lonely clam - digger ; of sand - walker and dune - haunter who be 
 never properly bury ; of hide treasure on Fire Island guard by the 
 spirit of Kidd 's man ; of ship that sail in the fog straight over 
 Truro township ; of that harbor in Maine where no one but a stranger 
 will lie at anchor twice in a certain place because of a dead crew who 
 row alongside at midnight with the anchor in the bow of their 
 old - fashioned boat , whistle - not call , but whistle - for the soul 
 of the man who break their rest . 
 Harvey have a notion that the east coast of his native land , from Mount 
 Desert south , be populate chiefly by people who take their horse 
 there in the summer and entertain in country - house with hardwood 
 floor and Vantine portire . he laugh at the ghost - tale , - not as 
 much as he would have do a month before , - but end by sit still 
 and shudder . 
 Tom Platt deal with his interminable trip round the Horn on the old 
 Ohio in flog day , with a navy more extinct than the dodo - the navy 
 that pass away in the great war . he tell they how red - hot shot be 
 drop into a cannon , a wad of wet clay between they and the 
 cartridge ; how they sizzle and reek when they strike wood , and how the 
 little ship - boy of the Miss Jim Buck hove water over they and shout 
 to the fort to try again . and he tell tale of blockade - long week of 
 sway at anchor , vary only by the departure and return of steamer 
 that have use up their coal   there be no chance for the 
 sailing - ship ; of gale and cold that keep two hundred man , night and 
 day , pound and chop at the ice on cable , block , and rigging , 
 when the galley be as red - hot as the fort 's shot , and man drink cocoa 
 by the bucket . Tom Platt have no use for steam . his service close when 
 that thing be comparatively new . he admit that it be a specious 
 invention in time of peace , but look hopefully for the day when sail 
 should come back again on ten - thousand - ton frigate with 
 hundred - and - ninety - foot boom . 
 Manuel 's talk be slow and gentle - all about pretty girl in Madeira 
 washing clothe in the dry bed of stream , by moonlight , under wave 
 banana ; legend of saint , and tale of queer dance or fight away in 
 the cold Newfoundland baiting - port Salters be mainly agricultural ; 
 for , though he read " Josephus " and expound it , his mission in life 
 be to prove the value of green manure , and specially of clover , 
 against every form of phosphate whatsoever . he grow libellous about 
 phosphate ; he drag greasy " Orange Judd " book from his bunk and 
 intone they , wag his finger at Harvey , to whom it be all greek . 
 Little Penn be so genuinely pain when Harvey make fun of Salters 's 
 lecture that the boy give it up , and suffer in polite silence . that 
 be very good for Harvey . 
 the cook naturally do not join in these conversation . as a rule , he 
 speak only when it be absolutely necessary ; but at time a queer gift 
 of speech descend on he , and he hold forth , half in Gaelic , half in 
 broken English , an hour at a time . he be especially communicative with 
 the boy , and he never withdraw his prophecy that one day Harvey would 
 be Dan 's master , and that he would see it . he tell they of 
 mail - carrying in the winter up Cape Breton way , of the dog - train that 
 go to Coudray , and of the ram - steamer Arctic , that break the ice 
 between the mainland and Prince Edward Island . then he tell they 
 story that his mother have tell he , of life far to the southward , 
 where water never freeze ; and he say that when he die his soul would 
 go to lie down on a warm white beach of sand with palm - tree wave 
 above . that seem to the boy a very odd idea for a man who have never 
 see a palm in his life . then , too , regularly at each meal , he would 
 ask Harvey , and Harvey alone , whether the cooking be to his taste ; and 
 this always make the ' second half " laugh . yet they have a great respect 
 for the cook 's judgment , and in their heart consider harvey 
 something of a mascot by consequence . 
 and while Harvey be take in knowledge of new thing at each pore and 
 hard health with every gulp of the good air , the we be here go she 
 way and do her business on the Bank , and the silvery - gray kenche of 
 well - press fish mount high and high in the hold . no one day 's 
 work be out of common , but the average day be many and close 
 together . 
 naturally , a man of Disko 's reputation be closely watch - ' scrowge 
 upon , " Dan call it - by his neighbour , but he have a very pretty knack 
 of give they the slip through the curdling , glidy fog - bank . Disko 
 avoid company for two reason . he wish to make his own 
 experirnent , in the first place ; and in the second , he object to the 
 mixed gathering of a fleet of all nation . the bulk of they be 
 mainly Gloucester boat , with a scattering from Provincetown , Harwich , 
 Chatham , and some of the Maine port , but the crew draw from goodness 
 know where . risk breed recklessness , and when greed be add there 
 be fine chance for every kind of accident in the crowded fleet , 
 which , like a mob of sheep , be huddle round some unrecognized leader . 
 " let the two Jeraulds lead them , " say Disko . " we be baound to lay among 
 them for a spell on the Eastern Shoals ; though ef luck hold , we will not 
 hev to lay long . where we be naow , Harve , be not   consider noway good 
 graound . " 
 " be not   it ? " say Harvey , who be draw water   he have learn just how 
 to wiggle the bucket , after an unusually long dressing - down . 
 " should not   mind strike some poor ground for a change , then . " 
 " all the graound I want to see - do not   want to strike she - be Eastern 
 Point , " say Dan . " Say , Dad , it look 's if we would not   hev to lay 
 more'n two week on the Shoals . you will meet all the comp'ny you want 
 then , Harve . that be the time we begin to work . no reg'lar meal fer no 
 one then . ' mug - up when ye're hungry , an ' sleep when ye can not   keep 
 awake . good job you be not   pick up a month later than you be , or 
 we would never ha ' have you dress in shape fer the Old Virgin . " 
 Harvey understand from the Eldridge chart that the Old Virgin and a 
 nest of curiously name shoal be the turning - point of the cruise , 
 and that with good luck they would wet the balance of their salt there . 
 but see the size of the Virgin   it be one tiny dot , he wonder 
 how even Disko with the hog - yoke and the lead could find she . he 
 learn later that Disko be entirely equal to that and any other 
 business and could even help other . a big four - by - five blackboard hung 
 in the cabin , and Harvey never understand the need of it till , after 
 some blind thick day , they hear the unmelodious tooting of a 
 foot - power fog - horn - a machine whose note be as that of a consumptive 
 elephant . 
 they be make a short berth , tow the anchor under their foot to 
 save trouble . " square - rigger bellowin ' fer his latitude , " say Long 
 Jack . the dripping red head - sail of a bark glide out of the fog , and 
 the ' we be here ' rang her bell thrice , use sea shorthand . 
 the large boat back her topsail with shriek and shouting . 
 " Frenchman , " say Uncle Salters , scornfully . " Miquelon boat from St. 
 Malo . " the farmer have a weatherly sea - eye . " I be ' most outer ' baccy , 
 too , Disko . " 
 " same here , " say Tom Platt . " hi ! backez vous - backez vous ! Standez 
 awayez , you butt - end mucho - bono ! where you from - St. Malo , eh ? " 
 " ah , ha ! Mucho bono ! Oui ! oui ! Clos Poulet - St. Malo ! St. Pierre et 
 Miquelon , " cry the other crowd , wave woollen cap and laugh . 
 then all together , " Bord ! Bord ! " 
 " bring up the board , Danny . beat I how they frenchman fetch 
 anywhere , exceptin ' America 's fairish broadly . forty - six forty - nine 's 
 good enough fer they ; an ' I guess it be abaout right , too . " 
 Dan chalk the figure on the board , and they hang it in the 
 main - rigging to a chorus of mercis from the bark . 
 " seem kind uneighbourly to let them swedge off like this , " Salters 
 suggest , feel in his pocket . 
 " Hev ye learn French then sence last trip ? " say Disko . " I do not   want 
 no more stone - ballast hove at we ' long o ' your callin ' Miquelon boat 
 ' footy cochin , ' same 's you do off Le Have . " 
 " Harmon Rush he say that be the way to rise them . Plain United States 
 be good enough fer I . we be all dretful short on tearakker . young 
 feller , do not   you speak French ? " 
 " oh , yes , " say Harvey valiantly ; and he bawl : " hi ! say ! Arretez 
 vous ! Attendez ! nous somme venant pour tabac . " 
 " ah , tabac , tabac ! " they cry , and laugh again . 
 " that hit them . let us heave a dory over , anyway , " say Tom Platt . " I 
 do not   exactly hold no certificate on French , but I know another lingo 
 that go , I guess . come on , Harve , an ' interpret . " 
 the raffle and confusion when he and Harvey be haul up the bark 's 
 black side be indescribable . her cabin be all stick round with 
 glare coloured print of the Virgin - the Virgin of Newfoundland , they 
 call she . Harvey find his French of no recognized Bank brand , and 
 his conversation be limit to nod and grin . but Tom Platt wave his 
 arm and get along swimmingly . the captain give he a drink of 
 unspeakable gin , and the opera - comique crew , with their hairy throat , 
 red cap , and long knife , greet he as a brother . then the trade 
 begin . they have tobacco , plenty of it - American , that have never pay 
 duty to France . they want chocolate and cracker . Harvey row back 
 to arrange with the cook and Disko , who own the store , and on his 
 return the cocoa - tin and cracker - bag be count out by the 
 Frenchman 's wheel . it look like a piratical division of loot ; but Tom 
 Platt come out of it rope with black pigtail and stuff with cake of 
 chew and smoke tobacco . then those jovial mariner swing off into 
 the mist , and the last Harvey hear be a gay chorus : 
 " Par derriere chez ma tante , il'y a un bois joli , 
 Et le rossignol y chante 
 Et le jour et la nuit .... 
 Que donneriez vous , belle , 
 Qui l'arnenerait ici ? 
 Je donnerai Quebec , 
 Sorel et Saint Denis . " 
 " how be it my French do not   go , and your sign - talk do ? " harvey 
 demand when the barter have be distribute among the we be here . 
 " sign - talk ! " Platt guffaw . " well , yes , ' twa sign - talk , but a heap 
 older'n your French , Harve . they french boat be chockfull o ' 
 freemason , an ' that be why . " 
 " be you a Freemason , then ? " 
 " look that way , do not   it ? " say the man - o'-war 's man , stuff his 
 pipe ; and Harvey have another mystery of the deep sea to brood upon . 
 CHAPTER VI 
 the thing that strike he most be the exceedingly casual way in which 
 some craft loaf about the broad Atlantic . fishing - boat , as Dan say , 
 be naturally dependent on the courtesy and wisdom of their 
 neighbour ; but one expect well thing of steamer . that be after 
 another interesting interview , when they have be chase for three 
 mile by a big lumber old cattle - boat , all board over on the upper 
 deck , that smell like a thousand cattle - pen . a very excited officer 
 yell at they through a speaking - trumpet , and she lie and lolloppe 
 helplessly on the water while Disko run the ' we be here ' under her lee 
 and give the skipper a piece of his mind . " where might ye be - eh ? ye 
 do not   deserve to be anywhere . you barn - yard tramp go hoggin ' the road 
 on the high sea with no blame consideration fer your neighbour , an ' 
 your eye in your coffee - cup instid o ' in your silly head . " 
 at this the skipper dance on the bridge and say something about 
 Disko 's own eye . " we have not   have an observation for three day . D'you 
 suppose we can run she blind ? " he shout . 
 " Wa - al , I can , " Disko retort . " what be come to your lead ? et it ? can not 
 ye smell bottom , or be they cattle too rank ? " 
 " what d ' ye feed them ? " say Uncle Salters with intense seriousness , for 
 the smell of the pen wake all the farmer in he . " they say they fall 
 off dretful on a v'yage . dunno as it be any o ' my business , but I have   a 
 kind o ' notion that oil - cake break small an ' sprinkle - " 
 " Thunder ! " say a cattle - man in a red jersey as he look over the 
 side . " what asylum do they let his whisker out of ? " 
 " young feller , " salter begin , stand up in the fore - rigging , " let I 
 tell yeou ' fore we go any far that I have   - " 
 the officer on the bridge take off his cap with immense politeness . 
 " excuse I , " he say , " but I have   ask for my reckoning . if the 
 agricultural person with the hair will kindly shut his head , the 
 sea - green barnacle ' with the wall - eye may per - hap condescend to 
 enlighten we . " 
 " Naow you have   make a show o ' I , Salters , " say Disko , angrily . he could 
 not stand up to that particular sort of talk , and snap out the 
 latitude and longitude without more lecture . 
 " well , that be a boat - load of lunatic , sure , " say the skipper , as he 
 ring up the engine - room and toss a bundle of newspaper into the 
 schooner . 
 " of all the blame fool , next to you , Salters , he an ' his crowd be 
 abaout the likeliest I have   ever see , " say Disko as the ' we be here ' 
 slide away . " I be jest givin ' he my jedgment on lullsikin ' round these 
 water like a lost child , an ' you must cut in with your fool farmin ' . 
 can not   ye never keep thing sep'rate ? " 
 Harvey , Dan , and the other stand back , wink one to the other and 
 full of joy ; but Disko and Salters wrangle seriously till evening , 
 salter argue that a cattle - boat be practically a barn on blue 
 water , and Disko insist that , even if this be the case , decency 
 and fisher - pride demand that he should have keep " thing sep'rate . " 
 Long Jack stand it in silence for a time , - an angry skipper make an 
 unhappy crew , - and then he speak across the table after supper : 
 " Fwhat be the good o ' bodderin ' fwhat they will say ? " say he . 
 " they will tell that tale agin we fer year - that be all , " say Disko . 
 " oil - cake sprinkle ! " 
 " with salt , o ' course , " say Salters , Impenitent , read the farming 
 report from a week - old New York paper . 
 " it be plumb mortifyin ' to all my feelin 's , " the skipper go on . 
 " can not   see ut that way , " say Long Jack , the peacemaker " look at here , 
 Disko ! be there another packet afloat this day in this weather cud ha ' 
 meet a tramp an ' over an ' above givin ' her her reckonin ' , - over an ' 
 above that , I say , - cud ha ' discoorsed wid she quite intelligent on the 
 management av steer an ' such at sea ? forgit ut ! av coorse they will 
 not . ' twas the most compenjus conversation that iver accrue . double 
 game an ' twice runnin ' - all to we . " Dan kick Harvey under the table , 
 and Harvey choke in his cup . 
 " well , " say Salters , who feel that his honour have be somewhat 
 plaster , " I say I do not   know as ' twuz any business o ' mine , ' fore I 
 speak . " 
 " An ' right there , " say Tom Platt , experience in discipline and 
 etiquette - " right there , I take it , Disko , you should ha ' ask he to 
 stop ef the conversation wuz likely , in your jedgment , to be 
 anyways - what it should not . " 
 " dunno but that be so , " say Disko , who see his way to an honourable 
 retreat from a fit of the dignity . 
 " why , o ' course it be so , " say Salters , " you bein ' skipper here ; an ' 
 I would cheerful hev stop on a hint - not from any leadin ' or conviction , 
 but fer the sake o ' bearin ' an example to these two blame boy of 
 aour . " 
 " do not   I tell you , Harve , ' twould come araound to we ' fore we have do ? 
 always those blame boy . but I would not   have miss the show fer a 
 half - share in a halibutter , " Dan whisper . 
 " still , thing should ha ' be kep ' sep'rate , " say Disko , and the 
 light of new argument light in Salters 's eye as he crumble cut plug into 
 his pipe . 
 " there be a power av vartue in keepin ' thing sep'rate , " say Long Jack , 
 intent on still the storm . " that be fwhat steyning of Steyning and 
 Hare 's f'und when he send Counahan fer skipper on the Manila D. Kuhn , 
 instid o ' Cap . Newton that be take with inflam'try rheumatism an ' 
 could not   go . Counahan the Navigator we call he . " 
 " Nick Counahan he never go aboard fer a night ' thout a pond o ' rum 
 somewhere in the manifest , " say Tom Platt , play up to the lead . 
 " he use to bum araound the c'mission house to Boston lookin ' fer the 
 Lord to make he captain of a tow - boat on his merit . Sam Coy , up to 
 Atlantic Avenoo , give he his board free fer a year or more on account 
 of his story . 
 " Counahan the Navigator ! Tck ! Tck ! Dead these fifteen year , be not   he ? " 
 " Seventeen , I guess . he die the year the Caspar McVeagh be build ; but 
 he could niver keep thing sep'rate . steyne tuk he fer the reason 
 the thief tuk the hot stove - bekaze there be nothing else that season . 
 the man be all to the bank , and Counahan he whack up an iverlastin ' 
 hard crowd f crew . Rum ! Ye cud ha ' float the Manila , insurance an ' 
 all , in fwhat they stow aboard she . they lef ' Boston Harbour for the 
 great Grand Bank wid a roarin ' nor'wester behind them an ' all hand full 
 to the bung . an ' the hiven look after thim , for divil a watch do 
 they set , an ' divil a rope do they lay hand to , till they would see the 
 bottom av a fifteen - gallon cask o ' bug - juice . that be about wan week , 
 so far as Counahan remember .   if I cud only tell the tale as he tell 
 ut !   all that whoile the wind blow like ould glory , an ' the 
 Marilla - ' twas summer , and they would give she a foretopmast - strike she 
 gait and keep ut . then Counahan tuk the hog - yoke an ' thrembled over it 
 for a whoile , an ' make out , betwix ' that an ' the chart an ' the singin ' 
 in his head , that they be to the south'ard o ' Sable Island , gettin ' 
 along glorious , but speakin ' nothing . then they broach another keg , 
 an ' quit speculatin ' about anythin ' fer another spell . the Marilla she 
 lie down whin she drop Boston Light , and she never lufte she 
 lee - rail up to that time - hustlin ' on one an ' the same slant . but they 
 see no weed , nor gull , nor schooner ; an ' prisintly they obsarve 
 they would bin out a matter o ' fourteen day and they mis - trust the Bank 
 have suspinde payment . so they sound , an ' get sixty fathom . ' that be 
 I , ' sez Counahan . ' that be I iv'ry time ! I have   run she slat on the Bank 
 fer you , an ' when we get thirty fathom we will turn in like little man . 
 Counahan be the b'y , ' sez he . ' counahan the Navigator ! ' 
 " Nex ' cast they get ninety . Sez Counahan : ' either the lead - line 's tuk 
 to stretchin ' or else the Bank 's sunk . ' 
 " they haul ut up , bein ' just about in that state when ut seem right 
 an ' reasonable , and sit down on the deck countin ' the knot , an ' 
 gettin ' she snarl up hijju . the Marilla she would strike her gait , an ' 
 she hild ut , an ' prisintly along come a tramp , an ' Counahan speak she . 
 " ' hev ye see any fishin'-boats now ? ' sez he , quite casual . 
 " ' there be lashin 's av they off the irish coast , ' sez the tramp . 
 " ' aah ! go shake yerself , ' sez Counahan . ' Fwhat have I to do wid the 
 irish coast ? ' 
 " ' then fwhat be ye do here ? ' sez the tramp . 
 " ' Sufferin ' Christianity ! ' sez Counahan   he always say that whin his 
 pump suck an ' he be not feelin ' good   - ' Sufferin ' Christianity ! ' he 
 sez , ' where be I at ? ' 
 " ' thirty - five mile west - sou'west o ' Cape Clear , ' sez the tramp , ' if 
 that be any consolation to you . ' 
 " Counahan fetch wan jump , four foot sivin inch , measure by the 
 cook . 
 " ' consolation ! ' sez he , bould as brass . ' d'ye take I fer a dialect ? 
 thirty - five mile from Cape Clear , an ' fourteen day from Boston Light . 
 Sufferin ' christianity , ' tis a record , an ' by the same token I have   a 
 mother to Skibbereen ! ' think av ut ! the gall av um ! but ye see he could 
 niver keep thing sep'rate . 
 " the crew be mostly Cork an ' Kerry man , barrin ' one Marylander that 
 want to go back , but they call he a mutineer , an ' they run the 
 ould Marilla into Skibbereen , an ' they have an illigant time visitin ' 
 around with frind on the ould sod fer a week . thin they wint back , an ' 
 it cost them two an ' thirty day to beat to the Banks again . ' Twas 
 gettin ' on towards fall , and grub be low , so Counahan run she back to 
 Boston , wid no more bone to ut . " 
 " and what do the firm say ? " Harvey demand . 
 " Fwhat could they ? the fish be on the Banks , an ' Counahan be at 
 t - wharf talkin ' av his record trip east ! they tuk their satisfaction 
 out av that , an ' ut all come av not keepin ' the crew and the rum 
 sep'rate in the first place ; an ' confusin ' Skibbereen wid ' Queereau , in 
 the second . Counahan the Navigator , rest his sowl ! he be an imprompju 
 citizen ! " 
 " once I be in the Lucy Holmes , " say Manuel , in his gentle voice . 
 " they not want any of her feesh in Gloucester . eh , wha - at ? give we no 
 price . so we go across the water , and think to sell to some Fayal man . 
 then it blow fresh , and we can not see well . eh , wha - at ? then it blow 
 some more fresh , and we go down below and drive very fast - no one know 
 where . by and by we see a land , and it get some hot . then come two , 
 three nigger in a brick . eh , wha - at ? we ask where we be , and they 
 say - now , what you all think ? " 
 " Grand Canary , " say Disko , after a moment . Manuel shake his head , 
 smile . 
 " Blanco , " say Tom Platt . 
 " no . bad than that . we be below Bezagos , and the brick she be from 
 Liberia ! so we sell our feesh there ! not bad , so ? eh , wha - at ? " 
 " can a schooner like this go right across to Africa ? " say Harvey . 
 " go araound the Horn ef there be anythin ' worth go fer , and the grub 
 hold aout , " say Disko . " my father he run his packet , an ' she be a 
 kind o ' pinkey , abaout fifty ton , I guess , - the Rupert , - he run she 
 over to Greenland 's icy mountain the year ha'af our fleet be tryin ' 
 after cod there . an ' what be more , he take my mother along with he , - to 
 show her haow the money be earn , I presoom , - an ' they be all iced 
 up , an ' I be bear at Disko . do not   remember nothing abaout it , o ' 
 course . we come back when the ice ease in the spring , but they name 
 I fer the place . Kinder mean trick to put up on a baby , but we be all 
 baound to make mistake in aour life . " 
 " sure ! sure ! " say Salters , wag his head . " all baound to make 
 mistake , an ' I tell you two boy here thet after you have   make a 
 mistake - ye do not   make fewer'n a hundred a day - the next good thing be 
 to own up to it like man . " 
 Long Jack wink one tremendous wink that embrace all hand except 
 Disko and Salters , and the incident be close . 
 then they make berth after berth to the northward , the dory out 
 almost every day , run along the east edge of the Grand Bank in 
 thirty- to forty - fathom water , and fish steadily . 
 it be here Harvey first meet the squid , who be one of the good 
 cod - bait , but uncertain in his mood . they be wake out of their 
 bunk one black night by yell of " Squid O ! " from Salters , and for an 
 hour and a half every soul aboard hang over his squid - jig - a piece of 
 lead paint red and armed at the low end with a circle of pin bent 
 backward like half - open umbrella rib . the squid - for some unknown 
 reason - like , and wrap himself round , this thing , and be haul up 
 ere he can escape from the pin . but as he leave his home he squirt 
 first water and next ink into his captor 's face ; and it be curious to 
 see the man weave their head from side to side to dodge the shot . 
 they be as black as sweep when the flurry end ; but a pile of fresh 
 squid lie on the deck , and the large cod think very well of a little 
 shiny piece of squid tentacle at the tip of a clam - bait hook . next 
 day they catch many fish , and meet the Carrie Pitman , to whom they 
 shout their luck , and she want to trade - seven cod for one 
 fair - sized squid ; but Disko would not agree at the price , and the 
 Carrie drop sullenly to leeward and anchor half a mile away , in 
 the hope of strike on to some for herself . 
 Disco say nothing till after supper , when he send Dan and Manuel out 
 to buoy the ' we be here 's ' cable and announce his intention of turn 
 in with the broad - axe . Dan naturally repeat these remark to the dory 
 from the Carrie , who want to know why they be buoy their cable , 
 since they be not on rocky bottom . 
 " dad sez he would not   trust a ferryboat within five mile o ' you , " Dan 
 howl cheerfully . 
 " why do not   he git out , then ? who be hinderin ' ? " say the other . 
 " 'cause you have   jest the same ez lee - bow he , an ' he do not   take that 
 from any boat , not to speak o ' sech a driftin ' gurry - butt as you be . " 
 " she be not   driftin ' any this trip , " say the man angrily , for the 
 Carrie Pitman have an unsavory reputation for break her ground - tackle . 
 " then haow d'you make berth ? " say Dan . " it be her good p'int o ' 
 sailin ' . an ' ef she be quit driftin ' , what in thunder be you do with 
 a new jib - boom ? " that shot go home . 
 " hey , you Portugoosy organ - grinder , take your monkey back to 
 Gloucester . go back to school , Dan Troop , " be the answer . 
 " o - ver - all ! o - ver - all ! " yell Dan , who know that one of the Carrie 's 
 crew have work in an overall factory the winter before . 
 " Shrimp ! Gloucester shrimp ! Git aout , you novy ! " 
 to call a Gloucester man a Nova Scotian be not well receive . Dan 
 answer in kind . 
 " novy yourself , ye Scrabble - towner ! ye Chatham wrecker ! Git aout with 
 your brick in your stockin ' ! " and the force separate , but Chatharn 
 have the bad of it . 
 " I know haow ' twould be , " say Disko . " she be draw the wind raound 
 already . some one oughter put a deesist on thet packet . she will snore 
 till midnight , an ' jest when we be gettin ' our sleep she will strike 
 adrift . good job we be not   crowd with craft hereaway . but I be not 
 go to up anchor fer Chatham . she may hold . " 
 the wind , which have haul round , rise at sundown and blow steadily . 
 there be not enough sea , though , to disturb even a dory 's tackle , but 
 the Carrie Pitman be a law unto herself . at the end of the boy ' watch 
 they hear the crack - crack - crack of a huge muzzle - loading revolver 
 aboard she . 
 " gory , glory , hallelujah ! " sing Dan . " here she come , Dad ; butt - end 
 first , walkin ' in her sleep same 's she do on ' Queereau . " 
 have she be any other boat Disko would have take his chance , but now 
 he cut the cable as the Carrie Pitman , with all the North Atlantic to 
 play in , lurch down directly upon they . the ' we be here ' , under jib 
 and rid - sail , give she no more room than be absolutely 
 necessary , - Disko do not wish to spend a week hunting for his 
 cable , - but scuttle up into the wind as the Carrie pass within easy 
 hail , a silent and angry boat , at the mercy of a rake broadside of 
 Bank chaff . 
 " Good evenin ' , " say Disko , raise his head - gear , " an ' haow do your 
 garden grow ? " 
 " go to Ohio an ' hire a mule , " say Uncle Salters . " we do not   want no 
 farmer here . " 
 " will I lend you my dory - anchor ? " cry Long Jack . 
 " unship your rudder an ' stick it in the mud , " bawl Tom Platt . 
 " say ! " Dan 's voice rise shrill and high , as he stand on the wheel - box . 
 " Sa - ay ! be there a strike in the o - ver - all factory ; or hev they hire 
 girl , ye Shackamaxons ? " 
 " veer out the tiller - line , " cry Harvey , " and nail them to the 
 bottom ! " that be a salt - flavour jest he have be put up to by Tom 
 Platt . Manuel lean over the stern and yell : " Johanna Morgan play 
 the organ ! ahaaaa ! " he flourish his broad thumb with a gesture of 
 unspeakable contempt and derision , while little Penn cover himself 
 with glory by pip up : " Gee a little ! hssh ! come here . haw ! " 
 they ride on their chain for the rest of the night , a short , snappy , 
 uneasy motion , as Harvey find , and waste half the forenoon recover 
 the cable . but the boy agree the trouble be cheap at the price of 
 triumph and glory , and they think with grief over all the beautiful 
 thing that they might have say to the discomfited Carrie . 
 CHAPTER VII 
 next day they fall in with more sail , all circle slowly from the 
 east northerly towards the west . but just when they expect to make 
 the shoal by the Virgin the fog shut down , and they anchor , 
 surround by the tinkling of invisible bell . there be not much 
 fishing , but occasionally dory meet dory in the fog and exchange news . 
 that night , a little before dawn , Dan and Harvey , who have be sleep 
 most of the day , tumble out to " hook " fried pie . there be no reason 
 why they should not have take they openly ; but they taste well so , 
 and it make the cook angry . the heat and smell below drive they on deck 
 with their plunder , and they find Disko at the bell , which he hand 
 over to Harvey . 
 " keep her go , " say he . " I mistrust I hear something . ef it be 
 anything , I be best where I be so be to get at thing . " 
 it be a forlorn little jingle ; the thick air seem to pinch it off , 
 and in the pause Harvey hear the muffled shriek of a liner 's siren , 
 and he know enough of the Banks to know what that mean . it come to 
 he , with horrible distinctness , how a boy in a cherry - colour 
 jersey - he despise fancy blazer now with all a fisher - man 's 
 contempt - how an ignorant , rowdy boy have once say it would be " great " 
 if a steamer run down a fishing - boat . that boy have a stateroom with a 
 hot and cold bath , and spend ten minute each morning pick over a 
 gilt - edge bill of fare . and that same boy - no , his very much old 
 brother - be up at four of the dim dawn in streaming , crackling 
 oilskin , hammer , literally for the dear life , on a bell small 
 than the steward 's breakfast - bell , while somewhere close at hand a 
 thirty - foot steel stem be storm along at twenty mile an hour ! the 
 bitter thought of all be that there be folk asleep in dry , 
 upholstered cabin who would never learn that they have massacre a boat 
 before breakfast . so Harvey ring the bell . 
 " yes , they slow daown one turn o ' their blame propeller , " say Dan , 
 apply himself to Manuel 's conch , " fer to keep inside the law , an ' 
 that be consolin ' when we be all at the bottom . Hark to she ! she be a 
 humper ! " 
 " aooo - whoo - whupp ! " go the siren . " wingle - tingle - tink , " go the bell . 
 " Graaa - ouch ! " go the conch , while sea and sky be all mire up in 
 milky fog . then Harvey feel that he be near a move body , and find 
 himself look up and up at the wet edge of a cliff - like bow , leaping , 
 it seem , directly over the schooner . a jaunty little feather of water 
 curl in front of it , and as it lift it show a long ladder of 
 roman numeral - XV . , XVI . , XVII . , XVIII . , and so forth - on a 
 salmon - colour gleam side . it tilt forward and downward with a 
 heart - still " Ssssooo " ; the ladder disappear ; a line of 
 brass - rim port - hole flash past ; a jet of steam puff in Harvey 's 
 helplessly uplifted hand ; a spout of hot water roar along the rail 
 of the ' we be here ' , and the little schooner stagger and shake in a 
 rush of screw - tear water , as a liner 's stern vanish in the fog . 
 Harvey get ready to faint or be sick , or both , when he hear a crack 
 like a trunk throw on a sidewalk , and , all small in his ear , a 
 far - away telephone voice drawling : " heave to ! you have   sink we ! " 
 " be it we ? " he gasp . 
 " no ! boat out yonder . Ring ! we be go to look , " say Dan , run out 
 a dory . 
 in half a minute all except Harvey , Penn , and the cook be overside 
 and away . presently a schooner 's stump - foremast , snap clean across , 
 drift past the bow . then an empty green dory come by , knock on 
 the ' we be here 's ' side , as though she wish to be take in . then 
 follow something , face down , in a blue jersey , but - it be not the 
 whole of a man . Penn change colour and catch his breath with a click . 
 Harvey pound despairingly at the bell , for he fear they might be 
 sink at any minute , and he jump at Dan 's hail as the crew come back . 
 " the Jennie Cushman , " say Dan , hysterically , " cut clean in 
 half - graound up an ' tromple on at that ! not a quarter of a mile away . 
 Dad 's get the old man . there be not   any one else , and - there be his 
 son , too . oh , Harve , Harve , I can not   stand it ! I have   see - " he drop 
 his head on his arm and sob while the other drag a gray - head 
 man aboard . 
 " what do you pick I up for ? " the stranger groan . " Disko , what do 
 you pick I up for ? " 
 Disko drop a heavy hand on his shoulder , for the man 's eye be 
 wild and his lip tremble as he star at the silent crew . then up and 
 speak Pennsylvania Pratt , who be also Haskins or Rich or McVitty when 
 Uncle Salters forget ; and his face be change on he from the face of 
 a fool to the countenance of an old , wise man , and he say in a strong 
 voice : " the Lord give , and the Lord hath take away ; blessed be the 
 name of the Lord ! I be - I be a minister of the Gospel . leave he to 
 I . " 
 " oh , you be , be you ? " say the man . " then pray my son back to I ! pray 
 back a nine - thousand - dollar boat an ' a thousand quintal of fish . if 
 you would leave I alone my widow could ha ' go on to the Provident an ' 
 work fer her board , an ' never know - an ' never know . now I will hev to 
 tell she . " 
 " there be not   nothing to say , " say Disko . " well lie down a piece , 
 Jason Olley . " 
 when a man have lose his only son , his summer 's work , and his mean of 
 livelihood , in thirty count second , it be hard to give consolation . 
 " all Gloucester man , be not   they ? " say Tom Platt , fiddle helplessly 
 with a dory - becket . 
 " oh , that do not   make no odd , " say Jason , wring the wet from his 
 beard . " I will be rowin ' summer boarder araound East Gloucester this 
 fall . " he roll heavily to the rail , singing : 
 " happy bird that sing and fly 
 Round thine altar , o most high ! " 
 " come with I . come below ! " say Penn , as though he have a right to give 
 order . their eye meet and fight for a quarter of a minute . 
 " I dunno who you be , but I will come , " say Jason submissively . " Mebbe 
 I will get back some o ' the - some o ' the - nine thousand dollar . " Penn lead 
 he into the cabin and slide the door behind . 
 " that be not   Penn , " cry Uncle Salters . " it be Jacob Boiler , an ' - he be 
 remember Johnstown ! I never seed stich eye in any livin ' man 's head . 
 what be to do naow ? what will I do naow ? " 
 they could hear Penn 's voice and Jason be together . then Penn 's go on 
 alone , and Salters slip off his hat , for Penn be pray . presently 
 the little man come up the step , huge drop of sweat on his face , and 
 look at the crew . Dan be still sob by the wheel . 
 " he do not   know we , " salter groan . " it be all to do over again , 
 checker and everything - an ' what will he say to I ? " 
 Penn speak ; they could hear that it be to stranger . " I have pray , " 
 say he . " our people believe in prayer . I have pray for the life of 
 this man 's son . mine be drown before my eye - she and my eld 
 and - the other . shall a man be more wise than his maker ? I pray 
 never for their life , but I have pray for this man 's son , and he 
 will surely be send he . " 
 salter look pleadingly at Penn to see if he remember . 
 " how long have I be mad ? " Penn ask suddenly . his mouth be 
 twitch . 
 " Pshaw , Penn ! you be not   never mad , " salter begin " only a little 
 distracted like . " 
 " I see the house strike the bridge before the fire break out . I do 
 not remember any more . how long ago be that ? " 
 " I can not   stand it ! I can not   stand it ! " cry Dan , and Harvey whimper 
 in sympathy . 
 " Abaout five year , " say Disko , in a shake voice . 
 " then I have be a charge on some one for every day of that time . who 
 be the man ? " 
 Disko point to Salters . 
 " ye hain't   - ye hain't ! " cry the sea - farmer , twist his hand 
 together . " Ye've   more'n earn your keep twice - tell ; an ' there 's money 
 owin ' you , Penn , besides ha'af o ' my quarter - share in the boat , which 
 be yours fer value receive . " 
 " you be good man . I can see that in your face . but - " 
 " Mother av Mercy , " whisper Long Jack , " an ' he be be wid we all these 
 trip ! he be clean bewitch . " 
 a schooner 's bell strike up alongside , and a voice hail through the 
 fog : " O Disko ! ' hear abaout the Jennie Cushman ? " 
 " they have find his son , " cry Penn . " stand you still and see the 
 salvation of the Lord ! " 
 " Got Jason aboard here , " Disko answer , but his voice quaver . 
 " there - warn't   any one else ? " 
 " we have   fund one , though . ' run acrost he snarl up in a mess o ' lumber 
 thet might ha ' bin a foc'sle . his head 's cut some . " 
 " who be he ? " 
 the ' we be here 's ' heart - beat answer one another . 
 " guess it be young Olley , " the voice drawl . 
 Penn raise his hand and say something in German . harvey could have 
 swear that a bright sun be shin upon his lift face ; but the drawl 
 go on : " Sa - ay ! you feller guy we consid'rable t'other night . " 
 " we do not   feel like guyin ' any now , " say Disko . 
 " I know it ; but to tell the honest truth we be kinder - kinder driftin ' 
 when we run agin young Olley . " 
 it be the irrepressible Carrie Pitman , and a roar of unsteady laughter 
 go up from the deck of the ' we be here ' . 
 " hedn't   you ' baout be well send the old man aboard ? we be runnin ' in fer 
 more bait an ' graound - tackle . guess you will not   want he , anyway , an ' 
 this blame windlass work make we short - handed . we will take care of he . 
 he marry my woman 's aunt . " 
 " I will give you anything in the boat , " say Troop . 
 " do not   want nothing , ' less , mebbe , an anchor that will hold . say ! Young 
 Olley 's gittin ' kinder baulky an ' excited . send the old man along . " 
 Penn wake he from his stupor of despair , and Tom Platt row he 
 over . he go away without a word of thank , not know what be to 
 come ; and the fog close over all . 
 " and now , " say Penn , draw a deep breath as though about to preach . 
 " and now " - the erect body sink like a sword drive home into the 
 scabbard ; the light fade from the overbright eye ; the voice return 
 to its usual pitiful little titter - " and now , " say Pennsylvania Pratt , 
 " do you think it be too early for a little game of checker , Mr. 
 Salters ? " 
 " the very thing - the very thing I be go to say myself , " cry 
 salter promptly . " it beat all , Penn , how ye git on to what be in a 
 man 's mind . " 
 the little fellow blush and meekly follow Salters forward . 
 " up anchor ! hurry ! let us quit these crazy water , " shout Disko , and 
 never be he more swiftly obey . 
 " now what in creation d'ye suppose be the meanin ' o ' that all ? " say 
 Long Jack , when they be work through the fog once more , damp , 
 dripping , and bewilder . 
 " the way I sense it , " say Disko , at the wheel , " be this : the Jennie 
 Cushman business comin ' on an empty stummick - " 
 " h - he see one of they go by , " sob Harvey . 
 " An ' that , o ' course , kinder hove he outer water , julluk runnin ' a 
 craft ashore ; hove he right aout , I take it , to rememberin ' Johnstown 
 an ' Jacob Boiler an ' such - like reminiscence . well , consolin ' Jason 
 there hold he up a piece , same 's shorin ' up a boat . then , bein ' weak , 
 they prop slip an ' slip , an ' he slide down the way , an ' naow 
 he be water - bear agin . that be haow I sense it . " 
 they decide that Disko be entirely correct . 
 " ' twould ha ' bruk salter all up , " say Long Jack , " if Penn have stay 
 Jacob Boilerin ' . do ye see his face when Penn ask who he have be 
 charge on all these year ? how be ut , Salters ? " 
 " asleep - dead asleep . turn in like a child , " salter reply , 
 tiptoeing aft . " there will not   be no grub till he wake , natural . do ye 
 ever see sech a gift in prayer ? he everlastin'ly hike young Olley 
 outer the ocean . Thet 's my belief . Jason be tur'ble praoud of his boy , 
 an ' I mistrust all along ' twas a jedgment on worshippin ' vain idol . " 
 " there be other jes as sot , " say Disko . 
 " that be difrunt , " salter retort quickly . " Penn be not all caulk , 
 an ' I be not   only but do my duty by he . " 
 they wait , those hungry man , three hour , till Penn reappear with a 
 smooth face and a blank mind . he say he believe that he have be 
 dream . then he want to know why they be so silent , and they 
 could not tell he . 
 Disko work all hand mercilessly for the next three or four day ; and 
 when they could not go out , turn they into the hold to stack the 
 ship 's store into small compass , to make more room for the fish . the 
 pack mass run from the cabin partition to the slide door behind the 
 foc'sle stove ; and Disko show how there be great art in stow cargo 
 so as to bring a schooner to her good draft . the crew be thus keep 
 lively till they recover their spirit ; and Harvey be tickle with a 
 rope 's end by Long Jack for being , as the Galway man say , ' sorrowful 
 as a sick cat over fwhat could not   be help . " he do a great deal of 
 think in those weary day , and tell Dan what he think , and Dan 
 agree with he - even to the extent of ask for fried pie instead of 
 hook they . 
 but a week later the two nearly upset the Hattie S. in a wild attempt 
 to stab a shark with an old bayonet tie to a stick . the grim brute 
 rub alongside the dory beg for small fish , and between the three 
 of they it be a mercy they all get off alive . 
 at last , after play blindman's - buff in the fog , there come a morning 
 when Disko shout down the foc'sle : " hurry , boy ! we be in taown ! " 
 CHAPTER VIII 
 to the end of his day , Harvey will never forget that sight . the sun 
 be just clear of the horizon they have not see for nearly a week , and 
 his low red light strike into the riding - sail of three fleet of 
 anchored schooner - one to the north , one to the westward , and one to 
 the south . there must have be nearly a hundred of they , of every 
 possible make and build , with , far away , a square - rig Frenchman , all 
 bow and courtesye one to the other . from every boat dory be 
 drop away like bee from a crowded hive , and the clamour of voice , 
 the rattling of rope and block , and the splash of the oar carry 
 for mile across the heaving water . the sail turn all colour , 
 black , pearly - gray , and white , as the sun mount ; and more boat swing 
 up through the mist to the southward . 
 the dory gather in cluster , separate , reform , and break again , 
 all head one way ; while man hail and whistle and cat - call and 
 sang , and the water be speckle with rubbish throw overboard . 
 " it be a town , " say Harvey . " Disko be right . it be a town ! " 
 " I have   see small , " say Disko . " there be about a thousand man here ; 
 an ' yonder 's the Virgin . " he point to a vacant space of greenish sea , 
 where there be no dory . 
 the ' we be here ' skirt round the northern squadron , Disko wave his 
 hand to friend after friend , and anchor as nearly as a racing yacht 
 at the end of the season . the Bank fleet pass good seamanship in 
 silence ; but a bungler be jeered all along the line . 
 " Jest in time fer the caplin , " cry the Mary Chilton . 
 " ' salt ' most wet ? " ask the King Philip . 
 " hey , Tom Platt ! come t ' supper to - night ? " say the Henry Clay ; and so 
 question and answer fly back and forth . man have meet one another 
 before , dory - fishing in the fog , and there be no place for gossip like 
 the Bank fleet . they all seem to know about Harvey 's rescue , and 
 ask if he be worth his salt yet . the young blood jest with Dan , 
 who have a lively tongue of his own , and inquire after their health by 
 the town - nickname they least like . Manuel 's countryman jabber at 
 he in their own language ; and even the silent cook be see rid the 
 jib - boom and shout Gaelic to a friend as black as himself . after 
 they have buoy the cable - all around the Virgin be rocky bottom , and 
 carelessness mean chafe ground - tackle and danger from drift - after 
 they have buoy the cable , their dory go forth to join the mob of 
 boat anchor about a mile away . the schooner rock and dip at a 
 safe distance , like mother duck watch their brood , while the dory 
 behave like mannerless duckling . 
 as they drive into the confusion , boat banging boat , Harvey 's ear 
 tingle at the comment on his rowing . every dialect from Labrador to 
 Long Island , with Portuguese , Neapolitan , Lingua Franca , French , and 
 Gaelic , with song and shouting and new oath , rattle round he , and 
 he seem to be the butt of it all . for the first time in his life he 
 feel shy - perhaps that come from live so long with only the ' we be 
 here ' - among the score of wild face that rise and fall with the 
 reel small craft . a gentle , breathe swell , three furlong from 
 trough to barrel , would quietly shoulder up a string of variously 
 paint dory . they hang for an instant , a wonderful frieze against 
 the sky - line , and their man point and hail . next moment the open 
 mouth , wave arm , and bare chest disappear , while on another 
 swell come up an entirely new line of character like paper figure in 
 a toy theatre . so Harvey star . " watch out ! " say Dan , flourish a 
 dip - net " when I tell you dip , you dip . the caplin'll school any time 
 from naow on . where will we lay , Tom Platt ? " 
 Pushing , shoving , and haul , greet old friend here and warn 
 old enemy there , Commodore Tom Platt lead his little fleet well to 
 leeward of the general crowd , and immediately three or four man begin 
 to haul on their anchor with intent to lee - bow the ' we be here ' . but 
 a yell of laughter go up as a dory shot from her station with 
 exceed speed , its occupant pull madly on the roding . 
 " give her slack ! " roar twenty voice . " let he shake it out . " 
 " what be the matter ? " say Harvey , as the boat flash away to the 
 southward . " he be anchor , be not   he ? " 
 " anchored , sure enough , but his graound - tackle 's kind shifty , " say 
 Dan , laugh . " Whale 's fouled it . . . . Dip Harve ! here they come ! " 
 the sea round they cloud and darken , and then frizz up in shower 
 of tiny silver fish , and over a space of five or six acre the cod 
 begin to leap like trout in May ; while behind the cod three or four 
 broad gray - back break the water into boil . 
 then everybody shout and try to haul up his anchor to get among the 
 school , and foul his neighbour 's line and say what be in his heart , 
 and dip furiously with his dip - net , and shriek caution and advice 
 to his companion , while the deep fizz like freshly open 
 soda - water , and cod , man , and whale together fling in upon the 
 luckless bait . Harvey be nearly knock overboard by the handle of 
 Dan 's net . but in all the wild tumult he notice , and never forget , the 
 wicked , set little eye - something like a circus elephant 's eye - of a 
 whale that drive along almost level with the water , and , so he say , 
 wink at he . three boat find their roding foul by these reckless 
 mid - sea hunter , and be tow half a mile ere their horse shake the 
 line free . 
 then the caplin move off , and five minute later there be no sound 
 except the splash of the sinker overside , the flapping of the cod , and 
 the whack of the muckle as the man stun they . it be wonderful 
 fishing . harvey could see the glimmering cod below , swim slowly in 
 drove , bite as steadily as they swam . Bank law strictly forbid more 
 than one hook on one line when the dory be on the Virgin or the 
 Eastern Shoals ; but so close lie the boat that even single hook 
 snarl , and Harvey find himself in hot argument with a gentle , hairy 
 newfoundlander on one side and a howl portuguese on the other . 
 bad than any tangle of fishing - line be the confusion of the 
 dory - roding below water . each man have anchor where it seem good to 
 he , drift and row round his fix point . as the fish strike on 
 less quickly , each man want to haul up and get to well ground ; but 
 every third man find himself intimately connect with some four or 
 five neighbour . to cut another 's roding be crime unspeakable on the 
 bank ; yet it be do , and do without detection , three or four time 
 that day . Tom Platt catch a Maine man in the black act and knock he 
 over the gunwale with an oar , and Manuel serve a fellow - countryman in 
 the same way . but Harvey 's anchor - line be cut , and so be Penn 's , and 
 they be turn into relief - boat to carry fish to the ' we be here ' as 
 the dory fill . the caplin school once more at twilight , when the 
 mad clamour be repeat ; and at dusk they row back to dress down by 
 the light of kerosene - lamp on the edge of the pen . 
 it be a huge pile , and they go to sleep while they be dress . 
 next day several boat fish right above the cap of the Virgin ; and 
 Harvey , with they , look down on the very weed of that lonely rock , 
 which rise to within twenty foot of the surface . the cod be there in 
 legion , march solemnly over the leathery kelp . when they bit , they 
 bite all together ; and so when they stop . there be a slack time at 
 noon , and the dory begin to search for amusement . it be Dan who 
 sight the Hope of Prague just come up , and as her boat join the 
 company they be greet with the question : " who be the mean man in 
 the Fleet ? " 
 three hundred voice answer cheerily : " Nick Bra - ady . " it sound like 
 an organ chant . 
 " who steal the lampwick ? " that be Dan 's contribution . 
 " Nick Bra - ady , " sing the boat . 
 " who bile the salt bait fer soup ? " this be an unknown backbiter a 
 quarter of a mile away . 
 again the joyful chorus . now , Brady be not especially mean , but he have 
 that reputation , and the Fleet make the most of it . then they 
 discover a man from a Truro boat who , six year before , have be 
 convict of use a tackle with five or six hook - a ' scrowger , " they 
 call it - in the Shoals . naturally , he have be christen " Scrowger 
 Jim " ; and though he have hide himself on the Georges ever since , he 
 find his honour wait for he full blown . they take it up in a sort 
 of firecracker chorus : " Jim ! o Jim ! Jim ! o Jim ! Sssscrowger Jim ! " that 
 please everybody . and when a poetical Beverly man - he have be make 
 it up all day , and talk about it for week - sang , " the Carrie 
 Pitman 's anchor do not   hold she for a cent " the dory feel that they 
 be indeed fortunate . then they have to ask that Beverly man how he be 
 off for bean , because even poet must not have thing all their own 
 way . every schooner and nearly every man get it in turn . be there a 
 careless or dirty cook anywhere ? the dory sing about he and his 
 food . be a schooner badly find ? the Fleet be tell at full length . 
 have a man hook tobacco from a mess - mate ? he be name in meeting ; the 
 name toss from roller to roller . Disko 's infallible judgment , Long 
 Jack 's market - boat that he have sell year ago , Dan 's sweetheart   oh , 
 but Dan be an angry boy ! , Penn 's bad luck with dory - anchor , Salter 's 
 view on manure , Manuel 's little slip from virtue ashore , and Harvey 's 
 ladylike handling of the oar - all be lay before the public ; and as 
 the fog fall around they in silvery sheet beneath the sun , the voice 
 sound like a bench of invisible judge pronounce sentence . 
 the dory rove and fish and squabble till a swell underran the 
 sea . then they draw more apart to save their side , and some one call 
 that if the swell continue the Virgin would break . a reckless Galway 
 man with his nephew deny this , haul up anchor , and row over the 
 very rock itself . many voice call they to come away , while other 
 dare they to hold on . as the smooth - back roller pass to the 
 southward , they hove the dory high and high into the mist , and drop 
 she in ugly , sucking , dimpled water , where she spin round her anchor , 
 within a foot or two of the hidden rock . it be play with death for 
 mere bravado ; and the boat look on in uneasy silence till Long Jack 
 row up behind his countryman and quietly cut their roding . 
 " can not   ye hear ut knockin ' ? " he cry . " pull for you miserable life ! 
 pull ! " 
 the man swear and try to argue as the boat drift ; but the next 
 swell check a little , like a man trip on a carpet . there be a 
 deep sob and a gathering roar , and the Virgin fling up a couple of 
 acre of foaming water , white , furious , and ghastly over the shoal sea . 
 then all the boat greatly applaud Long Jack , and the Galway man hold 
 their tongue . 
 " be not   it elegant ? " say Dan , bob like a young seal at home . 
 " she will break about once every ha'af hour now , ' les the swell pile up 
 good . what be her reg'lar time when she be at work , Tom Platt ? " 
 " once ivry fifteen minute , to the tick . Harve , you have   see the 
 great thing on the bank ; an ' but for Long Jack you would see some dead 
 man too . " 
 there come a sound of merriment where the fog lie thick and the 
 schooner be ring their bell . a big bark nose cautiously out of 
 the mist , and be receive with shout and cry of , " come along , 
 darlin ' , " from the Irishry . 
 " another Frenchman ? " say Harvey . 
 " hain't   you eye ? she be a Baltimore boat ; go in fear an ' tremblin ' , " 
 say Dan . " we will guy the very stick out of she . guess it be the fust 
 time her skipper ever meet up with the Fleet this way . " 
 she be a black , buxom , eight - hundred - ton craft . her mainsail be 
 loop up , and her topsail flap undecidedly in what little wind be 
 move . now a bark be feminine beyond all other daughter of the sea , 
 and this tall , hesitate creature , with her white and gilt figurehead , 
 look just like a bewildered woman half lift her skirt to cross a 
 muddy street under the jeer of bad little boy . that be very much her 
 situation . she know she be somewhere in the neighbourhood of the 
 Virgin , have catch the roar of it , and be , therefore , ask her way . 
 this be a small part of what she hear from the dancing dory : 
 " the Virgin ? Fwhat be you talkin ' of ? ' this be Le have on a Sunday 
 mornin ' . go home an ' sober up . " 
 " go home , ye tarrapin ! go home an ' tell them we be comin ' . " 
 half a dozen voice together , in a most tuneful chorus , as her stern 
 go down with a roll and a bubble into the trough : 
 " Thay - aah - she - strike ! " 
 " hard up ! hard up fer your life ! you be on top of she now . " 
 " Daown ! hard daown ! let go everything ! " 
 " all hand to the pump ! " 
 " daown jib an ' pole she ! " 
 here the skipper lose his temper and say thing . instantly fishing be 
 suspend to answer he , and he hear many curious fact about his boat 
 and her next port of call . they ask he if he be insure ; and 
 whence he have steal his anchor , because , they say , it belong to the 
 Carrie Pitman ; they call his boat a mud - scow , and accuse he of 
 dump garbage to frighten the fish ; they offer to tow he and 
 charge it to his wife ; and one audacious youth slip up almost under 
 the counter , smack it with his open palm , and yell : " gid up , Buck ! " 
 the cook empty a pan of ash on he , and he reply with cod - head . 
 the bark 's crew fire small coal from the galley , and the dory 
 threaten to come aboard and " razee " she . they would have warn she 
 at once have she be in real peril ; but , see she well clear of the 
 Virgin , they make the most of their chance . the fun be spoilt when 
 the rock speak again , a half - mile to windward , and the torment bark 
 set everything that would draw and go her way ; but the dory feel 
 that the honour lie with they . 
 all that night the Virgin roar hoarsely ; and next morning , over an 
 angry , white - headed sea , Harvey see the Fleet with flickering mast 
 wait for a lead . not a dory be hove out till ten o'clock , when the 
 two Jeraulds of the Day 's Eye , imagine a lull which do not exist , 
 set the example . in a minute half the boat be out and bob in the 
 cockly swell , but Troop keep the ' we be here ' at work dress down . 
 he see no sense in " dare " ; and as the storm grow that evening they have 
 the pleasure of receive wet stranger only too glad to make any 
 refuge in the gale . the boy stand by the dory - tackle with lantern , 
 the man ready to haul , one eye cock for the sweeping wave that would 
 make they drop everything and hold on for dear life . out of the dark 
 would come a yell of " dory , dory ! " they would hook up and haul in a 
 drenched man and a half - sunk boat , till their deck be litter down 
 with nest of dory and the bunk be full . five time in their watch 
 do Harvey , with Dan , jump at the foregaff where it lie lash on the 
 boom , and cle with arm , leg , and tooth to rope and spar and sodden 
 canvas as a big wave fill the deck . one dory be smash to piece , 
 and the sea pitch the man head first on to the deck , cut his 
 forehead open ; and about dawn , when the racing sea glimmer white all 
 along their cold edge , another man , blue and ghastly , crawl in with 
 a broken hand , ask news of his brother . seven extra mouth sit down 
 to breakfast : a swede ; a Chatham skipper ; a boy from Hancock , Maine ; 
 one Duxbury , and three provincetown man . 
 there be a general sort out among the Fleet next day ; and though no 
 one say anything , all eat with well appetite when boat after boat 
 report full crew aboard . only a couple of portuguese and an old man 
 from Gloucester be drown , but many be cut or bruise ; and two 
 schooner have part their tackle and be blow to the southward , 
 three day ' sail . a man die on a Frenchman - it be the same bark that 
 have trade tobacco with the ' we be here ' . she slip away quite 
 quietly one wet , white morning , move to a patch of deep water , her 
 sail all hang anyhow , and Harvey see the funeral through Disko 's 
 spy - glass . it be only an oblong bundle slide overside . they do not 
 seem to have any form of service , but in the night , at anchor , Harvey 
 hear they across the star - powder black water , sing something that 
 sound like a hymn . it go to a very slow tune . 
 " La brigantine 
 Qui va tourner , 
 Roule et s'incline 
 Pour m'entrainer . 
 oh , Vierge Marie , 
 pour moi priez Dieu ! 
 Adieu , patrie ; 
 Quebec , adieu ! " 
 Tom Platt visit she , because , he say , the dead man be his brother 
 as a Freemason . it come out that a wave have double the poor fellow 
 over the heel of the bowsprit and break his back . the news spread like 
 a flash , for , contrary to general custom , the Frenchman hold an auction 
 of the dead man 's kit , - he have no friend at St Malo or Miquelon , - and 
 everything be spread out on the top of the house , from his red knit 
 cap to the leather belt with the sheath - knife at the back . Dan and 
 Harvey be out on twenty - fathom water in the Hattie S. , and naturally 
 row over to join the crowd . it be a long pull , and they stay some 
 little time while Dan buy the knife , which have a curious brass 
 handle . when they drop overside and push off into a drizzle of 
 rain and a lop of sea , it occur to they that they might get into 
 trouble for neglect the line . 
 " guess ' twon't   hurt we any to be warm up , " say Dan , shiver under 
 his oilskin , and they row on into the heart of a white fog , which , 
 as usual , drop on they without warn . 
 " there be too much blame tide hereabout to trust to your instink , " he 
 say . " heave over the anchor , Harve , and we will fish a piece till the 
 thing lift . bend on your big lead . three pound be not   any too much 
 in this water . see how she be tighten on her rodin ' already . " 
 there be quite a little bubble at the bow , where some irresponsible 
 Bank current hold the dory full stretch on her rope ; but they could not 
 see a boat 's length in any direction . Harvey turn up his collar and 
 bunch himself over his reel with the air of a wearied navigator . Fog 
 have no special terror for he now . they fish a while in silence , and 
 find the cod strike on well . then Dan draw the sheath - knife and test 
 the edge of it on the gunwale . 
 " that be a daisy , " say Harvey . " how do you get it so cheap ? " 
 " on account o ' their blame cath'lic superstition , " say Dan , jabbing 
 with the bright blade . " they do not   fancy takin ' iron from off a dead 
 man , so to speak . ' see they arichat frenchman step back when I bid ? " 
 " but an auction be not   take anythink off a dead man . it be business . " 
 " we know it be not , but there be no go in the tooth o ' superstition . 
 that be one o ' the advantage o ' livin ' in a progressive country . " and 
 Dan begin whistle : 
 " oh , Double Thatcher , how be you ? 
 now Eastern Point come inter view . 
 the girl an ' boy we soon shall see , 
 at anchor off Cape Ann ! " 
 " why do not   that Eastport man bid , then ? he buy his boot . ai not 
 Maine progressive ? " 
 " Maine ? Pshaw ! they do not   know enough , or they hain't   get money enough , 
 to paint their haouse in Maine . I have   see them . the Eastport man he 
 tell I that the knife have be use - so the french captain tell 
 he - use up on the french coast last year . " 
 " cut a man ? Heave be the muckle . " Harvey haul in his fish , rebaite , 
 and throw over . 
 " kill he ! course , when I hear that I be keener'n ever to get it . " 
 " Christmas ! I do not   know it , " say Harvey , turn round . " I will give 
 you a dollar for it when I - get my wage . say , I will give you two 
 dollar . " 
 " honest ? d'you like it as much as all that ? " say Dan , flush . " well , 
 to tell the truth , I kind get it for you - to give ; but I do not   let 
 on till I see how you would take it . it be yours and welcome , Harve , because 
 we be dory - mate , and so on and so forth , an ' so followin ' . catch 
 a - holt ! " 
 he hold it out , belt and all . 
 " but look at here . Dan , I do not   see - " 
 " take it . ' tain't   no use to I . I wish you to hev it . " the temptation 
 be irresistible . " Dan , you be a white man , " say Harvey . " I will keep it 
 as long as I live . " 
 " that be good hearin ' , " say Dan , with a pleasant laugh ; and then , 
 anxious to change the subject : " ' look be if your line be fast to 
 something . " 
 " Fouled , I guess , " say Harve , tug . before he pull up he fasten 
 the belt round he , and with deep delight hear the tip of the sheath 
 click on the thwart . " concern the thing ! " he cry . " she act as though 
 she be on strawberry - bottom . it be all sand here , be not   it ? " 
 Dan reach over and give a judgmatic tweak . " Hollbut'll act that way 
 ' f he be sulky . Thet 's no strawberry - bottom . yank she once or twice . she 
 give , sure . guess we would well haul up an ' make certain . " 
 they pull together , make fast at each turn on the cleat , and the 
 hide weight rise sluggishly . 
 " Prize , oh ! Haul ! " shout Dan , but the shout end in a shrill , double 
 shriek of horror , for out of the sea come the body of the dead 
 Frenchman bury two day before ! the hook have catch he under the 
 right armpit , and he sway , erect and horrible , head and shoulder 
 above water . his arm be tie to his side , and - he have no face . the 
 boy fall over each other in a heap at the bottom of the dory , and 
 there they lie while the thing bob alongside , hold on the shorten 
 line . 
 " the tide - the tide bring he ! " say Harvey with quivering lip , as 
 he fumble at the clasp of the belt . 
 " oh , Lord ! oh , Harve ! " groan Dan , " be quick . he be come for it . let 
 he have it . take it off . " 
 " I do not   want it ! I do not   want it ! " cry Harvey . " I can not   find the 
 bu - buckle . " 
 " Quick , Harve ! he be on your line ! " 
 Harvey sit up to unfasten the belt , face the head that have no face 
 under its streaming hair . " he be fast still , " he whisper to Dan , who 
 slip out his knife and cut the line , as Harvey fling the belt far 
 overside . the body shoot down with a plop , and Dan cautiously rise to 
 his knee , white than the fog . 
 " he come for it . he come for it . I have   see a stale one haul up on a 
 trawl and I do not   much care , but he come to us special . " 
 " I wish - I wish I have not   take the knife . then he would have come on your 
 line . " 
 " dunno as thet would ba ' make any differ . we be both scar out o ' ten 
 year ' growth . oh , Harve , do ye see his head ? " 
 " do I ? I will never forget it . but look at here , Dan ; it could not   have 
 be mean . it be only the tide . " 
 " Tide ! he come for it , Harve . why , they sink he six mile to south'ard 
 o ' the Fleet , an ' we be two mile from where she be lyin ' now . they tell 
 I he be weight with a fathom an ' a half o ' chain - cable . " 
 " wonder what he do with the knife - up on the french coast ? " 
 " something bad . ' guess he be bind to take it with he to the Judgment , 
 an ' so - what be you do with the fish ? " 
 " heave them overboard , " say Harvey . 
 " what for ? we sha'n't   eat them . " 
 " I do not   care . I have to look at his face while I be takin ' the belt 
 off . you can keep your catch if you like . I have   no use for mine . " 
 Dan say nothing , but throw his fish over again . 
 " guess it be good to be on the safe side , " he murmur at last . " I would 
 give a month 's pay if this fog ' u'd lift . thing go abaout in a fog 
 that ye do not   see in clear weather - yo - hoe an ' hollerer and such 
 like . I be sorter relieve he come the way he do instid o ' walkin ' . he 
 might ha ' walk . " 
 " do not , Dan ! we be right on top of he now . ' wish I be safe aboard , 
 hem ' pound by Uncle Salters . " 
 " they will be lookin ' fer we in a little . Gimme the tooter . " Dan take the 
 tin dinner - horn , but pause before he blow . 
 " go on , " say Harvey . " I do not   want to stay here all night " 
 " question be , haow he would take it . there be a man frum down the coast 
 tell I once he be in a schooner where they darsen't   ever blow a horn 
 to the dory , becaze the skipper - not the man he be with , but a 
 captain that have run she five year before - he would drown a boy 
 alongside in a drunk fit ; an ' ever after , that boy he would row along - side 
 too and shout , ' dory ! dory ! ' with the rest . " 
 " dory ! dory ! " a muffled voice cry through the fog . they cower 
 again , and the horn drop from Dan 's hand . 
 " hold on ! " cry Harvey ; " it be the cook . " 
 " dunno what make I think o ' thet fool tale , either , " say Dan . " it be 
 the doctor , sure enough . " 
 " Dan ! Danny ! Oooh , Dan ! Harve ! harvey ! Oooh , Haarveee ! " 
 " we be here , " sing both boy together . they hear oar , but could see 
 nothing till the cook , shin and dripping , row into they . 
 " what iss happen ? " say he . " you will be beat at home . " 
 " Thet 's what we want . Thet 's what we be sufferin ' for " say Dan . 
 " anything homey 's good enough fer we . we have   have kinder depressin ' 
 company . " as the cook pass they a line , Dan tell he the tale . 
 " yess ! he come for hiss knife , " be all he say at the end . 
 never have the little rock ' we be here ' look so deliciously 
 home - like as when the cook , bear and breed in fog , row they back to 
 she . there be a warm glow of light from the cabin and a satisfying 
 smell of food forward , and it be heavenly to hear Disko and the 
 other , all quite alive and solid , lean over the rail and promise 
 they a first - class pounding . but the cook be a black ; master of 
 strategy . he do not get the dory aboard till he have give the more 
 strike point of the tale , explain as he back and bump round 
 the counter how Harvey be the mascot to destroy any possible bad luck . 
 so the boy come override as rather uncanny hero , and every one ask 
 they question instead of pound they for make trouble . Little Penn 
 deliver quite a speech on the folly of superstition ; but public 
 opinion be against he and in favour of Long Jack , who tell the most 
 excruciating ghost - story , till nearly midnight . under that influence 
 no one except Salters and Penn say anything about " idolatry , " when the 
 cook put a lighted candle , a cake of flour and water , and a pinch of 
 salt on a shingle , and float they out astern to keep the Frenchman 
 quiet in case he be still restless . Dan light the candle because he have 
 buy the belt , and the cook grunt and muttered charm as long as he 
 could see the ducking point of flame . 
 say Harvey to Dan , as they turn in after watch : 
 " how about progress and catholic superstition ? " 
 " Huh ! I guess I be as enlighten and progressive as the next man , but 
 when it come to a dead St. Malo deck - hand scarin ' a couple o ' pore 
 boy stiff fer the sake of a thirty - cent knife , why , then , the cook can 
 take hold fer all o ' I . I mistrust furriners , livin ' or dead . " 
 next morning all , except the cook , be rather ashamed of the 
 ceremony , and go to work double tide , speak gruffly to one 
 another . 
 the ' we be here ' be race neck and neck for her last few load 
 against the Parry Norman ; and so close be the struggle that the Fleet 
 take side and betted tobacco . all hand work at the line or 
 dressing - down till they fall asleep where they stand - begin before 
 dawn and end when it be too dark to see . they even use the cook as 
 pitcher , and turn Harvey into the hold to pass salt , while Dan help 
 to dress down . luckily a Parry Norman man sprain his ankle fall 
 down the foc'sle , and the ' we be here ' gain . harvey could not see 
 how one more fish could be cram into she , but Disko and Tom Platt 
 stow and stow , and plank the mass down with big stone from the 
 ballast , and there be always " jest another day 's work . " Disko do not 
 tell they when all the salt be wet . he roll to the lazarette aft 
 the cabin and begin haul out the big mainsail . this be at ten in 
 the morning . the riding - sail be down and the main- and topsail be up 
 by noon , and dory come alongside with letter for home , envy their 
 good fortune . at last she clear deck , hoist her flag , - as be the 
 right of the first boat off the Banks , - up - anchor , and begin to move . 
 Disko pretend that he wish to accomodate folk who have not send in 
 their mail , and so work she gracefully in and out among the 
 schooner . in reality , that be his little triumphant procession , and 
 for the fifth year run it show what kind of mariner he be . Dan 's 
 accordion and Tom Platt 's fiddle supply the music of the magic verse 
 you must not sing till all the salt be wet : 
 " Hih ! yih ! Yoho ! send your letter raound ! 
 all our salt be wet , an ' the anchor be off the graound ! 
 Bend , oh , bend your mains'l , we be back to Yankeeland - 
 with fifteen hunder ' quintal , 
 an ' fifteen hunder ' quintal , 
 ' teen hunder ' toppin ' quintal , 
 ' Twix ' old ' Queereau an ' Grand . " 
 the last letter pitch on deck wrap round piece of coal , and the 
 Gloucester man shout message to their wife and womenfolk and 
 owner , while the ' we be here ' finish the musical ride through the 
 Fleet , her headsail quiver like a man 's hand when he raise it to 
 say good - by . 
 Harvey very soon discover that the ' we be here ' , with she 
 riding - sail , stroll from berth to berth , and the ' we be here ' head 
 west by south under home canvas , be two very different boat . there 
 be a bite and kick to the wheel even in " boy 's " weather ; he could feel 
 the dead weight in the hold fling forward mightily across the surge , 
 and the streaming line of bubble overside make his eye dizzy . 
 Disko keep they busy fiddle with the sail ; and when those be 
 flatten like a race yacht 's , Dan have to wait on the big topsail , 
 which be put over by hand every time she go about . in spare moment 
 they pump , for the pack fish drip brine , which do not improve 
 a cargo . but since there be no fishing , Harvey have time to look at the 
 sea from another point of view . the low - sided schooner be naturally on 
 most intimate term with her surrounding . they see little of the 
 horizon save when she top a swell ; and usually she be elbow , 
 fidgeting , and coast her steadfast way through gray , gray - blue , or 
 black hollow lace across and across with streak of shiver foam ; 
 or rub herself caressingly along the flank of some big 
 water - hill . it be as if she say : " you would not   hurt I , surely ? I be 
 only the little ' we be here ' . " then she would slide away chuckle 
 softly to herself till she be bring up by some fresh obstacle . the 
 dull of folk can not see this kind of thing hour after hour through 
 long day without notice it ; and Harvey , be anything but dull , 
 begin to comprehend and enjoy the dry chorus of wave - top turn over 
 with a sound of incessant tearing ; the hurry of the wind work 
 across open space and herd the purple - blue cloud - shadow ; the 
 splendid upheaval of the red sunrise ; the folding and pack away of 
 the morning mist , wall after wall withdraw across the white floor ; 
 the salty glare and blaze of noon ; the kiss of rain fall over 
 thousand of dead , flat square mile ; the chilly blackening of 
 everything at the day 's end ; and the million wrinkle of the sea under 
 the moonlight , when the jib - boom solemnly poke at the low star , and 
 Harvey go down to get a doughnut from the cook . 
 but the good fun be when the boy be put on the wheel together , Tom 
 Platt within hail , and she cuddle her lee - rail down to the crash 
 blue , and keep a little home - make rainbow arch unbroken over her 
 windlass . then the jaw of the boom whine against the mast , and the 
 sheet creak , and the sail fill with roaring ; and when she slide 
 into a hollow she trample like a woman trip in her own silk dress , 
 and come out , her jib wet half - way up , yearn and peer for the 
 tall twin - light of Thatcher 's Island . 
 they leave the cold gray of the Bank sea , see the lumber - ship make 
 for Quebec by the Straits of St. Lawrence , with the Jersey salt - brig 
 from Spain and Sicily ; find a friendly northeaster off Artimon Bank 
 that drive they within view of the East light of Sable Island , - a sight 
 Disko do not linger over , - and stay with they past western and Le 
 have , to the northern fringe of George 's . from there they pick up the 
 deep water , and let she go merrily . 
 " Hattie 's pull on the string , " Dan confide to Harvey . " Hattie an ' 
 Ma . next Sunday you will be hirin ' a boy to throw water on the window to 
 make ye go to sleep . ' guess you will keep with we till your folk come . 
 do you know the good of gettin ' ashore again ? " 
 " hot bath ? " say Harvey . his eyebrow be all white with dry spray . 
 " that be good , but a night - shirt 's well . I have   be dreamin ' o ' 
 night - shirt ever since we bent our mainsail . ye can wiggle your toe 
 then . Ma'll hev a new one fer I , all wash soft . it be home , Harve . 
 it be home ! ye can sense it in the air . we be runnin ' into the aidge of 
 a hot wave naow , an ' I can smell the bayberry . wonder if we will get in 
 fer supper . port a trifle . " 
 the hesitating sail flap and lurch in the close air as the deep 
 smooth out , blue and oily , round they . when they whistle for a wind 
 only the rain come in spiky rod , bubble and drum , and behind the 
 rain the thunder and the lightning of mid - August . they lie on the deck 
 with bare foot and arm , tell one another what they would order at 
 their first meal ashore ; for now the land be in plain sight . a 
 Gloucester swordfish - boat drift alongside , a man in the little pulpit 
 on the bowsprit flourish his harpoon , his bare head plaster down 
 with the wet . " and all be well ! " he sing cheerily , as though he be 
 watch on a big liner . " Wouverman 's wait fer you , Disko . what be the 
 news o ' the Fleet ? " 
 Disko shout it and pass on , while the wild summer storm pound 
 overhead and the lightning flicker along the cape from four 
 different quarter at once . it give the low circle of hill round 
 Gloucester Harbor , Ten Pound Island , the fish - shed , with the break 
 line of house - roof , and each spar and buoy on the water , in blinding 
 photograph that come and go a dozen time to the minute as the 
 ' we be here ' crawl in on half - flood , and the whistling - buoy moan 
 and mourn behind she . then the storm die out in long , separate , 
 vicious dag of blue - white flame , follow by a single roar like the 
 roar of a mortar - battery , and the shake air tingle under the star as 
 it get back to silence . 
 " the flag , the flag ! " say Disko , suddenly , point upward . 
 " what be ut ? " say Long Jack . 
 " Otto ! Ha'af mast . they can see we frum shore now . " 
 " I would clean forgot he be no folk to Gloucester , have he ? " 
 " girl he be go to be married to this fall . " 
 " Mary pity she ! " say Long Jack , and lower the little flag half - mast 
 for the sake of Otto , sweep overboard in a gale off Le have three 
 month before . 
 Disko wipe the wet from his eye and lead the ' we be here ' to 
 Wouverman 's wharf , give his order in whisper , while she swing round 
 moor tug and night - watchman hail she from the end of inky - black 
 pier . over and above the darkness and the mystery of the procession , 
 Harvey could feel the land close round he once more , with all its 
 thousand of people asleep , and the smell of earth after rain , and the 
 familiar noise of a switching - engine cough to herself in a 
 freight - yard ; and all those thing make his heart beat and his throat 
 dry up as he stand by the foresheet . they hear the anchor - watch 
 snore on a lighthouse - tug , nose into a pocket of darkness where a 
 lantern glimmer on either side ; somebody wake with a grunt , throw 
 they a rope , and they make fast to a silent wharf flank with great 
 iron - roof shed fall of warm emptiness , and lie there without a sound . 
 then Harvey sit down by the wheel , and sob and sob as though his 
 heart would break , and a tall woman who have be sit on a 
 weigh - scale drop down into the schooner and kiss Dan once on the 
 cheek ; for she be his mother , and she have see the ' we be here ' by the 
 lightning flash . she take no notice of Harvey till he have recover 
 himself a little and Disko have tell she his story . then they go to 
 Disko 's house together as the dawn be break ; and until the 
 telegraph office be open and he could wire his folk , Harvey Cheyne be 
 perhaps the lonely boy in all America . but the curious thing be 
 that Disko and Dan seem to think none the bad of he for cry . 
 Wouverman be not ready for Disko 's price till Disko , sure that the 
 ' we be here ' be at least a week ahead of any other Gloucester boat , 
 have give he a few day to swallow they ; so all hand play about the 
 street , and Long Jack stop the Rocky Neck trolley , on principle , as 
 he say , till the conductor let he ride free . but Dan go about with 
 his freckled nose in the air , bung - full of mystery and most haughty to 
 his family . 
 " Dan , I will hev to lay inter you ef you act this way , " say Troop , 
 pensively . " sence we have   come ashore this time you have   bin a heap too 
 fresh . " 
 " I would lay into he naow ef he be mine , " say Uncle Salters , sourly . he 
 and Penn board with the troop . 
 " Oho ! " say Dan , shuffle with the accordion round the backyard , ready 
 to leap the fence if the enemy advance . " Dan , you be welcome to your 
 own judgment , but remember I have   warn ye . your own flesh an ' blood ha ' 
 warn ye ! ' tain't   any o ' my fault ef you be mistook , but I will be on 
 deck to watch ye . an ' ez fer yeou , Uncle Salters , Pharaoh 's chief 
 butler be not   in it ' longside o ' you ! you watch aout an ' wait . you will be 
 plow under like your own blame clover ; but me - Dan Troop - I will 
 flourish like a green bay - tree because I warn't   stick on my own 
 opinion . " 
 Disko be smoke in all his shore dignity and a pair of beautiful 
 carpet - slipper . " you be gettin ' ez crazy as poor Harve . you two go 
 araound gigglin ' an ' squinchin ' an ' kickin ' each other under the table 
 till there be no peace in the haouse , " say he . 
 " there be go to be a heap less - fer some folk , " Dan reply . " you 
 wait an ' see . " 
 he and Harvey go out on the trolley to East Gloucester , where they 
 tramp through the bayberry bush to the lighthouse , and lie down on 
 the big red boulder and laugh themselves hungry . Harvey have show 
 Dan a telegram , and the two swear to keep silence till the shell burst . 
 " Harve 's folk ? " say Dan , with an unruffled face after supper . " well , I 
 guess they do not   amount to much of anything , or we would ha ' hear from them 
 by naow . his pop keep a kind o ' store out West . maybe he will give you 
 be much as five dollar , Dad . " 
 " what do I tell ye ? " say Salters . " do not   sputter over your vittle , 
 Dan . " 
 CHAPTER ix 
 whatever his private sorrow may be , a multimillionaire , like any other 
 workingman , should keep abreast of his business . Harvey Cheyne , senior , 
 have go East late in June to meet a woman break down , half mad , who 
 dream day and night of her son drown in the gray sea . he have 
 surround she with doctor , train nurse , massage - woman , and even 
 faith - cure companion , but they be useless . Mrs. Cheyne lie still and 
 moan , or talk of her boy by the hour together to any one who would 
 listen . Hope she have none , and who could offer it ? all she need be 
 assurance that drowning do not hurt ; and her husband watch to guard 
 lest she should make the experiment . of his own sorrow he speak 
 little - hardly realize the depth of it till he catch himself ask 
 the calendar on his writing - desk , " what be the use of go on ? " 
 there have always lain a pleasant notion at the back of his head that , 
 some day , when he have round off everything and the boy have leave 
 college , he would take his son to his heart and lead he into his 
 possession . then that boy , he argue , as busy father do , would 
 instantly become his companion , partner , and ally , and there would 
 follow splendid year of great work carry out together - the old head 
 back the young fire . now his boy be dead - lose at sea , as it might 
 have be a Swede sailor from one of Cheyne 's big teaship ; the wife 
 dying , or bad ; he himself be tread down by platoon of woman and 
 doctor and maid and attendant ; worry almost beyond endurance by 
 the shift and change of her poor restless whim ; hopeless , with no 
 heart to meet his many enemy . 
 he have take the wife to his raw new palace in San Diego , where she and 
 her people occupy a wing of great price , and Cheyne , in a 
 veranda - room , between a secretary and a typewriter , who be also a 
 telegraphist , toil along wearily from day to day . there be a war of 
 rate among four western railroad in which he be suppose to be 
 interested ; a devastating strike have develop in his lumber camp in 
 Oregon , and the legislature of the State of California , which have no 
 love for its maker , be prepare open war against he . 
 ordinarily he would have accept battle ere it be offer , and have 
 wag a pleasant and unscrupulous campaign . but now he sit limply , his 
 soft black hat push forward on to his nose , his big body shrunk 
 inside his loose clothe , star at his boot or the chinese junk in 
 the bay , and assent absently to the secretary 's question as he 
 open the Saturday mail . 
 Cheyne be wonder how much it would cost to drop everything and pull 
 out . he carry huge insurance , could buy himself royal annuity , and 
 between one of his place in Colorado and a little society   that would 
 do the wife good , say in Washington and the South Carolina island , a 
 man might forget plan that have come to nothing . on the other hand - 
 the click of the typewriter stop ; the girl be look at the 
 secretary , who have turn white . 
 he pass Cheyne a telegram repeat from San Francisco : 
 pick up by fishing schooner ' we be here ' have fall off boat great 
 time on Banks fish all well wait Gloucester Mass care Disko 
 Troop for money or order wire what shall do and how be Mama Harvey N. 
 Cheyne . 
 the father let it fall , lay his head down on the roller - top of the 
 shut desk , and breathe heavily . the secretary run for Mrs. Cheyne 's 
 doctor who find Cheyne pacing to and fro . 
 " what - what d ' you think of it ? be it possible ? be there any meaning to 
 it ? I can not   quite make it out , " he cry . 
 " I can , " say the doctor . " I lose seven thousand a year - that be all . " 
 he think of the struggle New York practice he have drop at 
 Cheyne 's imperious bidding , and return the telegram with a sigh . 
 " you mean you would tell she ? ' may be a fraud ? " 
 " what be the motive ? " say the doctor , coolly . " detection be too certain . 
 it be the boy sure enough . " 
 enter a french maid , impudently , as an indispensable one who be keep on 
 only by large wage . 
 " Mrs. Cheyne she say you must come at once . she think you be seek . " 
 the master of thirty million bow his head meekly and follow 
 Suzanne ; and a thin , high voice on the upper landing of the great 
 white - wood square staircase cry : " what be it ? what have happen ? " 
 no door could keep out the shriek that ring through the echo house 
 a moment later , when her husband blurt out the news . 
 " and that be all right , " say the doctor , serenely , to the typewriter . 
 " about the only medical statement in novel with any truth to it be 
 that joy do not   kill , Miss Kinzey . " 
 " I know it ; but we have   a heap to do first . " Miss Kinzey be from 
 Milwaukee , somewhat direct of speech ; and as her fancy lean towards 
 the secretary , she divine there be work in hand . he be look 
 earnestly at the vast roller - map of America on the wall . 
 " Milsom , we be go right across . private car - straight 
 through - Boston . fix the connection , " shout Cheyne down the 
 staircase . 
 " I think so . " 
 the secretary turn to the typewriter , and their eye meet   out of that 
 be bear a story - nothing to do with this story . she look 
 inquiringly , doubtful of his resource . he sign to she to move to the 
 Morse as a general bring brigade into action . then he sweep his hand 
 musician - wise through his hair , regard the ceiling , and set to work , 
 while Miss Kinzey 's white finger call up the Continent of America . 
 " K. H. Wade , Los Angeles the ' Constance ' be at Los Angeles , be not   she , 
 Miss Kinzey ? " 
 " Yep . " Miss Kinzey nod between click as the secretary look at his 
 watch . 
 " ready ? send ' Constance , ' private car , here , and arrange for special to 
 leave here Sunday in time to connect with New York Limited at Sixteenth 
 Street , Chicago , Tuesday next . " 
 click - lick - lick ! " could not   you well that ? " 
 " not on those grade . that give them sixty hour from here to Chicago . 
 they will not   gain anything by take a special east of that . ready ? also 
 arrange with Lake Shore and Michigan Southern to take ' Constance ' on 
 New York Central and Hudson River Buffalo to Albany , and B. and A. the 
 same Albany to Boston . Indispensable I should reach Boston Wednesday 
 evening . be sure nothing prevent . have also wire Canniff , Toucey , and 
 Barnes . - Sign , Cheyne . " 
 Miss Kinzey nod , and the secretary go on . 
 " now then . Canniff , Toucey , and Barnes , of course . ready ? Canniff , 
 Chicago . please take my private car ' Constance ' from Santa Fe at 
 Sixteenth Street next Tuesday p. m. on N. Y. Limited through to Buffalo 
 and deliver N. Y. C. for Albany . - ever bin to N ' York , Miss Kinzey ? 
 we will go some day . - ready ? take car Buffalo to Albany on Limited 
 Tuesday p. m. that be for Toucey . " 
 " have not   bin to Noo York , but I know that ! " with a toss of the head . 
 " Beg pardon . now , Boston and Albany , Barnes , same instruction from 
 Albany through to Boston . leave three - five P. M.   you need not   wire 
 that ; arrive nine - five P. M. Wednesday . that cover everything Wade 
 will do , but it pay to shake up the manager . " 
 " it be great , " say Miss Kinzey , with a look of admiration . this be the 
 kind of man she understand and appreciate . 
 " ' tisn't   bad , " say Milsom , modestly . " now , any one but I would have 
 lose thirty hour and spend a week work out the run , instead of 
 hand he over to the Santa Fe ' straight through to Chicago . " 
 " but see here , about that Noo York Limited . Chauncey Depew himself 
 could not   hitch his car to she , " Miss Kinzey suggest , recover 
 herself . 
 " yes , but this be not   Chauncey . it be Cheyne - lightning . it go . " 
 " even so . guess we would well wire the boy . you have   forget that , 
 anyhow . " 
 " I will ask . " 
 when he return with the father 's message bidding Harvey meet they in 
 Boston at an appoint hour , he find Miss Kinzey laugh over the 
 key . then Milsom laugh too , for the frantic click from Los Angeles 
 run : " we want to know why - why - why ? general uneasiness develop and 
 spread . " 
 ten minute later Chicago appeal to Miss Kinzey in these word : " if 
 crime of century be mature please warn friend in time . we be all 
 get to cover here . " 
 this be cap by a message from Topeka   and wherein Topeka be 
 concerned even Milsom could not guess : " do not   shoot , Colonel . we will 
 come down . " 
 Cheyne smile grimly at the consternation of his enemy when the 
 telegram be lay before he . " they think we be on the warpath . tell 
 them we do not   feel like fight just now , Milsom . tell them what we be 
 go for . I guess you and Miss Kinsey have well come along , though it 
 be not   likely I shall do any business on the road . tell them the 
 truth - for once . " 
 so the truth be tell . Miss Kinzey click in the sentiment while the 
 secretary add the memorable quotation , " let we have peace , " and in 
 board room two thousand mile away the representative of sixty - three 
 million dollar ' worth of variously manipulate railroad interest 
 breathe more freely . Cheyne be fly to meet the only son , so 
 miraculously restore to he . the bear be seek his cub , not the 
 bull . hard man who have their knife draw to fight for their financial 
 life put away the weapon and wish he god - speed , while half a dozen 
 panic - smite tin - pot toad perk up their head and speak of the 
 wonderful thing they would have do have not Cheyne bury the hatchet . 
 it be a busy week - end among the wire ; for now that their anxiety be 
 remove , man and city hasten to accommodate . Los Angeles call to 
 San Diego and Barstow that the Southern California engineer might know 
 and be ready in their lonely roundhouse ; Barstow pass the word to 
 the Atlantic and Pacific ; and Albuquerque fling it the whole length of 
 the Atchinson , Topeka , and Santa Fe management , even into Chicago . an 
 engine , combination - car with crew , and the great and gild " Constance " 
 private car be to be " expedite " over those two thousand three 
 hundred and fifty mile . the train would take precedence of one hundred 
 and seventy - seven other meet and pass ; despatcher and crew of 
 every one of those say train must be notify . sixteen locomotive , 
 sixteen engineer , and sixteen fireman would be need - each and every 
 one the well available . two and one half minute would be allow for 
 change engine , three for watering , and two for coal . " warn the 
 man , and arrange tank and chute accordingly ; for Harvey Cheyne be in 
 a hurry , a hurry , a hurry , " sing the wire . " forty mile an hour will 
 be expect , and division superintendent will accompany this special 
 over their respective division . from San Diego to Sixteenth Street , 
 Chicago , let the magic carpet be lay down . hurry ! oh , hurry ! " 
 " it will be hot , " say Cheyne , as they roll out of San Diego in the 
 dawn of Sunday . " we be go to hurry , Mama , just as fast as ever we 
 can ; but I really do not   think there be any good of your put on your 
 bonnet and glove yet . you would much well lie down and take your 
 medicine . I would play you a game of domino , but it be Sunday . " 
 " I will be good . oh , I will be good . only - take off my bonnet make I 
 feel as if we would never get there . " 
 " try to sleep a little , Mama , and we will be in Chicago before you know . " 
 " but it be Boston , Father . tell they to hurry . " 
 the six - foot driver be hammer their way to San Bernardino and the 
 Mohave waste , but this be no grade for speed . that would come later . 
 the heat of the desert follow the heat of the hill as they turn 
 east to the Needles and the Colorado River . the car crack in the 
 utter drouth and glare , and they put crush ice to Mrs. Cheyne 's neck , 
 and toil up the long , long grade , past Ash Fork , towards Flagstaff , 
 where the forest and quarry be , under the dry , remote sky . the 
 needle of the speed - indicator flick and wag to and fro ; the 
 cinder rattle on the roof , and a whirl of dust suck after the 
 whirling wheel . the crew of the combination sit on their bunk , 
 pant in their shirtsleeve , and Cheyne find himself among they 
 shout old , old story of the railroad that every trainman know , 
 above the roar of the car . he tell they about his son , and how the sea 
 have give up its dead , and they nod and spat and rejoice with he ; 
 ask after " she , back there , " and whether she could stand it if the 
 engineer " let she out a piece , " and Cheyne think she could . 
 accordingly , the great fire - horse be " let ' ut " from Flagstaff to 
 Winslow , till a division superintendent protest . 
 but Mrs. Cheyne , in the boudoir stateroom , where the French maid , 
 sallow - white with fear , clung to the silver door - handle , only moan a 
 little and beg her husband to bid they " hurry . " and so they drop 
 the dry sand and moon - strike rock of Arizona behind they , and grill 
 on till the crash of the coupling and the wheeze of the brake - hose 
 tell they they be at Coolidge by the Continental Divide . 
 three bold and experience man - cool , confident , and dry when they 
 begin ; white , quivering , and wet when they finish their trick at 
 those terrible wheel - swing she over the great lift from Albuquerque 
 to Glorietta and beyond Springer , up and up to the Raton Tunnel on the 
 State line , whence they drop rock into La Junta , have sight of the 
 Arkansaw , and tear down the long slope to Dodge City , where Cheyne take 
 comfort once again from set his watch an hour ahead . 
 there be very little talk in the car . the secretary and typewriter sit 
 together on the stamp spanish - leather cushion by the plate - glass 
 observation - window at the rear end , watch the surge and ripple of 
 the tie crowd back behind they , and , it be believe , make note of 
 the scenery . Cheyne move nervously between his own extravagant 
 gorgeousness and the naked necessity of the combination , an unlit cigar 
 in his tooth , till the pitying crew forget that he be their tribal 
 enemy , and do their good to entertain he . 
 at night the bunch electric light up that distressful palace of all 
 the luxury , and they fare sumptuously , swing on through the 
 emptiness of abject desolation . 
 now they hear the swish of a water - tank , and the guttural voice of a 
 Chinaman , the click - clink of hammer that test the Krupp steel 
 wheel , and the oath of a tramp chase off the rear - platform ; now the 
 solid crash of coal shot into the tender ; and now a beating back of 
 noise as they fly past a waiting train . now they look out into 
 great abyss , a trestle purr beneath their tread , or up to rock 
 that bar out half the star . now scour and ravine change and roll 
 back to jagged mountain on the horizon 's edge , and now break into 
 hill low and low , till at last come the true plain . 
 at Dodge City an unknown hand throw in a copy of a Kansas paper 
 contain some sort of an interview with Harvey , who have evidently 
 fall in with an enterprise reporter , telegraph on from Boston . 
 the joyful journalese reveal that it be beyond question their boy , 
 and it soothe Mrs. Cheyne for a while . her one word " hurry " be 
 convey by the crew to the engineer at Nickerson , Topeka , and 
 Marceline , where the grade be easy , and they brush the continent 
 behind they . town and village be close together now , and a man 
 could feel here that he move among people . 
 " I can not   see the dial , and my eye ache so . what be we do ? " 
 " the very good we can , Mama . there be no sense in get in before the 
 Limited . we would only have to wait . " 
 " I do not   care . I want to feel we be move . sit down and tell I the 
 mile . " 
 Cheyne sit down and read the dial for she   there be some mile which 
 stand for record to this day , but the seventy - foot car never change 
 its long steamer - like roll , move through the heat with the hum of a 
 giant bee . yet the speed be not enough for Mrs. Cheyne ; and the heat , 
 the remorseless August heat , be make she giddy ; the clock - hand 
 would not move , and when , oh , when would they be in Chicago ? 
 it be not true that , as they change engine at Fort Madison , Cheyne 
 pass over to the Amalgamated Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers an 
 endowment sufficient to enable they to fight he and his fellow on 
 equal term for evermore . he pay his obligation to engineer and 
 fireman as he believe they deserve , and only his bank know what he 
 give the crew who have sympathize with he . it be on record that the 
 last crew take entire charge of switch operation at Sixteenth 
 Street , because ' she " be in a doze at last , and Heaven be to help any 
 one who bump she . 
 now the highly pay specialist who convey the Lake Shore and Michigan 
 Southern Limited from Chicago to Elkhart be something of an autocrat , 
 and he do not approve of be tell how to back up to a car . none the 
 less he handle the " Constance " as if she might have be a load of 
 dynamite , and when the crew rebuke he , they do it in whisper and 
 dumb show . 
 " Pshaw ! " say the Atchinson , Topeka , and Santa Fe man , discuss life 
 later , " we be not   runnin ' for a record . Harvey Cheyne 's wife , she be 
 sick back , an ' we do not   want to jounce she . ' come to think of it , our 
 runnin ' time from San Diego to Chicago be 57.54 . you can tell that to 
 they eastern way - train . when we be tryin ' for a record , we will let you 
 know . " 
 to the western man   though this would not please either city   Chicago 
 and Boston be cheek by jowl , and some railroad encourage the 
 delusion . the Limited whirl the " Constance " into Buffalo and the arm 
 of the New York Central and Hudson River   illustrious magnate with 
 white whisker and gold charm on their watch - chain board she here 
 to talk a little business to Cheyne , who slide she gracefully into 
 Albany , where the Boston and Albany complete the run from tide - water 
 to tide - water - total time , eighty - seven hour and thirty - five minute , 
 or three day , fifteen hour and one half . Harvey be wait for they . 
 after violent emotion most people and all boy demand food . they 
 feast the return prodigal behind draw curtain , cut off in their 
 great happiness , while the train roar in and out around they . harvey 
 ate , drank , and enlarge on his adventure all in one breath , and when 
 he have a hand free his mother fondle it . his voice be thicken with 
 live in the open , salt air ; his palm be rough and hard , his wrist 
 dot with mark of gurrysore ; and a fine full flavour of codfish 
 hang round rubber boot and blue jersey . 
 the father , well use to judge man , look at he keenly . he do not 
 know what endure harm the boy might have take . indeed , he catch 
 himself think that he know very little whatever of his son ; but he 
 distinctly remember an unsatisfied , dough - face youth who take 
 delight in " call down the old man , " and reduce his mother to 
 tear - such a person as add to the gaiety of public room and hotel 
 piazzas , where the ingenuous young of the wealthy play with or revile 
 the bell - boy . but this well set - up fisher - youth do not wriggle , 
 look at he with eye steady , clear , and unflinche , and speak in a 
 tone distinctly , even startlingly , respectful . there be that in his 
 voice , too , which seem to promise that the change might be permanent , 
 and that the new Harvey have come to stay . 
 " some one be be coerce he , " think Cheyne . " now Constance would 
 never have allow that . do not   see as Europe could have do it any 
 well . " 
 " but why do not   you tell this man , Troop , who you be ? " the mother 
 repeat , when Harvey have expand his story at least twice . 
 " Disko Troop , dear . the good man that ever walk a deck . I do not   care 
 who the next be . " 
 " why do not   you tell he to put you ashore ? you know Papa would have 
 make it up to he ten time over . " 
 " I know it ; but he think I be crazy . I be afraid I call he a thief 
 because I could not   find the bill in my pocket . " 
 " a sailor find they by the flagstaff that - that night , " sob Mrs. 
 Cheyne . 
 " that explain it , then . I do not   blame Troop any . I just say I 
 would not   work - on a Banker , too - and of course he hit I on the nose , 
 and oh ! I bleed like a stuck hog . " 
 " my poor darling ! they must have abuse you horribly . " 
 " dunno quite . well , after that , I see a light . " 
 Cheyne slap his leg and chuckle . this be go to be a boy after 
 his own hungry heart . he have never see precisely that twinkle in 
 Harvey 's eye before . 
 " and the old man give I ten and a half a month ; he be pay I half now ; 
 and I take hold with Dan and pitch right in . I can not   do a man 's work 
 yet . but I can handle a dory ' most as well as Dan , and I do not   get 
 rattle in a fog - much ; and I can take my trick in light wind - that be 
 steering , dear - and I can ' most bait up a trawl , and I know my rope , 
 of course ; and I can pitch fish till the cow come home , and I be great 
 on old Josephus , and I will show you how I can clear coffee with a piece 
 of fish - skin , and - I think I will have another cup , please . say , you have 
 no notion what a heap of work there be in ten and a half a month ! " 
 " I begin with eight and a half , my son , " say Cheyne . 
 " that so ? you never tell I , sir . " 
 " you never ask , Harve . I will tell you about it some day , if you care 
 to listen . try a stuff olive . " 
 " troop say the most interesting thing in the world be to find out how 
 the next man get his vittle . it be great to have a trim - up meal 
 again . we be well feed , though . but mug on the bank . Disko feed we 
 first - class . he be a great man . and Dan - that be his son - Dan 's my 
 partner . and there be Uncle Salters and his manure , an ' he read 
 Josephus . he be sure I be crazy yet . and there be poor little Penn , and he 
 be crazy . you must not   talk to he about Johnstown , because - 
 " and , oh , you must know Tom Platt and Long Jack and Manuel . Manuel 
 save my life . I be sorry he be a Portuguee . he can not   talk much , but he be 
 an everlasting musician . he find I strike adrift and drift , and 
 haul I in . " 
 " I wonder your nervous system be not   completely wreck , " say Mrs. 
 Cheyne . 
 " what for , Mama ? I work like a horse and I eat like a hog and I sleep 
 like a dead man . " 
 that be too much for Mrs. Cheyne , who begin to think of her vision of 
 a corpse rock on the salty sea . she go to her stateroom , and 
 Harvey curl up beside his father , explain his indebtedness . 
 " you can depend upon I to do everything I can for the crowd , Harve . 
 they seem to be good man on your showing . " 
 " well in the Fleet , sir . ask at Gloucester , " say Harvey . " but Disko 
 believe still he be cure I of be crazy . Dan 's the only one I have 
 let on to about you , and our private car and all the rest of it , and 
 I be not quite sure Dan believe . I want to paralyze them to - morrow . say , 
 can not   they run the ' Constance ' over to Gloucester ? Mama do not   look fit 
 to be move , anyway , and we be bind to finish clean out by 
 tomorrow . Wouverman take our fish . you see , we be the first off the 
 bank this season , and it be four twenty - five a quintal . we hold out 
 till he pay it . they want it quick . " 
 " you mean you will have to work to - morrow , then ? " 
 " I tell Troop I would . I be on the scale . I have   bring the tally with 
 I . " he look at the greasy notebook with an air of importance that 
 make his father choke . " there be not   but three - no - two ninety - four or 
 five quintal more by my reckoning . " 
 " hire a substitute , " suggest Cheyne , to see what Harvey would say . 
 " can not , sir . I be tally - man for the schooner . troop say I have   a well 
 head for figure than Dan . Troop 's a mighty just man . " 
 " well , suppose I do not   move the ' Constance ' to - night , how will you fix 
 it ? " 
 Harvey look at the clock , which mark twenty past eleven . 
 " then I will sleep here till three and catch the four o'clock freight . 
 they let we man from the Fleet ride free as a rule . " 
 " that be a notion . but I think we can get the ' Constance ' around about 
 as soon as your man 's freight . well go to bed now . " 
 Harvey spread himself on the sofa , kick off his boot , and be asleep 
 before his father could shade the electric . Cheyne sit watch the 
 young face under the shadow of the arm throw over the forehead , and 
 among many thing that occur to he be the notion that he might 
 perhaps have be neglectful as a father . 
 " one never know when one be take one 's big risk , " he say . " it 
 might have be bad than drown ; but I do not   think it have - I do not 
 think it have . if it have not , I have not   enough to pay Troop , that be all ; 
 and I do not   think it have . " 
 Morning bring a fresh sea breeze through the window , the " Constance " 
 be side - track among freight - car at Gloucester , and Harvey have go 
 to his business . 
 " then he will fall overboard again and be drown , " the mother say 
 bitterly . 
 " we will go and look , ready to throw he a rope in case . you have   never 
 see he work for his bread , " say the father . 
 " what nonsense ! as if any one expect - " 
 " well , the man that hire he do . he be about right , too . " 
 they go down between the store full of fisherman 's oilskin to 
 Wouverman 's wharf where the ' we be here ' ride high , her Bank flag still 
 fly , all hand busy as beaver in the glorious morning light . Disko 
 stand by the main hatch superintend Manuel , Penn , and Uncle Salters 
 at the tackle . Dan be swing the loaded basket inboard as Long Jack 
 and Tom Platt fill they , and Harvey , with a notebook , represent the 
 skipper 's interest before the clerk of the scale on the 
 salt - sprinkle wharf - edge . 
 " ready ! " cry the voice below . " Haul ! " cry Disko . " hi ! " say 
 Manuel . " here ! " say Dan , swing the basket . then they hear Harvey 's 
 voice , clear and fresh , check the weight . 
 the last of the fish have be whip out , and Harvey leap from the 
 string - piece six foot to a ratline , as the short way to hand Disko 
 the tally , shout , " two ninety - seven , and an empty hold ! " 
 " what be the total , Harve ? " say Disko . 
 " eight sixty - five . three thousand six hundred and seventy - six dollar 
 and a quarter . ' wish I would share as well as wage . " 
 " well , I will not   go so far as to say you hevn't   deserve it , Harve . do not 
 you want to slip up to Wouverman 's office and take he our tally ? " 
 " who be that boy ? " say Cheyne to Dan , well use to all manner of 
 question from those idle imbecile call summer boarder . 
 " well , he be kind o ' supercargo , " be the answer . " we pick he up 
 strike adrift on the bank . fall overboard from a liner , he sez . he be 
 a passenger . he be by way o ' hem ' a fisherman now . " 
 " be he worth his keep ? " 
 " ye - ep . Dad , this man want to know ef Harve 's worth his keep . say , 
 would you like to go aboard ? we will fix up a ladder for she . " 
 " I should very much , indeed . ' twon't   hurt you , Mama , and you will be able 
 to see for yourself . " 
 the woman who could not lift her head a week ago scramble down the 
 ladder , and stand aghast amid the mess and tangle aft . 
 " be you anyways interested in Harve ? " say Disko . 
 " well , ye - es . " 
 " he be a good boy , an ' ketch right hold jest as he be bid . you have   hear 
 haow we find he ? he be sufferin ' from nervous prostration , I guess , 
 ' r else his head have hit something , when we haul he aboard . he be all 
 over that naow . yes , this be the cabin . ' tain't   in order , but you be 
 quite welcome to look araound . those be his figure on the stove - pipe , 
 where we keep the reckonin ' mosdy . " 
 " do he sleep here ? " say Mrs. Cheyne , sit on a yellow locker and 
 survey the disorderly bunk . 
 " no . he berth forward , madam , an ' only fer he an ' my boy hookin ' 
 fried pie an muggin ' up when they ought to ha ' be asleep , I dunno as 
 I have   any special fault to find with he . " 
 " there be not   nothing wrong with Harve , " say Uncle Salters , 
 descend the step . " he hang my boot on the main - truck , and he be not 
 over an ' above respectful to such as know more'n he do , specially 
 about farmin ' ; but he be mostly mislead by Dan . " 
 Dan in the meantime , profit by dark hint from Harvey early that 
 morning , be execute a war - dance on deck . " Tom , Tom ! " he whisper 
 down the hatch . " his folk have come , an ' Dad hain't   catch on yet , an ' 
 they be pow - wowin ' in the cabin . she be a daisy , an ' he be all Harve 
 claim he be , by the look of he . " 
 " Howly smoke ! " say Long Jack , climb out cover with salt and 
 fish - skin . " D'ye belave his tale av the kid an ' the little four - horse 
 rig be thrue ? " 
 " I know it all along , " say Dan . " come an ' see Dad mistook in his 
 judgment . " 
 they come delightedly , just in time to hear Cheyne say : " I be glad he 
 have a good character , because - he be my son . " 
 Disko 's jaw fall , - Long Jack always vow that he hear the click of 
 it , - and he star alternately at the man and the woman . 
 " I get his telegram in San Diego four day ago , and we come over . " 
 " in a private car ? " say Dan . " he say ye might . " 
 " in a private car , of course . " 
 Dan look at his father with a hurricane of irreverent wink . 
 " there be a tale he tell we av drivin ' four little pony in a rig av 
 his own , " say Long Jack . " be that thrue now ? " 
 " very likely , " say Cheyne . " be it , Mama ? " 
 " he have a little drag when we be in Toledo , I think , " say the mother . 
 Long Jack whistle . " oh , Disko ! " say he , and that be all . 
 " I wuz - I be mistook in my jedgment - worse'n the man o ' marblehead , " 
 say Disko , as though the word be be windlasse out of he . " I 
 do not   mind ownin ' to you , Mr. Cheyne , as I mistrust the boy to be 
 crary . he talk kinder odd about money . " 
 " so he tell I . " 
 " do he tell ye anything else ? 'cause I pound he once . " this with a 
 somewhat anxious glance at Mrs. Cheyne . 
 " oh , yes , " Cheyne reply . " I should say it probably do he more good 
 than anything else in the world . " 
 " I jedge ' twuz necessary , er I would not   ha ' do it . I do not   want you 
 to think we abuse our boy any on this packet . " 
 " I do not   think you do , Mr. Troop . " 
 Mrs. Cheyne have be look at the face - Disko 's ivory - yellow , 
 hairless , iron countenance ; Uncle Salters 's , with its rim of 
 agricultural hair ; Penn 's bewildered simplicity ; Manuel 's quiet smile ; 
 Long Jack 's grin of delight , and Tom Platt 's scar . rough , by her 
 standard , they certainly be ; but she have a mother 's wit in her 
 eye , and she rise with out - stretch hand . 
 " oh , tell I , which be who ? " say she , half sob . " I want to thank 
 you and bless you - all of you . " 
 " Faith , that pay I a hunder time , " say Long Jack . 
 Disko introduce they all in due form . the captain of an old - time 
 Chinaman could have do no well , and Mrs. Cheyne babble 
 incoherently . she nearly throw herself into Manuel 's arm when she 
 understand that he have first find Harvey . 
 " but how shall I leave he dreeft ? " say poor Manuel . " what do you 
 yourself if you find he so ? eh , wha - at ? we be in one good boy , and I 
 be ever so pleased he come to be your son . " 
 " and he tell I Dan be his partner ! " she cry . Dan be already 
 sufficiently pink , but he turn a rich crimson when Mrs. Cheyne kiss 
 he on both cheek before the assembly . then they lead she forward to 
 show she the foc'sle , at which she weep again , and must need go down 
 to see Harvey 's identical bunk , and there she find the nigger cook 
 clean up the stove , and he nod as though she be some one he have 
 expect to meet for year . they try , two at a time , to explain the 
 boat 's daily life to she , and she sit by the pawl - post , her gloved 
 hand on the greasy table , laugh with trembling lip and cry with 
 dance eye . 
 " and who be ever to use the ' we be here ' after this ? " say Long Jack to 
 Tom Platt . " I feel as if she have make a cathedral av ut all . " 
 " cathedral ! " sneer Tom Platt . " oh , if it have bin even the fish 
 C'mmission boat instid of this bally - hoo o ' blaze . if we only he d some 
 decency an ' order an ' side - boy when she go over ! she will have to 
 climb that ladder like a hen , an ' we - we ought to be mannin ' the yard ! " 
 " then Harvey be not mad , " say Penn , slowly , to Cheyne . 
 " no , indeed - thank God , " the big millionaire reply , stoop down 
 tenderly . 
 " it must be terrible to be mad . except to lose your child , I do not 
 know anything more terrible . but your child have come back ? let we thank 
 God for that . " 
 " hello ! " cry Harvey , look down upon they benignly from the wharf . 
 " I wuz mistook , Harve . I wuz mistook , " say Disko , swiftly , hold up 
 a hand . " I wuz mistook in my jedgment . ye need not   rub in any more . " 
 " guess I will take care o ' that , " say Dan , under his breath . 
 " you will be go off naow , will not   ye ? " 
 " well , not without the balance of my wage , ' less you want to have the 
 ' we be here ' attach . " 
 " Thet 's so ; I would clean forgot " ; and he count out the remain 
 dollar . " you do all you contract to do , Harve ; and you do it 
 ' baout be well as if you have be bring up - " here Disko bring himself 
 up . he do not quite see where the sentence be go to end . 
 " outside of a private car ? " suggest Dan , wickedly . 
 " come on , and I will show she to you , " say Harvey . 
 Cheyne stay to talk with Disko , but the other make a procession to 
 the depot , with Mrs. Cheyne at the head . the French maid shriek at 
 the invasion ; and Harvey lay the glory of the " Constance " before 
 they without a word . they take they in in equal silence - stamp 
 leather , silver door - handle and rail , cut velvet , plate - glass , 
 nickel , bronze , hammer iron , and the rare wood of the continent 
 inlay . 
 " I tell you , " say Harvey ; " I tell you . " this be his crown revenge , 
 and a most ample one . 
 Mrs. Cheyne decreed a meal , and that nothing might be lack to the 
 tale Long Jack tell afterwards in his boarding - house , she wait on 
 they herself . man who be accustomed to eat at tiny table in howling 
 gale have curiously neat and finished manner ; but Mrs. Cheyne , who 
 do not know this , be surprised . she long to have Manuel for a 
 butler ; so silently and easily do he comport himself among the frail 
 glassware and dainty silver . Tom Platt remember the great day on the 
 Ohio and the manner of foreign potentate who din with the officer ; 
 and Long Jack , be irish , supply the small talk till all be at 
 their ease . 
 in the ' we be here 's ' cabin the father take stock of each other behind 
 their cigar . Cheyne know well enough when he deal with a man to whom 
 he could not offer money ; equally well he know that no money could pay 
 for what Disko have do . he keep his own counsel and wait for an 
 opening . 
 " I hevn't   do anything to your boy or fer your boy excep ' make he 
 work a piece an ' learn he how to handle the hog - yoke , " say Disko . " he 
 have twice my boy 's head for figger . " 
 " by the way , " Cheyne answer casually , " what d'you calculate to make 
 of your boy ? " 
 Disko remove his cigar and wave it comprehensively round the cabin . 
 " Dan 's jest plain boy , an ' he do not   allow I to do any of his thinkin ' . 
 he will hev this able little packet when I be lay by . he be not   noway 
 anxious to quit the business . I know that . " 
 " Mmm ! ' ever be West , Mr. Troop ? " 
 " ' Bin 's fer ez Noo York once in a boat . I have   no use for railroad . no 
 more hez Dan . salt water 's good enough fer the troop . I have   be ' most 
 everywhere - in the nat'ral way , o ' course . " 
 " I can give he all the salt water he be likely to need - till he be a 
 skipper . " 
 " Haow 's that ? I think you wuz a kind railroad king . Harve tell I 
 so when - I be mistook in my jedgment . " 
 " we be all apt to be mistake . I fancy perhaps you might know I own a 
 line of tea - clipper - San Francisco to Yokohama - six of 
 them - iron - build , about seventeen hundred and eighty ton apiece . 
 " blame that boy ! he never tell . I would ha ' listen to that , instid o ' his 
 truck abaout railroad an ' ponycarriage . " 
 " he do not   know . " 
 " ' little thing like that slip his mind , I guess . " 
 " no , I only capt - take hold of the ' Blue M. ' freighter - Morgan and 
 McQuade 's old line - this summer . " Disko collapse where he sit , beside 
 the stove . 
 " Great Caesar Almighty ! I mistrust I have   be fool from one end to the 
 other . why , Phil Airheart he go from this very town six year 
 back - no , seven - an ' he be mate on the San Jose - now - twenty - six day 
 be her time out . his sister she be livin ' here yet , an ' she read his 
 letter to my woman . an ' you own the ' Blue M. ' freighter ? " 
 Cheyne nod . 
 " if I have know that I would ha ' jerk the ' we be here ' back to port all 
 standin ' , on the word . " 
 " perhaps that would not   have be so good for Harvey . " 
 " if I would only know ! if he have only say about the cuss line , I would ha ' 
 understand ! I will never stand on my own jedgment again - never . they be 
 well - find packet . Phil Airheart he say so . " 
 " I be glad to have a recommend from that quarter . Airheart 's skipper of 
 the San Jose now . what I be get at be to know whether you would lend 
 I Dan for a year or two , and we will see if we can not   make a mate of he . 
 would you trust he to airheart ? " 
 " it be a resk take a raw boy - " 
 " I know a man who do more for I . " 
 " that be diff'runt . look at here naow , I be not   recommendin ' Dan special 
 because he be my own flesh an ' blood . I know Bank way be not   clipper 
 way , but he hain't   much to learn . steer he can - no boy well , if I 
 say it - an ' the rest be in our blood an ' get ; but I could wish he warn't 
 so cuss weak on navigation . " 
 " airheart will attend to that . he will ship as boy for a voyage or two , 
 and then we can put he in the way of do well . suppose you take 
 he in hand this winter , and I will send for he early in the spring . I 
 know the Pacific 's a long way off - " 
 " Pshaw ! we Troops , livin ' an ' dead , be all around the earth an ' the 
 sea thereof . " 
 " but I want you to understand - and I mean this - any time you think 
 you would like to see he , tell I , and I will attend to the transportation . 
 ' twon't   cost you a cent . " 
 " if you will walk a piece with I , we will go to my house an ' talk this to 
 my woman . I have   bin so crazy mistook in all my jedgment , it do not   seem 
 to I this be like to be real . " 
 they go blue - trim of nasturtium over to Troop 's 
 eighteen - hundred - dollar , white house , with a retire dory full in the 
 front yard and a shuttered parlour which be a museum of oversea 
 plunder . there sit a large woman , silent and grave , with the dim eye 
 of those who look long to sea for the return of their beloved . Cheyne 
 address himself to she , and she give consent wearily . 
 " we lose one hundred a year from Gloucester only , Mr. Cheyne , " she 
 say - " one hundred boy an ' man ; and I have   come so be to hate the sea as 
 if ' twuz alive an ' listenin ' . God never make it fer human to anchor 
 on . these packet o ' yours they go straight out , I take it ' and 
 straight home again ? " 
 " as straight as the wind let them , and I give a bonus for record 
 passage . tea do not   improve by be at sea . " 
 " when he wuz little he use to play at keep store , an ' I have hope 
 he might follow that up . but soon be he could paddle a dory I know that 
 be go to be deny I . " 
 " they be square - rigger , Mother ; iron - build an ' well find . remember 
 what Phil 's sister read you when she git his letter . " 
 " I have   never know as Phil tell lie , but he be too venturesome   like 
 most of them that use the sea . if Dan see fit , Mr. Cheyne , he can 
 go - fer all o ' I . " 
 " she jest despise the ocean , " Disko explain , " an ' i - I dunno haow to 
 act polite , I guess , er I would thank you well . " 
 " my father - my own eld brother - two nephew - an ' my second sister 's 
 man , " she say , drop her head on her hand . " would you care fer any 
 one that take all those ? " 
 Cheyne be relieve when Dan turn up and accept with more delight 
 than he be able to put into word . indeed , the offer mean a plain and 
 sure road to all desirable thing ; but Dan think most of command 
 watch on broad deck , and look into far - away harbour . 
 Mrs. Cheyne have speak privately to the unaccountable Manuel in the 
 matter of Harvey 's rescue . he seem to have no desire for money . 
 press hard , he say that he would take five dollar , because he 
 want to buy something for a girl . otherwise - " how shall I take money 
 when I make so easy my eat and smoke ? you will giva some if I like or 
 no ? eh , wha - at ? then you shall giva I money , but not that way . you 
 shall giva all you can think . " he introduce she to a snuffy Portuguese 
 priest with a list of semi - destitute widow as long as his cassock . as 
 a strict Unitarian , Mrs. Cheyne could not sympathize with the creed , 
 but she end by respect the brown , voluble little man . 
 Manuel , faithful son of the Church , appropriate all the blessing 
 shower on she for her charity . " that letta I out , " say he . " I have 
 now ver ' good absolution for six month " ; and he stroll forth to get 
 a handkerchief for the girl of the hour and to break the heart of all 
 the other . 
 salter go West for a season with Penn , and leave no address behind . 
 he have a dread that these millionary people , with wasteful private 
 car , might take undue interest in his companion . it be well to 
 visit inland relative till the coast be clear . " never you be adopt 
 by rich folk , Penn , " he say in the car , " or I will take ' n ' break this 
 checker - board over your head . ef you forgit your name agin - which be 
 Pratt - you remember you belong with Salters Troop , an ' set down right 
 where you be till I come fer you . do not   go taggin ' araound after they 
 whose eye bung out with fatness , accordin ' to Scripcher . " 
 CHAPTER X 
 but it be otherwise with the ' we be here 's ' silent cook , for he come 
 up , his kit in a handkerchief , and board the " Constance . " pay be no 
 particular object , and he do not in the least care where he sleep . his 
 business , as reveal to he in dream , be to follow Harvey for the 
 rest of his day . they try argument and , at last , persuasion ; but 
 there be a difference between one Cape Breton and two Alabama negro , 
 and the matter be refer to Cheyne by the cook and porter . the 
 millionaire only laugh . he presume Harvey might need a body - servant 
 some day or other , and be sure that one volunteer be worth five 
 hireling . let the man stay , therefore ; even though he call himself 
 MacDonald and swear in Gaelic . the car could go back to Boston , where , 
 if he be still of the same mind , they would take he West . 
 with the " Constance , " which in his heart of heart he loathe , depart 
 the last remnant of Cheyne 's millionairedom , and he give himself up to 
 an energetic idleness . this Gloucester be a new town in a new land , 
 and he purpose to " take it in , " as of old he have take in all the 
 city from Snohomish to San Diego of that world whence he hail . they 
 make money along the crooked street which be half wharf and half 
 ship 's store : as a lead professional he wish to learn how the 
 noble game be play . man say that four out of every five fish - ball 
 serve at New England 's Sunday breakfast come from Gloucester , and 
 overwhelm he with figure in proof - statistic of boat , gear , 
 wharf - frontage , capital invest , salting , packing , factory , 
 insurance , wage , repair , and profit . he talk with the owner of 
 the large fleet whose skipper be little more than hire man , and 
 whose crew be almost all swede or Portuguese . then he confer 
 with Disko , one of the few who own their craft , and compare note in 
 his vast head . he coil himself away on chain - cable in marine 
 junk - shop , ask question with cheerful , unslaked western curiosity , 
 till all the water - front want to know " what in thunder that man be 
 after , anyhow . " he prowl into the Mutual Insurance room , and 
 demand explanation of the mysterious remark chalk up on the 
 blackboard day by day ; and that bring down upon he secretary of 
 every Fisherman 's Widow and Orphan aid Society within the city limit . 
 they beg shamelessly , each man anxious to beat the other 
 institution 's record , and Cheyne tug at his beard and hand they 
 all over to Mrs. Cheyne . 
 she be rest in a boarding - house near Eastern Point - a strange 
 establishment , manage , apparently , by the boarder , where the 
 table - cloth be red - and - white - checker and the population , who 
 seem to have know one another intimately for year , rise up at 
 midnight to make Welsh rarebit if it feel hungry . on the second 
 morning of she stay Mrs. Cheyne put away her diamond solitaire before 
 she come down to breakfast . 
 " they be most delightful people , " she confide to her husband ; ' so 
 friendly and simple , too , though they be all Boston , nearly . " 
 " that be not   simpleness , Mama , " he say , look across the boulder 
 behind the apple - tree where the hammock be slung . " it be the other 
 thing , that what I have not   get . " 
 " it can not   be , " say Mrs. Cheyne quietly . " there be not   a woman here own 
 a dress that cost a hundred dollar . why , we - " 
 " I know it , dear . we have - of course we have . I guess it be only the 
 style they wear East . be you have a good time ? " 
 " I do not   see very much of harvey ; he be always with you ; but I be not 
 near as nervous as I be . " 
 " I have not   have such a good time since Willie die . I never rightly 
 understand that I have a son before this . Harve 's get to be a great boy . 
 ' anything I can fetch you , dear ? ' cushion under your head ? well , we will 
 go down to the wharf again and look around . " 
 Harvey be his father 's shadow in those day , and the two stroll 
 along side by side , Cheyne use the grade as an excuse for lay his 
 hand on the boy 's square shoulder . it be then that Harvey notice and 
 admire what have never strike he before - his father 's curious power of 
 get at the heart of new matter as learn from man in the street . 
 " how d'you make them tell you everything without open your head ? " 
 demand the son , as they come out of a rigger 's loft . 
 " I have   deal with quite a few man in my time , Harve , and one size them 
 up somehow , I guess . I know something about myself , too . " then , after a 
 pause , as they sit down on a wharf - edge : " man can ' most always tell 
 when a man have handle thing for himself , and then they treat he as 
 one of themselves . " 
 " same as they treat I down at Wouverman 's wharf . I be one of the crowd 
 now . Disko have tell every one I have   earn my pay . " Harvey spread out 
 his hand and rub the palm together . " they be all soft again , " he 
 say dolefully . 
 " keep them that way for the next few year , while you be get your 
 education . you can harden them up after . " 
 " ye - es , I suppose so , " be the reply , in no delighted voice . 
 " it rest with you , Harve . you can take cover behind your mama , of 
 course , and put she on to fuss about your nerve and your 
 high - strungness and all that kind of poppycock . " 
 " have I ever do that ? " say Harvey , uneasily . 
 his father turn where he sit and thrust out a long hand . " you know as 
 well as I do that I can not   make anything of you if you do not   act 
 straight by I . I can handle you alone if you will stay alone , but I 
 do not   pretend to manage both you and Mama . Life 's too short , anyway . " 
 " do not   make I out much of a fellow , do it ? " 
 " I guess it be my fault a good deal ; but if you want the truth , you 
 have not   be much of anything up to date . now , have you ? " 
 " Umm ! Disko think . . . say , what d'you reckon it be cost you to raise 
 I from the start - first , last and all over ? " 
 Cheyne smile . " I have   never keep track , but I should estimate , in 
 dollar and cent , nearer fifty than forty thousand ; maybe sixty . the 
 young generation come high . it have to have thing , and it tire of 
 them , and - the old man foot the bill . " 
 Harvey whistle , but at heart he be rather pleased to think that his 
 upbringing have cost so much . " and all that be sunk capital , be not   it ? " 
 " invest , Harve . invest , I hope . " 
 " make it only thirty thousand , the thirty I have   earn be about ten 
 cent on the hundred . that be a mighty poor catch . " Harvey wag his 
 head solemnly . 
 Cheyne laugh till he nearly fall off the pile into the water . 
 " Disko have get a heap more than that out of Dan since he be ten ; and 
 Dan 's at school half the year , too . " 
 " oh , that be what you be after , be it ? " 
 " no . I be not after anything . I be not stick on myself any just 
 now - that be all . . . . I ought to be kick . " 
 " I can not   do it , old man ; or I would , I presume , if I have be make that 
 way . " 
 " then I would have remember it to the last day I live - and never 
 forgive you , " say Harvey , his chin on his double fist . 
 " exactly . that be about what I would do . you see ? " 
 " I see . the fault 's with I and no one else . all the same , something be 
 get to be do about it . " 
 Cheyne draw a cigar from his vest - pocket , bit off the end , and fall to 
 smoking . Father and son be very much alike ; for the beard hid 
 Cheyne 's mouth , and Harvey have his father 's slightly aquiline nose , 
 close - set black eye , and narrow , high cheek - bone . with a touch of 
 brown paint he would have make up very picturesquely as a Red Indian of 
 the story - book . 
 " now you can go on from here , " say Cheyne , slowly , " cost I between 
 six or eight thousand a year till you be a voter . well , we will call you 
 a man then . you can go right on from that , live on I to the tune of 
 forty or fifty thousand , besides what your mother will give you , with a 
 valet and a yacht or a fancy - ranch where you can pretend to raise 
 trotting - stock and play card with your own crowd . " 
 " like Lorry Tuck ? " Harvey put in . 
 " Yep ; or the two De Vitre boy or old man McQuade 's son . California 's 
 full of them , and here be an eastern sample while we be talk . " 
 a shiny black steam - yacht , with mahogany deck - house , nickel - plat 
 binnacle , and pink - and - white - strip awning puff up the harbour , 
 fly the burgee of some New York club . two young man in what they 
 conceive to be sea costume be play card by the saloon skylight ; 
 and a couple of woman with red and blue parasol look on and laugh 
 noisily . 
 " should not   care to be catch out in she in any sort of a breeze . no 
 beam , " say Harvey , critically , as the yacht slow to pick up her 
 mooring - buoy . 
 " they be have what stand they for a good time . I can give you that , 
 and twice as much as that , Harve . how would you like it ? " 
 " Caesar ! that be no way to get a dinghy overside , " say Harvey , still 
 intent on the yacht . " if I could not   slip a tackle well than that I would 
 stay ashore . . . . what if I do not ? " 
 " stay ashore - or what ? " 
 " yacht and ranch and live on ' the old man , ' and - get behind Mama where 
 there be trouble , " say Harvey , with a twinkle in his eye . 
 " why , in that case , you come right in with I , my son . " 
 " ten dollar a month ? " another twinkle . 
 " not a cent more until you be worth it , and you will not   begin to touch 
 that for a few year . " 
 " I would soon begin sweep out the office - be not   that how the big bug 
 start ? - and touch something now than - " 
 " I know it ; we all feel that way . but I guess we can hire any sweeping 
 we need . I make the same mistake myself of start in too soon . " 
 " thirty million dollar ' worth o ' mistake , be not   it ? I would risk it for 
 that . " 
 " I lose some ; and I gain some . I will tell you . " 
 Cheyne pull his beard and smile as he look over the still water , 
 and speak away from Harvey , who presently begin to be aware that his 
 father be tell the story of his life . he talk in a low , even 
 voice , without gesture and without expression ; and it be a history for 
 which a dozen lead journal would cheerfully have pay many 
 dollar - the story of forty year that be at the same time the story 
 of the New West , whose story be yet to be write . 
 it begin with a kinless boy turn loose in Texas , and go on 
 fantastically through a hundred change and chop of life , the scene 
 shift from State after Western State , from city that spring up in 
 a month and - in a season utterly wither away , to wild venture in 
 wilder camp that be now laborious , paved municipality . it cover 
 the building of three railroad and the deliberate wreck of a fourth . 
 it tell of steamer , township , forest , and mine , and the man of 
 every nation under heaven , man , create , hewing , and dig 
 these . it touch on chance of gigantic wealth fling before eye that 
 could not see , or miss by the mere accident of time and travel ; and 
 through the mad shift of thing , sometimes on horseback , more often 
 afoot , now rich , now poor , in and out , and back and forth , deck - hand , 
 train - hand , contractor , boarding - house keeper , journalist , engineer , 
 drummer , real - estate agent , politician , dead - beat , rum - seller , 
 mine - owner , speculator , cattle - man , or tramp , move Harvey Cheyne , 
 alert and quiet , seek his own end , and , so he say , the glory and 
 advancement of his country . 
 he tell of the faith that never desert he even when he hang on the 
 ragged edge of despair - the faith that come of know man and thing . 
 he enlarge , as though he be talk to himself , on his very great 
 courage and resource at all time . the thing be so evident in the 
 man 's mind that he never even change his tone . he describe how he have 
 best his enemy , or forgive they , exactly as they have best or 
 forgive he in those careless day ; how he have entreat , cajole , and 
 bully town , company , and syndicate , all for their endure good ; 
 crawl round , through , or under mountain and ravine , drag a 
 string and hoop - iron railroad after he , and in the end , how he have sit 
 still while promiscuous community tear the last fragment of his 
 character to shred . 
 the tale hold Harvey almost breathless , his head a little cocked to one 
 side , his eye fix on his father 's face , as the twilight deepen and 
 the red cigar - end light up the furrow cheek and heavy eyebrow . it 
 seem to he like watch a locomotive storming across country in the 
 dark - a mile between each glare of the open fire - door : but this 
 locomotive could talk , and the word shake and stir the boy to the 
 core of his soul . at last Cheyne pitch away the cigar - butt , and the 
 two sit in the dark over the lap water . 
 " I have   never tell that to any one before , " say the father . 
 Harvey gasp . " it be just the great thing that ever be ! " say he . 
 " that be what I get . now I be come to what I do not   get . it will not   sound 
 much of anything to you , but I do not   wish you to be as old as I be 
 before you find out . I can handle man , of course , and I be no fool along 
 my own line , but - but - I can not   compete with the man who have be 
 teach ! I have   pick up as I go along , and I guess it stick out all 
 over I . " 
 " I have   never see it , " say the son , indignantly . 
 " you will , though , Harve . you will - just as soon as you be through 
 college . do not   I know it ? do not   I know the look on man 's face when 
 they think I a - a ' mucker , ' as they call it out here ? I can break they 
 to little piece - yes - but I can not   get back at them to hurt them where 
 they live . I do not   say they be ' way ' way up , but I feel I be ' way , ' way , 
 ' way off , somehow . now you have   get your chance . you have   get to soak up 
 all the learning that be around , and you will live with a crowd that be 
 do the same thing . they will be do it for a few thousand dollar a 
 year at most ; but remember you will be do it for million . you will 
 learn law enough to look after your own property when I be out o ' the 
 light , and you will have to be solid with the good man in the market 
  they be useful later ; and above all , you will have to stow away the 
 plain , common , sit - down - with - your chin - on your - elbows book - learning . 
 nothing pay like that , Harve , and it be bind to pay more and more each 
 year in our country - in business and in politic . you will see . " 
 " there be no sugar in my end of the deal , " say Harvey . " four year at 
 college ! ' wish I have choose the valet and the yacht ! " 
 " never mind , my son , " Cheyne insist . " you be invest your capital 
 where it will bring in the good return ; and I guess you will not   find our 
 property shrunk any when you be ready to take hold . think it over , and 
 let I know in the morning . hurry ! we will be late for supper ! " 
 as this be a business talk , there be no need for Harvey to tell his 
 mother about it ; and Cheyne naturally take the same point of view . but 
 Mrs. Cheyne see and fear , and be a little jealous . her boy , who ride 
 rough - shod over she , be go , and in his stead reign a keen - face 
 youth , abnormally silent , who address most of his conversation to his 
 father . she understand it be business , and therefore a matter beyond 
 her premise . if she have any doubt , they be resolve when Cheyne 
 go to Boston and bring back a new diamond marquise ring . 
 " what have you two be do now ? " she say , with a weak little smile , 
 as she turn it in the light . 
 " talk - just talk , Mama ; there be nothing mean about Harvey . " 
 there be not . the boy have make a treaty on his own account . railroad , 
 he explain gravely , interest he as little as lumber , real estate , 
 or mining . what his soul yearn after be control of his father 's 
 newly purchase sailing - ship . if that could be promise he within what 
 he conceive to be a reasonable time , he , for his part , guarantee 
 diligence and sobriety at college for four or five year . in vacation 
 he be to be allow full access to all detail connect with the 
 line - he have not ask more than two thousand question about it , - from 
 his father 's most private paper in the safe to the tug in San 
 Francisco harbour . 
 " it be a deal , " say Cheyne at the last . " you will alter your mind twenty 
 time before you leave college , o ' course ; but if you take hold of it 
 in proper shape , and if you do not   tie it up before you be twenty - three , 
 I will make the thing over to you . how be that , Harve ? " 
 " nope ; never pay to split up a go concern . there be too much 
 competition in the world anyway , and Disko say ' blood - kin hev to stick 
 together . ' his crowd never go back on he . that be one reason , he say , 
 why they make such big fare . say , the ' we be here ' go off to the 
 Georges on Monday . they do not   stay long ashore , do they ? " 
 " well , we ought to be go , too , I guess . I have   leave my business hung 
 up at loose end between two ocean , and it be time to connect again . I 
 just hate to do it , though ; have not   have a holiday like this for twenty 
 year . " 
 " we can not   go without see Disko off , " say Harvey ; " and Monday 's 
 Memorial Day . let us stay over that , anyway . " 
 " what be this memorial business ? they be talk about it at the 
 boarding - house , " say Cheyne weakly . he , too , be not anxious to spoil 
 the golden day . 
 " well , as far as I can make out , this business be a sort of 
 song - and - dance act , whack up for the summer boarder . Disko do not 
 think much of it , he say , because they take up a collection for the 
 widow and orphan . Disko 's independent . have not   you notice that ? " 
 " well - yes . a little . in spot . be it a town show , then ? " 
 " the summer convention be . they read out the name of the fellow 
 drown or go astray since last time , and they make speech , and 
 recite , and all . then , Disko say , the secretary of the Aid Societies 
 go into the back yard and fight over the catch . the real show , he say , 
 be in the spring . the minister all take a hand then , and there be not 
 any summer boarder around . " 
 " I see , " say Cheyne , with the brilliant and perfect comprehension of 
 one bear into and breed up to city pride . " we will stay over for Memorial 
 Day , and get off in the afternoon . " 
 " guess I will go down to Disko 's and make he bring his crowd up before 
 they sail . I will have to stand with they , of course . " 
 " oh , that be it , be it , " say Cheyne . " I be only a poor summer boarder , 
 and you be - " 
 " a Banker - full - blooded banker , " Harvey call back as he board a 
 trolley , and Cheyne go on with his blissful dream for the future . 
 Disko have no use for public function where appeal be make for 
 charity , but Harvey plead that the glory of the day would be lose , so 
 far as he be concern , if the ' we be here ' absented themselves . then 
 Disko make condition . he have hear - it be astonish how all the 
 world know all the world 's business along the water - front - he have hear 
 that a " Philadelphia actress - woman " be go to take part in the 
 exercise ; and he mistrust that she would deliver " Skipper Ireson 's 
 Ride . " personally , he have as little use for actress as for summer 
 boarder ; but justice be justice , and though he himself   here Dan 
 giggle   have once slip up on a matter of judgment , this thing must 
 not be . so Harvey come back to East Gloucester , and spend half a day 
 explain to an amused actress with a royal reputation on two 
 seaboard the inwardness of the mistake she contemplate ; and she 
 admit that it be justice , even as Disko have say . 
 Cheyne know by old experience what would happen ; but anything of the 
 nature of a public palaver be meat and drink to the man 's soul . he see 
 the trolley hurry west , in the hot , hazy morning , full of woman in 
 light summer dress , and white - face straw - hat man fresh from 
 Boston desk ; the stack of bicycle outside the post office ; the 
 come - and - go of busy official , greet one another ; the slow flick and 
 swash of bunting in the heavy air ; and the important man with a hose 
 sluice the brick sidewalk . 
 " Mother , " he say suddenly , " do not   you remember - after Seattle be 
 burn out - and they get she go again ? " 
 Mrs. Cheyne nod , and look critically down the crooked street . like 
 her husband , she understand these gathering , all the West over , and 
 compare they one against another . the fisherman begin to mingle with 
 the crowd about the town - hall door - blue - jowle Portuguese , their 
 woman bare - headed or shawle for the most part ; clear - eyed Nova 
 Scotians , and man of the Maritime Provinces ; French , Italians , Swedes , 
 and Danes , with outside crew of coast schooner ; and everywhere 
 woman in black , who salute one another with gloomy pride , for this be 
 their day of great day . and there be minister of many 
 creed , - pastor of great , gilt - edge congregation , at the seaside for 
 a rest , with shepherd of the regular work , - from the priest of the 
 Church on the Hill to bush - bearded ex - sailor Lutherans , hail - fellow 
 with the man of a score of boat . there be owner of line of 
 schooner , large contributor to the society , and small man , their 
 few craft pawn to the masthead , with banker and marine - insurance 
 agent , captain of tug and water - boat , rigger , fitter , lumper , 
 salter , boat - builder , and cooper , and all the mixed population of 
 the water - front . 
 they drift along the line of seat make gay with the dress of the 
 summer boarder , and one of the town official patrol and perspire 
 till he shine all over with pure civic pride . Cheyne have meet he for 
 five minute a few day before , and between the two there be entire 
 understanding . 
 " well , Mr. Cheyne , and what d'you think of our city ? - yes , madam , you 
 can sit anywhere you please . - you have this kind of thing out West , I 
 presume ? " 
 " yes , but we be not   as old as you . " 
 " that be so , of course . you ought to have be at the exercise when we 
 celebrate our two hundred and fiftieth birthday . I tell you , Mr. 
 Cheyne , the old city do herself credit . " 
 " so I hear . it pay , too . what be the matter with the town that it 
 do not   have a first - class hotel , though ? " 
 " - right over there to the left , Pedro . heap o ' room for you and your 
 crowd . - why , that be what I tell them all the time , Mr. Cheyne . there be 
 big money in it , but I presume that do not   affect you any . what we want 
 be - " 
 a heavy hand fall on his broadcloth shoulder , and the flushed skipper 
 of a Portland coal - and - ice coaster spin he half round . " what in 
 thunder do you fellow mean by clappin ' the law on the town when all 
 decent man be at sea this way ? Heh ? Town 's dry as a bone , an ' smell a 
 sight bad sence I quit . ' might ha ' leave we one saloon for soft 
 drink , anyway . " 
 " do not   seem to have hinder your nourishment this morning , Carsen . 
 I will go into the politic of it later . sit down by the door and think 
 over your argument till I come back . " 
 " what good be argument to I ? in Miquelon champagne 's eighteen dollar 
 a case and - " the skipper lurch into his seat as an organ - prelude 
 silence he . 
 " our new organ , " say the official proudly to Cheyne . " cost we four 
 thousand dollar , too . we will have to get back to high - license next year 
 to pay for it . I be not   go to let the minister have all the 
 religion at their convention . those be some of our orphan stand up 
 to sing . my wife teach them . see you again later , Mr. Cheyne . I be 
 want on the platform . " 
 high , clear , and true , child 's voice bear down the last noise of 
 those settle into their place . 
 " o all ye Works of the Lord , bless ye the Lord : praise he and magnify 
 he for ever ! " 
 the woman throughout the hall lean forward to look as the reiterate 
 cadence fill the air . Mrs. Cheyne , with some other , begin to 
 breathe short ; she have hardly imagine there be so many widow in the 
 world ; and instinctively search for Harvey . he have find the ' we be 
 here ' at the back of the audience , and be stand , as by right , 
 between Dan and Disko . Uncle Salters , return the night before with 
 Penn , from Pamlico Sound , receive he suspiciously . 
 " hain't   your folk go yet ? " he grunt . " what be you do here , 
 young feller ? " 
 " o ye Seas and flood , bless ye the Lord : praise he , and magnify he 
 for ever ! " 
 " Hain't   he good right ? " say Dan . " he be bin there , same as the rest of 
 we . " 
 " not in they clothe , " salter snarl . 
 " shut your head , salter , " say Disko . " your bile 's go back on you . 
 stay right where ye be , Harve . " 
 then up and speak the orator of the occasion , another pillar of the 
 municipality , bid the world welcome to Gloucester , and incidentally 
 point out wherein Gloucester excel the rest of the world . then he 
 turn to the sea - wealth of the city , and speak of the price that must 
 be pay for the yearly harvest . they would hear later the name of 
 their lost dead one hundred and seventeen of they .   the widow star a 
 little , and look at one another here .   Gloucester could not boast any 
 overwhelming mill or factory . her son work for such wage as the 
 sea give ; and they all know that neither george nor the bank be 
 cow - pasture . the utmost that folk ashore could accomplish be to help 
 the widow and the orphan , and after a few general remark he take 
 this opportunity of thanking , in the name of the city , those who have so 
 public - spiritedly consent to participate in the exercise of the 
 occasion . 
 " I jest despise the beggin ' piece in it , " growl Disko . " it do not 
 give folk a fair notion of we . " 
 " ef folk will not   be fore - hand an ' put by when they have   the chance , " 
 return Salters , " it stand in the nature o ' thing they hev to be 
 ' sham . you take warnin ' by that , young feller . rich endureth but 
 for a season , ef you scatter they araound on lugsurie - 
 " but to lose everything , everything , " say Penn . " what can you do then ? 
 once I " - the watery blue eye star up and down as if look for 
 something to steady they - " once I read - in a book , I think - of a boat 
 where every one be run down - except some one - and he say to I - " 
 " Shucks ! " say Salters , cut in . " you read a little less an ' take 
 more int'rust in your vittle , and you will come nearer earnin ' your 
 keep , Penn . " 
 Harvey , jam among the fisherman , feel a creepy , crawly , tingle 
 thrill that begin in the back of his neck and end at his boot . he 
 be cold , too , though it be a stifling day . 
 " that the actress from Philadelphia ? " say Disko Troop , scowl at the 
 platform . " you have   fix it about old man Ireson , hain't   ye , Harve ? Ye 
 know why naow . " 
 it be not " Ireson 's Ride " that the woman deliver , but some sort of 
 poem about a fishing - port call Brixham and a fleet of trawler 
 beat in against storm by night , while the woman make a guide fire 
 at the head of the quay with everything they could lay hand on . 
 " they take the grandma 's blanket , 
 who shiver and bid they go ; 
 they take the baby 's cradle , 
 who could not say they no . " 
 " Whew ! " say Dan , peer over Long Jack 's shoulder . " that be great ! 
 must ha ' bin expensive , though . " 
 " ground - hog case , " say the Galway man . " badly light port , Danny . " 
 " and know not all the while 
 if they be light a bonfire 
 or only a funeral pile . " 
 the wonderful voice take hold of people by their heartstring ; and when 
 she tell how the drench crew be fling ashore , living and dead , and 
 they carry the body to the glare of the fire , ask : " child , be 
 this your father ? " or " Wife , be this your man ? " you could hear hard 
 breathing all over the bench . 
 " and when the boat of Brixham 
 go out to face the gale , 
 think of the love that travel 
 like light upon their sail ! " 
 there be very little applause when she finish . the woman be 
 look for their handkerchief , and many of the man star at the 
 ceiling with shiny eye . 
 " H'm , " say Salters ; " that ' u'd cost ye a dollar to hear at any 
 theatre - maybe two . some folk , I presoom , can afford it . ' seem 
 downright waste to I . . . . Naow , how in Jerusalem do Cap . Bart 
 edwarde strike adrift here ? " 
 " no keepin ' he under , " say an Eastport man behind . " he be a poet , an ' 
 he be baound to say his piece . ' come from daown aour way , too . " 
 he do not say that Captain B. Edwardes have strive for five 
 consecutive year to be allow to recite a piece of his own 
 composition on Gloucester Memorial Day . an amused and exhausted 
 committee have at last give he his desire . the simplicity and utter 
 happiness of the old man , as he stand up in his very good Sunday 
 clothe , win the audience ere he open his mouth . they sit unmurmure 
 through seven - and - thirty hatchet - make verse describe at full 
 length the loss of the schooner Joan Hasken off the Georges in the gale 
 of 1867 , and when he come to an end they shout with one kindly throat . 
 a far - sighted Boston reporter slide away for a full copy of the epic and 
 an interview with the author ; so that earth have nothing more to offer 
 Captain Bart Edwardes , ex - whaler , shipwright , master - fisherman , and 
 poet , in the seventy - third year of his age . 
 " Naow , I call that sensible , " say the Eastport man . " I have   bin over 
 that graound with his writin ' , jest as he read it , in my two hand , and 
 I can testily that he be get it all in . " 
 " if Dan here could not   do better'n that with one hand before breakfast , 
 he ought to be switch , " say Salters , uphold the honor of 
 Massachusetts on general principle . " not but what I be free to own he be 
 considerable litt'ery - fer Maine . still - " 
 " guess Uncle Salters 's go to die this trip . fust compliment he be 
 ever pay I , " Dan snigger . " what be wrong with you , Harve ? you act 
 all quiet and you look greenish . Feelin ' sick ? " 
 " do not   know what be the matter with I , " Harvey imply . " seem if my 
 inside be too big for my outside . I be all crowded up and shivery . " 
 " Dispepsy ? Pshaw - too bad . we will wait for the readin ' , an ' then we will 
 quit , an ' catch the tide . " 
 the widow - they be nearly all of that season 's making - brace 
 themselves rigidly like people go to be shoot in cold blood , for they 
 know what be come . the summer - boarder girl in pink and blue 
 shirt - waist stop titter over Captain Edwardes 's wonderful poem , 
 and look back to see why all be silent . the fisherman press 
 forward as that town official who have talk to Cheyne bob up on the 
 platform and begin to read the year 's list of loss , divide they 
 into month . last September 's casualty be mostly single man and 
 stranger , but his voice ring very loud in the stillness of the hall . 
 " September 9th . Schooner Florrie Anderson lose , with all aboard , off 
 the Georges . 
 " Reuben Pitman , master , 50 , single , Main Street , City . 
 " Emil Olsen , 19 , single , 329 Hammond Street , City . Denmark . 
 " Oscar Standberg , single , 25 . Sweden . 
 " Carl Stanberg , single , 28 , Main Street . City . 
 " Pedro , suppose Madeira , single , Keene 's boardinghouse . City . 
 " Joseph Welsh , alia Joseph Wright , 30 , St. John 's , Newfoundland . " 
 " No - Augusty , Maine , " a voice cry from the body of the hall . 
 " he ship from St. John 's , " say the reader , look to see . 
 " I know it . he belong in Augusty . my nevvy . " 
 the reader make a pencil correction on the margin of the list , and 
 resume . 
 " same schooner , Charlie Ritchie , Liverpool , Nova Scotia , 33 , single . 
 " Albert May , 267 Rogers Street , City , 27 , single . 
 " September 27th . - Orvin Dollard , 30 , marry , drown in dory off 
 Eastern Point . " 
 that shot go home , for one of the widow flinch where she sit , 
 clasp and unclasp her hand . Mrs. Cheyne , who have be listen 
 with wide - open eye , throw up her head and choke . Dan 's mother , a 
 few seat to the right , see and hear and quickly move to her side . 
 the reading go on . by the time they reach the January and February 
 wreck the shot be fall thick and fast , and the widow draw 
 breath between their tooth . 
 " February 14th . - Schooner Harry Randolph dismaste on the way home from 
 Newfoundland ; Asa Musie , married , 32 , Main Street , City , lose overboard . 
 " February 23d . - Schooner Gilbert Hope ; go astray in dory , Robert 
 Beavon , 29 , married , native of Pubnico , Nova Scotia . " 
 but his wife be in the hall . they hear a low cry , as though a little 
 animal have be hit . it be stifle at once , and a girl stagger out 
 of the hall . she have be hop against hope for month , because some 
 who have go adrift in dory have be miraculously pick up by 
 deep - sea sailing - ship . now she have her certainty , and Harvey could see 
 the policeman on the sidewalk hail a hack for she . " it be fifty cent 
 to the depot " - the driver begin , but the policeman hold up his 
 hand - " but I be go there anyway . jump right in . look at here , Al ; you 
 do not   pull I next time my lamp be not   light . see ? " 
 the side - door close on the patch of bright sunshine , and Harvey 's eye 
 turn again to the reader and his endless list . 
 " April 19th . - Schooner Mamie Douglas lose on the Banks with all hand . 
 " Edward Canton , 43 , master , marry , City . 
 " D. Hawkins , alia Williams , 34 , marry , Shelbourne , Nova Scotia . 
 " G. W. Clay , colour , 28 , married , City . " 
 and so on , and so on . great lump be rise in Harvey 's throat , and 
 his stomach remind he of the day when he fall from the liner . 
 " may 10th . - Schooner ' we be here '   the blood tingle all over he   Otto 
 Svendson , 20 , single , City , lose overboard . " 
 once more a low , tear cry from somewhere at the back of the hall . 
 " she should not   ha ' come . she should not   ha ' come , " say Long Jack , with 
 a cluck of pity . 
 " do not   scrowge , Harve , " grunt Dan . Harvey hear that much , but the 
 rest be all darkness spot with fiery wheel . Disko lean forward 
 and speak to his wife , where she sit with one arm round Mrs. Cheyne , 
 and the other hold down the snatching , catch , ring hand . 
 " lean your head daown - right daown ! " he whisper . " it will go off in a 
 minute . " 
 " I can - an't ! I do - don't ! oh , let I - " Mrs. Cheyne do not at all know 
 what she say . 
 " you must , " Mrs. Troop repeat . " your boy 's jest faint dead away . 
 they do that some when they be gettin ' their growth . ' wish to tend to 
 he ? we can git aout this side . quite quiet . you come right along with 
 I . Psha ' , my dear , we be both woman , I guess . we must tend to aour 
 man - folk . come ! " 
 the ' we be here ' promptly go through the crowd as a body - guard , and 
 it be a very white and shake Harvey that they prop up on a bench 
 in an anteroom . 
 " favour his ma , " be Mrs. Troop 's ouly comment , as the mother bend 
 over her boy . 
 " how d'you suppose he could ever stand it ? " she cry indignantly to 
 Cheyne , who have say nothing at all . " it be horrible - horrible ! we 
 should not   have come . it be wrong and wicked ! it - it be not   right ! 
 why - why could not   they put these thing in the paper , where they 
 belong ? be you well , darling ? " 
 that make Harvey very properly ashamed . " oh , I be all right , I guess , " 
 he say , struggle to his foot , with a broken giggle . " must ha ' be 
 something I eat for breakfast . " 
 " Coffee , perhaps , " say Cheyne , whose face be all in hard line , as 
 though it have be cut out of bronze . " we will not   go back again . " 
 " guess ' twould be ' baout be well to git daown to the wharf , " say Disko . 
 " it be close in along with they Dagoes , an ' the fresh air will fresh 
 Mrs. Cheyne up . " 
 Harvey announce that he never feel well in his life ; but it be not 
 till he see the ' we be here ' , fresh from the lumper 's hand , at 
 Wouverman 's wharf , that he lose his all - overish feeling in a queer 
 mixture of pride and sorrowfulness . other people - summer boarder and 
 such - like - play about in cat - boat or look at the sea from 
 pier - head ; but he understand thing from the inside - more thing than 
 he could begin to think about . none the less , he could have sit down 
 and howl because the little schooner be go off . Mrs. Cheyne 
 simply cry and cry every step of the way and say most 
 extraordinary thing to Mrs. Troop , who " baby " she till Dan , who have 
 not be " baby " since he be six , whistle aloud . 
 and so the old crowd - Harvey feel like the most ancient of mariner 
 drop into the old schooner among the battered dory , while Harvey 
 slip the stern - fast from the pier - head , and they slide she along the 
 wharf - side with their hand . every one want to say so much that no 
 one say anything in particular . harvey bade Dan take care of Uncle 
 Salters 's sea - boot and Penn 's dory - anchor , and Long Jack entreat 
 Harvey to remember his lesson in seamanship ; but the joke fall flat 
 in the presence of the two woman , and it be hard to be funny with green 
 harbour - water widening between good friend . 
 " up jib and fores'l ! " shout Disko , get to the wheel , as the wind 
 take she . " see you later , Harve . Dunno but I come near thinkin ' a heap 
 o ' you an ' your folk . " 
 then she glide beyond ear - shot , and they sit down to watch she up the 
 harbour , and still Mrs. Cheyne weep . 
 " Pshaw , my dear , " say Mrs. Troop : " we be both woman , I guess . like be 
 not it will ease your heart to hev your cry aout . God he know it never 
 do I a mite o ' good , but then he know I have   have something to cry 
 fer ! " 
 now it be a few year later , and upon the other edge of America , that 
 a young man come through the clammy sea fog up a windy street which be 
 flank with most expensive house build of wood to imitate stone . to 
 he , as he be stand by a hammered iron gate , enter on 
 horseback - and the horse would have be cheap at a thousand 
 dollar - another young man . and this be what they say : 
 " hello , Dan ! " 
 " hello , Harve ! " 
 " what be the good with you ? " 
 " well , I be so be to be that kind o ' animal call second mate this trip . 
 ai not   you most through with that triple invoice college of your ? " 
 " get that way . I tell you , the Leland Stanford Junior , be not   a 
 circumstance to the old ' we be here ' ; but I be come into the business 
 for keep next fall . " 
 " Meanin ' aour packet ? " 
 " nothing else . you just wait till I get my knife into you , Dan . I be 
 go to make the old line lie down and cry when I take hold . " 
 " I will resk it , " say Dan , with a brotherly grin , as Harvey dismount 
 and ask whether he be come in . 
 " that be what I take the cable fer ; but , say , be the doctor anywhere 
 araound ? I will draown that crazy nigger some day , his one cuss joke 
 an ' all . " 
 there be a low , triumphant chuckle , as the ex - cook of the ' we be here ' 
 come out of the fog to take the horse 's bridle . he allow no one but 
 himself to attend to any of Harvey 's want . 
 " thick as the bank , be not   it , doctor ? " say Dan , propitiatingly . 
 but the coal - black Celt with the second - sight do not see fit to reply 
 till he have tap Dan on the shoulder , and for the twentieth time 
 croak the old , old prophecy in his ear . 
 " Master - man . man - master , " say he . " you remember , Dan Troop , what I 
 say ? on the ' we be here ' ? " 
 " well , I will not   go so far as to deny that it do look like it as thing 
 stand at present , " say Dan . " she be a noble packet , and one way an ' 
 another I owe she a heap - she and Dad . " 
 " I too , " quoth Harvey Cheyne . 
