the light that fail 


 by Rudyard Kipling 
 CHAPTER I 

  so we settle it all when the storm be do 
  as comf'y as comf'y could be ; 
  and I be to wait in the barn , my dear , 
  because I be only three ; 
  and Teddy would run to the rainbow 's foot , 
  because he be five and a man ; 
  and that be how it all begin , my dear , 
  and that be how it all begin . 

  - Big Barn story . 
 ' what do you think she would do if she catch we ? we ought not   to have it , 
 you know , ' say Maisie . 

 ' beat I , and lock you up in your bedroom , ' Dick answer , without 
 hesitation . ' have you get the cartridge ? ' 

 ' yes ; they be in my pocket , but they be joggle horribly . do pin - fire 
 cartridge go off of their own accord ? ' 

 ' do not   know . take the revolver , if you be afraid , and let I carry 
 they . ' 

 ' I be not afraid . ' Maisie stride forward swiftly , a hand in her pocket 
 and her chin in the air . Dick follow with a small pin - fire revolver . 

 the child have discover that their life would be unendurable 
 without pistol - practice . after much forethought and self - denial , Dick 
 have save seven shilling and sixpence , the price of a badly construct 
 belgian revolver . Maisie could only contribute half a crown to the 
 syndicate for the purchase of a hundred cartridge . ' you can save well 
 than I can , Dick , ' she explain ; ' I like nice thing to eat , and it 
 do not   matter to you . besides , boy ought to do these thing . ' 

 Dick grumble a little at the arrangement , but go out and make the 
 purchase , which the child be then on their way to test . revolver 
 do not lie in the scheme of their daily life as decreed for they by the 
 guardian who be incorrectly suppose to stand in the place of a mother 
 to these two orphan . Dick have be under her care for six year , during 
 which time she have make her profit of the allowance suppose to be 
 expend on his clothe , and , partly through thoughtlessness , partly 
 through a natural desire to pain , - she be a widow of some year anxious 
 to marry again , - have make his day burdensome on his young shoulder . 

 where he have look for love , she give he first aversion and then hate . 

 where he grow old have seek a little sympathy , she give he 
 ridicule . the many hour that she could spare from the ordering of her 
 small house she devote to what she call the home - training of Dick 
 Heldar . her religion , manufacture in the main by her own intelligence 
 and a keen study of the scripture , be an aid to she in this matter . at 
 such time as she herself be not personally displeased with Dick , she 
 leave he to understand that he have a heavy account to settle with his 
 creator ; wherefore Dick learn to loathe his God as intensely as he 
 loathe Mrs. Jennett ; and this be not a wholesome frame of mind for 
 the young . since she choose to regard he as a hopeless liar , but 
 an economical and self - contain one , never throw away the least 
 unnecessary fib , and never hesitate at the black , be it only 
 plausible , that might make his life a little easy . the treatment 
 teach he at least the power of live alone , - a power that be of 
 service to he when he go to a public school and the boy laugh at 
 his clothe , which be poor in quality and much mend . in the holiday 
 he return to the teaching of Mrs. Jennett , and , that the chain of 
 discipline might not be weaken by association with the world , be 
 generally beat , on one account or another , before he have be twelve 
 hour under her roof . 

 the autumn of one year bring he a companion in bondage , a 
 long - haired , gray - eyed little atom , as self - contain as himself , who 
 move about the house silently and for the first few week speak only 
 to the goat that be her chief friend on earth and live in the 
 back - garden . Mrs. Jennett object to the goat on the ground that 
 he be un - christian , - which he certainly be . ' then , ' say the 
 atom , choose her word very deliberately , ' I shall write to my 
 lawyer - people and tell they that you be a very bad woman . Amomma 
 be mine , mine , mine ! ' Mrs. Jennett make a movement to the hall , where 
 certain umbrella and cane stand in a rack . the atom understand as 
 clearly as Dick what this mean . ' I have be beat before , ' she say , 
 still in the same passionless voice ; ' I have be beat bad than you 
 can ever beat I . if you beat I I shall write to my lawyer - people 
 and tell they that you do not give I enough to eat . I be not afraid of 
 you . ' Mrs. Jennett do not go into the hall , and the atom , after a pause 
 to assure herself that all danger of war be past , go out , to weep 
 bitterly on Amomma 's neck . 

 Dick learn to know she as Maisie , and at first mistrust she 
 profoundly , for he fear that she might interfere with the small 
 liberty of action leave to he . she do not , however ; and she volunteer 
 no friendliness until Dick have take the first step . long before the 
 holiday be over , the stress of punishment share in common drive the 
 child together , if it be only to play into each other 's hand as 
 they prepare lie for Mrs. Jennett 's use . when Dick return to school , 
 Maisie whisper , ' now I shall be all alone to take care of myself ; 
 but , ' and she nod her head bravely , ' I can do it . you promise to 
 send Amomma a grass collar . send it soon . ' a week later she ask for 
 that collar by return of post , and be not pleased when she learn that 
 it take time to make . when at last Dick forward the gift , she forget 
 to thank he for it . 

 many holiday have come and go since that day , and Dick have grow into 
 a lanky hobbledehoy more than ever conscious of his bad clothe . not 
 for a moment have Mrs. Jennett relax her tender care of he , but the 
 average caning of a public school - Dick fall under punishment about 
 three time a month - fill he with contempt for her power . ' she 
 do not   hurt , ' he explain to Maisie , who urge he to rebellion , ' and 
 she be kind to you after she have whack I . ' Dick shamble through 
 the day unkempt in body and savage in soul , as the small boy of the 
 school learn to know , for when the spirit move he he would hit they , 
 cunningly and with science . the same spirit make he more than once try 
 to tease Maisie , but the girl refuse to be make unhappy . ' we be both 
 miserable as it be , ' say she . ' what be the use of try to make thing 
 bad ? let us find thing to do , and forget thing . ' 

 the pistol be the outcome of that search . it could only be use on the 
 muddy foreshore of the beach , far away from the bathing - machine and 
 pierhead , below the grassy slope of Fort Keeling . the tide run out 
 nearly two mile on that coast , and the many - colour mud - bank , touch 
 by the sun , send up a lamentable smell of dead weed . it be late in the 
 afternoon when Dick and Maisie arrive on their ground , Amomma trotting 
 patiently behind they . 

 ' Mf ! ' say Maisie , sniff the air . ' I wonder what make the sea so 
 smelly ? I do not   like it ! ' 

 ' you never like anything that be not   make just for you , ' say Dick 
 bluntly . ' give I the cartridge , and I will try first shoot . how far do 
 one of these little revolver carry ? ' 

 ' oh , half a mile , ' say Maisie , promptly . ' at least it make an awful 
 noise . be careful with the cartridge ; I do not   like those jagged 
 stick - up thing on the rim . Dick , do be careful . ' 

 ' all right . I know how to load . I will fire at the breakwater out there . ' 

 he fire , and Amomma run away bleat . the bullet throw up a spurt of 
 mud to the right of the wood - wreathe pile . 

 ' throw high and to the right . you try , Maisie . mind , it be load all 
 round . ' 

 Maisie take the pistol and step delicately to the verge of the mud , 
 her hand firmly close on the butt , her mouth and leave eye screw up . 

 Dick sit down on a tuft of bank and laugh . Amomma return very 
 cautiously . he be accustomed to strange experience in his afternoon 
 walk , and , find the cartridge - box unguarde , make investigation 
 with his nose . Maisie fire , but could not see where the bullet go . 

 ' I think it hit the post , ' she say , shade her eye and look out 
 across the sailless sea . 

 ' I know it have go out to the Marazion Bell - buoy , ' say Dick , with a 
 chuckle . ' fire low and to the left ; then perhaps you will get it . oh , look 
 at Amomma ! - he be eat the cartridge ! ' 

 Maisie turn , the revolver in her hand , just in time to see Amomma 
 scamper away from the pebble Dick throw after he . nothing be sacred 
 to a billy - goat . be well feed and the adore of his mistress , Amomma 
 have naturally swallow two loaded pin - fire cartridge . Maisie hurry 
 up to assure herself that Dick have not miscount the tale . 

 ' yes , he be eat two . ' 

 ' horrid little beast ! then they will joggle about inside he and blow up , 
 and serve he right .... oh , Dick ! have I kill you ? ' 

 revolver be tricky thing for young hand to deal with . Maisie could 
 not explain how it have happen , but a veil of reek smoke separate 
 she from Dick , and she be quite certain that the pistol have go off 
 in his face . then she hear he sputter , and drop on her knee beside 
 he , cry , ' Dick , you be not   hurt , be you ? I do not   mean it . ' 

 ' of course you do not , say Dick , come out of the smoke and wipe his 
 cheek . ' but you nearly blind I . that powder stuff sting awfully . ' 
 a neat little splash of gray lead on a stone show where the bullet have 
 go . Maisie begin to whimper . 

 ' do not , ' say Dick , jump to his foot and shake himself . ' I be not a 
 bit hurt . ' 

 ' no , but I might have kill you , ' protest Maisie , the corner of her 
 mouth drooping . ' what should I have do then ? ' 

 ' go home and tell Mrs. Jennett . ' Dick grin at the thought ; then , 
 soften , ' please do not   worry about it . besides , we be waste time . 

 we have   get to get back to tea . I will take the revolver for a bit . ' 

 Maisie would have weep on the least encouragement , but Dick 's 
 indifference , albeit his hand be shake as he pick up the pistol , 
 restrain she . she lie pant on the beach while Dick methodically 
 bombard the breakwater . ' got it at last ! ' he exclaim , as a lock of 
 weed fly from the wood . 

 ' let I try , ' say Maisie , imperiously . ' I be all right now . ' 

 they fire in turn till the rickety little revolver nearly shake itself 
 to piece , and Amomma the outcast - because he might blow up at any 
 moment - browse in the background and wonder why stone be throw 
 at he . then they find a balk of timber float in a pool which 
 be command by the seaward slope of Fort Keeling , and they sit down 
 together before this new target . 

 ' next holiday , ' say Dick , as the now thoroughly fouled revolver kick 
 wildly in his hand , ' we will get another pistol , - central fire , - that will 
 carry far . ' 

 ' there will not   be any next holiday for I , ' say Maisie . ' I be go 
 away . ' 

 ' where to ? ' 

 ' I do not   know . my lawyer have write to Mrs. Jennett , and I have   get to 
 be educate somewhere , - in France , perhaps , - I do not   know where ; but I 
 shall be glad to go away . ' 

 ' I shall not   like it a bit . I suppose I shall be leave . look here , Maisie , 
 be it really true you be go ? then these holiday will be the last 
 I shall see anything of you ; and I go back to school next week . I 
 wish - - ' 

 the young blood turn his cheek scarlet . Maisie be pick 
 grass - tuft and throw they down the slope at a yellow sea - poppy 
 nodding all by itself to the illimitable level of the mud - flat and the 
 milk - white sea beyond . 

 ' I wish , ' she say , after a pause , ' that I could see you again sometime . 

 you wish that , too ? ' 

 ' yes , but it would have be well if - if - you have - shoot straight over 
 there - down by the breakwater . ' 

 Maisie look with large eye for a moment . and this be the boy 
 who only ten day before have decorate Amomma 's horn with cut - paper 
 ham - frill and turn he out , a bearded derision , among the public 
 way ! then she drop her eye : this be not the boy . 

 ' do not   be stupid , ' she say reprovingly , and with swift instinct 
 attack the side - issue . ' how selfish you be ! just think what I should 
 have feel if that horrid thing have kill you ! I be quite miserable 
 enough already . ' 

 ' why ? because you be go away from Mrs. Jennett ? ' 

 ' no . ' 

 ' from I , then ? ' 

 no answer for a long time . Dick dare not look at she . he feel , though 
 he do not know , all that the past four year have be to he , and this 
 the more acutely since he have no knowledge to put his feeling in word . 

 ' I do not   know , ' she say . ' I suppose it be . ' 

 ' Maisie , you must know . I be not suppose . ' 

 ' let us go home , ' say Maisie , weakly . 

 but Dick be not minded to retreat . 

 ' I can not   say thing , ' he plead , ' and I be awfully sorry for tease you 
 about Amomma the other day . it be all different now , Maisie , can not   you 
 see ? and you might have tell I that you be go , instead of leave 
 I to find out . ' 

 ' you do not . I do tell . oh , Dick , what be the use of worry ? ' 

 ' there be not   any ; but we have   be together year and year , and I do not 
 know how much I care . ' 

 ' I do not   believe you ever do care . ' 

 ' no , I do not ; but I do , - I care awfully now , Maisie , ' he 
 gulp , - ' Maisie , darling , say you care too , please . ' 

 ' I do , indeed I do ; but it will not   be any use . ' 

 ' why ? ' 

 ' because I be go away . ' 

 ' yes , but if you promise before you go . only say - will you ? ' a second 
 ' darling ' come to his lip more easily than the first . there be 
 few endearment in Dick 's home or school life ; he have to find they by 
 instinct . Dick catch the little hand blacken with the escaped gas of 
 the revolver . 

 ' I promise , ' she say solemnly ; ' but if I care there be no need for 
 promise . ' 

 ' and do you care ? ' for the first time in the past few minute their eye 
 meet and speak for they who have no skill in speech .... 

 ' oh , Dick , do not ! please do not ! it be all right when we say 
 good - morning ; but now it be all different ! ' Amomma look on from afar . 

 he have see his property quarrel frequently , but he have never see 
 kiss exchange before . the yellow sea - poppy be wise , and nod its 
 head approvingly . consider as a kiss , that be a failure , but since it 
 be the first , other than those demand by duty , in all the world that 
 either have ever give or take , it open to they new world , and every 
 one of they glorious , so that they be lift above the consideration 
 of any world at all , especially those in which tea be necessary , and 
 sit still , hold each other 's hand and say not a word . 

 ' you can not   forget now , ' say Dick , at last . there be that on his cheek 
 that sting more than gunpowder . 

 ' I should not   have forget anyhow , ' say Maisie , and they look at 
 each other and see that each be change from the companion of an hour 
 ago to a wonder and a mystery they could not understand . the sun begin 
 to set , and a night - wind thrash along the bent of the foreshore . 

 ' we shall be awfully late for tea , ' say Maisie . ' let us go home . ' 

 ' let us use the rest of the cartridge first , ' say Dick ; and he help 
 Maisie down the slope of the fort to the sea , - a descent that she be 
 quite capable of cover at full speed . equally gravely Maisie take the 
 grimy hand . Dick bend forward clumsily ; Maisie draw the hand away , and 
 Dick blush . 

 ' it be very pretty , ' he say . 

 ' Pooh ! ' say Maisie , with a little laugh of gratified vanity . she stand 
 close to Dick as he load the revolver for the last time and fire 
 over the sea with a vague notion at the back of his head that he be 
 protect Maisie from all the evil in the world . a puddle far across 
 the mud catch the last ray of the sun and turn into a wrathful red 
 disc . the light hold Dick 's attention for a moment , and as he raise his 
 revolver there fall upon he a renew sense of the miraculous , in 
 that he be stand by Maisie who have promise to care for he for an 
 indefinite length of time till such date as - - a gust of the grow 
 wind drive the girl 's long black hair across his face as she stand with 
 her hand on his shoulder call Amomma ' a little beast , ' and for a 
 moment he be in the dark , - a darkness that sting . the bullet go 
 sing out to the empty sea . 

 ' spoilt my aim , ' say he , shake his head . ' there be not   any more 
 cartridge ; we shall have to run home . ' but they do not run . they 
 walk very slowly , arm in arm . and it be a matter of indifference to 
 they whether the neglect Amomma with two pin - fire cartridge in his 
 inside blow up or trot beside they ; for they have come into a golden 
 heritage and be dispose of it with all the wisdom of all their 
 year . 

 ' and I shall be - - ' quoth Dick , valiantly . then he check himself : ' I 
 do not   know what I shall be . I do not   seem to be able to pass any exam , 
 but I can make awful caricature of the master . Ho ! Ho ! ' 

 ' be an artist , then , ' say Maisie . ' you be always laugh at my trying 
 to draw ; and it will do you good . ' 

 ' I will never laugh at anything you do , ' he answer . ' I will be an artist , 
 and I will do thing . ' 

 ' artist always want money , do not   they ? ' 

 ' I have   get a hundred and twenty pound a year of my own . my guardian 
 tell I I be to have it when I come of age . that will be enough to begin 
 with . ' 

 ' ah , I be rich , ' say Maisie . ' I have   get three hundred a year all my own 
 when I be twenty - one . that be why Mrs. Jennett be kind to I than she be 
 to you . I wish , though , that I have somebody that belong to I , - just a 
 father or a mother . ' 

 ' you belong to I , ' say Dick , ' for ever and ever . ' 

 ' yes , we belong - for ever . it be very nice . ' she squeeze his arm . the 
 kindly darkness hide they both , and , embolden because he could only 
 just see the profile of Maisie 's cheek with the long lash veil the 
 gray eye , Dick at the front door deliver himself of the word he have 
 be boggle over for the last two hour . 

 ' and I - love you , Maisie , ' he say , in a whisper that seem to he to 
 ring across the world , - the world that he would to - morrow or the next 
 day set out to conquer . 

 there be a scene , not , for the sake of discipline , to be report , 
 when Mrs. Jennett would have fall upon he , first for disgraceful 
 unpunctuality , and secondly for nearly kill himself with a forbidden 
 weapon . 

 ' I be play with it , and it go off by itself , ' say Dick , when the 
 powder - pock cheek could no long be hide , ' but if you think you be 
 go to lick I you be wrong . you be never go to touch I again . 

 sit down and give I my tea . you can not   cheat we out of that , anyhow . ' 

 Mrs. Jennett gasp and become livid . Maisie say nothing , but 
 encourage Dick with her eye , and he behave abominably all that 
 evening . Mrs. Jennett prophesy an immediate judgment of Providence and 
 a descent into Tophet later , but Dick walk in Paradise and would not 
 hear . only when he be go to bed Mrs. Jennett recover and assert 
 herself . he have bid Maisie good - night with down - drop eye and from 
 a distance . 

 ' if you be not   a gentleman you might try to behave like one , ' say Mrs. 
 Jennett , spitefully . ' you have   be quarrel with Maisie again . ' 

 this mean that the usual good - night kiss have be omit . maisie , 
 white to the lip , thrust she cheek forward with a fine air of 
 indifference , and be duly peck by Dick , who tramp out of the room 
 red as fire . that night he dream a wild dream . he have win all the 
 world and bring it to Maisie in a cartridge - box , but she turn it 
 over with her foot , and , instead of say ' thank you , ' cry - ' where be 
 the grass collar you promise for Amomma ? oh , how selfish you be ! ' 





 CHAPTER II 

  then we bring the lance down , then the bugle blow , 
  when we go to Kandahar , ridin ' two an ' two , 
  ridin ' , ridin ' , ridin ' , two an ' two , 
  Ta - ra - ra - ra - ra - ra - ra , 
  all the way to Kandahar , ridin ' two an ' two . 

  - Barrack - Room Ballad . 
 ' i'm not angry with the british public , but I wish we have a few thousand 
 of they scatter among these rook . they would not   be in such a hurry 
 to get at their morning paper then . can not   you imagine the regulation 
 householder - Lover of Justice , Constant Reader , Paterfamilias , and all 
 that lot - frizzling on hot gravel ? ' 

 ' with a blue veil over his head , and his clothe in strip . have any man 
 here a needle ? I have   get a piece of sugar - sack . ' 

 ' I will lend you a packing - needle for six square inch of it then . both 
 my knee be wear through . ' 

 ' why not six square acre , while you be about it ? but lend I the 
 needle , and I will see what I can do with the selvage . I do not   think 
 there be enough to protect my royal body from the cold blast as it be . 
 what be you do with that everlasting sketch - book of your , Dick ? ' 

 ' study of our Special Correspondent repair his wardrobe , ' say 
 Dick , gravely , as the other man kick off a pair of sorely wear 
 riding - breech and begin to fit a square of coarse canvas over the most 
 obvious open space . he grunt disconsolately as the vastness of the 
 void develop itself . 

 ' sugar - bag , indeed ! hi ! you pilot man there ! lend I all the sail for 
 that whale - boat . ' 

 a fez - crown head bob up in the stern - sheet , divide itself into 
 exact half with one flash grin , and bob down again . the man of 
 the tattered breech , clothe only in a Norfolk jacket and a gray flannel 
 shirt , go on with his clumsy sewing , while Dick chuckle over the 
 sketch . 

 some twenty whale - boat be nuzzle a sand - bank which be dot 
 with english soldiery of half a dozen corps , bath or wash their 
 clothe . a heap of boat - roller , commissariat - box , sugar - bag , 
 and flour- and small - arm - ammunition - case show where one of the 
 whale - boat have be compel to unload hastily ; and a regimental 
 carpenter be swear aloud as he try , on a wholly insufficient 
 allowance of white lead , to plaster up the sun - parch gap seam of 
 the boat herself . 

 ' first the bloomin ' rudder snap , ' say he to the world in general ; 
 ' then the mast go ; an ' then , s ' ' help I , when she can not   do nothing 
 else , she open ' erself out like a cock - eye chinese lotus . ' 

 ' exactly the case with my breech , whoever you be , ' say the tailor , 
 without look up . ' Dick , I wonder when I shall see a decent shop 
 again . ' 

 there be no answer , save the incessant angry murmur of the Nile as it 
 race round a basalt - wall bend and foam across a rock - ridge half 
 a mile upstream . it be as though the brown weight of the river would 
 drive the white man back to their own country . the indescribable scent 
 of Nile mud in the air tell that the stream be fall and the next 
 few mile would be no light thing for the whale - boat to overpass . the 
 desert run down almost to the bank , where , among gray , red , and black 
 hillock , a camel - corps be encamp . no man dare even for a day lose 
 touch of the slow - move boat ; there have be no fighting for week 
 past , and throughout all that time the Nile have never spar they . Rapid 
 have follow rapid , rock rock , and island - group island - group , till the 
 rank and file have long since lose all count of direction and very 
 nearly of time . they be move somewhere , they do not know why , to do 
 something , they do not know what . before they lie the Nile , and at the 
 other end of it be one Gordon , fight for the dear life , in a town 
 call Khartoum . there be column of british troop in the desert , 
 or in one of the many desert ; there be yet more column wait to 
 embark on the river ; there be fresh draft wait at Assioot and 
 Assuan ; there be lie and rumour run over the face of the 
 hopeless land from Suakin to the Sixth Cataract , and man suppose 
 generally that there must be some one in authority to direct the general 
 scheme of the many movement . the duty of that particular river - column 
 be to keep the whale - boat afloat in the water , to avoid trample 
 on the villager ' crop when the gang ' track ' the boat with line 
 throw from midstream , to get as much sleep and food as be possible , 
 and , above all , to press on without delay in the tooth of the churning 
 Nile . 

 with the soldier sweat and toil the correspondent of the 
 newspaper , and they be almost as ignorant as their companion . but 
 it be above all thing necessary that England at breakfast should be 
 amuse and thrilled and interested , whether Gordon live or die , or 
 half the british army go to piece in the sand . the Soudan campaign 
 be a picturesque one , and lend itself to vivid word - painting . now and 
 again a ' Special ' manage to get slay , - which be not altogether 
 a disadvantage to the paper that employ he , - and more often the 
 hand - to - hand nature of the fighting allow of miraculous escape which 
 be worth telegraph home at eighteenpence the word . there be many 
 correspondent with many corp and column , - from the veteran who have 
 follow on the heel of the cavalry that occupy Cairo in ' 82 , what 
 time Arabi Pasha call himself king , who have see the first miserable 
 work round Suakin when the sentry be cut up nightly and the scrub 
 swarm with spear , to youngster jerk into the business at the 
 end of a telegraph - wire to take the place of their better kill or 
 invalid . 

 among the senior - those who know every shift and change in the 
 perplexing postal arrangement , the value of the seedy , weedy 
 egyptian garron offer for sale in Cairo or Alexandria , who could talk 
 a telegraph - clerk into amiability and soothe the ruffled vanity of 
 a newly appoint staff - officer when press regulation become 
 burdensome - be the man in the flannel shirt , the black - browed 
 Torpenhow . he represent the Central Southern Syndicate in the 
 campaign , as he have represent it in the egyptian war , and elsewhere . 
 the syndicate do not concern itself greatly with criticism of 
 attack and the like . it supply the mass , and all it demand be 
 picturesqueness and abundance of detail ; for there be more joy in 
 England over a soldier who insubordinately step out of square to rescue 
 a comrade than over twenty general slave even to baldness at the 
 gross detail of transport and commissariat . 

 he have meet at Suakin a young man , sit on the edge of a recently 
 abandon redoubt about the size of a hat - box , sketch a clump of 
 shell - tear body on the gravel plain . 

 ' what be you for ? ' say Torpenhow . the greeting of the correspondent be 
 that of the commercial traveller on the road . 

 ' my own hand , ' say the young man , without look up . ' have you any 
 tobacco ? ' 

 Torpenhow wait till the sketch be finish , and when he have look at 
 it say , ' what be your business here ? ' 

 ' nothing ; there be a row , so I come . I be suppose to be do something 
 down at the painting - slip among the boat , or else I be in charge of the 
 condenser on one of the water - ship . I have   forget which . ' 

 ' you have   cheek enough to build a redoubt with , ' say Torpenhow , and take 
 stock of the new acquaintance . ' do you always draw like that ? ' 

 the young man produce more sketch . ' row on a chinese pig - boat , ' say 
 he , sententiously , show they one after another . - ' chief mate dirke 
 by a comprador . - junk ashore off Hakodate . - somali muleteer being 
 flog . - star - shell burst over camp at Berbera . - slave - dhow be 
 chase round Tajurrah Bah . - soldier lie dead in the moonlight outside 
 Suakin . - throat cut by fuzzie . ' 

 ' H'm ! ' say Torpenhow , ' can not   say I care for Verestchagin - and - water 
 myself , but there be no accounting for taste . do anything now , be 
 you ? ' 

 ' no . I be amusing myself here . ' 

 Torpenhow look at the sketch again , and nod . ' yes , you be right 
 to take your first chance when you can get it . ' 

 he ride away swiftly through the Gate of the Two War - Ships , rattle 
 across the causeway into the town , and wire to his syndicate , ' got man 
 here , picture - work . good and cheap . shall I arrange ? will do letterpress 
 with sketch . ' 

 the man on the redoubt sit swing his leg and murmuring , ' I know the 
 chance would come , soon or later . by Gad , they will have to sweat for it 
 if I come through this business alive ! ' 

 in the evening Torpenhow be able to announce to his friend that 
 the Central Southern Agency be willing to take he on trial , pay 
 expense for three month . ' and , by the way , what be your name ? ' say 
 Torpenhow . 

 ' Heldar . do they give I a free hand ? ' 

 ' they have   take you on chance . you must justify the choice . you would well 
 stick to I . I be go up - country with a column , and I will do what I can 
 for you . give I some of your sketch take here , and I will send 
 them along . ' to himself he say , ' that be the good bargain the Central 
 southern have ever make ; and they get I cheaply enough . ' 

 so it come to pass that , after some purchase of horse - flesh and 
 arrangement financial and political , Dick be make free of the New 
 and honourable Fraternity of war correspondent , who all possess the 
 inalienable right of do as much work as they can and get as much 
 for it as Providence and their owner shall please . to these thing be 
 add in time , if the brother be worthy , the power of glib speech that 
 neither man nor woman can resist when a meal or a bed be in question , 
 the eye of a horse - cope , the skill of a cook , the constitution of a 
 bullock , the digestion of an ostrich , and an infinite adaptability to 
 all circumstance . but many die before they attain to this degree , and 
 the past - master in the craft appear for the most part in dress - clothe 
 when they be in England , and thus their glory be hide from the 
 multitude . 

 Dick follow Torpenhow wherever the latter 's fancy choose to lead he , 
 and between the two they manage to accomplish some work that almost 
 satisfied themselves . it be not an easy life in any way , and under its 
 influence the two be draw very closely together , for they eat from 
 the same dish , they share the same water - bottle , and , most binding tie 
 of all , their mail go off together . it be Dick who manage to make 
 gloriously drunk a telegraph - clerk in a palm hut far beyond the Second 
 Cataract , and , while the man lie in bliss on the floor , possess 
 himself of some laboriously acquire exclusive information , forward 
 by a confide correspondent of an opposition syndicate , make a careful 
 duplicate of the matter , and bring the result to Torpenhow , who say 
 that all be fair in love or war correspondence , and build an excellent 
 descriptive article from his rival 's riotous waste of word . it be 
 Torpenhow who - but the tale of their adventure , together and apart , 
 from Philae to the waste wilderness of Herawi and Muella , would fill 
 many book . they have be pen into a square side by side , in deadly 
 fear of be shoot by over - excited soldier ; they have fight with 
 baggage - camel in the chill dawn ; they have jog along in silence 
 under blind sun on indefatigable little egyptian horse ; and they have 
 flounder on the shallow of the Nile when the whale - boat in which 
 they have find a berth choose to hit a hide rock and rip out half her 
 bottom - plank . 

 now they be sit on the sand - bank , and the whale - boat be 
 bring up the remainder of the column . 

 ' yes , ' say Torpenhow , as he put the last rude stitch into his 
 over - long - neglect gear , ' it have be a beautiful business . ' 

 ' the patch or the campaign ? ' say Dick . ' do not   think much of either , 
 myself . ' 

 ' you want the Euryalus bring up above the Third Cataract , do not   you ? 
 and eighty - one - ton gun at Jakdul ? now , I be quite satisfied with my 
 breech . ' he turn round gravely to exhibit himself , after the manner 
 of a clown . 

 ' it be very pretty . specially the lettering on the sack . G.B.T. 
 Government Bullock Train . that be a sack from India . ' 

 ' it be my initial , - Gilbert Belling Torpenhow . I steal the cloth on 
 purpose . 

 what the mischief be the camel - corps do yonder ? ' torpenhow shade 
 his eye and look across the scrub - strew gravel . 

 a bugle blow furiously , and the man on the bank hurry to their arm 
 and accoutrement . 

 ' " pisan soldiery surprise while bath , " ' remark Dick , calmly . 

 ' d'you remember the picture ? it be by Michael Angelo ; all beginner copy 
 it . that scrub 's alive with enemy . ' 

 the camel - corps on the bank yell to the infantry to come to they , and 
 a hoarse shout down the river show that the remainder of the 
 column have wind of the trouble and be hasten to take share in it . 
 as swiftly as a reach of still water be crisp by the wind , the 
 rock - strew ridge and scrub - top hill be troubled and alive with 
 armed man . 

 mercifully , it occur to these to stand far off for a time , to shout 
 and gesticulate joyously . one man even deliver himself of a long 
 story . the camel - corps do not fire . they be only too glad of a little 
 breathing - space , until some sort of square could be form . the man on 
 the sand - bank run to their side ; and the whale - boat , as they toil up 
 within shout distance , be thrust into the near bank and empty 
 of all save the sick and a few man to guard they . the arab orator cease 
 his outcry , and his friend howl . 

 ' they look like the Mahdi 's man , ' say Torpenhow , elbow himself 
 into the crush of the square ; ' but what thousand of them there be ! the 
 tribe hereabout be not   against we , I know . ' 

 ' then the Mahdi 's take another town , ' say Dick , ' and set all these 
 yelp devil free to show we up . lend we your glass . ' 

 ' our scout should have tell we of this . we have   be trap , ' say a 
 subaltern . ' be not   the camel gun ever go to begin ? hurry up , you 
 man ! ' 

 there be no need of any order . the man fling themselves pant against 
 the side of the square , for they have good reason to know that whoso 
 be leave outside when the fighting begin would very probably die in 
 an extremely unpleasant fashion . the little hundred - and - fifty - pound 
 camel - gun post at one corner of the square open the ball as the 
 square move forward by its right to get possession of a knoll of rise 
 ground . all have fight in this manner many time before , and there 
 be no novelty in the entertainment ; always the same hot and stifle 
 formation , the smell of dust and leather , the same boltlike rush of 
 the enemy , the same pressure on the weak side , the few minute of 
 hand - to - hand scuffle , and then the silence of the desert , break only 
 by the yell of those whom their handful of cavalry attempt to purse . 
 they have become careless . the camel - gun speak at interval , and the 
 square slouch forward amid the protest of the camel . then come the 
 attack of three thousand man who have not learn from book that it be 
 impossible for troop in close order to attack against breech - loading 
 fire . 

 a few dropping shot herald their approach , and a few horseman lead , 
 but the bulk of the force be naked humanity , mad with rage , and arm 
 with the spear and the sword . the instinct of the desert , where there 
 be always much war , tell they that the right flank of the square be the 
 weak , for they swing clear of the front . the camel - gun shell they 
 as they pass and open for an instant lane through their midst , most 
 like those quick - close vista in a kentish hop - garden see when the 
 train race by at full speed ; and the infantry fire , hold till the 
 opportune moment , drop they in close - pack hundred . no civilised 
 troop in the world could have endure the hell through which they come , 
 the live leap high to avoid the dying who clutch at their heel , 
 the wounded cursing and stagger forward , till they fall - a torrent 
 black as the slide water above a mill - dam - full on the right flank of 
 the square . 

 then the line of the dusty troop and the faint blue desert sky overhead 
 go out in rolling smoke , and the little stone on the heated ground 
 and the tinder - dry clump of scrub become matter of surpass 
 interest , for man measure their agonise retreat and recovery by these 
 thing , count mechanically and hew their way back to choose pebble 
 and branch . there be no semblance of any concerted fighting . for aught 
 the man know , the enemy might be attempt all four side of the square 
 at once . their business be to destroy what lie in front of they , to 
 bayonet in the back those who pass over they , and , dying , to drag 
 down the slayer till he could be knock on the head by some avenge 
 gun - butt . 

 Dick wait with Torpenhow and a young doctor till the stress grow 
 unendurable . it be hopeless to attend to the wound till the attack 
 be repulse , so the three move forward gingerly towards the weak 
 side of the square . there be a rush from without , the short hough - hough 
 of the stabbing spear , and a man on a horse , follow by thirty or 
 forty other , dash through , yell and hack . the right flank of 
 the square suck in after they , and the other side send help . the 
 wound , who know that they have but a few hour more to live , catch at 
 the enemy 's foot and bring they down , or , stagger into a discard 
 rifle , fire blindly into the scuffle that rag in the centre of the 
 square . 

 Dick be conscious that somebody have cut he violently across his 
 helmet , that he have fire his revolver into a black , foam - fleck face 
 which forthwith cease to bear any resemblance to a face , and that 
 Torpenhow have go down under an Arab whom he have try to ' collar low , ' 
 and be turn over and over with his captive , feel for the man 's 
 eye . the doctor jab at a venture with a bayonet , and a helmetless 
 soldier fire over Dick 's shoulder : the fly grain of powder sting 
 his cheek . it be to Torpenhow that Dick turn by instinct . the 
 representative of the Central Southern Syndicate have shake himself 
 clear of his enemy , and rise , wipe his thumb on his trouser . the 
 Arab , both hand to his forehead , scream aloud , then snatch up his 
 spear and rush at Torpenhow , who be pant under shelter of Dick 's 
 revolver . Dick fire twice , and the man drop limply . his upturned 
 face lack one eye . the musketry - fire redouble , but cheer mingle 
 with it . the rush have fail and the enemy be fly . if the heart of 
 the square be shamble , the ground beyond be a butcher 's shop . Dick 
 thrust his way forward between the maddened man . the remnant of the 
 enemy be retire , as the few - the very few - english cavalry ride down 
 the laggard . 

 beyond the line of the dead , a broad blood - stain arab spear cast 
 aside in the retreat lie across a stump of scrub , and beyond this again 
 the illimitable dark level of the desert . the sun catch the steel 
 and turn it into a red disc . some one behind he be say , ' ah , 
 get away , you brute ! ' Dick raise his revolver and point towards the 
 desert . his eye be hold by the red splash in the distance , and the 
 clamour about he seem to die down to a very far - away whisper , like 
 the whisper of a level sea . there be the revolver and the red light .... 
 and the voice of some one scar something away , exactly as have fall 
 somewhere before , - a darkness that sting . he fire at random , and the 
 bullet go out across the desert as he mutter , ' spoilt my aim . there 
 be not   any more cartridge . we shall have to run home . ' he put his hand 
 to his head and bring it away cover with blood . 

 ' old man , you be cut rather badly , ' say Torpenhow . ' I owe you something 
 for this business . thank . stand up ! I say , you can not   be ill here . ' 

 throughout the night , when the troop be encamp by the whale - boat , 
 a black figure dance in the strong moonlight on the sand - bar and 
 shout that Khartoum the accursed one be dead , - be dead , - be 
 dead , - that two steamer be rock - stake on the Nile outside the city , 
 and that of all their crew there remain not one ; and Khartoum be 
 dead , - be dead , - be dead ! 

 but Torpenhow take no heed . he be watch Dick , who call aloud to 
 the restless Nile for Maisie , - and again Maisie ! 

 ' behold a phenomenon , ' say Torpenhow , rearrange the blanket . ' here 
 be a man , presumably human , who mention the name of one woman only . and 
 I have   see a good deal of delirium , too . - Dick , here be some fizzy drink . ' 

 ' thank you , Maisie , ' say Dick . 





 CHAPTER III 

  so he think he shall take to the sea again 
  for one more cruise with his buccaneer , 
  to singe the beard of the King of Spain , 
  and capture another Dean of Jaen 
  and sell he in Algiers . - a Dutch Picture . - Longfellow 
 the SOUDAN campaign and Dick 's broken head have be some month end 
 and mend , and the Central Southern Syndicate have pay Dick a certain 
 sum on account for work do , which work they be careful to assure he 
 be not altogether up to their standard . Dick heave the letter into 
 the Nile at Cairo , cash the draft in the same town , and bade a warm 
 farewell to Torpenhow at the station . 

 ' I be go to lie up for a while and rest , ' say Torpenhow . ' I do not 
 know where I shall live in London , but if God bring we to meet , we 
 shall meet . 

 be you starye here on the off - chance of another row ? there will be 
 none till the Southern Soudan be reoccupie by our troop . mark that . 

 good - bye ; bless you ; come back when your money 's spend ; and give I your 
 address . ' 

 Dick loiter in Cairo , Alexandria , Ismailia , and Port Said , - especially 
 Port say . there be iniquity in many part of the world , and vice in 
 all , but the concentrated essence of all the iniquity and all the 
 vice in all the continent find itself at Port Said . and through the 
 heart of that sand - border hell , where the mirage flicker day long 
 above the Bitter Lake , move , if you will only wait , most of the man and 
 woman you have know in this life . Dick establish himself in quarter 
 more riotous than respectable . he spend his evening on the quay , and 
 board many ship , and see very many friend , - gracious Englishwomen 
 with whom he have talk not too wisely in the veranda of Shepherd 's 
 Hotel , hurry war correspondent , skipper of the contract troop - ship 
 employ in the campaign , army officer by the score , and other of less 
 reputable trade . 

 he have choice of all the race of the East and West for study , and 
 the advantage of see his subject under the influence of strong 
 excitement , at the gaming - table , saloon , dancing - hell , and elsewhere . 
 for recreation there be the straight vista of the Canal , the blaze 
 sand , the procession of shipping , and the white hospital where the 
 english soldier lay . he strive to set down in black and white and 
 colour all that Providence send he , and when that supply be end 
 seek about for fresh material . it be a fascinating employment , but 
 it run away with his money , and he have draw in advance the hundred and 
 twenty pound to which he be entitle yearly . ' now I shall have to work 
 and starve ! ' think he , and be address himself to this new fate 
 when a mysterious telegram arrive from Torpenhow in England , which 
 say , ' come back , quick ; you have catch on . come . ' 

 a large smile overspread his face . ' so soon ! that be a good hearing , ' 
 say he to himself . ' there will be an orgy to - night . I will stand or fall 
 by my luck . faith , it be time it come ! ' he deposit half of his fund 
 in the hand of his well - know friend Monsieur and Madame Binat , and 
 order himself a zanzibar dance of the fine . Monsieur Binat be 
 shake with drink , but Madame smile sympathetically - ' Monsieur need 
 a chair , of course , and of course Monsieur will sketch ; Monsieur amuse 
 himself strangely . ' 

 Binat raise a blue - white face from a cot in the inner room . ' I 
 understand , ' he quaver . ' we all know Monsieur . Monsieur be an artist , 
 as I have be . ' Dick nod . ' in the end , ' say Binat , with gravity , 
 ' Monsieur will descend alive into hell , as I have descend . ' and he 
 laugh . 

 ' you must come to the dance , too , ' say Dick ; ' I shall want you . ' 

 ' for my face ? I know it would be so . for my face ? my God ! and for my 
 degradation so tremendous ! I will not . take he away . he be a devil . 
 or at least do thou , Celeste , demand of he more . ' the excellent binat 
 begin to kick and scream . 

 ' all thing be for sale in Port say , ' say Madame . ' if my husband 
 come it will be so much more . eh , ' how you call - ' alf a sovereign . ' 

 the money be pay , and the mad dance be hold at night in a walled 
 courtyard at the back of Madame Binat 's house . the lady herself , in 
 fade mauve silk always about to slide from her yellow shoulder , 
 play the piano , and to the tin - pot music of a western waltz the naked 
 Zanzibari girl dance furiously by the light of kerosene lamp . Binat 
 sit upon a chair and star with eye that see nothing , till the whirl 
 of the dance and the clang of the rattle piano steal into the drink 
 that take the place of blood in his vein , and his face glisten . Dick 
 take he by the chin brutally and turn that face to the light . Madame 
 Binat look over her shoulder and smile with many tooth . Dick lean 
 against the wall and sketch for an hour , till the kerosene lamp begin 
 to smell , and the girl throw themselves pant on the hard - beat 
 ground . then he shut his book with a snap and move away , Binat plucking 
 feebly at his elbow . ' show I , ' he whimper . ' I too be once an artist , 
 even I ! ' Dick show he the rough sketch . ' be I that ? ' he scream . 
 ' will you take that away with you and show all the world that it be 
 I , - binat ? ' he moan and weep . 

 ' Monsieur have pay for all , ' say Madame . ' to the pleasure of see 
 Monsieur again . ' 

 the courtyard gate shut , and Dick hurry up the sandy street to the 
 near gambling - hell , where he be well know . ' if the luck hold , it be 
 an omen ; if I lose , I must stay here . ' he place his money picturesquely 
 about the board , hardly dare to look at what he do . the luck hold . 

 three turn of the wheel leave he rich by twenty pound , and he go 
 down to the shipping to make friend with the captain of a decayed 
 cargo - steamer , who land he in London with few pound in his pocket 
 than he care to think about . 

 a thin gray fog hang over the city , and the street be very cold ; for 
 summer be in England . 

 ' it be a cheerful wilderness , and it have not   the knack of alter much , ' 
 Dick think , as he tramp from the Docks westward . ' now , what must I 
 do ? ' 

 the pack house give no answer . Dick look down the long lightless 
 street and at the appalling rush of traffic . ' oh , you rabbit - hutch ! ' 
 say he , address a row of highly respectable semi - detach 
 residence . ' do you know what you have   get to do later on ? you have to 
 supply I with man - servant and maid - servant , ' - here he smack his 
 lip , - ' and the peculiar treasure of king . meantime I will find clothe 
 and boot , and presently I will return and trample on you . ' he step 
 forward energetically ; he see that one of his shoe be burst at the 
 side . as he stoop to make investigation , a man jostle he into the 
 gutter . ' all right , ' he say . 

 ' that be another nick in the score . I will jostle you later on . ' 

 good clothe and boot be not cheap , and Dick leave his last shop with 
 the certainty that he would be respectably array for a time , but with 
 only fifty shilling in his pocket . he return to street by the Docks , 
 and lodge himself in one room , where the sheet on the bed be almost 
 audibly mark in case of theft , and where nobody seem to go to bed at 
 all . when his clothe arrive he seek the Central Southern Syndicate 
 for Torpenhow 's address , and get it , with the intimation that there be 
 still some money wait for he . 

 ' how much ? ' say Dick , as one who habitually deal in million . 

 ' between thirty and forty pound . if it would be any convenience to 
 you , of course we could let you have it at once ; but we usually settle 
 account monthly . ' 

 ' if I show that I want anything now , I be lose , ' he say to himself . ' all 
 I need I will take later on . ' then , aloud , ' it be hardly worth while ; and 
 I be go to the country for a month , too . wait till I come back , and 
 I will see about it . ' 

 ' but we trust , Mr. Heldar , that you do not intend to sever your 
 connection with we ? ' 

 Dick 's business in life be the study of face , and he watch the 
 speaker keenly . ' that man mean something , ' he say . ' I will do no 
 business till I have   see Torpenhow . there be a big deal come . ' so he 
 depart , make no promise , to his one little room by the Docks . and 
 that day be the seventh of the month , and that month , he reckon with 
 awful distinctness , have thirty - one day in it ! 

 it be not easy for a man of catholic taste and healthy appetite to 
 exist for twenty - four day on fifty shilling . nor be it cheer to 
 begin the experiment alone in all the loneliness of London . Dick pay 
 seven shilling a week for his lodging , which leave he rather less than 
 a shilling a day for food and drink . naturally , his first purchase be 
 of the material of his craft ; he have be without they too long . half 
 a day 's investigation and comparison bring he to the conclusion that 
 sausage and mashed potato , twopence a plate , be the good food . 
 now , sausage once or twice a week for breakfast be not unpleasant . 
 as lunch , even , with mashed potato , they become monotonous . at dinner 
 they be impertinent . at the end of three day Dick loathe sausage , 
 and , go , forth , pawn his watch to revel on sheep 's head , which 
 be not as cheap as it look , owe to the bone and the gravy . then 
 he return to sausage and mashed potato . then he confine himself 
 entirely to mashed potato for a day , and be unhappy because of pain 
 in his inside . then he pawn his waistcoat and his tie , and think 
 regretfully of money throw away in time past . there be few thing 
 more edifying unto art than the actual belly - pinch of hunger , and 
 Dick in his few walk abroad , - he do not care for exercise ; it raise 
 desire that could not be satisfied - find himself divide mankind into 
 two class , - those who look as if they might give he something to 
 eat , and those who look otherwise . ' I never know what I have to learn 
 about the human face before , ' he think ; and , as a reward for his 
 humility , Providence cause a cab - driver at a sausage - shop where Dick 
 feed that night to leave half eat a great chunk of bread . Dick take 
 it , - would have fight all the world for its possession , - and it cheer 
 he . 

 the month drag through at last , and , nearly prance with impatience , 
 he go to draw his money . then he hasten to Torpenhow 's address 
 and smell the smell of cooking meat all along the corridor of the 
 chamber . torpenhow be on the top floor , and Dick burst into his room , 
 to be receive with a hug which nearly crack his rib , as Torpenhow 
 drag he tot he light and speak of twenty different thing in the 
 same breath . 

 ' but you be look tuck up , ' he conclude . 

 ' got anything to eat ? ' say Dick , his eye roam round the room . 

 ' I shall be have breakfast in a minute . what do you say to sausage ? ' 

 ' no , anything but sausage ! Torp , I have   be starve on that accurse 
 horse - flesh for thirty day and thirty night . ' 

 ' now , what lunacy have be your late ? ' 

 Dick speak of the last few week with unbridled speech . then he open 
 his coat ; there be no waistcoat below . ' I run it fine , awfully fine , 
 but I have   just scrap through . ' 

 ' you have not   much sense , but you have   get a backbone , anyhow . eat , and 
 talk afterwards . ' Dick fall upon egg and bacon and gorge till he could 
 gorge no more . torpenhow hand he a fill pipe , and he smoke as man 
 smoke who for three week have be deprive of good tobacco . 

 ' ouf ! ' say he . ' that be heavenly ! well ? ' 

 ' why in the world do not   you come to I ? ' 

 ' could not ; I owe you too much already , old man . besides I have a sort of 
 superstition that this temporary starvation - that be what it be , and it 
 hurt - would bring I luck later . it be over and do with now , and none 
 of the syndicate know how hard up I be . fire away . what be the exact 
 state of affair as regard myself ? ' 

 ' you have my wire ? you have   catch on here . People like your work 
 immensely . I do not   know why , but they do . they say you have a fresh 
 touch and a new way of draw thing . and , because they be chiefly 
 home - breed English , they say you have insight . you be want by half a 
 dozen paper ; you be want to illustrate book . ' 

 Dick grunt scornfully . 

 ' you be want to work up your small sketch and sell they to the 
 dealer . they seem to think the money sink in you be a good investment . 

 Good Lord ! who can account for the fathomless folly of the public ? ' 

 ' they be a remarkably sensible people . ' 

 ' they be subject to fit , if that be what you mean ; and you happen to be 
 the object of the late fit among those who be interested in what 
 they call Art . just now you be a fashion , a phenomenon , or whatever you 
 please . I appear to be the only person who know anything about you 
 here , and I have be show the most useful man a few of the sketch 
 you give I from time to time . those come after your work on the 
 Central Southern Syndicate appear to have do your business . you be in 
 luck . ' 

 ' huh ! call it luck ! do call it luck , when a man have be kick about 
 the world like a dog , wait for it to come ! I will luck them later on . I 
 want a place to work first . ' 

 ' come here , ' say Torpenhow , cross the landing . ' this place be a big 
 box room really , but it will do for you . there be your skylight , or 
 your north light , or whatever window you call it , and plenty of room to 
 thrash about in , and a bedroom beyond . what more do you need ? ' 

 ' good enough , ' say Dick , look round the large room that take up a 
 third of a top story in the rickety chamber overlook the Thames . a 
 pale yellow sun shine through the skylight and show the much dirt of 
 the place . three step lead from the door to the landing , and three 
 more to Torpenhow 's room . the well of the staircase disappear into 
 darkness , prick by tiny gas - jet , and there be sound of man talk 
 and door slamming seven flight below , in the warm gloom . 

 ' do they give you a free hand here ? ' say Dick , cautiously . he be 
 Ishmael enough to know the value of liberty . 

 ' anything you like ; latch - key and license unlimited . we be permanent 
 tenant for the most part here . ' tisn't   a place I would recommend for a 
 Young Men 's Christian Association , but it will serve . I take these room 
 for you when I wire . ' 

 ' you be a great deal too kind , old man . ' 

 ' you do not   suppose you be go away from I , do you ? ' torpenhow put 
 his hand on Dick 's shoulder , and the two walk up and down the room , 
 henceforward to be call the studio , in sweet and silent communion . 
 they hear rap at Torpenhow 's door . ' that be some ruffian come up 
 for a drink , ' say Torpenhow ; and he raise his voice cheerily . there 
 enter no one more ruffianly than a portly middle - aged gentleman in 
 a satin - face frockcoat . his lip be part and pale , and there be 
 deep pouch under the eye . 

 ' weak heart , ' say Dick to himself , and , as he shake hand , ' ve ry weak 
 heart . his pulse be shake his finger . ' 

 the man introduce himself as the head of the Central Southern Syndicate 
 and ' one of the most ardent admirer of your work , Mr. Heldar . I assure 
 you , in the name of the syndicate , that we be immensely indebted to 
 you ; and I trust , Mr. Heldar , you will not   forget that we be largely 
 instrumental in bring you before the public . ' he pant because of 
 the seven flight of stair . 

 Dick glance at Torpenhow , whose left eyelid lie for a moment dead on 
 his cheek . 

 ' I shall not   forget , ' say Dick , every instinct of defence rouse in he . 

 ' you have   pay I so well that I could not , you know . by the way , when I be 
 settle in this place I should like to send and get my sketch . there 
 must be nearly a hundred and fifty of they with you . ' 

 ' that be er - be what I come to speak about . I fear we can not   allow it 
 exactly , Mr. Heldar . in the absence of any specify agreement , the 
 sketch be our property , of course . ' 

 ' do you mean to say that you be go to keep they ? ' 

 ' yes ; and we hope to have your help , on your own term , Mr. Heldar , to 
 assist we in arrange a little exhibition , which , back by our name 
 and the influence we naturally command among the press , should be of 
 material service to you . sketch such as yours - - ' 

 ' belong to I . you engage I by wire , you pay I the low rate you 
 dare . you can not   mean to keep they ! good God alive , man , they be all 
 I have   get in the world ! ' 

 torpenhow watch Dick 's face and whistle . 

 Dick walk up and down , think . he see the whole of his little stock 
 in trade , the first weapon of his equipment , annex at the outset of 
 his campaign by an elderly gentleman whose name Dick have not catch 
 aright , who say that he represent a syndicate , which be a thing for 
 which Dick have not the least reverence . the injustice of the proceeding 
 do not much move he ; he have see the strong hand prevail too often in 
 other place to be squeamish over the moral aspect of right and wrong . 

 but he ardently desire the blood of the gentleman in the frockcoat , and 
 when he speak again it be with a strained sweetness that Torpenhow know 
 well for the beginning of strife . 

 ' forgive I , sir , but you have no - no young man who can arrange this 
 business with I ? ' 

 ' I speak for the syndicate . I see no reason for a third party to - - ' 

 ' you will in a minute . be good enough to give back my sketch . ' 

 the man star blankly at Dick , and then at Torpenhow , who be lean 
 against the wall . he be not use to ex - employee who order he to be 
 good enough to do thing . 

 ' yes , it be rather a cold - blooded steal , ' say Torpenhow , critically ; 
 ' but I be afraid , I be very much afraid , you have   strike the wrong man . be 
 careful , Dick ; remember , this be not   the Soudan . ' 

 ' consider what service the syndicate have do you in put your 
 name before the world - - ' 

 this be not a fortunate remark ; it remind Dick of certain vagrant 
 year live out in loneliness and strife and unsatisfied desire . the 
 memory do not contrast well with the prosperous gentleman who propose 
 to enjoy the fruit of those year . 

 ' I do not   know quite what to do with you , ' begin Dick , meditatively . ' of 
 course you be a thief , and you ought to be half kill , but in your case 
 you would probably die . I do not   want you dead on this floor , and , besides , 
 it be unlucky just as one 's move in . do not   hit , sir ; you will only excite 
 yourself . ' 

 he put one hand on the man 's forearm and run the other down the plump 
 body beneath the coat . ' my goodness ! ' say he to Torpenhow , ' and this 
 gray oaf dare to be a thief ! I have see an Esneh camel - driver have the 
 black hide take off his body in strip for steal half a pound of wet 
 date , and he be as tough as whipcord . this thing ' soft all over - like 
 a woman . ' 

 there be few thing more poignantly humiliating than be handle by 
 a man who do not intend to strike . the head of the syndicate begin to 
 breathe heavily . Dick walk round he , paw he , as a cat paw a 
 soft hearth - rug . then he trace with his forefinger the leaden pouch 
 underneath the eye , and shake his head . ' you be go to steal my 
 thing , - mine , mine , mine ! - you , who do not   know when you may die . 

 write a note to your office , - you say you be the head of it , - and order 
 they to give Torpenhow my sketch , - every one of they . wait a minute : 
 your hand 's shake . now ! ' he thrust a pocket - book before he . the note 
 be write . torpenhow take it and depart without a word , while Dick 
 walk round and round the spellbound captive , give he such advice as 
 he conceive well for the welfare of his soul . when Torpenhow return 
 with a gigantic portfolio , he hear Dick say , almost soothingly , ' now , 
 I hope this will be a lesson to you ; and if you worry I when I have 
 settle down to work with any nonsense about action for assault , 
 believe I , I will catch you and manhandle you , and you will die . you 
 have not   very long to live , anyhow . go ! Imshi , Vootsak , - get out ! ' the 
 man depart , staggering and daze . Dick draw a long breath : ' Phew ! what 
 a lawless lot these people be ! the first thing a poor orphan meet be 
 gang robbery , organised burglary ! think of the hideous blackness of that 
 man 's mind ! be my sketch all right , Torp ? ' 

 ' yes ; one hundred and forty - seven of they . well , I must say , Dick , 
 you have   begin well . ' 

 ' he be interfere with I . it only mean a few pound to he , but it 
 be everything to I . I do not   think he will bring an action . I give he 
 some medical advice gratis about the state of his body . it be cheap at 
 the little flurry it cost he . now , let us look at my thing . ' 

 two minute later Dick have throw himself down on the floor and be deep 
 in the portfolio , chuckle lovingly as he turn the drawing over and 
 thought of the price at which they have be buy . 

 the afternoon be well advanced when torpenhow come to the door and see 
 Dick dance a wild saraband under the skylight . 

 ' I build well than I know , Torp , ' he say , without stop the 
 dance . 

 ' they be good ! they be damned good ! they will go like flame ! I shall have 
 an exhibition of they on my own brazen hook . and that man would have 
 cheat I out of it ! do you know that I be sorry now that I do not 
 actually hit he ? ' 

 ' go out , ' say Torpenhow , - ' go out and pray to be deliver from the 
 sin of arrogance , which you never will be . bring your thing up from 
 whatever place you be stay in , and we will try to make this barn a 
 little more shipshape . ' 

 ' and then - oh , then , ' say Dick , still caper , ' we will spoil the 
 Egyptians ! ' 





 CHAPTER IV 

  the wolf - cub at even lie hid in the corn , 
  when the smoke of the cook hung gray : 
  he know where the doe make a couch for her fawn , 
  and he look to his strength for his prey . 

  but the moon sweep the smoke - wreath away . 

  and he turn from his meal in the villager 's close , 
  and he bay to the moon as she rise . 

  - In seonee . 
 ' well , and how do success taste ? ' say Torpenhow , some three month 
 later . he have just return to chamber after a holiday in the country . 

 ' good , ' say Dick , as he sit lick his lip before the easel in the 
 studio . 

 ' I want more , - heap more . the lean year have pass , and I approve of 
 these fat one . ' 

 ' be careful , old man . that way lie bad work . ' 

 Torpenhow be sprawl in a long chair with a small fox - terri asleep 
 on his chest , while Dick be prepare a canvas . a dais , a background , 
 and a lay - figure be the only fix object in the place . they rise 
 from a wreck of oddment that begin with feel - cover water - bottle , 
 belt , and regimental badge , and end with a small bale of second - hand 
 uniform and a stand of mixed arm . the mark of muddy foot on the dai 
 show that a military model have just go away . the watery autumn 
 sunlight be fall , and shadow sit in the corner of the studio . 

 ' yes , ' say Dick , deliberately , ' I like the power ; I like the fun ; I 
 like the fuss ; and above all I like the money . I almost like the 
 people who make the fuss and pay the money . almost . but they be a queer 
 gang , - an amazingly queer gang ! ' 

 ' they have be good enough to you , at any rate . that tin - pot exhibition 
 of your sketch must have pay . do you see that the paper call it 
 the " Wild Work Show " ? ' 

 ' never mind . I sell every shred of canvas I want to ; and , on my word , 
 I believe it be because they believe I be a self - teach flagstone 
 artist . 

 I should have get well price if I work my thing on wool or 
 scratch they on camel - bone instead of use mere black and white and 
 colour . verily , they be a queer gang , these people . limited be not   the 
 word to describe them . I meet a fellow the other day who tell I that 
 it be impossible that shadow on white sand should be 
 blue , - ultramarine , - as they be . I find out , later , that the man have 
 be as far as Brighton beach ; but he know all about Art , confound he . 
 he give I a lecture on it , and recommend I to go to school to learn 
 technique . I wonder what old Kami would have say to that . ' 

 ' when be you under Kami , man of extraordinary beginning ? ' 

 ' I study with he for two year in Paris . he teach by personal 
 magnetism . all he ever say be , " Continuez , me enfant , " and you have 
 to make the good you could of that . he have a divine touch , and he know 
 something about colour . Kami use to dream colour ; I swear he could 
 never have see the genuine article ; but he evolve it ; and it be 
 good . ' 

 ' recollect some of those view in the Soudan ? ' say Torpenhow , with a 
 provoke drawl . 

 Dick squirm in his place . ' do not ! it make I want to get out there 
 again . what colour that be ! Opal and umber and amber and claret and 
 brick - red and sulphur - cockatoo - crest - sulphur - against brown , with a 
 nigger - black rock stick up in the middle of it all , and a decorative 
 frieze of camel festoon in front of a pure pale turquoise sky . ' he 
 begin to walk up and down . ' and yet , you know , if you try to give these 
 people the thing as God give it , key down to their comprehension and 
 accord to the power he have give you - - ' 

 ' modest man ! go on . ' 

 ' half a dozen epicene young pagan who have not   even be to Algiers will 
 tell you , first , that your notion be borrow , and , secondly , that it 
 be not   art . 

 " this come of my leave town for a month . Dickie , you have   be 
 promenade among the toy - shop and hear people talk . ' 

 ' I could not   help it , ' say Dick , penitently . ' you be not   here , and it 
 be lonely these long evening . a man can not   work for ever . ' 

 ' a man might have go to a pub , and get decently drunk . ' 

 ' I wish I have ; but I forgather with some man of sort . they say they 
 be artist , and I know some of they could draw , - but they would not 
 draw . they give I tea , - tea at five in the afternoon ! - and talk about 
 Art and the state of their soul . as if their soul matter . I have   hear 
 more about art and see less of she in the last six month than in 
 the whole of my life . do you remember Cassavetti , who work for some 
 continental syndicate , out with the desert column ? he be a regular 
 Christmas - tree of contraption when he take the field in full fig , with 
 his water - bottle , lanyard , revolver , writing - case , housewife , gig - lamp , 
 and the Lord know what all . he use to fiddle about with them and show 
 we how they work ; but he never seem to do much except fudge his 
 report from the Nilghai . see ? ' 

 ' dear old Nilghai ! he be in town , fat than ever . he ought to be up 
 here this evening . I see the comparison perfectly . you should have keep 
 clear of all that man - millinery . serve you right ; and I hope it will 
 unsettle your mind . ' 

 ' it will not . it have teach I what art - holy sacred art - mean . ' 

 ' you have   learn something while I have   be away . what be art ? ' 

 ' give them what they know , and when you have   do it once do it again . ' 

 Dick drag forward a canvas lay face to the wall . ' here be a sample 
 of real art . it be go to be a facsimile reproduction for a weekly . I 
 call it " his last Shot . " it be work up from the little water - colour 
 I make outside El Maghrib . well , I lure my model , a beautiful rifleman , 
 up here with drink ; I drore he , and I redrore he , and I redrore 
 he , and I make he a flushed , dishevel , bedevil scallawag , with 
 his helmet at the back of his head , and the live fear of death in his 
 eye , and the blood ooze out of a cut over his ankle - bone . he be not 
 pretty , but he be all soldier and very much man . ' 

 ' once more , modest child ! ' 

 Dick laugh . ' well , it be only to you I be talk . I do he just as 
 well as I know how , make allowance for the slickness of oil . then the 
 art - manager of that abandon paper say that his subscriber would not 
 like it . it be brutal and coarse and violent , - man be naturally 
 gentle when he be fight for his life . they want something more 
 restful , with a little more colour . I could have say a good deal , but 
 you might as well talk to a sheep as an art - manager . I take my " last 
 Shot " back . behold the result ! I put he into a lovely red coat without 
 a speck on it . that be Art . I polish his boot , - observe the high 
 light on the toe . that be Art . I clean his rifle , - rifle be always 
 clean on service , - because that be Art . 

 I pipeclaye his helmet , - pipeclay be always use on active service , and 
 be indispensable to Art . I shave his chin , I wash his hand , and give 
 he an air of fat peace . result , military tailor 's pattern - plate . 
 price , thank Heaven , twice as much as for the first sketch , which be 
 moderately decent . ' 

 ' and do you suppose you be go to give that thing out as your work ? ' 

 ' why not ? I do it . alone I do it , in the interest of sacred , 
 home - breed art and Dickenson 's Weekly . ' 

 Torpenhow smoke in silence for a while . then come the verdict , 
 deliver from roll cloud : ' if you be only a mass of blather 
 vanity , Dick , I would not   mind , - I would let you go to the deuce on your own 
 mahl - stick ; but when I consider what you be to I , and when I find 
 that to vanity you add the twopenny - halfpenny pique of a twelve - year - old 
 girl , then I bestir myself in your behalf . thus ! ' 

 the canvas rip as Torpenhow 's booted foot shoot through it , and the 
 terrier jump down , think rat be about . 

 ' if you have any bad language to use , use it . you have not . I continue . 

 you be an idiot , because no man bear of woman be strong enough to take 
 liberty with his public , even though they be - which they be not   - all 
 you say they be . ' 

 ' but they do not   know any well . what can you expect from creature bear 
 and breed in this light ? ' Dick point to the yellow fog . ' if they want 
 furniture - polish , let they have furniture - polish , so long as they pay 
 for it . 

 they be only man and woman . you talk as if they be god . ' 

 ' that sound very fine , but it have nothing to do with the case . they be 
 the people you have to do work for , whether you like it or not . they 
 be your master . do not   be deceive , Dickie , you be not   strong enough to 
 trifle with they , - or with yourself , which be more important . 

 moreover , - come back , Binkie : that red daub be not   go 
 anywhere , - unless you take precious good care , you will fall under the 
 damnation of the check - book , and that be bad than death . you will get 
 drunk - you - re half drunk already - on easily acquire money . for that 
 money and your own infernal vanity you be willing to deliberately turn 
 out bad work . you will do quite enough bad work without know it . and , 
 Dickie , as I love you and as I know you love I , I be not go to let 
 you cut off your nose to spite your face for all the gold in England . 
 that be settle . now swear . ' 

 ' do not   know , say Dick . ' I have   be try to make myself angry , but 
 I can not , you be so abominably reasonable . there will be a row on 
 Dickenson 's Weekly , I fancy . ' 

 ' why the Dickenson do you want to work on a weekly paper ? it be slow 
 bleeding of power . ' 

 ' it bring in the very desirable dollar , ' say Dick , his hand in his 
 pocket . 

 Torpenhow watch he with large contempt . ' why , I think it be a 
 man ! ' say he . ' it be a child . ' 

 ' no , it be not , ' say Dick , wheel quickly . ' you have   no notion what the 
 certainty of cash mean to a man who have always want it badly . 

 nothing will pay I for some of my life 's joy ; on that chinese 
 pig - boat , for instance , when we eat bread and jam for every meal , 
 because Ho - Wang would not   allow we anything well , and it all taste of 
 pig , - chinese pig . I have   work for this , I have   sweat and I have   starve 
 for this , line on line and month after month . and now I have   get it I be 
 go to make the most of it while it last . let they pay - they have   no 
 knowledge . ' 

 ' what do your Majesty please to want ? you can not   smoke more than you 
 do ; you will not   drink ; you be a gross feeder ; and you dress in the dark , 
 by the look of you . you would not   keep a horse the other day when I 
 suggest , because , you say , it might fall lame , and whenever you cross 
 the street you take a hansom . even you be not foolish enough to suppose 
 that theatre and all the live thing you can buy thereabout mean Life . 

 what earthly need have you for money ? ' 

 ' it be there , bless its golden heart , ' say Dick . ' it be there all the 
 time . 

 Providence have send I nuts while I have tooth to crack them with . I 
 have not   yet find the nut I wish to crack , but I be keep my tooth 
 file . 

 perhaps some day you and I will go for a walk round the wide earth . ' 

 ' with no work to do , nobody to worry we , and nobody to compete with ? you 
 would be unfit to speak to in a week . besides , I should not   go . I do not 
 care to profit by the price of a man 's soul , - for that be what it would 
 mean . 

 Dick , it be no use argue . you be a fool . ' 

 ' do not   see it . when I be on that chinese pig - boat , our captain get 
 credit for save about twenty - five thousand very seasick little pig , 
 when our old tramp of a steamer fall foul of a timber - junk . now , take 
 those pig as a parallel - - ' 

 ' oh , confound your parallel ! whenever I try to improve your soul , you 
 always drag in some anecdote from your very shady past . pig be not   the 
 british public ; and self - respect be self - respect the world over . go 
 out for a walk and try to catch some self - respect . and , I say , if the 
 Nilghai come up this evening can I show he your digging ? ' 

 ' surely . ' and Dick depart , to take counsel with himself in the rapidly 
 gather London fog . 

 half an hour after he have leave , the Nilghai labour up the staircase . 
 he be the chief , as he be the young , of the war correspondent , 
 and his experience date from the birth of the needle - gun . save only 
 his ally , Keneu the Great War Eagle , there be no man high in the 
 craft than he , and he always open his conversation with the news that 
 there would be trouble in the Balkans in the spring . torpenhow laugh 
 as he enter . 

 ' never mind the trouble in the Balkans . those little state be always 
 screech . you have   hear about Dick 's luck ? ' 

 ' yes ; he have be call up to notoriety , have not   he ? I hope you keep he 
 properly humble . he want suppress from time to time . ' 

 ' he do . he be begin to take liberty with what he think be his 
 reputation . ' 

 ' already ! by Jove , he have cheek ! I do not   know about his reputation , but 
 he will come a cropper if he try that sort of thing . ' 

 ' so I tell he . I do not   think he believe it . ' 

 ' they never do when they first start off . what be that wreck on the 
 ground there ? ' 

 ' speciman of his late impertinence . ' torpenhow thrust the torn edge 
 of the canvas together and show the well - groom picture to the 
 Nilghai , who look at it for a moment and whistle . 

 ' it be a chromo , ' say he , - ' a chromo - litholeomargarine fake ! what 
 possess he to do it ? and yet how thoroughly he have catch the note 
 that catch a public who think with their boot and read with their 
 elbow ! the cold - blooded insolence of the work almost save it ; but 
 he must not   go on with this . have not   he be praise and cocker up too 
 much ? you know these people here have no sense of proportion . they will 
 call he a second Detaille and a third - hand Meissonier while his fashion 
 last . it be windy diet for a colt . ' 

 ' I do not   think it affect Dick much . you might as well call a young 
 wolf a lion and expect he to take the compliment in exchange for a 
 shin - bone . 

 Dick 's soul be in the bank . he be work for cash . ' 

 ' now he have throw up war work , I suppose he do not   see that the 
 obligation of the service be just the same , only the proprietor be 
 change . ' 

 ' how should he know ? he think he be his own master . ' 

 ' do he ? I could undeceive he for his good , if there be any virtue in 
 print . he want the whiplash . ' 

 ' lay it on with science , then . I would flay he myself , but I like he too 
 much . ' 

 ' I have   no scruple . he have the audacity to try to cut I out with a woman 
 at Cairo once . I forget that , but I remember now . ' 

 ' do he cut you out ? ' 

 ' you will see when I have deal with he . but , after all , what be the 
 good ? leave he alone and he will come home , if he have any stuff in he , 
 drag or wag his tail behind he . there be more in a week of life 
 than in a lively weekly . none the less I will slate he . I will slate he 
 ponderously in the Cataclysm . ' 

 ' good luck to you ; but I fancy nothing short of a crowbar would make 
 Dick wince . his soul seem to have be fire before we come across he . 

 he be intensely suspicious and utterly lawless . ' 

 ' Matter of temper , ' say the Nilghai . ' it be the same with horse . some 
 you wallop and they work , some you wallop and they jib , and some you 
 wallop and they go out for a walk with their hand in their pocket . ' 

 ' that be exactly what Dick have do , ' say Torpenhow . ' wait till he come 
 back . in the meantime , you can begin your slating here . I will show you 
 some of his last and bad work in his studio . ' 

 Dick have instinctively seek run water for a comfort to his mood of 
 mind . he be lean over the Embankment wall , watch the rush of the 
 Thames through the arch of Westminster Bridge . he begin by think of 
 Torpenhow 's advice , but , as of custom , lose himself in the study of the 
 face flock past . some have death write on their feature , and Dick 
 marvel that they could laugh . other , clumsy and coarse - build for 
 the most part , be alight with love ; other be merely draw and line 
 with work ; but there be something , Dick know , to be make out of they 
 all . the poor at least should suffer that he might learn , and the rich 
 should pay for the output of his learning . thus his credit in the world 
 and his cash balance at the bank would be increase . so much the well 
 for he . he have suffer . now he would take toll of the ill of other . 

 the fog be drive apart for a moment , and the sun shine , a blood - red 
 wafer , on the water . Dick watch the spot till he hear the voice of 
 the tide between the pier die down like the wash of the sea at low 
 tide . a girl hard press by her lover shout shamelessly , ' ah , get 
 away , you beast ! ' and a shift of the same wind that have open the fog 
 drive across Dick 's face the black smoke of a river - steamer at her berth 
 below the wall . he be blind for the moment , then spin round and find 
 himself face to face with - Maisie . 

 there be no mistaking . the year have turn the child to a woman , but 
 they have not alter the dark - gray eye , the thin scarlet lip , or the 
 firmly modelled mouth and chin ; and , that all should be as it be of 
 old , she wear a closely fitting gray dress . 

 since the human soul be finite and not in the least under its own 
 command , Dick , advancing , say ' Halloo ! ' after the manner of schoolboy , 
 and Maisie answer , ' oh , Dick , be that you ? ' then , against his will , 
 and before the brain newly release from consideration of the cash 
 balance have time to dictate to the nerve , every pulse of Dick 's body 
 throb furiously and his palate dry in his mouth . the fog shut down 
 again , and Maisie 's face be pearl - white through it . no word be speak , 
 but Dick fall into step at her side , and the two pace the embankment 
 together , keep the step as perfectly as in their afternoon excursion 
 to the mud - flat . then Dick , a little hoarsely - ' what have happen to 
 Amomma ? ' 

 ' he die , Dick . not cartridge ; over - eating . he be always greedy . be not 
 it funny ? ' 

 ' yes . no . do you mean Amomma ? ' 

 ' Ye - es . no . this . where have you come from ? ' 

 ' over there , ' he point eastward through the fog . ' and you ? ' 

 ' oh , I be in the north , - the black north , across all the Park . I be very 
 busy . ' 

 ' what do you do ? ' 

 ' I paint a great deal . that be all I have to do . ' 

 ' why , what be happen ? you have three hundred a year . ' 

 ' I have that still . I be paint ; that be all . ' 

 ' be you alone , then ? ' 

 ' there be a girl live with I . do not   walk so fast , Dick ; you be out of 
 step . ' 

 ' then you notice it too ? ' 

 ' of course I do . you be always out of step . ' 

 ' so I be . I be sorry . you go on with the painting ? ' 

 ' of course . I say I should . I be at the Slade , then at Merton 's in St. 
 John 's Wood , the big studio , then I pepper - pot , - I mean I go to the 
 National , - and now I be work under Kami . ' 

 ' but Kami be in Paris surely ? ' 

 ' no ; he have his teaching studio in Vitry - sur - Marne . I work with he in 
 the summer , and I live in London in the winter . I be a householder . ' 

 ' do you sell much ? ' 

 ' now and again , but not often . there be my ' bus . I must take it or lose 
 half an hour . good - bye , Dick . ' 

 ' good - bye , Maisie . will not   you tell I where you live ? I must see you 
 again ; and perhaps I could help you . I - I paint a little myself . ' 

 ' I may be in the Park to - morrow , if there be no work light . I walk 
 from the Marble Arch down and back again ; that be my little excursion . 
 but of course I shall see you again . ' she step into the omnibus and 
 be swallow up by the fog . 

 ' well - I - be - damned ! ' exclaim Dick , and return to the chamber . 

 Torpenhow and the Nilghai find he sit on the step to the studio 
 door , repeat the phrase with an awful gravity . 

 ' you will be more damned when I be do with you , ' say the Nilghai , 
 upheave his bulk from behind Torpenhow 's shoulder and wave a sheaf 
 of half - dry manuscript . ' Dick , it be of common report that you be 
 suffer from swell head . ' 

 ' Halloo , Nilghai . back again ? how be the Balkans and all the little 
 Balkans ? one side of your face be out of drawing , as usual . ' 

 ' never mind that . I be commission to smite you in print . torpenhow 
 refuse from false delicacy . I have   be overhaul the pot - boiler in 
 your studio . they be simply disgraceful . ' 

 ' Oho ! that be it , be it ? if you think you can slate I , you be wrong . you 
 can only describe , and you need as much room to turn in , on paper , as a 
 P. and O. cargo - boat . but continue , and be swift . I be go to bed . ' 

 ' H'm ! h'm ! h'm ! the first part only deal with your picture . here be 
 the peroration : " for work do without conviction , for power waste on 
 triviality , for labour expend with levity for the deliberate purpose 
 of win the easy applause of a fashion - drive public - - " ' that be 
 " his last Shot , " second edition . go on . ' 

 ' - - " public , there remain but one end , - the oblivion that be precede 
 by toleration and cenotaphe with contempt . from that fate Mr. Heldar 
 have yet to prove himself out of danger . ' 

 ' wow - wow - wow - wow - wow ! ' say Dick , profanely . ' it be a clumsy ending 
 and vile journalese , but it be quite true . and yet , ' - he spring to his 
 foot and snatch at the manuscript , - ' you scar , deboshe , batter 
 old gladiator ! you be send out when a war begin , to minister to the 
 blind , brutal , british public 's bestial thirst for blood . they have 
 no arena now , but they must have special correspondent . you be a fat 
 gladiator who come up through a trap - door and talk of what he be see . 
 you stand on precisely the same level as an energetic bishop , an affable 
 actress , a devastating cyclone , or - mine own sweet self . and you 
 presume to lecture I about my work ! Nilghai , if it be worth while I would 
 caricature you in four paper ! ' 

 the Nilghai wince . he have not think of this . 

 ' as it be , I shall take this stuff and tear it small - so ! ' the 
 manuscript flutter in slip down the dark well of the staircase . ' go 
 home , Nilghai , ' say Dick ; ' go home to your lonely little bed , and leave 
 I in peace . I be about to turn in till to - morrow . ' 

 ' why , it be not   seven yet ! ' say Torpenhow , with amazement . 

 ' it shall be two in the morning , if I choose , ' say Dick , back to the 
 studio door . ' I go to grapple with a serious crisis , and I shall not   want 
 any dinner . ' 

 the door shut and be lock . 

 ' what can you do with a man like that ? ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' leave he alone . he be as mad as a hatter . ' 

 at eleven there be a kicking on the studio door . ' be the Nilghai with 
 you still ? ' say a voice from within . ' then tell he he might have 
 condense the whole of his lumber nonsense into an epigram : " only 
 the free be bond , and only the bond be free . " tell he he be an idiot , 
 Torp , and tell he I be another . ' 

 ' all right . come out and have supper . you be smoke on an empty 
 stomach . ' 

 there be no answer . 





 CHAPTER V 

  ' I have a thousand man , ' say he , 
  ' to wait upon my will , 
  and tower nine upon the Tyne , 
  and three upon the Till . ' 

  ' and what care I for you man , ' say she , 
  ' or tower from Tyne to Till , 
  Sith you must go with I , ' she say , 
  ' to wait upon my will ? ' 

  Sir Hoggie and the fairy 
 next morning Torpenhow find Dick sink in deepest repose of tobacco . 

 ' well , madman , how d'you feel ? ' 

 ' I do not   know . I be try to find out . ' 

 ' you have much well do some work . ' 

 ' maybe ; but I be in no hurry . I have   make a discovery . Torp , there be too 
 much ego in my Cosmos . ' 

 ' not really ! be this revelation due to my lecture , or the Nilghai 's ? ' 

 ' it come to I suddenly , all on my own account . much too much ego ; and 
 now I be go to work . ' 

 he turn over a few half - finish sketch , drum on a new canvas , 
 clean three brush , set Binkie to bite the toe of the lay figure , 
 rattle through his collection of arm and accoutrement , and then go 
 out abruptly , declare that he have do enough for the day . 

 ' this be positively indecent , ' say Torpenhow , ' and the first time that 
 Dick have ever break up a light morning . perhaps he have find out 
 that he have a soul , or an artistic temperament , or something equally 
 valuable . 

 that come of leave he alone for a month . perhaps he have be go 
 out of evening . I must look to this . ' he ring for the bald - headed old 
 housekeeper , whom nothing could astonish or annoy . 

 ' Beeton , do Mr. Heldar dine out at all while I be out of town ? ' 

 ' never lay ' be dress - clothe out once , sir , all the time . mostly ' e 
 din in ; but ' e bring some most remarkable young gentleman up ' ere 
 after theatre once or twice . remarkable fancy they be . you gentleman 
 on the top floor do very much as you like , but it do seem to I , sir , 
 droppin ' a walkin'-stick down five flight o ' stair an ' then go 
 down four abreast to pick it up again at half - past two in the mornin ' , 
 singin , ' " bring back the whiskey , Willie darlin , ' " - not once or twice , 
 but score o ' time , - be not   charity to the other tenant . what I say be , 
 " do as you would be do by . " that be my motto . ' 

 ' of course ! of course ! I be afraid the top floor be not   the quiet in 
 the house . ' 

 ' I make no complaint , sir . I have speak to Mr. Heldar friendly , an ' 
 he laugh , an ' do I a picture of the missis that be as good as a 
 coloured print . it ' asn't   the high shine of a photograph , but what I say 
 be , " never look a gift - horse in the mouth . " Mr. Heldar 's dress - clothe 
 ' aven't   be on he for week . ' 

 ' then it be all right , ' say torpenhow to himself . ' orgy be healthy , 
 and Dick have a head of his own , but when it come to woman make 
 eye I be not so certain , - Binkie , never you be a man , little dorglum . 
 they be contrary brute , and they do thing without any reason . ' 

 Dick have turn northward across the Park , but he be walk in the 
 spirit on the mud - flat with Maisie . he laugh aloud as he remember 
 the day when he have deck Amomma 's horn with the ham - frill , and 
 Maisie , white with rage , have cuff he . how long those four year 
 seem in review , and how closely Maisie be connect with every hour 
 of they ! storm across the sea , and Maisie in a gray dress on the beach , 
 sweep her drench hair out of her eye and laugh at the homeward 
 race of the fishing - smack ; hot sunshine on the mud - flat , and Maisie 
 sniff scornfully , with her chin in the air ; Maisie fly before 
 the wind that thresh the foreshore and drive the sand like small shot 
 about her ear ; Maisie , very composed and independent , tell lie to 
 Mrs. Jennett while Dick support she with coarser perjury ; Maisie 
 pick her way delicately from stone to stone , a pistol in her hand 
 and her tooth firm - set ; and Maisie in a gray dress sit on the 
 grass between the mouth of a cannon and a nodding yellow sea - poppy . the 
 picture pass before he one by one , and the last stay the long . 

 Dick be perfectly happy with a quiet peace that be as new to his mind 
 as it be foreign to his experience . it never occur to he that 
 there might be other call upon his time than loaf across the Park in 
 the forenoon . 

 ' there be a good working light now , ' he say , watch his shadow 
 placidly . ' some poor devil ought to be grateful for this . and there be 
 Maisie . ' 

 she be walk towards he from the Marble Arch , and he see that no 
 mannerism of her gait have be change . it be good to find she still 
 Maisie , and , so to speak , his next - door neighbour . no greeting pass 
 between they , because there have be none in the old day . 

 ' what be you do out of your studio at this hour ? ' say Dick , as one 
 who be entitle to ask . 

 ' idle . just idle . I get angry with a chin and scrap it out . then I 
 leave it in a little heap of paint - chip and come away . ' 

 ' I know what palette - knifing mean . what be the piccy ? ' 

 ' a fancy head that would not   come right , - horrid thing ! ' 

 ' I do not   like work over scrap paint when I be do flesh . the grain 
 come up woolly as the paint dry . ' 

 ' not if you scrape properly . ' Maisie wave her hand to illustrate her 
 method . there be a dab of paint on the white cuff . Dick laugh . 

 ' you be as untidy as ever . ' 

 ' that come well from you . look at your own cuff . ' 

 ' by Jove , yes ! it be bad than your . I do not   think we have   much alter 
 in anything . let us see , though . ' he look at Maisie critically . the 
 pale blue haze of an autumn day creep between the tree - trunk of the 
 Park and make a background for the gray dress , the black velvet toque 
 above the black hair , and the resolute profile . 

 ' no , there be nothing change . how good it be ! d'you remember when I 
 fasten your hair into the snap of a hand - bag ? ' 

 Maisie nod , with a twinkle in her eye , and turn she full face to 
 Dick . 

 ' wait a minute , ' say he . ' that mouth be down at the corner a little . 

 who be be worry you , Maisie ? ' 

 ' no one but myself . I never seem to get on with my work , and yet I try 
 hard enough , and Kami say - - ' 

 ' " Continuez , mademoiselle . Continuez toujour , me enfant . " Kami be 
 depressing . I beg your pardon . ' 

 ' yes , that be what he say . he tell I last summer that I be do 
 well and he would let I exhibit this year . ' 

 ' not in this place , surely ? ' 

 ' of course not . the Salon . ' 

 ' you fly high . ' 

 ' I have   be beat my wing long enough . where do you exhibit , Dick ? ' 

 ' I do not   exhibit . I sell . ' 

 ' what be your line , then ? ' 

 ' have not   you hear ? ' Dick 's eye open . be this thing possible ? he 
 cast about for some mean of conviction . they be not far from the 
 Marble Arch . ' come up Oxford Street a little and I will show you . ' 

 a small knot of people stand round a print - shop that Dick know well . 

 ' some reproduction of my work inside , ' he say , with suppress triumph . 
 never before have success taste so sweet upon the tongue . ' you see the 
 sort of thing I paint . d'you like it ? ' 

 Maisie look at the wild whirling rush of a field - battery go into 
 action under fire . two artillery - man stand behind she in the crowd . 

 ' they have   chuck the off lead-'orse ' say one to the other . " E 's tore 
 up awful , but they be makin ' good time with the other . that lead - driver 
 drive well nor you , Tom . see ' ow cunnin ' ' e 's nursin ' ' be ' orse . ' 

 ' Number Three'll be off the limber , next jolt , ' be the answer . 

 ' no , ' e will not . see ' ow ' is foot 's braced against the iron ? ' E be all 
 right . ' 

 Dick watch Maisie 's face and swell with joy - fine , rank , vulgar 
 triumph . she be more interested in the little crowd than in the 
 picture . 

 that be something that she could understand . 

 ' and I want it so ! oh , I do want it so ! ' she say at last , under her 
 breath . 

 ' I , - all I ! ' say Dick , placidly . ' look at their face . it hit them . 
 they do not   know what make their eye and mouth open ; but I know . and I 
 know my work 's right . ' 

 ' yes . I see . oh , what a thing to have come to one ! ' 

 ' come to one , indeed ! I have to go out and look for it . what do you 
 think ? ' 

 ' I call it success . tell I how you get it . ' 

 they return to the Park , and Dick deliver himself of the saga of his 
 own doing , with all the arrogance of a young man speak to a woman . 

 from the beginning he tell the tale , the I - I - I be flash through the 
 record as telegraph - pole fly past the traveller . Maisie listen and 
 nod her head . the history of strife and privation do not move she 
 a hair' - breadth . at the end of each canto he would conclude , ' and that 
 give I some notion of handle colour , ' or light , or whatever it might 
 be that he have set out to pursue and understand . he lead her breathless 
 across half the world , speak as he have never speak in his life 
 before . 

 and in the flood - tide of his exaltation there come upon he a great 
 desire to pick up this maiden who nod her head and say , ' I 
 understand . go on , ' - to pick she up and carry she away with he , because 
 she be Maisie , and because she understand , and because she be his 
 right , and a woman to be desire above all woman . 

 then he check himself abruptly . ' and so I take all I want , ' he say , 
 ' and I have to fight for it . now you tell . ' 

 Maisie 's tale be almost as gray as her dress . it cover year of 
 patient toil back by savage pride that would not be break , though 
 dealer laugh , and fog delay work , and Kami be unkind and even 
 sarcastic , and girl in other studio be painfully polite . it have a 
 few bright spot , in picture accept at provincial exhibition , but 
 it wind up with the oft repeat wail , ' and so you see , Dick , I have no 
 success , though I work so hard . ' 

 then pity fill Dick . even thus have Maisie speak when she could not 
 hit the breakwater , half an hour before she have kiss he . and that have 
 happen yesterday . 

 ' never mind , ' he say . ' I will tell you something , if you will believe it . ' 
 the word be shape themselves of their own accord . ' the whole thing , 
 lock , stock , and barrel , be not   worth one big yellow sea - poppy below Fort 
 Keeling . ' 

 Maisie flush a little . ' it be all very well for you to talk , but you have 
 have the success and I have not . ' 

 ' let I talk , then . I know you will understand . Maisie , dear , it sound a 
 bit absurd , but those ten year never exist , and I have   come back again . 
 it really be just the same . can not   you see ? you be alone now and I be 
 alone . 

 what be the use of worry ? come to I instead , darling . ' 

 Maisie poke the gravel with her parasol . they be sit on a bench . 

 ' I understand , ' she say slowly . ' but I have   get my work to do , and I must 
 do it . ' 

 ' do it with I , then , dear . I will not   interrupt . ' 

 ' no , I could not . it be my work , - mine , - mine , - mine ! I have   be alone all 
 my life in myself , and I be not go to belong to anybody except myself . 
 I remember thing as well as you do , but that do not   count . we be 
 baby then , and we do not   know what be before we . Dick , do not   be 
 selfish . I think I see my way to a little success next year . do not   take 
 it away from I . ' 

 ' I beg your pardon , darling . it be my fault for speak stupidly . I 
 can not   expect you to throw up all your life just because I be back . I will 
 go to my own place and wait a little . ' 

 ' but , Dick , I do not   want you to - go - out of - my life , now you have   just 
 come back . ' 

 ' I be at your order ; forgive I . ' Dick devour the troubled little face 
 with his eye . there be triumph in they , because he could not conceive 
 that Maisie should refuse soon or later to love he , since he love 
 she . 

 ' it be wrong of I , ' say Maisie , more slowly than before ; ' it be wrong 
 and selfish ; but , oh , I have   be so lonely ! no , you misunderstand . now 
 I have   see you again , - it be absurd , but I want to keep you in my life . ' 

 ' naturally . we belong . ' 

 ' we do not ; but you always understand I , and there be so much in my work 
 that you could help I in . you know thing and the way of do thing . 
 you must . ' 

 ' I do , I fancy , or else I do not   know myself . then you will not   care to lose 
 sight of I altogether , and - you want I to help you in your work ? ' 

 ' yes ; but remember , Dick , nothing will ever come of it . that be why I 
 feel so selfish . can not   thing stay as they be ? I do want your help . ' 

 ' you shall have it . but let us consider . I must see your pic first , and 
 overhaul your sketch , and find out about your tendency . you should 
 see what the paper say about my tendency ! then I will give you good 
 advice , and you shall paint accord . be not   that it , Maisie ? ' 

 again there be triumph in Dick 's eye . 

 ' it be too good of you , - much too good . because you be console 
 yourself with what will never happen , and I know that , and yet I want to 
 keep you . do not   blame I later , please . ' 

 ' I be go into the matter with my eye open . moreover the Queen can 
 do no wrong . it be not   your selfishness that impress I . it be your 
 audacity in propose to make use of I . ' 

 ' Pooh ! you be only Dick , - and a print - shop . ' 

 ' very good : that be all I be . but , Maisie , you believe , do not   you , that I 
 love you ? I do not   want you to have any false notion about brother and 
 sister . ' 

 Maisie look up for a moment and drop her eye . 

 ' it be absurd , but - I believe . I wish I could send you away before you 
 get angry with I . but - but the girl that live with I be red - haired , 
 and an impressionist , and all our notion clash . ' 

 ' so do ours , I think . never mind . three month from to - day we shall be 
 laugh at this together . ' 

 Maisie shake her head mournfully . ' I know you would not   understand , and 
 it will only hurt you more when you find out . look at my face , Dick , and 
 tell I what you see . ' 

 they stand up and face each other for a moment . the fog be gather , 
 and it stifle the roar of the traffic of London beyond the railing . 
 Dick bring all his painfully acquire knowledge of face to bear on 
 the eye , mouth , and chin underneath the black velvet toque . 

 ' it be the same Maisie , and it be the same I , ' he say . ' we have   both nice 
 little will of our own , and one or other of we have to be break . now 
 about the future . I must come and see your picture some day , - I suppose 
 when the red - haired girl be on the premise . ' 

 ' sunday be my good time . you must come on Sundays . there be such 
 heap of thing I want to talk about and ask your advice about . now I 
 must get back to work . ' 

 ' try to find out before next Sunday what I be , ' say Dick . ' do not   take 
 my word for anything I have   tell you . good - bye , darling , and bless you . ' 

 Maisie steal away like a little gray mouse . Dick watch she till she 
 be out of sight , but he do not hear she say to herself , very soberly , 
 ' I be a wretch , - a horrid , selfish wretch . but it be Dick , and Dick will 
 understand . ' 

 no one have yet explain what actually happen when an irresistible 
 force meet the immovable post , though many have think deeply , even as 
 Dick think . he try to assure himself that Maisie would be lead in 
 a few week by his mere presence and discourse to a well way of 
 think . then he remember much too distinctly her face and all that 
 be write on it . 

 ' if I know anything of head , ' he say , ' there be everything in that face 
 but love . I shall have to put that in myself ; and that chin and mouth 
 will not   be win for nothing . but she be right . she know what she want , and 
 she be go to get it . what insolence ! I ! of all the people in the wide 
 world , to use I ! but then she be Maisie . there be no getting over that 
 fact ; and it be good to see she again . this business must have be 
 simmer at the back of my head for year .... she will use I as I use 
 Binat at Port Said . 

 she be quite right . it will hurt a little . I shall have to see she every 
 Sunday , - like a young man court a housemaid . she be sure to come 
 around ; and yet - that mouth be not   a yield mouth . I shall be want 
 to kiss she all the time , and I shall have to look at her picture , - I 
 do not   even know what sort of work she do yet , - and I shall have to 
 talk about Art , - woman 's art ! therefore , particularly and perpetually , 
 damn all variety of Art . it do I a good turn once , and now it be in 
 my way . I will go home and do some art . ' 

 half - way to the studio , Dick be smite with a terrible thought . the 
 figure of a solitary woman in the fog suggest it . 

 ' she be all alone in London , with a red - haired impressionist girl , who 
 probably have the digestion of an ostrich . Most red - haired people have . 

 Maisie be a bilious little body . they will eat like lone woman , - meal at 
 all hour , and tea with all meal . I remember how the student in Paris 
 use to pig along . she may fall ill at any minute , and I shall not   be able 
 to help . 

 Whew ! this be ten time bad than own a wife . ' 

 Torpenhow enter the studio at dusk , and look at Dick with eye full 
 of the austere love that spring up between man who have tug at the 
 same oar together and be yoke by custom and use and the intimacy of 
 toil . this be a good love , and , since it allow , and even encourage , 
 strife , recrimination , and brutal sincerity , do not die , but grow , 
 and be proof against any absence and evil conduct . 

 Dick be silent after he hand Torpenhow the fill pipe of council . he 
 think of Maisie and her possible need . it be a new thing to think of 
 anybody but Torpenhow , who could think for himself . here at last be an 
 outlet for that cash balance . he could adorn Maisie barbarically with 
 jewelry , - a thick gold necklace round that little neck , bracelet 
 upon the rounded arm , and ring of price upon her hand , - the cool , 
 temperate , ringless hand that he have take between his own . it be an 
 absurd thought , for Maisie would not even allow he to put one ring on 
 one finger , and she would laugh at golden trapping . it would be well 
 to sit with she quietly in the dusk , his arm around her neck and her 
 face on his shoulder , as befit husband and wife . Torpenhow 's boot 
 creak that night , and his strong voice jar . Dick 's brow contract 
 and he murmur an evil word because he have take all his success as a 
 right and part payment for past discomfort , and now he be check in 
 his stride by a woman who admit all the success and do not instantly 
 care for he . 

 ' I say , old man , ' say Torpenhow , who have make one or two vain attempt 
 at conversation , ' I have not   put your back up by anything I have   say 
 lately , have I ? ' 

 ' you ! no . how could you ? ' 

 ' liver out of order ? ' 

 ' the truly healthy man do not   know he have a liver . I be only a bit 
 worried about thing in general . I suppose it be my soul . ' 

 ' the truly healthy man do not   know he have a soul . what business have 
 you with luxury of that kind ? ' 

 ' it come of itself . who be the man that say that we be all island 
 shout lie to each other across sea of misunderstanding ? ' 

 ' he be right , whoever he be , - except about the misunderstanding . I do not 
 think we could misunderstand each other . ' 

 the blue smoke curl back from the ceiling in cloud . then Torpenhow , 
 insinuatingly - ' Dick , be it a woman ? ' 

 ' be hang if it be anything remotely resemble a woman ; and if you 
 begin to talk like that , I will hire a red - brick studio with white paint 
 trimming , and begonia and petunias and blue Hungarias to play among 
 three - and - sixpenny pot - palm , and I will mount all my pic in aniline - dye 
 plush plaster , and I will invite every woman who maunder over what her 
 guide - book tell she be art , and you shall receive them , Torp , - in a 
 snuff - brown velvet coat with yellow trouser and an orange tie . you will 
 like that ? ' 

 ' too thin , Dick . a well man than you once deny with cursing and 
 swearing . you have   overdone it , just as he do . it be no business of mine , 
 of course , but it be comfort to think that somewhere under the star 
 there be save up for you a tremendous thrashing . whether it will come 
 from heaven or earth , I do not   know , but it be bind to come and break you 
 up a little . you want hammer . ' 

 Dick shiver . ' all right , ' say he . ' when this island be disintegrate , 
 it will call for you . ' 

 ' I shall come round the corner and help to disintegrate it some more . 

 we be talk nonsense . come along to a theatre . ' 





 CHAPTER VI 

  ' and you may lead a thousand man , 
  nor ever draw the rein , 
  but ere ye lead the Faery Queen 
  ' twill burst your heart in twain . ' 

  he have slip his foot from the stirrup - bar , 
  the bridle from his hand , 
  and he be bind by hand and foot 
  to the Queen o ' Faery - land . 

  Sir Hoggie and the Fairies . 
 some week later , on a very foggy Sunday , Dick be return across the 
 Park to his studio . ' this , ' he say , ' be evidently the thrashing that 
 Torp mean . it hurt more than I expect ; but the Queen can do no 
 wrong ; and she certainly have some notion of draw . ' 

 he have just finish a Sunday visit to Maisie , - always under the green 
 eye of the red - haired impressionist girl , whom he learn to hate 
 at sight , - and be tingle with a keen sense of shame . Sunday after 
 Sunday , put on his good clothe , he have walk over to the untidy 
 house north of the Park , first to see Maisie 's picture , and then to 
 criticise and advise upon they as he realise that they be production 
 on which advice would not be waste . Sunday after Sunday , and his love 
 grow with each visit , he have be compel to cram his heart back from 
 between his lip when it prompt he to kiss Maisie several time and 
 very much indeed . Sunday after Sunday , the head above the heart have 
 warn he that Maisie be not yet attainable , and that it would be 
 well to talk as connectedly as possible upon the mystery of the 
 craft that be all in all to she . therefore it be his fate to endure 
 weekly torture in the studio build out over the clammy back garden of a 
 frail stuffy little villa where nothing be ever in its right place and 
 nobody ever call , - to endure and to watch Maisie move to and fro 
 with the teacup . he abhor tea , but , since it give he a little 
 long time in her presence , he drink it devoutly , and the red - haired 
 girl sit in an untidy heap and eye he without speak . she be always 
 watch he . 

 once , and only once , when she have leave the studio , Maisie show he 
 an album that hold a few poor cutting from provincial paper , - the 
 brief of hurried note on some of her picture send to outlying 
 exhibition . Dick stoop and kiss the paint - smudge thumb on the open 
 page . ' oh , my love , my love , ' he mutter , ' do you value these thing ? 
 chuck them into the waste - paper basket ! ' 

 ' not till I get something well , ' say Maisie , shut the book . 

 then Dick , move by no respect for his public and a very deep regard for 
 the maiden , do deliberately propose , in order to secure more of these 
 coveted cutting , that he should paint a picture which Maisie should 
 sign . 

 ' that be childish , ' say Maisie , ' and I do not   think it of you . it must 
 be my work . mine , - mine , - mine ! ' 

 ' go and design decorative medallion for rich brewer ' house . you be 
 thoroughly good at that . ' Dick be sick and savage . 

 ' well thing than medallion , Dick , ' be the answer , in tone that 
 recall a gray - eyed atom 's fearless speech to Mrs. Jennett . Dick would 
 have abase himself utterly , but that other girl trail in . 

 next Sunday he lay at Maisie 's foot small gift of pencil that could 
 almost draw of themselves and colour in whose permanence he believe , 
 and he be ostentatiously attentive to the work in hand . it demand , 
 among other thing , an exposition of the faith that be in he . 

 Torpenhow 's hair would have stand on end have he hear the fluency with 
 which Dick preach his own gospel of Art . 

 a month before , Dick would have be equally astonish ; but it be 
 Maisie 's will and pleasure , and he drag his word together to make 
 plain to her comprehension all that have be hide to himself of the 
 why s and wherefore of work . there be not the least difficulty in do 
 a thing if you only know how to do it ; the trouble be to explain your 
 method . 

 ' I could put this right if I have a brush in my hand , ' say Dick , 
 despairingly , over the modelling of a chin that Maisie complain would 
 not ' look flesh , ' - it be the same chin that she have scrap out with 
 the palette knife , - ' but I find it almost impossible to teach you . 
 there be a queer grin , dutch touch about your painting that I like ; but 
 I have   a notion that you be weak in drawing . you foreshorten as though you 
 never use the model , and you have   catch Kami 's pasty way of deal with 
 flesh in shadow . then , again , though you do not   know it yourself , you 
 shirk hard work . suppose you spend some of your time on line alone . line 
 do not   allow of shirk . oil do , and three square inch of flashy , 
 tricky stuff in the corner of a pic sometimes carry a bad thing off , - as 
 I know . that be immoral . do line - work for a little while , and then I can 
 tell more about your power , as old Kami use to say . ' 

 Maisie protest ; she do not care for the pure line . 

 ' I know , ' say Dick . ' you want to do your fancy head with a bunch of 
 flower at the base of the neck to hide bad modelling . ' the red - haired 
 girl laugh a little . ' you want to do landscape with cattle knee - deep 
 in grass to hide bad drawing . you want to do a great deal more than 
 you can do . you have sense of colour , but you want form . Colour 's a 
 gift , - put it aside and think no more about it , - but form you can be 
 drill into . 

 now , all your fancy head - and some of they be very good - will keep you 
 exactly where you be . with line you must go forward or backward , and it 
 will show up all your weakness . ' 

 ' but other people - - ' begin Maisie . 

 ' you must not   mind what other people do . if their soul be your soul , 
 it would be different . you stand and fall by your own work , remember , 
 and it be waste of time to think of any one else in this battle . ' 

 Dick pause , and the longing that have be so resolutely put away come 
 back into his eye . he look at Maisie , and the look ask as plainly 
 as word , be it not time to leave all this barren wilderness of canvas 
 and counsel and join hand with Life and Love ? 

 Maisie assent to the new programme of school so adorably that Dick 
 could hardly restrain himself from pick she up then and there and 
 carry she off to the near registrar 's office . it be the implicit 
 obedience to the speak word and the blank indifference to the unspoken 
 desire that baffle and buffet his soul . he hold authority in that 
 house , - authority limit , indeed , to one - half of one afternoon in 
 seven , but very real while it last . Maisie have learn to appeal 
 to he on many subject , from the proper packing of picture to the 
 condition of a smoky chimney . the red - haired girl never consult he 
 about anything . 

 on the other hand , she accept his appearance without protest , and 
 watch he always . he discover that the meal of the establishment 
 be irregular and fragmentary . they depend chiefly on tea , pickle , 
 and biscuit , as he have suspect from the beginning . the girl be 
 suppose to market week and week about , but they live , with the help of 
 a charwoman , as casually as the young raven . Maisie spend most of her 
 income on model , and the other girl revel in apparatus as refine 
 as her work be rough . arm with knowledge , dear - buy from the Docks , 
 Dick warn Maisie that the end of semi - starvation mean the crippling 
 of power to work , which be considerably bad than death . 

 Maisie take the warning , and give more thought to what she eat and 
 drank . when his trouble return upon he , as it generally do in the 
 long winter twilight , the remembrance of that little act of domestic 
 authority and his coercion with a hearth - brush of the smoky drawing - room 
 chimney sting Dick like a whip - lash . 

 he conceive that this memory would be the extreme of his suffering , 
 till one Sunday , the red - haired girl announce that she would make a 
 study of Dick 's head , and that he would be good enough to sit still , 
 and - quite as an afterthought - look at Maisie . he sit , because he could 
 not well refuse , and for the space of half an hour he reflect on all 
 the people in the past whom he have lay open for the purpose of his 
 own craft . he remember Binat most distinctly , - that Binat who have once 
 be an artist and talk about degradation . 

 it be the mere monochrome roughing in of a head , but it present the 
 dumb waiting , the longing , and , above all , the hopeless enslavement of 
 the man , in a spirit of bitter mockery . 

 ' I will buy it , ' say Dick , promptly , ' at your own price . ' 

 ' my price be too high , but I dare say you will be as grateful if - - ' the 
 wet sketch , flutter from the girl 's hand and fall into the ash of 
 the studio stove . when she pick it up it be hopelessly smudge . 

 ' oh , it be all spoil ! ' say Maisie . ' and I never see it . be it like ? ' 

 ' thank you , ' say Dick under his breath to the red - haired girl , and he 
 remove himself swiftly . 

 ' how that man hat I ! ' say the girl . ' and how he love you , Maisie ! ' 

 ' what nonsense ? I know Dick 's very fond of I , but he have his work to 
 do , and I have mine . ' 

 ' yes , he be fond of you , and I think he know there be something in 
 impressionism , after all . Maisie , can not   you see ? ' 

 ' see ? see what ? ' 

 ' nothing ; only , I know that if I could get any man to look at I as that 
 man look at you , I would - I do not   know what I would do . but he hat I . oh , 
 how he hat I ! ' 

 she be not altogether correct . Dick 's hatred be temper with 
 gratitude for a few moment , and then he forget the girl entirely . only 
 the sense of shame remain , and he be nurse it across the Park 
 in the fog . ' there will be an explosion one of these day , ' he say 
 wrathfully . ' but it be not   Maisie 's fault ; she be right , quite right , as 
 far as she know , and I can not   blame she . this business have be go on 
 for three month nearly . 

 three month ! - and it cost I ten year ' knock about to get at the 
 notion , the mere raw notion , of my work . that be true ; but then I 
 do not   have pin , drawing - pin , and palette - knife , stick into I every 
 Sunday . 

 oh , my little darling , if ever I break you , somebody will have a very 
 bad time of it . no , she will not . I would be as big a fool about she as I 
 be now . I will poison that red - haired girl on my wedding - day , - she be 
 unwholesome , - and now I will pass on these present bad time to Torp . ' 

 Torpenhow have be move to lecture Dick more than once lately on the 
 sin of levity , and Dick listen and reply not a word . in the week 
 between the first few sunday of his discipline he have fling himself 
 savagely into his work , resolve that Maisie should at least know the 
 full stretch of his power . then he have teach Maisie that she must 
 not pay the least attention to any work outside her own , and Maisie have 
 obey he all too well . she take his counsel , but be not interested 
 in his picture . 

 ' your thing smell of tobacco and blood , ' she say once . ' can not   you do 
 anything except soldier ? ' 

 ' I could do a head of you that would startle you , ' think 
 Dick , - this be before the red - haired girl have bring he under 
 the guillotine , - but he only say , ' I be very sorry , ' and harrow 
 Torpenhow 's soul that evening with blasphemy against Art . later , 
 insensibly and to a large extent against his own will , he cease to 
 interest himself in his own work . 

 for Maisie 's sake , and to soothe the self - respect that it seem to he 
 he lose each Sunday , he would not consciously turn out bad stuff , but , 
 since Maisie do not care even for his good , it be well not to 
 do anything at all save wait and mark time between Sunday and Sunday . 
 Torpenhow be disgusted as the week go by fruitless , and then 
 attack he one Sunday evening when Dick feel utterly exhausted after 
 three hour ' bite self - restraint in Maisie 's presence . there be 
 Language , and Torpenhow withdraw to consult the Nilghai , who have come in 
 to talk continental politic . 

 ' bone - idle , be he ? careless , and touch in the temper ? ' say the 
 Nilghai . 

 ' it be not   worth worry over . Dick be probably play the fool with a 
 woman . ' 

 ' be not   that bad enough ? ' 

 ' no . she may throw he out of gear and knock his work to piece for 
 a while . she may even turn up here some day and make a scene on the 
 staircase : one never know . but until Dick speak of his own accord you 
 have well not touch he . he be no easy - temper man to handle . ' 

 ' no ; I wish he be . he be such an aggressive , cocksure , you - be - damned 
 fellow . ' 

 ' he will get that knock out of he in time . he must learn that he can not 
 storm up and down the world with a box of moist tube and a slick brush . 

 you be fond of he ? ' 

 ' I would take any punishment that be in store for he if I could ; but the 
 bad of it be , no man can save his brother . ' 

 ' no , and the worser of it be , there be no discharge in this war . Dick 
 must learn his lesson like the rest of we . talk of war , there will be 
 trouble in the Balkans in the spring . ' 

 ' that trouble be long come . I wonder if we could drag Dick out there 
 when it come off ? ' 

 Dick enter the room soon afterwards , and the question be put to he . 

 ' not good enough , ' he say shortly . ' I be too comf'y where I be . ' 

 ' surely you be not   take all the stuff in the paper seriously ? ' say 
 the Nilghai . ' your vogue will be end in less than six month , - the 
 public will know your touch and go on to something new , - and where will 
 you be then ? ' 

 ' here , in England . ' 

 ' when you might be do decent work among we out there ? nonsense ! I 
 shall go , the Keneu will be there , Torp will be there , Cassavetti will 
 be there , and the whole lot of we will be there , and we shall have as 
 much as ever we can do , with unlimited fighting and the chance for you 
 of see thing that would make the reputation of three verestchagin . ' 

 ' um ! ' say Dick , pull at his pipe . 

 ' you prefer to stay here and imagine that all the world be gap at 
 your picture ? just think how full an average man 's life be of his own 
 pursuit and pleasure . when twenty thousand of he find time to look 
 up between mouthful and grunt something about something they be not 
 the least interested in , the net result be call fame , reputation , or 
 notoriety , accord to the taste and fancy of the speller my lord . ' 

 ' I know that as well as you do . give I credit for a little gumption . ' 

 ' be hang if I do ! ' 

 ' be hang , then ; you probably will be , - for a spy , by excited Turks . 

 Heigh - ho ! I be weary , dead weary , and virtue have go out of I . ' Dick 
 drop into a chair , and be fast asleep in a minute . 

 ' that be a bad sign , ' say the Nilghai , in an undertone . 

 Torpenhow pick the pipe from the waistcoat where it be begin to 
 burn , and put a pillow behind the head . ' we can not   help ; we can not   help , ' 
 he say . ' it be a good ugly sort of old cocoanut , and I be fond of it . 
 there be the scar of the wipe he get when he be cut over in the square . ' 

 ' should not   wonder if that have make he a trifle mad . ' 

 ' I should . he be a most businesslike madman . ' 

 then Dick begin to snore furiously . 

 ' oh , here , no affection can stand this sort of thing . wake up , Dick , and 
 go and sleep somewhere else , if you intend to make a noise about it . ' 

 ' when a cat have be out on the tile all night , ' say the Nilghai , in 
 his beard , ' I notice that she usually sleep all day . this be natural 
 history . ' 

 Dick stagger away rub his eye and yawn . in the night - watch 
 he be overtake with an idea , so simple and so luminous that he 
 wonder he have never conceive it before . it be full of craft . he 
 would seek Maisie on a week - day , - would suggest an excursion , and would 
 take she by train to Fort Keeling , over the very ground that they two 
 have tread together ten year ago . 

 ' as a general rule , ' he explain to his chin - lather reflection in the 
 morning , ' it be not   safe to cross an old trail twice . thing remind one 
 of thing , and a cold wind get up , and you feel sad ; but this be an 
 exception to every rule that ever be . I will go to Maisie at once . ' 

 fortunately , the red - haired girl be out shop when he arrive , and 
 Maisie in a paint - spatter blouse be war with her canvas . she be 
 not pleased to see he ; for week - day visit be a stretch of the bond ; 
 and it need all his courage to explain his errand . 

 ' I know you have   be work too hard , ' he conclude , with an air of 
 authority . ' if you do that , you will break down . you have much well 
 come . ' 

 ' where ? ' say Maisie , wearily . she have be stand before her easel 
 too long , and be very tired . 

 ' anywhere you please . we will take a train to - morrow and see where it 
 stop . we will have lunch somewhere , and I will bring you back in the 
 evening . ' 

 ' if there be a good working light to - morrow , I lose a day . ' Maisie 
 balance the heavy white chestnut palette irresolutely . 

 Dick bite back an oath that be hurry to his lip . he have not yet 
 learn patience with the maiden to whom her work be all in all . 

 ' you will lose ever so many more , dear , if you use every hour of working 
 light . Overwork 's only murderous idleness . do not   be unreasonable . I will 
 call for you to - morrow after breakfast early . ' 

 ' but surely you be go to ask - - ' 

 ' no , I be not . I want you and nobody else . besides , she hat I as much 
 as I hate she . she will not   care to come . to - morrow , then ; and pray that we 
 get sunshine . ' 

 Dick go away delighted , and by consequence do no work whatever . 

 he strangle a wild desire to order a special train , but buy a great 
 gray kangaroo cloak line with glossy black marten , and then retire 
 into himself to consider thing . 

 ' I be go out for the day to - morrow with Dick , ' say Maisie to the 
 red - haired girl when the latter return , tired , from marketing in the 
 Edgware road . 

 ' he deserve it . I shall have the studio floor thoroughly scrub while 
 you be away . it be very dirty . ' 

 Maisie have enjoy no sort of holiday for month and look forward to 
 the little excitement , but not without misgiving . 

 ' there be nobody nice than Dick when he talk sensibly , she though , 
 but I be sure he will be silly and worry I , and I be sure I can not   tell he 
 anything he would like to hear . if he would only be sensible , I should like he 
 so much well . ' 

 Dick 's eye be full of joy when he make his appearance next morning 
 and see Maisie , gray - ulstere and black - velvet - hat , stand in the 
 hallway . palace of marble , and not sordid imitation of grain wood , 
 be surely the fit background for such a divinity . the red - haired 
 girl draw she into the studio for a moment and kiss she hurriedly . 

 Maisie 's eyebrow climb to the top of her forehead ; she be altogether 
 unused to these demonstration . ' mind my hat , ' she say , hurry away , 
 and run down the step to Dick wait by the hansom . 

 ' be you quite warm enough ! be you sure you would not   like some more 
 breakfast ? put the cloak over your knee . ' 

 ' I be quite comf'y , thank . where be we go , Dick ? oh , do stop sing 
 like that . People will think we be mad . ' 

 ' let them think , - if the exertion do not   kill they . they do not   know who 
 we be , and I be sure I do not   care who they be . my faith , Maisie , you be 
 look lovely ! ' 

 Maisie star directly in front of she and do not reply . the wind of a 
 keen clear winter morning have put colour into her cheek . Overhead , 
 the creamy - yellow smoke - cloud be thin away one by one against a 
 pale - blue sky , and the improvident sparrow break off from water - spout 
 committee and cab - rank cabal to clamour of the coming of spring . 

 ' it will be lovely weather in the country , ' say Dick . 

 ' but where be we go ? ' 

 ' wait and see . ' 

 the stop at Victoria , and Dick seek ticket . for less than half the 
 fraction of an instant it occur to Maisie , comfortably settle by the 
 waiting - room fire , that it be much more pleasant to send a man to the 
 booking - office than to elbow one 's own way through the crowd . Dick put 
 she into a Pullman , - solely on account of the warmth there ; and she 
 regard the extravagance with grave scandalise eye as the train move 
 out into the country . 

 ' I wish I know where we be go , ' she repeat for the twentieth time . 

 the name of a well - remember station flash by , towards the end of the 
 run , and Maisie be delighted . 

 ' oh , Dick , you villain ! ' 

 ' well , I think you might like to see the place again . you have not   be 
 here since the old time , have you ? ' 

 ' no . I never care to see Mrs. Jennett again ; and she be all that be 
 ever there . ' 

 ' not quite . look out a minute . there be the windmill above the 
 potato - field ; they have not   build villa there yet ; d'you remember when 
 I shut you up in it ? ' 

 ' yes . how she beat you for it ! I never tell it be you . ' 

 ' she guess . I jam a stick under the door and tell you that I be 
 bury Amomma alive in the potato , and you believe I . you have a 
 trusting nature in those day . ' 

 they laugh and lean to look out , identify ancient landmark with 
 many reminiscence . Dick fix his weather eye on the curve of Maisie 's 
 cheek , very near his own , and watch the blood rise under the clear 
 skin . he congratulate himself upon his cunning , and look that the 
 evening would bring he a great reward . 

 when the train stop they go out to look at an old town with new 
 eye . first , but from a distance , they regard the house of Mrs. 
 Jennett . 

 ' suppose she should come out now , what would you do ? ' say Dick , with 
 mock terror . 

 ' I should make a face . ' 

 ' Show , then , ' say Dick , drop into the speech of childhood . 

 Maisie make that face in the direction of the mean little villa , and 
 Dick laugh . 

 ' " this be disgraceful , " ' say Maisie , mimic Mrs. Jennett 's tone . 

 ' " Maisie , you run in at once , and learn the collect , gospel , and epistle 
 for the next three sunday . after all I have   teach you , too , and three 
 help every Sunday at dinner ! Dick 's always lead you into mischief . 
 if you be not   a gentleman , Dick , you might at least - " ' 

 the sentence end abruptly . Maisie remember when it have last be 
 use . 

 ' " try to behave like one , " ' say Dick , promptly . ' quite right . now we will 
 get some lunch and go on to Fort Keeling , - unless you would rather drive 
 there ? ' 

 ' we must walk , out of respect to the place . how little change it all 
 be ! ' 

 they turn in the direction of the sea through unaltered street , 
 and the influence of old thing lie upon they . presently they pass 
 a confectioner 's shop much consider in the day when their joint 
 pocket - money amount to a shilling a week . 

 ' Dick , have you any penny ? ' say Maisie , half to herself . 

 ' only three ; and if you think you be go to have two of them to buy 
 peppermint with , you be wrong . she say peppermint be not   ladylike . ' 

 again they laugh , and again the colour come into Maisie 's cheek as 
 the blood boil through Dick 's heart . after a large lunch they go 
 down to the beach and to Fort Keeling across the waste , wind - bite land 
 that no builder have think it worth his while to defile . the winter 
 breeze come in from the sea and sing about their ear . 

 ' maisie , ' say Dick , ' your nose be get a crude prussian blue at the 
 tip . 

 I will race you as far as you please for as much as you please . ' 

 she look round cautiously , and with a laugh set off , swiftly as the 
 ulster allow , till she be out of breath . 

 ' we use to run mile , ' she pant . ' it be absurd that we can not   run now . ' 

 ' old age , dear . this it be to get fat and sleek in town . when I wish 
 to pull your hair you generally run for three mile , shriek at the 
 top of your voice . I ought to know , because those shriek of your be 
 mean to call up Mrs. Jennett with a cane and - - ' 

 ' Dick , I never get you a beating on purpose in my life . ' 

 ' no , of course you never do . good heaven ! look at the sea . ' 

 ' why , it be the same as ever ! ' say Maisie . 

 Torpenhow have gather from Mr. Beeton that Dick , properly dress and 
 shave , have leave the house at half - past eight in the morning with a 
 travel - rug over his arm . the Nilghai roll in at mid - day for chess 
 and polite conversation . 

 ' it be bad than anything I imagine , ' say Torpenhow . 

 ' oh , the everlasting Dick , I suppose ! you fuss over he like a hen with 
 one chick . let he run riot if he think it will amuse he . you can whip a 
 young pup off feather , but you can not   whip a young man . ' 

 ' it be not   a woman . it be one woman ; and it be a girl . ' 

 ' where be your proof ? ' 

 ' he get up and go out at eight this morning , - get up in the middle of 
 the night , by Jove ! a thing he never do except when he be on service . 

 even then , remember , we have to kick he out of his blanket before the 
 fight begin at El - Maghrib . it be disgusting . ' 

 ' it look odd ; but maybe he be decide to buy a horse at last . he might 
 get up for that , might not   he ? ' 

 ' buy a blaze wheelbarrow ! he would have tell we if there be a horse in 
 the wind . it be a girl . ' 

 ' do not   be certain . perhaps it be only a married woman . ' 

 ' Dick have some sense of humour , if you have not . who get up in the gray 
 dawn to call on another man 's wife ? it be a girl . ' 

 ' let it be a girl , then . she may teach he that there be somebody else in 
 the world besides himself . ' 

 ' she will spoil his hand . she will waste his time , and she will marry he , and 
 ruin his work for ever . he will be a respectable married man before we can 
 stop he , and - he will ever go on the long trail again . ' 

 ' all quite possible , but the earth will not   spin the other way when that 
 happen .... no ! ho ! I would give something to see Dick " go wooing with the 
 boy . " do not   worry about it . these thing be with Allah , and we can only 
 look on . get the chessman . ' 

 the red - haired girl be lie down in her own room , star at the 
 ceiling . the footstep of people on the pavement sound , as they grow 
 indistinct in the distance , like a many - time - repeat kiss that be 
 all one long kiss . her hand be by her side , and they open and shut 
 savagely from time to time . 

 the charwoman in charge of the scrubbing of the studio knock at her 
 door : ' beg y ' pardon , miss , but in cleanin ' of a floor there be two , 
 not to say three , kind of soap , which be yaller , an ' mottle , an ' 
 disinfectink . 

 now , jist before I take my pail into the passage I think it would be 
 pre'ap jest as well if I be to come up ' ere an ' ask you what sort of 
 soap you be wishful that I should use on they board . the yaller soap , 
 miss - - ' 

 there be nothing in the speech to have cause the paroxysm of fury 
 that drive the red - haired girl into the middle of the room , almost 
 shout - ' do you suppose I care what you use ? any kind will do ! - any 
 kind ! ' 

 the woman flee , and the red - haired girl look at her own reflection in 
 the glass for an instant and cover her face with her hand . it be as 
 though she have shout some shameless secret aloud . 





 CHAPTER VII 

  Roses red and rose white 
  pluck I for my love 's delight . 

  she would none of all my posy , - 
  Bade I gather her blue rose . 

  half the world I wander through , 
  seek where such flower grow ; 
  half the world unto my quest 
  Answered but with laugh and jest . 

  it may be beyond the grave 
  she shall find what she would have . 

  Mine be but an idle quest , - 
  rose white and red be good ! - Blue Roses 
 the sea have not change . its water be low on the mud - bank , and 
 the Marazion Bell - buoy clank and swing in the tide - way . on the white 
 beach - sand dry stump of sea - poppy shiver and chatter . 

 ' I do not   see the old breakwater , ' say Maisie , under her breath . 

 ' let us be thankful that we have as much as we have . I do not   believe 
 they have   mount a single new gun on the fort since we be here . come 
 and look . ' 

 they come to the glacis of Fort Keeling , and sit down in a nook 
 shelter from the wind under the tarred throat of a forty - pounder 
 cannon . 

 ' now , if Ammoma be only here ! ' say Maisie . 

 for a long time both be silent . then Dick take Maisie 's hand and 
 call she by her name . 

 she shake her head and look out to sea . 

 ' Maisie , darling , do not   it make any difference ? ' 

 ' no ! ' between clenched tooth . ' I would - I would tell you if it do ; but it 
 do not , oh , Dick , please be sensible . ' 

 ' do not   you think that it ever will ? ' 

 ' no , I be sure it will not . ' 

 ' why ? ' 

 Maisie rest her chin on her hand , and , still regard the sea , speak 
 hurriedly - ' I know what you want perfectly well , but I can not   give it to 
 you , Dick . it be not   my fault ; indeed , it be not . if I feel that I 
 could care for any one - - but I do not   feel that I care . I simply do not 
 understand what the feeling mean . ' 

 ' be that true , dear ? ' 

 ' you have   be very good to I , Dickie ; and the only way I can pay you 
 back be by speak the truth . I dare not   tell a fib . I despise myself 
 quite enough as it be . ' 

 ' what in the world for ? ' 

 ' because - because I take everything that you give I and I give you 
 nothing in return . it be mean and selfish of I , and whenever I think of 
 it it worry I . ' 

 ' understand once for all , then , that I can manage my own affair , and if 
 I choose to do anything you be not   to blame . you have not   a single thing 
 to reproach yourself with , darling . ' 

 ' yes , I have , and talk only make it bad . ' 

 ' then do not   talk about it . ' 

 ' how can I help myself ? if you find I alone for a minute you be always 
 talk about it ; and when you be not   you look it . you do not   know how I 
 despise myself sometimes . ' 

 ' great goodness ! ' say Dick , nearly jump to his foot . ' speak the 
 truth now , Maisie , if you never speak it again ! do I - do this worrying 
 bear you ? ' 

 ' no . it do not . ' 

 ' you would tell I if it do ? ' 

 ' I should let you know , I think . ' 

 ' thank you . the other thing be fatal . but you must learn to forgive 
 a man when he be in love . he be always a nuisance . you must have know 
 that ? ' 

 Maisie do not consider the last question worth answering , and Dick be 
 force to repeat it . 

 ' there be other man , of course . they always worry just when I be in 
 the middle of my work , and want I to listen to they . ' 

 ' do you listen ? ' 

 ' at first ; and they could not   understand why I do not   care . and they use 
 to praise my picture ; and I think they mean it . I use to be proud 
 of the praise , and tell Kami , and - I shall never forget - once Kami 
 laugh at I . ' 

 ' you do not   like be laugh at , Maisie , do you ? ' 

 ' I hate it . I never laugh at other people unless - unless they do bad 
 work . 

 Dick , tell I honestly what you think of my picture generally , - of 
 everything of mine that you have   see . ' 

 ' " honest , honest , and honest over ! " ' quote Dick from a catchword of 
 long ago . ' tell I what Kami always say . ' 

 Maisie hesitate . ' he - he say that there be feel in they . ' 

 ' how dare you tell I a fib like that ? remember , I be under Kami for 
 two year . I know exactly what he say . ' 

 ' it be not   a fib . ' 

 ' it be bad ; it be a half - truth . Kami say , when he put his head on one 
 side , - so , - " Il y a du sentiment , mais il n'y a pas de parti pris . " ' he 
 roll the r threateningly , as Kami use to do . 

 ' yes , that be what he say ; and I be begin to think that he be 
 right . ' 

 ' certainly he be . ' Dick admit that two people in the world could do 
 and say no wrong . Kami be the man . 

 ' and now you say the same thing . it be so disheartening . ' 

 ' I be sorry , but you ask I to speak the truth . besides , I love you 
 too much to pretend about your work . it be strong , it be patient 
 sometimes , - not always , - and sometimes there be power in it , but there be 
 no special reason why it should be do at all . at least , that be how it 
 strike I . ' 

 ' there be no special reason why anything in the world should ever be 
 do . you know that as well as I do . I only want success . ' 

 ' you be go the wrong way to get it , then . have not   Kami ever tell you 
 so ? ' 

 ' do not   quote Kami to I . I want to know what you think . my work 's bad , 
 to begin with . ' 

 ' I do not   say that , and I do not   think it . ' 

 ' it be amateurish , then . ' 

 ' that it most certainly be not . you be a work - woman , darling , to your 
 boot - heel , and I respect you for that . ' 

 ' you do not   laugh at I behind my back ? ' 

 ' no , dear . you see , you be more to I than any one else . put this cloak 
 thing round you , or you will get chill . ' 

 Maisie wrap herself in the soft marten skin , turn the gray 
 kangaroo fur to the outside . 

 ' this be delicious , ' she say , rub her chin thoughtfully along the 
 fur . 

 ' well ? why be I wrong in try to get a little success ? ' 

 ' just because you try . do not   you understand , darling ? good work have 
 nothing to do with - do not   belong to - the person who do it . it be put 
 into he or she from outside . ' 

 ' but how do that affect - - ' 

 ' wait a minute . all we can do be to learn how to do our work , to be 
 master of our material instead of servant , and never to be afraid of 
 anything . ' 

 ' I understand that . ' 

 ' everything else come from outside ourselves . very good . if we sit down 
 quietly to work out notion that be send to we , we may or we may not 
 do something that be not   bad . a great deal depend on be master of the 
 brick and mortar of the trade . but the instant we begin to think 
 about success and the effect of our work - to play with one eye on the 
 gallery - we lose power and touch and everything else . at least that be 
 how I have find it . instead of be quiet and give every power 
 you possess to your work , you be fret over something which you can 
 neither help nor hinder by a minute . see ? ' 

 ' it be so easy for you to talk in that way . People like what you do . 
 do not   you ever think about the gallery ? ' 

 ' much too often ; but I be always punish for it by loss of power . it be 
 as simple as the Rule of Three . if we make light of our work by use 
 it for our own end , our work will make light of we , and , as we be the 
 weak , we shall suffer . ' 

 ' I do not   treat my work lightly . you know that it be everything to I . ' 

 ' of course ; but , whether you realise it or not , you give two stroke 
 for yourself to one for your work . it be not   your fault , darling . I do 
 exactly the same thing , and know that I be do it . Most of the french 
 school , and all the school here , drive the student to work for their 
 own credit , and for the sake of their pride . I be tell that all 
 the world be interested in my work , and everybody at Kami 's talk 
 turpentine , and I honestly believe that the world need elevate and 
 influencing , and all manner of impertinence , by my brush . by Jove , I 
 actually believe that ! when my little head be burst with a notion 
 that I could not   handle because I have not   sufficient knowledge of my 
 craft , I use to run about wonder at my own magnificence and get 
 ready to astonish the world . ' 

 ' but surely one can do that sometimes ? ' 

 ' very seldom with malice aforethought , darling . and when it be do it be 
 such a tiny thing , and the world 's so big , and all but a millionth part 
 of it do not   care . Maisie , come with I and I will show you something of 
 the size of the world . one can no more avoid work than eat , - that 
 go on by itself , - but try to see what you be work for . I know such 
 little heaven that I could take you to , - island tuck away under the 
 line . 

 you sight they after week of crash through water as black as black 
 marble because it be so deep , and you sit in the fore - chain day after 
 day and see the sun rise almost afraid because the sea 's so lonely . ' 

 ' who be afraid ? - you , or the sun ? ' 

 ' the sun , of course . and there be noise under the sea , and sound 
 overhead in a clear sky . then you find your island alive with hot moist 
 orchid that make mouth at you and can do everything except talk . 

 there be a waterfall in it three hundred foot high , just like a sliver of 
 green jade lace with silver ; and million of wild bee live up in the 
 rock ; and you can hear the fat cocoanut fall from the palm ; and 
 you order an ivory - white servant to sle you a long yellow hammock with 
 tassel on it like ripe maize , and you put up your foot and hear the 
 bee hum and the water fall till you go to sleep . ' 

 ' can one work there ? ' 

 ' certainly . one must do something always . you hang your canvas up in a 
 palm tree and let the parrot criticise . when they scuffle you heave a 
 ripe custard - apple at they , and it burst in a lather of cream . there 
 be hundred of place . come and see they . ' 

 ' I do not   quite like that place . it sound lazy . tell I another . ' 

 ' what do you think of a big , red , dead city build of red sandstone , 
 with raw green aloe grow between the stone , lie out neglect on 
 honey - colour sand ? there be forty dead king there , Maisie , each in 
 a gorgeous tomb fine than all the other . you look at the palace and 
 street and shop and tank , and think that man must live there , 
 till you find a wee gray squirrel rub its nose all alone in the 
 market - place , and a jewel peacock strut out of a carve doorway and 
 spread its tail against a marble screen as fine pierce as point - lace . 
 then a monkey - a little black monkey - walk through the main square to 
 get a drink from a tank forty foot deep . he slide down the creeper to 
 the water 's edge , and a friend hold he by the tail , in case he should 
 fall in . ' 

 ' be that all true ? ' 

 ' I have be there and see . then evening come , and the light change 
 till it be just as though you stand in the heart of a king - opal . a little 
 before sundown , as punctually as clockwork , a big bristly wild boar , 
 with all his family follow , trot through the city gate , churn the 
 foam on his tusk . you climb on the shoulder of a blind black stone god 
 and watch that pig choose himself a palace for the night and stump in 
 wag his tail . then the night - wind get up , and the sand move , and 
 you hear the desert outside the city singing , " now I lie I down to 
 sleep , " and everything be dark till the moon rise . Maisie , darling , 
 come with I and see what the world be really like . it be very lovely , 
 and it be very horrible , - but I will not   let you see anything horrid , - and 
 it do not   care for your life or mine for picture or anything else 
 except do its own work and make love . come , and I will show you how 
 to brew sangaree , and sle a hammock , and - oh , thousand of thing , and 
 you will see for yourself what colour mean , and we will find out together 
 what love mean , and then , maybe , we shall be allow to do some good 
 work . come away ! ' 

 ' why ? ' say Maisie . 

 ' how can you do anything until you have see everything , or as much as 
 you can ? and besides , darling , I love you . come along with I . you 
 have no business here ; you do not   belong to this place ; you be half a 
 gipsy , - your face tell that ; and I - even the smell of open water make 
 I restless . come across the sea and be happy ! ' 

 he have rise to his foot , and stand in the shadow of the gun , look 
 down at the girl . the very short winter afternoon have wear away , and , 
 before they know , the winter moon be walk the untroubled sea . long 
 rule line of silver show where a ripple of the rise tide be 
 turn over the mud - bank . the wind have drop , and in the intense 
 stillness they could hear a donkey crop the frosty grass many yard 
 away . a faint beating , like that of a muffle drum , come out of the 
 moon - haze . 

 ' what be that ? ' say Maisie , quickly . ' it sound like a heart beat . 

 where be it ? ' 

 Dick be so angry at this sudden wrench to his pleading that he could 
 not trust himself to speak , and in this silence catch the sound . maisie 
 from her seat under the gun watch he with a certain amount of fear . 

 she wish so much that he would be sensible and cease to worry she with 
 over - sea emotion that she both could and could not understand . she be 
 not prepare , however , for the change in his face as he listen . 

 ' it be a steamer , ' he say , - ' a twin - screw steamer , by the beat . I can not 
 make she out , but she must be stand very close in - shore . ah ! ' as the 
 red of a rocket streak the haze , ' she be stand in to signal before 
 she clear the Channel . ' 

 ' be it a wreck ? ' say Maisie , to whom these word be as Greek . 

 Dick 's eye be turn to the sea . ' wreck ! what nonsense ! she be only 
 report herself . red rocket forward - there be a green light aft now , 
 and two red rocket from the bridge . ' 

 ' what do that mean ? ' 

 ' it be the signal of the Cross Keys Line run to Australia . I wonder 
 which steamer it be . ' the note of his voice have change ; he seem to 
 be talk to himself , and Maisie do not approve of it . the moonlight 
 break the haze for a moment , touch the black side of a long steamer 
 work down Channel . ' four mast and three funnel - she be in deep 
 draught , too . that must be the Barralong , or the Bhutia . no , the Bhutia 
 have a clopper bow . it be the Barralong , to Australia . she will lift the 
 Southern Cross in a week , - lucky old tub ! - oh , lucky old tub ! ' 

 he star intently , and move up the slope of the fort to get a well 
 view , but the mist on the sea thicken again , and the beating of the 
 screw grow fainter . Maisie call to he a little angrily , and he 
 return , still keep his eye to seaward . ' have you ever see the 
 Southern Cross blaze right over your head ? ' he ask . ' it be superb ! ' 

 ' no , ' she say shortly , ' and I do not   want to . if you think it be so 
 lovely , why do not   you go and see it yourself ? ' 

 she raise her face from the soft blackness of the marten skin about 
 her throat , and her eye shine like diamond . the moonlight on the gray 
 kangaroo fur turn it to frost silver of the cold . 

 ' by Jove , Maisie , you look like a little heathen idol tuck up there . ' 
 the eye show that they do not appreciate the compliment . ' I be 
 sorry , ' he continue . ' the Southern Cross be not   worth look at unless 
 someone help you to see . that steamer be out of hearing . ' 

 ' Dick , ' she say quietly , ' suppose I be to come to you now , - be quiet 
 a minute , - just as I be , and care for you just as much as I do . ' 

 ' not as a brother , though you say you do not   - in the Park . ' 

 ' I never have a brother . suppose I say , " take I to those place , and in 
 time , perhaps , I might really care for you , " what would you do ? ' 

 ' send you straight back to where you come from , in a cab . no , I 
 would not ; I would let you walk . but you could not   do it , dear . and I would not 
 run the risk . you be worth wait for till you can come without 
 reservation . ' 

 ' do you honestly believe that ? ' 

 ' I have a hazy sort of idea that I do . have it never strike you in that 
 light ? ' 

 ' Ye - es . I feel so wicked about it . ' 

 ' wickeder than usual ? ' 

 ' you do not   know all I think . it be almost too awful to tell . ' 

 ' never mind . you promise to tell I the truth - at least . ' 

 ' it be so ungrateful of I , but - but , though I know you care for I , and 
 I like to have you with I , I would - I would even sacrifice you , if that would 
 bring I what I want . ' 

 ' my poor little darling ! I know that state of mind . it do not   lead to 
 good work . ' 

 ' you be not   angry ? remember , I do despise myself . ' 

 ' I be not exactly flattered , - I have guess as much before , - but I be not 
 angry . I be sorry for you . surely you ought to have leave a littleness 
 like that behind you , year ago . ' 

 ' you have   no right to patronise I ! I only want what I have work for so 
 long . it come to you without any trouble , and - and I do not   think it be 
 fair . ' 

 ' what can I do ? I would give ten year of my life to get you what you want . 

 but I can not   help you ; even I can not   help . ' 

 a murmur of dissent from Maisie . he go on - ' and I know by what you 
 have just say that you be on the wrong road to success . it be not   get 
 at by sacrifice other people , - I have   have that much knock into I ; 
 you must sacrifice yourself , and live under order , and never think for 
 yourself , and never have real satisfaction in your work except just at 
 the beginning , when you be reach out after a notion . ' 

 ' how can you believe all that ? ' 

 ' there be no question of belief or disbelief . that be the law , and you 
 take it or refuse it as you please . I try to obey , but I can not , and 
 then my work turn bad on my hand . under any circumstance , remember , 
 four - fifth of everybody 's work must be bad . but the remnant be worth 
 the trouble for its own sake . ' 

 ' be not   it nice to get credit even for bad work ? ' 

 ' it be much too nice . but - - May I tell you something ? it be not   a pretty 
 tale , but you be so like a man that I forget when I be talk to you . ' 

 ' tell I . ' 

 ' once when I be out in the Soudan I go over some ground that we have 
 be fight on for three day . there be twelve hundred dead ; and we 
 have not   time to bury they . ' 

 ' how ghastly ! ' 

 ' I have be at work on a big double - sheet sketch , and I be wonder 
 what people would think of it at home . the sight of that field teach 
 I a good deal . it look just like a bed of horrible toadstool in all 
 colour , and - I would never see man in bulk go back to their beginning 
 before . so I begin to understand that man and woman be only material 
 to work with , and that what they say or do be of no consequence . 
 see ? strictly speak , you might just as well put your ear down to the 
 palette to catch what your colour be say . ' 

 ' Dick , that be disgraceful ! ' 

 ' wait a minute . I say , strictly speak . unfortunately , everybody must 
 be either a man or a woman . ' 

 ' I be glad you allow that much . ' 

 ' in your case I do not . you be not   a woman . but ordinary people , Maisie , 
 must behave and work as such . that be what make I so savage . ' he hurl 
 a pebble towards the sea as he speak . ' I know that it be outside my 
 business to care what people say ; I can see that it spoil my output 
 if I listen to them ; and yet , confound it all , ' - another pebble flew 
 seaward , - ' I can not   help purr when I be rub the right way . even when 
 I can see on a man 's forehead that he be lie his way through a clump 
 of pretty speech , those lie make I happy and play the mischief with 
 my hand . ' 

 ' and when he do not   say pretty thing ? ' 

 ' then , beloved , ' - Dick grin , - ' I forget that I be the steward of 
 these gift , and I want to make that man love and appreciate my work 
 with a thick stick . it be too humiliating altogether ; but I suppose even 
 if one be an angel and paint human altogether from outside , one 
 would lose in touch what one gain in grip . ' 

 Maisie laugh at the idea of Dick as an angel . 

 ' but you seem to think , ' she say , ' that everything nice spoil your 
 hand . ' 

 ' I do not   think . it be the law , - just the same as it be at Mrs. 
 Jennett 's . 

 everything that be nice do spoil your hand . I be glad you see so 
 clearly . ' 

 ' I do not   like the view . ' 

 ' nor I. But - have get order : what can do ? be you strong enough to face 
 it alone ? ' 

 ' I suppose I must . ' 

 ' let I help , darling . we can hold each other very tight and try to 
 walk straight . we shall blunder horribly , but it will be well than 
 stumble apart . maisie , can not   you see reason ? ' 

 ' I do not   think we should get on together . we should be two of a trade , 
 so we should never agree . ' 

 ' how I should like to meet the man who make that proverb ! he live in a 
 cave and eat raw bear , I fancy . I would make he chew his own arrow - head . 

 well ? ' 

 ' I should be only half married to you . I should worry and fuss about my 
 work , as I do now . four day out of the seven I be not fit to speak to . ' 

 ' you talk as if no one else in the world have ever use a brush . 
 d'you suppose that I do not   know the feeling of worry and bother and 
 can not -get - at - ness ? you be lucky if you only have it four day out of the 
 seven . what difference would that make ? ' 

 ' a great deal - if you have it too . ' 

 ' yes , but I could respect it . another man might not . he might laugh at 
 you . but there be no use talk about it . if you can think in that way 
 you can not   care for I - yet . ' 

 the tide have nearly cover the mud - bank and twenty little ripple 
 break on the beach before Maisie choose to speak . 

 ' Dick , ' she say slowly , ' I believe very much that you be well than I 
 be . ' 

 ' this do not   seem to bear on the argument - but in what way ? ' 

 ' I do not   quite know , but in what you say about work and thing ; and 
 then you be so patient . yes , you be well than I be . ' 

 Dick consider rapidly the murkiness of an average man 's life . there 
 be nothing in the review to fill he with a sense of virtue . he lift 
 the hem of the cloak to his lip . 

 ' why , ' say Maisie , make as though she have not notice , ' can you see 
 thing that I can not ? I do not   believe what you believe ; but you be right , 
 I believe . ' 

 ' if I have   see anything , God know I could not   have see it but for you , 
 and I know that I could not   have say it except to you . you seem to 
 make everything clear for a minute ; but I do not   practice what I preach . 
 you would help I .... there be only us two in the world for all 
 purpose , and - and you like to have I with you ? ' 

 ' of course I do . I wonder if you can realise how utterly lonely I be ! ' 

 ' darling , I think I can . ' 

 ' two year ago , when I first take the little house , I use to walk up 
 and down the back - garden try to cry . I never can cry . can you ? ' 

 ' it be some time since I try . what be the trouble ? overwork ? ' 

 ' I do not   know ; but I use to dream that I have break down , and have no 
 money , and be starve in London . I think about it all day , and it 
 frighten I - oh , how it frighten I ! ' 

 ' I know that fear . it be the most terrible of all . it wake I up in the 
 night sometimes . you ought not   to know anything about it . ' 

 ' how do you know ? ' 

 ' never mind . be your three hundred a year safe ? ' 

 ' it be in Consols . ' 

 ' very well . if any one come to you and recommend a well 
 investment , - even if I should come to you , - do not   you listen . never 
 shift the money for a minute , and never lend a penny of it , - even to the 
 red - haired girl . ' 

 ' do not   scold I so ! I be not likely to be foolish . ' 

 ' the earth be full of man who would sell their soul for three hundred a 
 year ; and woman come and talk , and borrow a five - pound note here and a 
 ten - pound note there ; and a woman have no conscience in a money debt . 

 Stick to your money , Maisie , for there be nothing more ghastly in the 
 world than poverty in London . it be scar I . by Jove , it put the fear 
 into I ! and one ought not   to be afraid of anything . ' 

 to each man be appoint his particular dread , - the terror that , if he 
 do not fight against it , must cow he even to the loss of his manhood . 
 Dick 's experience of the sordid misery of want have enter into the 
 deep of he , and , lest he might find virtue too easy , that memory stand 
 behind he , tempt to shame , when dealer come to buy his ware . as 
 the Nilghai quake against his will at the still green water of a lake 
 or a mill - dam , as torpenhow flinch before any white arm that could cut 
 or stab and loathe himself for flinching , Dick fear the poverty he 
 have once taste half in jest . his burden be heavy than the burden of 
 his companion . 

 Maisie watch the face work in the moonlight . 

 ' you have   plenty of penny now , ' she say soothingly . 

 ' I shall never have enough , ' he begin , with vicious emphasis . then , 
 laugh , ' I shall always be three - pence short in my account . ' 

 ' why threepence ? ' 

 ' I carry a man 's bag once from Liverpool Street Station to 
 Blackfriar 's Bridge . it be a sixpenny job , - you need not   laugh ; indeed 
 it be , - and I want the money desperately . he only give I threepence ; 
 and he have not   even the decency to pay in silver . whatever money I make , 
 I shall never get that odd threepence out of the world . ' 

 this be not language befit the man who have preach of the sanctity 
 of work . it jar on Maisie , who prefer her payment in applause , 
 which , since all man desire it , must be of her right . she hunt for her 
 little purse and gravely take out a threepenny bit . 

 ' there it be , ' she say . ' I will pay you , Dickie ; and do not   worry any 
 more ; it be not   worth while . be you pay ? ' 

 ' I be , ' say the very human apostle of fair craft , take the coin . ' I be 
 pay a thousand time , and we will close that account . it shall live on my 
 watch - chain ; and you be an angel , Maisie . ' 

 ' I be very cramped , and I be feel a little cold . good gracious ! the 
 cloak be all white , and so be your moustache ! I never know it be so 
 chilly . ' 

 a light frost lie white on the shoulder of Dick 's ulster . he , too , have 
 forget the state of the weather . they laugh together , and with that 
 laugh end all serious discourse . 

 they run inland across the waste to warm themselves , then turn to look 
 at the glory of the full tide under the moonlight and the intense black 
 shadow of the furze bush . it be an additional joy to Dick that 
 Maisie could see colour even as he see it , - could see the blue in the 
 white of the mist , the violet that be in gray paling , and all thing 
 else as they be , - not of one hue , but a thousand . and the moonlight 
 come into Maisie 's soul , so that she , usually reserve , chatter of 
 herself and of the thing she take interest in , - of Kami , wise of 
 teacher , and of the girl in the studio , - of the Poles , who will kill 
 themselves with overwork if they be not check ; of the French , who 
 talk at great length of much more than they will ever accomplish ; of 
 the slovenly English , who toil hopelessly and can not understand that 
 inclination do not imply power ; of the Americans , whose rasp 
 voice in the hush of a hot afternoon strain tense - draw nerve to 
 breaking - point , and whose supper lead to indigestion ; of tempestuous 
 Russians , neither to hold nor to bind , who tell the girl ghost - story 
 till the girl shriek ; of stolid Germans , who come to learn one thing , 
 and , have master that much , stolidly go away and copy picture for 
 evermore . Dick listen enrapture because it be Maisie who speak . he 
 know the old life . 

 ' it have not   change much , ' he say . ' do they still steal colour at 
 lunch - time ? ' 

 ' not steal . Attract be the word . of course they do . I be good - I only 
 attract ultramarine ; but there be student who would attract flake - white . ' 

 ' I have   do it myself . you can not   help it when the palette be hang up . 

 every colour be common property once it run down , - even though you 
 do start it with a drop of oil . it teach people not to waste their 
 tube . ' 

 ' I should like to attract some of your colour , Dick . perhaps I might 
 catch your success with they . ' 

 ' I must not   say a bad word , but I should like to . what in the world , 
 which you have   just miss a lovely chance of see , do success or want 
 of success , or a three - storied success , matter compare with - - No , I 
 will not   open that question again . it be time to go back to town . ' 

 ' I be sorry , Dick , but - - ' 

 ' you be much more interested in that than you be in I . ' 

 ' I do not   know , I do not   think I be . ' 

 ' what will you give I if I tell you a sure short - cut to everything you 
 want , - the trouble and the fuss and the tangle and all the rest ? will 
 you promise to obey I ? ' 

 ' of course . ' 

 ' in the first place , you must never forget a meal because you happen 
 to be at work . you forget your lunch twice last week , ' say Dick , at a 
 venture , for he know with whom he be deal . ' 

 ' no , no , - only once , really . ' 

 ' that be bad enough . and you must not   take a cup of tea and a biscuit in 
 place of a regular dinner , because dinner happen to be a trouble . ' 

 ' you be make fun of I ! ' 

 ' I never be more in earnest in my life . oh , my love , my love , have not 
 it dawn on you yet what you be to I ? here be the whole earth in a 
 conspiracy to give you a chill , or run over you , or drench you to the 
 skin , or cheat you out of your money , or let you die of overwork and 
 underfeede , and I have not   the mere right to look after you . why , I 
 do not   even know if you have sense enough to put on warm thing when the 
 weather 's cold . ' 

 ' Dick , you be the most awful boy to talk to - really ! how do you suppose 
 I manage when you be away ? ' 

 ' I be not   here , and I do not   know . but now I be back I would give everything 
 I have for the right of tell you to come in out of the rain . ' 

 ' your success too ? ' 

 this time it cost Dick a severe struggle to refrain from bad word . 

 ' as Mrs. Jennett use to say , you be a trial , Maisie ! you have   be coope 
 up in the school too long , and you think every one be look at you . 

 there be not   twelve hundred people in the world who understand picture . 
 the other pretend and do not   care . remember , I have   see twelve hundred 
 man dead in toadstool - bed . it be only the voice of the tiny little 
 fraction of people that make success . the real world do not   care a 
 tinker 's - do not   care a bit . for aught you or I know , every man in the 
 world may be argue with a Maisie of his own . ' 

 ' Poor Maisie ! ' 

 ' Poor Dick , I think . do you believe while he be fight for what be 
 dearer than his life he want to look at a picture ? and even if he do , 
 and if all the world do , and a thousand million people rise up and 
 shout hymn to my honour and glory , would that make up to I for the 
 knowledge that you be out shop in the Edgware Road on a rainy day 
 without an umbrella ? now we will go to the station . ' 

 ' but you say on the beach - - ' persisted Maisie , with a certain fear . 

 Dick groan aloud : ' yes , I know what I say . my work be everything I 
 have , or am , or hope to be , to I , and I believe I have   learn the law 
 that govern it ; but I have   some linger sense of fun left , - though 
 you have   nearly knock it out of I . I can just see that it be not 
 everything to all the world . do what I say , and not what I do . ' 

 Maisie be careful not to reopen debatable matter , and they return to 
 London joyously . the terminus stop Dick in the midst of an eloquent 
 harangue on the beauty of exercise . he would buy Maisie a horse , - such 
 a horse as never yet bow head to bit , - would stable it , with a 
 companion , some twenty mile from London , and Maisie , solely for her 
 health 's sake should ride with he twice or thrice a week . 

 ' that be absurd , ' say she . ' it would not   be proper . ' 

 ' now , who in all London to - night would have sufficient interest or 
 audacity to call we two to account for anything we choose to do ? ' 

 Maisie look at the lamp , the fog , and the hideous turmoil . Dick be 
 right ; but horseflesh do not make for art as she understand it . 

 ' you be very nice sometimes , but you be very foolish more time . I be not 
 go to let you give I horse , or take you out of your way to - night . 
 I will go home by myself . only I want you to promise I something . you 
 will not   think any more about that extra threepence , will you ? remember , 
 you have   be pay ; and I will not   allow you to be spiteful and do bad work 
 for a little thing like that . you can be so big that you must not   be 
 tiny . ' 

 this be turn the table with a vengeance . there remain only to put 
 Maisie into her hansom . 

 ' good - bye , ' she say simply . ' you will come on Sunday . it have be a 
 beautiful day , Dick . why can not   it be like this always ? ' 

 ' because love 's like line - work : you must go forward or backward ; you 
 can not   stand still . by the way , go on with your line - work . good - night , 
 and , for my - for my sake , take care of yourself . ' 

 he turn to walk home , meditate . the day have bring he nothing that 
 he hop for , but - surely this be worth many day - it have bring he 
 nearer to Maisie . the end be only a question of time now , and the prize 
 well worth the waiting . by instinct , once more , he turn to the river . 

 ' and she understand at once , ' he say , look at the water . ' she find 
 out my pet besetting sin on the spot , and pay it off . my God , how she 
 understand ! and she say I be well than she be ! well than she 
 be ! ' he laugh at the absurdity of the notion . ' I wonder if girl 
 guess at one - half a man 's life . they can not , or - they would not   marry we . ' 
 he take her gift out of his pocket , and consider it in the light of a 
 miracle and a pledge of the comprehension that , one day , would lead to 
 perfect happiness . meantime , Maisie be alone in London , with none to 
 save she from danger . and the packed wilderness be very full of danger . 

 Dick make his prayer to fate disjointedly after the manner of the 
 heathen as he throw the piece of silver into the river . if any evil be 
 to befall , let he bear the burden and let Maisie go unscathed , since 
 the threepenny piece be dear to he of all his possession . it be 
 a small coin in itself , but Maisie have give it , and the Thames hold it , 
 and surely the Fates would be bribe for this once . 

 the drowning of the coin seem to cut he free from thought of Maisie 
 for the moment . he take himself off the bridge and go whistle to his 
 chamber with a strong yearning for some man - talk and tobacco after his 
 first experience of an entire day spend in the society of a woman . 
 there be a strong desire at his heart when there rise before he an 
 unsolicited vision of the Barralong dip deep and sail free for 
 the Southern Cross . 





 CHAPTER VIII 

  and these two , as I have tell you , 
  be the friend of Hiawatha , 
  Chibiabos , the musician , 
  and the very strong man , Kwasind . 

  - Hiawatha . 
 TORPENHOW be page the last sheet of some manuscript , while the 
 Nilghai , who have come for chess and remain to talk tactic , be 
 read through the first part , comment scornfully the while . 

 ' it be picturesque enough and it be sketchy , ' say he ; ' but as a serious 
 consideration of affair in Eastern Europe , it be not worth much . ' 

 ' it be off my hand at any rate .... thirty - seven , thirty - eight , 
 thirty - nine slip altogether , be not   there ? that should make between 
 eleven and twelve page of valuable misinformation . Heigho ! ' torpenhow 
 shuffle the writing together and hum - 

  Young lamb to sell , young lamb to sell , 
  if I would as much money as I could tell , 
  I never would cry , young lamb to sell ! 
 Dick enter , self - conscious and a little defiant , but in the good of 
 temper with all the world . 

 ' back at last ? ' say Torpenhow . 

 ' more or less . what have you be do ? ' 

 ' work . Dickie , you behave as though the Bank of England be behind you . 
 here be Sunday , Monday , and Tuesday go and you have not   do a line . 
 it be scandalous . ' 

 ' the notion come and go , my child - they come and go like our 
 ' baccy , ' he answer , fill his pipe . ' moreover , ' he stoop to thrust 
 a spill into the grate , ' Apollo do not always stretch his - - oh , 
 confound your clumsy jest , Nilghai ! ' 

 ' this be not the place to preach the theory of direct inspiration , ' 
 say the Nilghai , return Torpenhow 's large and workmanlike bellow to 
 their nail on the wall . ' we believe in cobbler ' wax . La ! - where you sit 
 down . ' 

 ' if you be not   so big and fat , ' say Dick , look round for a weapon , 
 ' I would - - ' 

 ' no skylarking in my room . you two smash half my furniture last time 
 you throw the cushion about . you might have the decency to say how 
 d'you do ? to Binkie . look at he . ' 

 Binkie have jump down from the sofa and be fawn round Dick 's knee , 
 and scratch at his boot . 

 ' dear man ! ' say Dick , snatch he up , and kiss he on the black 
 patch above his right eye . ' do ums be , Binks ? do that ugly Nilghai 
 turn you off the sofa ? bite he , Mr. Binkie . ' he pitch he on the 
 Nilghai 's stomach , as the big man lie at ease , and Binkie pretend to 
 destroy the Nilghai inch by inch , till a sofa cushion extinguish he , 
 and pant he stick out his tongue at the company . 

 ' the Binkie - boy go for a walk this morning before you be up , Torp . 

 I see he make love to the butcher at the corner when the shutter 
 be be take down - just as if he have not   enough to eat in his own 
 proper house , ' say Dick . 

 ' Binks , be that a true bill ? ' say Torpenhow , severely . the little dog 
 retreat under the sofa cushion , and show by the fat white back of 
 he that he really have no further interest in the discussion . 

 ' strike I that another disreputable dog go for a walk , too , ' say 
 the Nilghai . ' what make you get up so early ? Torp say you might be 
 buy a horse . ' 

 ' he know it would need three of we for a serious business like that . 
 no , I feel lonesome and unhappy , so I go out to look at the sea , and 
 watch the pretty ship go by . ' 

 ' where do you go ? ' 

 ' somewhere on the Channel . Progly or Snigly , or some watering - place be 
 its name ; I have   forget ; but it be only two hour ' run from London and 
 the ship go by . ' 

 ' do you see anything you know ? ' 

 ' only the Barralong outward to Australia , and an Odessa grain - boat 
 load down by the head . it be a thick day , but the sea smell good . ' 

 ' wherefore put on one 's good trouser to see the Barralong ? ' say 
 Torpenhow , point . 

 ' because I have   nothing except these thing and my painting dud . besides , 
 I want to do honour to the sea . ' 

 ' do she make you feel restless ? ' ask the Nilghai , keenly . 

 ' crazy . do not   speak of it . I be sorry I go . ' 

 Torpenhow and the Nilghai exchange a look as Dick , stoop , busy 
 himself among the former 's boot and tree . 

 ' these will do , ' he say at last ; ' I can not   say I think much of your 
 taste in slipper , but the fit be the thing . ' he slip his foot into a 
 pair of sock - like sambhur - skin foot covering , find a long chair , and 
 lie at length . 

 ' they be my own pet pair , ' torpenhow say . ' I be just go to put they 
 on myself . ' 

 ' all your reprehensible selfishness . just because you see I happy for a 
 minute , you want to worry I and stir I up . find another pair . ' 

 ' good for you that Dick can not   wear your clothe , Torp . you two live 
 communistically , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' Dick never have anything that I can wear . he be only useful to sponge 
 upon . ' 

 ' confound you , have you be rummage round among my clothe , then ? ' 
 say Dick . ' I put a sovereign in the tobacco - jar yesterday . how do you 
 expect a man to keep his account properly if you - - ' 

 here the Nilghai begin to laugh , and Torpenhow join he . 

 ' hid a sovereign yesterday ! you be no sort of financier . you lend I a 
 fiver about a month back . do you remember ? ' torpenhow say . 

 ' yes , of course . ' 

 ' do you remember that I pay it you ten day later , and you put it at 
 the bottom of the tobacco ? ' 

 ' by Jove , do I ? I think it be in one of my colour - box . ' 

 ' you think ! about a week ago I go into your studio to get some 
 ' baccy and find it . ' 

 ' what do you do with it ? ' 

 ' took the Nilghai to a theatre and feed he . ' 

 ' you could not   feed the Nilghai under twice the money - not though you 
 give he Army beef . well , I suppose I should have find it out soon or 
 later . what be there to laugh at ? ' 

 ' you be a most amazing cuckoo in many direction , ' say the Nilghai , 
 still chuckle over the thought of the dinner . ' never mind . we have both 
 be work very hard , and it be your unearned increment we spend , and 
 as you be only a loafer it do not   matter . ' 

 ' that be pleasant - from the man who be burst with my meat , too . I will 
 get that dinner back one of these day . suppose we go to a theatre now . ' 

 ' put our boot on , - and dress , - and wash ? ' the Nilghai speak very 
 lazily . 

 ' I withdraw the motion . ' 

 ' suppose , just for a change - as a startling variety , you know - we , that 
 be to say we , get our charcoal and our canvas and go on with our work . ' 

 Torpenhow speak pointedly , but Dick only wriggle his toe inside the 
 soft leather moccasin . 

 ' what a one - ideaed clucker that be ! if I have any unfinished figure on 
 hand , I have not   any model ; if I have my model , I have not   any spray , and I 
 never leave charcoal unfixed overnight ; and if I have my spray and twenty 
 photograph of background , I could not   do anything to - night . I do not 
 feel that way . ' 

 ' Binkie - dog , he be a lazy hog , be not   he ? ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' very good , I will do some work , ' say Dick , rise swiftly . ' I will fetch 
 the Nungapunga Book , and we will add another picture to the Nilghai Saga . ' 

 ' be not   you worry he a little too much ? ' ask the Nilghai , when 
 Dick have leave the room . 

 ' perhaps , but I know what he can turn out if he like . it make I 
 savage to hear he praise for past work when I know what he ought to 
 do . you and I be arrange for - - ' 

 ' by Kismet and our own power , more be the pity . I have dream of a good 
 deal . ' 

 ' so have I , but we know our limitation now . I be dash if I know what 
 Dick 's may be when he give himself to his work . that be what make I so 
 keen about he . ' 

 ' and when all be say and do , you will be put aside - quite rightly - for 
 a female girl . ' 

 ' I wonder ... where do you think he have be to - day ? ' 

 ' to the sea . do not   you see the look in his eye when he talk about 
 she ? he be as restless as a swallow in autumn . ' 

 ' yes ; but do he go alone ? ' 

 ' I do not   know , and I do not   care , but he have the beginning of the 
 go - fever upon he . he want to up - stake and move out . there be no 
 mistake the sign . whatever he may have say before , he have the call 
 upon he now . ' 

 ' it might be his salvation , ' torpenhow say . 

 ' perhaps - if you care to take the responsibility of be a saviour . ' 

 Dick return with the big clasp sketch - book that the Nilghai know 
 well and do not love too much . in it Dick have draw all manner of 
 move incident , experience by himself or relate to he by the 
 other , of all the four corner of the earth . but the wide range of the 
 Nilghai 's body and life attract he most . when truth fail he 
 fall back on fiction of the wild , and represent incident in the 
 Nilghai 's career that be unseemly , - his marriage with many african 
 princess , his shameless betrayal , for arab wife , of an army corps to 
 the Mahdi , his tattooment by skilled operator in Burmah , his 
 interview   and his fear   with the yellow headsman in the blood - stain 
 execution - ground of Canton , and finally , the passing of his spirit into 
 the body of whale , elephant , and toucan . torpenhow from time to 
 time have add rhyme description , and the whole be a curious piece of 
 art , because Dick decide , have regard to the name of the book which 
 be interpret mean ' naked , ' that it would be wrong to draw the 
 Nilghai with any clothe on , under any circumstance . consequently the 
 last sketch , represent that much - endure man call on the War 
 Office to press his claim to the egyptian medal , be hardly delicate . 
 he settle himself comfortably on Torpenhow 's table and turn over the 
 page . 

 ' what a fortune you would have be to Blake , Nilghai ! ' he say . 
 ' there be a succulent pinkness about some of these sketch that be 
 more than life - like . " the Nilghai surround while bath by the 
 Mahdieh " - that be found on fact , eh ? ' 

 ' it be very nearly my last bath , you irreverent dauber . have Binkie come 
 into the Saga yet ? ' 

 ' no ; the Binkie - boy have not   do anything except eat and kill cat . 
 let us see . here you be as a stain - glass saint in a church . deuce 
 decorative line about your anatomy ; you ought to be grateful for be 
 hand down to posterity in this way . fifty year hence you will exist in 
 rare and curious facsimile at ten guineas each . what shall I try this 
 time ? the domestic life of the Nilghai ? ' 

 ' have not   get any . ' 

 ' the undomestic life of the Nilghai , then . of course . mass - meeting of 
 his wife in Trafalgar Square . that be it . they come from the end of the 
 earth to attend Nilghai 's wedding to an english bride . this shall be an 
 epic . it be a sweet material to work with . ' 

 ' it be a scandalous waste of time , ' say Torpenhow . 

 ' do not   worry ; it keep one 's hand in - specially when you begin without 
 the pencil . ' he set to work rapidly . ' that be Nelson 's Column . presently 
 the Nilghai will appear shin up it . ' 

 ' give he some clothe this time . ' 

 ' certainly - a veil and an orange - wreath , because he be be marry . ' 

 ' Gad , that be clever enough ! ' say Torpenhow over his shoulder , as Dick 
 bring out of the paper with three twirl of the brush a very fat back 
 and labour shoulder press against stone . 

 ' just imagine , ' Dick continue , ' if we could publish a few of these dear 
 little thing every time the Nilghai subsidise a man who can write , to 
 give the public an honest opinion of my picture . ' 

 ' well , you will admit I always tell you when I have do anything of that 
 kind . I know I can not   hammer you as you ought to be hammer , so I give 
 the job to another . Young Maclagan , for instance - - ' 

 ' no - o - one half - minute , old man ; stick your hand out against the dark of 
 the wall - paper - you only burble and call I name . that left shoulder 's 
 out of drawing . I must literally throw a veil over that . where be my 
 pen - knife ? well , what about Maclagan ? ' 

 ' I only give he his riding - order to - to lambast you on general 
 principle for not produce work that will last . ' 

 ' whereupon that young fool , ' - Dick throw back his head and shut one 
 eye as he shift the page under his hand , - ' be leave alone with an 
 ink - pot and what he conceive be his own notion , go and spill they 
 both over I in the paper . you might have engage a grown man for the 
 business , Nilghai . how do you think the bridal veil look now , Torp ? ' 

 ' how the deuce do three dab and two scratch make the stuff stand away 
 from the body as it do ? ' say Torpenhow , to whom Dick 's method be 
 always new . 

 ' it just depend on where you put them . if Maclagan have know that much 
 about his business he might have do well . ' 

 ' why do not   you put the damned dab into something that will stay , then ? ' 
 insist the Nilghai , who have really take considerable trouble in 
 hire for Dick 's benefit the pen of a young gentleman who devote most 
 of his wake hour to an anxious consideration of the aim and end of 
 Art , which , he write , be one and indivisible . 

 ' wait a minute till I see how I be go to manage my procession of 
 wife . you seem to have marry extensively , and I must rough them in 
 with the pencil - Medes , Parthians , Edomites .... now , set aside the 
 weakness and the wickedness and - and the fat - headedness of deliberately 
 try to do work that will live , as they call it , I be content with the 
 knowledge that I have   do my good up to date , and I shall not   do anything 
 like it again for some hour at least - probably year . Most probably 
 never . ' 

 ' what ! any stuff you have in stock your good work ? ' say Torpenhow . 

 ' anything you have   sell ? ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' oh no . it be not   here and it be not   sell . well than that , it can not   be 
 sell , and I do not   think any one know where it be . I be sure I do not .... 
 and yet more and more wife , on the north side of the square . observe 
 the virtuous horror of the lion ! ' 

 ' you may as well explain , ' say Torpenhow , and Dick lift his head from 
 the paper . 

 ' the sea remind I of it , ' he say slowly . ' I wish it have not . it 
 weigh some few thousand ton - unless you cut it out with a cold 
 chisel . ' 

 ' do not   be an idiot . you can not   pose with we here , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' there be no pose in the matter at all . it be a fact . I be loaf from 
 Lima to Auckland in a big , old , condemn passenger - ship turn into 
 a cargo - boat and own by a second - hand italian firm . she be a crazy 
 basket . we be cut down to fifteen ton of coal a day , and we think 
 ourselves lucky when we kick seven knot an hour out of she . then 
 we use to stop and let the bearing cool down , and wonder whether the 
 crack in the shaft be spread . ' 

 ' be you a steward or a stoker in those day ? ' 

 ' I be flush for the time being , so I be a passenger , or else I 
 should have be a steward , I think , ' say Dick , with perfect gravity , 
 return to the procession of angry wife . ' I be the only other 
 passenger from Lima , and the ship be half empty , and full of rat and 
 cockroach and scorpion . ' 

 ' but what have this to do with the picture ? ' 

 ' wait a minute . she have be in the China passenger trade and her low 
 deck have bunk for two thousand pigtail . those be all take down , 
 and she be empty up to her nose , and the light come through the port 
 hole - most annoying light to work in till you get use to they . I 
 have not   anything to do for week . the ship 's chart be in piece and 
 our skipper dare not   run south for fear of catch a storm . so he do 
 his good to knock all the Society Islands out of the water one by one , 
 and I go into the low deck , and do my picture on the port side as 
 far forward in she as I could go . there be some brown paint and some 
 green paint that they use for the boat , and some black paint for 
 ironwork , and that be all I have . ' 

 ' the passenger must have think you mad . ' 

 ' there be only one , and it be a woman ; but it give I the notion of my 
 picture . ' 

 ' what be she like ? ' say Torpenhow . 

 ' she be a sort of negroid - jewess - Cuban ; with moral to match . she 
 could not   read or write , and she do not   want to , but she use to come 
 down and watch I paint , and the skipper do not   like it , because he be 
 pay her passage and have to be on the bridge occasionally . ' 

 ' I see . that must have be cheerful . ' 

 ' it be the good time I ever have . to begin with , we do not   know whether 
 we should go up or go down any minute when there be a sea on ; and when 
 it be calm it be paradise ; and the woman use to mix the paint 
 and talk broken English , and the skipper use to steal down every few 
 minute to the low deck , because he say he be afraid of fire . 
 so , you see , we could never tell when we might be catch , and I have a 
 splendid notion to work out in only three key of colour . ' 

 ' what be the notion ? ' 

 ' two line in Poe - 

 neither the angel in Heaven above nor the demon down under the sea , 
 can ever dissever my soul from the soul of the beautiful Annabel Lee . 

 it come out of the sea - all by itself . I draw that fight , fight out in 
 green water over the naked , choke soul , and the woman serve as the 
 model for the devil and the angel both - sea - devil and sea - angel , 
 and the soul half drown between they . it do not   sound much , but when 
 there be a good light on the low deck it look very fine and creepy . 
 it be seven by fourteen foot , all do in shift light for shift 
 light . ' 

 ' do the woman inspire you much ? ' say Torpenhow . 

 ' she and the sea between they - immensely . there be a heap of bad 
 drawing in that picture . I remember I go out of my way to foreshorten 
 for sheer delight of do it , and I foreshorten damnably , but for all 
 that it be the good thing I have   ever do ; and now I suppose the ship 's 
 break up or go down . whew ! what a time that be ! ' 

 ' what happen after all ? ' 

 ' it all end . they be load she with wool when I leave the ship , but 
 even the stevedore keep the picture clear to the last . the eye of the 
 demon scar they , I honestly believe . ' 

 ' and the woman ? ' 

 ' she be scared too when it be finish . she use to cross herself 
 before she go down to look at it . just three colour and no chance of 
 get any more , and the sea outside and unlimited love - making inside , 
 and the fear of death atop of everything else , o Lord ! ' he have cease to 
 look at the sketch , but be star straight in front of he across the 
 room . 

 ' why do not   you try something of the same kind now ? ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' because those thing come not by fasting and prayer . when I find a 
 cargo - boat and a Jewess - Cuban and another notion and the same old life , 
 I may . ' 

 ' you will not   find they here , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' no , I shall not . ' Dick shut the sketch - book with a bang . ' this room 's 
 as hot as an oven . open the window , some one . ' 

 he lean into the darkness , watch the great darkness of London 
 below he . the chamber stand much high than the other house , 
 command a hundred chimney - crooked cowl that look like sit 
 cat as they swing round , and other uncouth brick and zinc mystery 
 support by iron stanchion and clamp by 8 - piece . Northward the 
 light of Piccadilly Circus and Leicester Square throw a copper - colour 
 glare above the black roof , and southward by all the orderly light of 
 the Thames . a train roll out across one of the railway bridge , and 
 its thunder drown for a minute the dull roar of the street . the 
 Nilghai look at his watch and say shortly , ' that be the Paris 
 night - mail . you can book from here to St. Petersburg if you choose . ' 

 Dick cram head and shoulder out of the window and look across the 
 river . torpenhow come to his side , while the Nilghai pass over quietly 
 to the piano and open it . Binkie , make himself as large as possible , 
 spread out upon the sofa with the air of one who be not to be lightly 
 disturb . 

 ' well , ' say the Nilghai to the two pair of shoulder , ' have you never 
 see this place before ? ' 

 a steam - tug on the river hoot as she tow her barge to wharf . then 
 the boom of the traffic come into the room . torpenhow nudge Dick . 

 ' good place to bank in - bad place to bunk in , Dickie , be not   it ? ' 

 Dick 's chin be in his hand as he answer , in the word of a general 
 not without fame , still look out on the darkness - ' " my God , what a 
 city to loot ! " ' 

 Binkie find the night air tickle his whisker and sneeze 
 plaintively . 

 ' we shall give the Binkie - dog a cold , ' say Torpenhow . ' come in , ' and 
 they withdraw their head . ' you will be bury in Kensal Green , Dick , 
 one of these day , if it be not   close by the time you want to go 
 there - bury within two foot of some one else , his wife and his 
 family . ' 

 ' Allah forbid ! I shall get away before that time come . give a man room 
 to stretch his leg , Mr. Binkie . ' Dick fling himself down on the sofa 
 and tweak Binkie 's velvet ear , yawn heavily the while . 

 ' you will find that wardrobe - case very much out of tune , ' torpenhow say 
 to the Nilghai . ' it be never touch except by you . ' 

 ' a piece of gross extravagance , ' Dick grunt . ' the Nilghai only come 
 when I be out . ' 

 ' that be because you be always out . Howl , Nilghai , and let he hear . ' 

 ' the life of the Nilghai be fraud and slaughter , his writing be 
 water Dickens and water ; but the voice of the Nilghai raise on high 
 make even the Mahdieh glad to die ! ' 

 Dick quote from Torpenhow 's letterpress in the Nungapunga Book . 

 ' how do they call moose in Canada , Nilghai ? ' 

 the man laugh . singing be his one polite accomplishment , as many 
 Press - tent in far - off land have know . 

 ' what shall I sing ? ' say he , turn in the chair . 

 ' " Moll Roe in the morning , " ' say Torpenhow , at a venture . 

 ' no , ' say Dick , sharply , and the Nilghai open his eye . the old 
 chanty whereof he , among a very few , possess all the word be not 
 a pretty one , but Dick have hear it many time before without wince . 
 without prelude he launch into that stately tune that call together 
 and trouble the heart of the gipsy of the sea - 

 ' farewell and adieu to you , spanish lady , Farewell and adieu to you , 
 lady of Spain . ' 

 Dick turn uneasily on the sofa , for he could hear the bow of the 
 Barralong crash into the green sea on her way to the Southern Cross . 

 then come the chorus - 

 ' we will rant and we will roar like true british sailor , we will rant and 
 we will roar across the salt sea , until we take sounding in the Channel 
 of Old England from Ushant to scilly ' tis forty - five league . ' 

 ' thirty - five - thirty - five , ' say Dick , petulantly . ' do not   tamper with 
 Holy Writ . go on , Nilghai . ' 

 ' the first land we make it be call the Deadman , ' and they sing to the 
 end very vigourously . 

 ' that would be a well song if her head be turn the other way - to 
 the ushant light , for instance , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' fling his arm about like a mad windmill , ' say Torpenhow . ' give we 
 something else , Nilghai . you be in fine fog - horn form tonight . ' 

 ' give we the " Ganges Pilot " ; you sing that in the square the night 
 before El - Maghrib . by the way , I wonder how many of the chorus be alive 
 to - night , ' say Dick . 

 Torpenhow consider for a minute . ' by Jove ! I believe only you and I. 

 Raynor , Vicery , and Deenes - all dead ; Vincent catch smallpox in Cairo , 
 carry it here and die of it . yes , only you and I and the Nilghai . ' 

 ' umph ! and yet the man here who have   do their work in a well - warm 
 studio all their life , with a policeman at each corner , say that I 
 charge too much for my picture . ' 

 ' they be buy your work , not your insurance policy , dear child , ' 
 say the Nilghai . 

 ' I gamble with one to get at the other . do not   preach . go on with the 
 " Pilot . " where in the world do you get that song ? ' 

 ' on a tombstone , ' say the Nilghai . ' on a tombstone in a distant land . I 
 make it an accompaniment with heap of base chord . ' 

 ' oh , Vanity ! begin . ' and the Nilghai begin - 

 ' I have slip my cable , messmate , I be drift down with the tide , I 
 have my sailing order , while yet an anchor ride . 

 and never on fair June morning have I put out to sea with clear 
 conscience or well hope , or a heart more light and free . 

 ' Shoulder to shoulder , Joe , my boy , into the crowd like a wedge strike 
 with the hanger , messmate , but do not cut with the edge . 

 Cries Charnock , " Scatter the faggot , double that Brahmin in two , the 
 tall pale widow for I , Joe , the little brown girl for you ! " 

 ' Young Joe   you be near sixty , why be your hide so dark ? Katie have 
 soft fair blue eye , who blacken your ? - why , hark ! ' 

 they be all sing now , Dick with the roar of the wind of the open 
 sea about his ear as the deep bass voice let itself go . 

  ' the morning gun - 
  Ho , steady ! the arquebus to I ! 
  I ha ' sound the Dutch High Admiral 's heart 
  as my lead doth sound the sea . 
 ' sound , sound the gange , float down with the tide , Moore I 
 close to Charnock , next to my nut - brown bride . 

 my blessing to Kate at Fairlight - Holwell , my thank to you ; Steady ! we 
 steer for heaven , through sand - drift cold and blue . ' 

 ' now what be there in that nonsense to make a man restless ? ' say Dick , 
 haul Binkie from his foot to his chest . 

 ' it depend on the man , ' say Torpenhow . 

 ' the man who have be down to look at the sea , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' I do not   know she be go to upset I in this fashion . ' 

 ' that be what man say when they go to say good - bye to a woman . it be more 
 easy though to get rid of three woman than a piece of one 's life and 
 surrounding . ' 

 ' but a woman can be - - ' begin Dick , unguardedly . 

 ' a piece of one 's life , ' continue Torpenhow . ' no , she can not . his face 
 darken for a moment . ' she say she want to sympathise with you and 
 help you in your work , and everything else that clearly a man must 
 do for himself . then she send round five note a day to ask why the 
 dicken you have not   be waste your time with she . ' 

 ' do not   generalise , ' say the Nilghai . ' by the time you arrive at 
 five note a day you must have go through a good deal and behave 
 accordingly . 

 should not   begin these thing , my son . ' 

 ' I should not   have go down to the sea , ' say Dick , just a little 
 anxious to change the conversation . ' and you should not   have sing . ' 

 ' the sea be not   send you five note a day , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' no , but I be fatally compromise . she be an endure old hag , and 
 I be sorry I ever meet she . why be not   I bear and breed and dead in a 
 three - pair back ? ' 

 ' hear he blaspheme his first love ! why in the world should not   you 
 listen to she ? ' say Torpenhow . 

 before Dick could reply the Nilghai lift up his voice with a shout 
 that shake the window , in ' the Men of the Sea , ' that begin , as all 
 know , ' the sea be a wicked old woman , ' and after read through eight 
 line whose imagery be truthful , end in a refrain , slow as the clacking 
 of a capstan when the boat come unwillingly up to the bar where the 
 man sweat and tramp in the shingle . 

  ' " ye that bear we , o restore we ! 
  she be kind than ye ; 
  for the call be on our heart - string ! " 
  say the Men of the Sea . ' 
 the Nilghai sing that verse twice , with simple cunning , intend that 
 Dick should hear . but Dick be wait for the farewell of the man to 
 their wife . 

  ' " ye that love we , can ye move we ? 
  she be dearer than ye ; 
  and your sleep will be the sweet , " 
  say the Men of the Sea . ' 
 the rough word beat like the blow of the wave on the bow of the 
 rickety boat from Lima in the day when Dick be mix paint , make 
 love , draw devil and angel in the half dark , and wonder whether 
 the next minute would put the italian captain 's knife between his 
 shoulder - blade . and the go - fever which be more real than many doctor ' 
 disease , wake and rag , urge he who love Maisie beyond anything 
 in the world , to go away and taste the old hot , unregenerate life 
 again , - to scuffle , swear , gamble , and love light love with his 
 fellow ; to take ship and know the sea once more , and by her beget 
 picture ; to talk to Binat among the sand of Port Said while Yellow 
 ' Tina mix the drink ; to hear the crackle of musketry , and see the 
 smoke roll outward , thin and thicken again till the shin black face 
 come through , and in that hell every man be strictly responsible for 
 his own head , and his own alone , and strike with an unfettered arm . it 
 be impossible , utterly impossible , but - 

  ' " oh , our father in the churchyard , 
  she be old than ye , 
  and our graf will be the greener , " 
  say the Men of the Sea . ' 
 ' what be there to hinder ? ' say Torpenhow , in the long hush that 
 follow the song . 

 ' you say a little time since that you would not   come for a walk round 
 the world , Torp . ' 

 ' that be month ago , and I only object to your make money for 
 travelling expense . you have   shoot your bolt here and it have go home . go 
 away and do some work , and see some thing . ' 

 ' get some of the fat off you ; you be disgracefully out of condition , ' 
 say the Nilghai , make a plunge from the chair and grasp a handful 
 of Dick generally over the right rib . ' soft as putty - pure tallow bear 
 of over - feeding . train it off , Dickie . ' 

 ' we be all equally gross , Nilghai . next time you have to take the field 
 you will sit down , wink your eye , gasp , and die in a fit . ' 

 ' never mind . you go away on a ship . go to Lima again , or to Brazil . 

 there be always trouble in South America . ' 

 ' do you suppose I want to be tell where to go ? Great Heavens , the only 
 difficulty be to know where I be to stop . but I shall stay here , as I 
 tell you before . ' 

 ' then you will be bury in Kensal Green and turn into adipocere with the 
 other , ' say Torpenhow . ' be you think of commission in hand ? pay 
 forfeit and go . you have   money enough to travel as a king if you please . ' 

 ' you have   the grisly notion of amusement , Torp . I think I see myself 
 ship first class on a six - thousand - ton hotel , and ask the third 
 engineer what make the engine go round , and whether it be not   very warm 
 in the stokehold . Ho ! ho ! I should ship as a loafer if ever I ship at 
 all , which I be not go to do . I shall compromise , and go for a small 
 trip to begin with . ' 

 ' that be something at any rate . where will you go ? ' say Torpenhow . ' it 
 would do you all the good in the world , old man . ' 

 the Nilghai see the twinkle in Dick 's eye , and refrain from speech . 

 ' I shall go in the first place to Rathray 's stable , where I shall hire 
 one horse , and take he very carefully as far as Richmond Hill . then I 
 shall walk he back again , in case he should accidentally burst into a 
 lather and make Rathray angry . I shall do that to - morrow , for the sake 
 of air and exercise . ' 

 ' bah ! ' Dick have barely time to throw up his arm and ward off the cushion 
 that the disgusted Torpenhow heave at his head . 

 ' air and exercise indeed , ' say the Nilghai , sit down heavily on 
 Dick . 

 ' let us give he a little of both . get the bellow , Torp . ' 

 at this point the conference break up in disorder , because Dick would 
 not open his mouth till the Nilghai hold his nose fast , and there be 
 some trouble in force the nozzle of the bellow between his tooth ; and 
 even when it be there he weakly try to puff against the force of 
 the blast , and his cheek blow up with a great explosion ; and the enemy 
 become helpless with laughter he so beat they over the head with a 
 soft sofa cushion that that become unsewn and distribute its feather , 
 and Binkie , interfere in Torpenhow 's interest , be bundle into the 
 half - empty bag and advise to scratch his way out , which he do after 
 a while , travel rapidly up and down the floor in the shape of an 
 agitated green haggis , and when he come out look for satisfaction , 
 the three pillar of his world be pick feather out of their hair . 

 ' a prophet have no honour in his own country , ' say Dick , ruefully , 
 dust his knee . ' this filthy fluff will never brush off my leg . ' 

 ' it be all for your own good , ' say the Nilghai . ' nothing like air and 
 exercise . ' 

 ' all for your good , ' say Torpenhow , not in the least with reference to 
 past clown . ' it would let you focus thing at their proper worth and 
 prevent your become slack in this hothouse of a town . indeed it would , 
 old man . I should not   have speak if I have not   think so . only , you make 
 a joke of everything . ' 

 ' before God I do no such thing , ' say Dick , quickly and earnestly . ' you 
 do not   know I if you think that . ' 

 I do not   think it , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' how can fellow like ourselves , who know what life and death really 
 mean , dare to make a joke of anything ? I know we pretend it , to save 
 ourselves from break down or go to the other extreme . can not   I see , 
 old man , how you be always anxious about I , and try to advise I to 
 make my work well ? do you suppose I do not   think about that myself ? but 
 you can not   help I - you can not   help I - not even you . I must play my own 
 hand alone in my own way . ' 

 ' hear , hear , ' from the Nilghai . 

 ' what be the one thing in the Nilghai Saga that I have   never draw in 
 the Nungapunga Book ? ' Dick continue to Torpenhow , who be a little 
 astonish at the outburst . 

 now there be one blank page in the book give over to the sketch that 
 Dick have not draw of the crown exploit in the Nilghai 's life ; when 
 that man , be young and forget that his body and bone belong to 
 the paper that employ he , have ride over sunburned slippery grass 
 in the rear of Bredow 's brigade on the day that the trooper fling 
 themselves at Caurobert 's artillery , and for aught they know twenty 
 battalion in front , to save the batter 24th German Infantry , to give 
 time to decide the fate of Vionville , and to learn ere their remnant 
 come back to Flavigay that cavalry can attack and crumple and break 
 unshaken infantry . whenever he be inclined to think over a life that 
 might have be well , an income that might have be large , and 
 a soul that might have be considerably clean , the Nilghai would 
 comfort himself with the thought , ' I ride with Bredow 's brigade at 
 Vionville , ' and take heart for any less battle the next day might 
 bring . 

 ' I know , ' he say very gravely . ' I be always glad that you leave it 
 out . ' 

 ' I leave it out because Nilghai teach I what the Germany army learn 
 then , and what Schmidt teach their cavalry . I do not   know German . 

 what be it ? " take care of the time and the dressing will take care of 
 itself . " I must ride my own line to my own beat , old man . ' 

 ' Tempe ist richtung . you have   learn your lesson well , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' he must go alone . he speak truth , Torp . ' 

 ' maybe I be as wrong as I can be - hideously wrong . I must find that out 
 for myself , as I have to think thing out for myself , but I dare not   turn 
 my head to dress by the next man . it hurt I a great deal more than you 
 know not to be able to go , but I can not , that be all . I must do my own 
 work and live my own life in my own way , because I be responsible for 
 both . 

 only do not   think I frivol about it , Torp . I have my own match and 
 sulphur , and I will make my own hell , thank . ' 

 there be an uncomfortable pause . then Torpenhow say blandly , ' what do 
 the Governor of North Carolina say to the Governor of South Carolina ? ' 

 ' excellent notion . it be a long time between drink . there be the 
 making of a very fine prig in you , Dick , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' I have   liberate my mind , estimable Binkie , with the feather in his 
 mouth . ' Dick pick up the still indignant one and shake he tenderly . 

 ' you be tie up in a sack and make to run about blind , Binkie - wee , 
 without any reason , and it have hurt your little feeling . never mind . 
 Sic volo , sic jubeo , stet pro ratione volunta , and do not   sneeze in my 
 eye because I talk Latin . good - night . ' 

 he go out of the room . 

 ' that be distinctly one for you , ' say the Nilghai . ' I tell you it be 
 hopeless to meddle with he . he be not pleased . ' 

 ' he would swear at I if he be not . I can not   make it out . he have the 
 go - fever upon he and he will not   go . I only hope that he may not   have to go 
 some day when he do not   want to , ' say Torpenhow . 

 in his own room Dick be settle a question with himself - and the 
 question be whether all the world , and all that be therein , and a 
 burn desire to exploit both , be worth one threepenny piece throw 
 into the Thames . 

 ' it come of see the sea , and I be a cur to think about it , ' he 
 decide . 

 ' after all , the honeymoon will be that tour - with reservation ; only ... 
 only I do not   realise that the sea be so strong . I do not   feel it so 
 much when I be with Maisie . these damnable song do it . he be begin 
 again . ' 

 but it be only Herrick 's Nightpiece to Julia that the Nilghai sang , 
 and before it be end Dick reappear on the threshold , not altogether 
 clothe indeed , but in his right mind , thirsty and at peace . 

 the mood have come and go with the rise and the fall of the tide 
 by Fort Keeling . 





 CHAPTER IX 

  ' if I have take the common clay 
  and work it cunningly 
  in the shape of a god that be digge a clod , 
  the great honour to I . ' 

  ' if thou hast take the common clay , 
  and thy hand be not free 
  from the taint of the soil , thou hast make thy spoil 
  the great shame to thee . ' - the Two Potters . 
 he do no work of any kind for the rest of the week . then come another 
 Sunday . he dread and long for the day always , but since the 
 red - haired girl have sketch he there be rather more dread than desire 
 in his mind . 

 he find that Maisie have entirely neglect his suggestion about 
 line - work . she have go off at score file with some absurd notion for a 
 ' fancy head . ' it cost Dick something to command his temper . 

 ' what be the good of suggest anything ? ' he say pointedly . 

 ' ah , but this will be a picture , - a real picture ; and I know that Kami 
 will let I send it to the Salon . you do not   mind , do you ? ' 

 ' I suppose not . but you will not   have time for the Salon . ' 

 Maisie hesitate a little . she even feel uncomfortable . 

 ' we be go over to France a month soon because of it . I shall get 
 the idea sketch out here and work it up at Kami 's . 

 Dick 's heart stand still , and he come very near to be disgust with 
 his queen who could do no wrong . ' just when I think I have make some 
 headway , she go off chasing butterfly . it be too madden ! ' 

 there be no possibility of argue , for the red - haired girl be in the 
 studio . Dick could only look unutterable reproach . 

 ' I be sorry , ' he say , ' and I think you make a mistake . but what be the 
 idea of your new picture ? ' 

 ' I take it from a book . ' 

 ' that be bad , to begin with . book be not   the place for picture . 
 and - - ' 

 ' it be this , ' say the red - haired girl behind he . ' I be read it to 
 Maisie the other day from the City of Dreadful Night . d'you know the 
 book ? ' 

 ' a little . I be sorry I speak . there be picture in it . what have take 
 her fancy ? ' 

 ' the description of the Melancolia - 

  ' her fold wing as of a mighty eagle , 
  but all too impotent to lift the regal 
  Robustness of her earth - bear strength and pride . 
 and here again .   Maisie , get the tea , dear . 

  ' the forehead charge with baleful thought and dream , 
  the household bunch of key , the housewife 's gown , 
  Voluminous indent , and yet rigid 
  as though a shell of burnish metal frigid , 
  her foot thick - shod to tread all weakness down . ' 
 there be no attempt to conceal the scorn of the lazy voice . Dick 
 wince . 

 ' but that have be do already by an obscure artist by the name of 
 Durer , ' say he . ' how do the poem run ? - 

 ' three century and threescore year ago , with phantasy of his 
 peculiar thought . 

 you might as well try to rewrite Hamlet . it will be a waste of time . 

 ' no , it will not , ' say Maisie , put down the teacup with a clatter to 
 reassure herself . ' and I mean to do it . can not   you see what a beautiful 
 thing it would make ? ' 

 ' how in perdition can one do work when one have not   have the proper 
 training ? any fool can get a notion . it need training to drive the 
 thing through , - training and conviction ; not rush after the first 
 fancy . ' Dick speak between his tooth . 

 ' you do not   understand , ' say Maisie . ' I think I can do it . ' 

 again the voice of the girl behind he - 

  ' baffled and beat back , she work on still ; 
  weary and sick of soul , she work the more . 
  sustain by her indomitable will , 
  the hand shall fashion , and the brain shall pore , 
  and all her sorrow shall be turn to labour - - 
 I fancy Maisie mean to embody herself in the picture . ' 

 ' sit on a throne of reject picture ? no , I shall not , dear . the 
 notion in itself have fascinate I . - of course you do not   care for fancy 
 head , Dick . 

 I do not   think you could do they . you like blood and bone . ' 

 ' that be a direct challenge . if you can do a Melancolia that be not   merely 
 a sorrowful female head , I can do a well one ; and I will , too . what 
 d'you know about Melacolias ? ' Dick firmly believe that he be even then 
 taste three - quarter of all the sorrow in the world . 

 ' she be a woman , ' say Maisie , ' and she suffer a great deal , - till 
 she could suffer no more . then she begin to laugh at it all , and then I 
 paint she and send she to the Salon . ' 

 the red - haired girl rise up and leave the room , laugh . 

 Dick look at Maisie humbly and hopelessly . 

 ' never mind about the picture , ' he say . ' be you really go back to 
 Kami 's for a month before your time ? ' 

 ' I must , if I want to get the picture do . ' 

 ' and that be all you want ? ' 

 ' of course . do not   be stupid , Dick . ' 

 ' you have not   the power . you have only the idea - the idea and the 
 little cheap impulse . how you could have keep at your work for ten 
 year steadily be a mystery to I . so you be really go , - a month 
 before you need ? ' 

 ' I must do my work . ' 

 ' your work - bah ! ... no , I do not   mean that . it be all right , dear . of 
 course you must do your work , and - I think I will say good - bye for this 
 week . ' 

 ' will not   you even stay for tea ? ' no , thank you . have I your leave to 
 go , dear ? there be nothing more you particularly want I to do , and the 
 line - work do not   matter . ' 

 ' I wish you could stay , and then we could talk over my picture . if only 
 one single picture be a success , it draw attention to all the other . I 
 know some of my work be good , if only people could see . and you need not 
 have be so rude about it . ' 

 ' I be sorry . we will talk the Melancolia over some one of the other 
 Sundays . 

 there be four more - yes , one , two , three , four - before you go . 
 good - bye , Maisie . ' 

 Maisie stand by the studio window , think , till the red - haired girl 
 return , a little white at the corner of her lip . 

 ' Dick 's go off , ' say Maisie . ' just when I want to talk about the 
 picture . be not   it selfish of he ? ' 

 her companion open her lip as if to speak , shut they again , and go 
 on read the City of Dreadful Night . 

 Dick be in the Park , walk round and round a tree that he have choose 
 as his confidante for many sunday past . he be swear audibly , and 
 when he find that the infirmity of the english tongue hem in his 
 rage , he seek consolation in Arabic , which be expressly design for 
 the use of the afflict . he be not pleased with the reward of his 
 patient service ; nor be he pleased with himself ; and it be long before 
 he arrive at the proposition that the queen could do no wrong . 

 ' it be a lose game , ' he say . ' I be worth nothing when a whim of her 
 be in question . but in a lose game at Port say we use to double 
 the stake and go on . she do a Melancolia ! she have not   the power , or the 
 insight , or the training . only the desire . she be curse with the curse 
 of Reuben . she will not   do line - work , because it mean real work ; and yet 
 she be strong than I be . I will make she understand that I can beat she 
 on her own Melancolia . even then she would not   care . she say I can only 
 do blood and bone . I do not   believe she have blood in her vein . all the 
 same I love she ; and I must go on love she ; and if I can humble she 
 inordinate vanity I will . I will do a Melancolia that shall be something 
 like a Melancolia - " the Melancolia that transcend all wit . " I will do it 
 at once , con - bless she . ' 

 he discover that the notion would not come to order , and that he could 
 not free his mind for an hour from the thought of Maisie 's departure . 
 he take very small interest in her rough study for the Melancolia when 
 she show they next week . the Sundays be race past , and the time 
 be at hand when all the church bell in London could not ring 
 Maisie back to he . once or twice he say something to Binkie about 
 ' hermaphroditic futility , ' but the little dog receive so many 
 confidence both from Torpenhow and Dick that he do not trouble his 
 tulip - ear to listen . 

 Dick be permit to see the girl off . they be go by the Dover 
 night - boat ; and they hop to return in August . it be then February , 
 and Dick feel that he be be hardly use . Maisie be so busy 
 strip the small house across the Park , and pack her canvas , 
 that she have not time for thought . Dick go down to Dover and waste 
 a day there fret over a wonderful possibility . would Maisie at the 
 very last allow he one small kiss ? he reflect that he might capture 
 she by the strong arm , as he have seem woman capture in the Southern 
 Soudan , and lead she away ; but Maisie would never be lead . she would turn 
 her gray eye upon he and say , ' Dick , how selfish you be ! ' then his 
 courage would fail he . it would be well , after all , to beg for that 
 kiss . 

 Maisie look more than usually kissable as she step from the 
 night - mail on to the windy pier , in a gray waterproof and a little gray 
 cloth travel - cap . the red - haired girl be not so lovely . her green 
 eye be hollow and her lip be dry . Dick see the trunk aboard , and 
 go to Maisie 's side in the darkness under the bridge . the mail - bag 
 be thunder into the forehold , and the red - haired girl be watch 
 they . 

 ' you will have a rough passage to - night , ' say Dick . ' it be blow 
 outside . I suppose I may come over and see you if I be good ? ' 

 ' you must not . I shall be busy . at least , if I want you I will send for 
 you . but I shall write from Vitry - sur - Marne . I shall have heap of 
 thing to consult you about . oh , Dick , you have be so good to I ! - so 
 good to I ! ' 

 ' thank you for that , dear . it have not   make any difference , have it ? ' 

 ' I can not   tell a fib . it have not   - in that way . but do not   think I be not 
 grateful . ' 

 ' damn the gratitude ! ' say Dick , huskily , to the paddle - box . 

 ' what be the use of worry ? you know I should ruin your life , and you would 
 ruin mine , as thing be now . you remember what you say when you be 
 so angry that day in the Park ? one of we have to be break . 

 can not   you wait till that day come ? ' 

 ' no , love . I want you unbroken - all to myself . ' 

 Maisie shake her head . ' my poor Dick , what can I say ! ' 

 ' do not   say anything . give I a kiss . only one kiss , Maisie . I will swear 
 I will not   take any more . you might as well , and then I can be sure you be 
 grateful . ' 

 Maisie put she cheek forward , and Dick take his reward in the darkness . 

 it be only one kiss , but , since there be no time - limit specify , it 
 be a long one . Maisie wrench herself free angrily , and Dick stand 
 abash and tingle from head to toe . 

 ' good - bye , darling . I do not   mean to scare you . I be sorry . only - keep 
 well and do good work , - specially the Melancolia . I be go to do 
 one , too . remember I to Kami , and be careful what you drink . country 
 drinking - water be bad everywhere , but it be bad in France . write to 
 I if you want anything , and good - bye . say good - bye to the 
 whatever - you - call - um girl , and - can not   I have another kiss ? no . you be 
 quite right . good - bye . ' 

 I should tell he that it be not seemly to charge the mail - bag incline . 
 he reach the pier as the steamer begin to move off , and he follow 
 she with his heart . 

 ' and there be nothing - nothing in the wide world - to keep we apart except 
 her obstinacy . these Calais night - boat be much too small . I will get 
 Torp to write to the paper about it . she be begin to pitch already . ' 

 Maisie stand where Dick have leave she till she hear a little gasp 
 cough at her elbow . the red - haired girl 's eye be alight with cold 
 flame . 

 ' he kiss you ! ' she say . ' how could you let he , when he be not 
 anything to you ? how dare you to take a kiss from he ? oh , Maisie , 
 let us go to the lady ' cabin . I be sick , - deadly sick . ' 

 ' we be not   into open water yet . go down , dear , and I will stay here . 
 I do not   like the smell of the engine .... poor Dick ! he deserve 
 one , - only one . 

 but I do not   think he would frighten I so . ' 

 Dick return to town next day just in time for lunch , for which he have 
 telegraph . to his disgust , there be only empty plate in the studio . 

 he lift up his voice like the bear in the fairy - tale , and Torpenhow 
 enter , look guilty . 

 ' h'sh ! ' say he . ' do not   make such a noise . I take it . come into my 
 room , and I will show you why . ' 

 Dick pause amazed at the threshold , for on Torpenhow 's sofa lie a 
 girl asleep and breathe heavily . the little cheap sailor - hat , the 
 blue - and - white dress , fitter for June than for February , dabble with 
 mud at the skirt , the jacket trim with imitation Astrakhan and 
 rip at the shoulder - seam , the one - and - elevenpenny umbrella , and , 
 above all , the disgraceful condition of the kid - top boot , declare 
 all thing . 

 ' oh , I say , old man , this be too bad ! you must not   bring this sort up 
 here . 

 they steal thing from the room . ' 

 ' it look bad , I admit , but I be come in after lunch , and she 
 stagger into the hall . I think she be drunk at first , but it be 
 collapse . I could not   leave she as she be , so I bring she up here and 
 give she your lunch . she be faint from want of food . she go fast 
 asleep the minute she have finish . ' 

 ' I know something of that complaint . she be be live on sausage , 
 I suppose . Torp , you should have hand she over to a policeman for 
 presume to faint in a respectable house . poor little wretch ! look at 
 the face ! there be not   an ounce of immorality in it . only folly , - slack , 
 fatuous , feeble , futile folly . it be a typical head . d'you notice how 
 the skull begin to show through the flesh padding on the face and 
 cheek - bone ? ' 

 ' what a cold - blooded barbarian it be ! do not   hit a woman when she be down . 
 can not   we do anything ? she be simply drop with starvation . 

 she almost fall into my arm , and when she get to the food she eat like 
 a wild beast . it be horrible . ' 

 ' I can give her money , which she would probably spend in drink . be she 
 go to sleep for ever ? ' 

 the girl open her eye and glare at the man between terror and 
 effrontery . 

 ' feel well ? ' say Torpenhow . 

 ' yes . thank you . there be not   many gentleman that be as kind as you 
 be . thank you . ' 

 ' when do you leave service ? ' say Dick , who have be watch the 
 scarred and chap hand . 

 ' how do you know I be in service ? I be . general servant . I do not 
 like it . ' 

 ' and how do you like be your own mistress ? ' 

 ' do I look as if I like it ? ' 

 ' I suppose not . one moment . would you be good enough to turn your face 
 to the window ? ' 

 the girl obey , and Dick watch her face keenly , - so keenly that she 
 make as if to hide behind Torpenhow . 

 ' the eye have it , ' say Dick , walk up and down . ' they be superb 
 eye for my business . and , after all , every head depend on the eye . 
 this have be send from heaven to make up for - what be take away . now 
 the weekly strain 's off my shoulder , I can get to work in earnest . 

 evidently send from heaven . yes . raise your chin a little , please . ' 

 ' gently , old man , gently . you be scar somebody out of her wit , ' say 
 Torpenhow , who could see the girl tremble . 

 ' do not   let he hit I ! oh , please do not   let he hit I ! I have   be hit 
 cruel to - day because I speak to a man . do not   let he look at I like 
 that ! he be reg'lar wicked , that one . do not   let he look at I like that , 
 neither ! oh , I feel as if I have not   nothing on when he look at I like 
 that ! ' 

 the overstrained nerve in the frail body give way , and the girl weep 
 like a little child and begin to scream . Dick throw open the window , and 
 Torpenhow fling the door back . 

 ' there you be , ' say Dick , soothingly . ' my friend here can call for a 
 policeman , and you can run through that door . nobody be go to hurt 
 you . ' 

 the girl sob convulsively for a few minute , and then try to laugh . 

 ' nothing in the world to hurt you . now listen to I for a minute . I be 
 what they call an artist by profession . you know what artist do ? ' 

 ' they draw the thing in red and black ink on the pop - shop label . ' 

 ' I dare say . I have not   rise to pop - shop label yet . those be do by 
 the Academicians . I want to draw your head . ' 

 ' what for ? ' 

 ' because it be pretty . that be why you will come to the room across the 
 landing three time a week at eleven in the morning , and I will give you 
 three quid a week just for sit still and be draw . and there be a 
 quid on account . ' 

 ' for nothing ? oh , my ! ' the girl turn the sovereign in her hand , and 
 with more foolish tear , ' be not   neither o ' you two gentleman afraid of 
 my bilk you ? ' 

 ' no . only ugly girl do that . try and remember this place . and , by the 
 way , what be your name ? ' 

 ' I be bessic , - Bessie - - it be no use give the rest . Bessie 
 break , - stone - break , if you like . what be your name ? but there , - no one 
 ever give the real one . ' 

 Dick consult Torpenhow with his eye . 

 ' my name 's Heldar , and my friend 's call Torpenhow ; and you must be 
 sure to come here . where do you live ? ' 

 ' south - the - water , - one room , - five and sixpence a week . be not   you 
 make fun of I about that three quid ? ' 

 ' you will see later on . and , Bessie , next time you come , remember , you 
 need not   wear that paint . it be bad for the skin , and I have all the 
 colour you will be likely to need . ' 

 Bessie withdraw , scrub her cheek with a ragged pocket - handkerchief . 
 the two man look at each other . 

 ' you be a man , ' say Torpenhow . 

 ' I be afraid I have   be a fool . it be not   our business to run about the 
 earth reform Bessie Brokes . and a woman of any kind have no right on 
 this landing . ' 

 ' perhaps she will not   come back . ' 

 ' she will if she think she can get food and warmth here . I know she 
 will , bad luck . but remember , old man , she be not   a woman ; she be my 
 model ; and be careful . ' 

 ' the idea ! she be a dissolute little scarecrow , - a gutter - snippet and 
 nothing more . ' 

 ' so you think . wait till she have be feed a little and free from fear . 
 that fair type recover itself very quickly . you will not   know she in a 
 week or two , when that abject fear have die out of her eye . she will be 
 too happy and smile for my purpose . ' 

 ' but surely you be not take she out of charity ? - to please I ? ' 

 ' I be not in the habit of play with hot coal to please anybody . she 
 have be send from heaven , as I may have remark before , to help I 
 with my Melancolia . ' 

 ' never hear a word about the lady before . ' 

 ' what be the use of have a friend , if you must sle your notion at 
 he in word ? you ought to know what I be think about . you have   hear I 
 grunt lately ? ' 

 ' even so ; but grunt mean anything in your language , from bad ' baccy to 
 wicked dealer . and I do not   think I have   be much in your confidence for 
 some time . ' 

 ' it be a high and soulful grunt . you ought to have understand that 
 it mean the Melancolia . ' Dick walk Torpenhow up and down the room , 
 keep silence . then he smite he in the rib , ' now do not   you see it ? 
 Bessie 's abject futility , and the terror in her eye , weld on to one 
 or two detail in the way of sorrow that have come under my experience 
 lately . likewise some orange and black , - two key of each . but I can not 
 explain on an empty stomach . ' 

 ' it sound mad enough . you would well stick to your soldier , Dick , 
 instead of maunder about head and eye and experience . ' 

 ' think so ? ' Dick begin to dance on his heel , sing - 

 ' they be as proud as a turkey when they hold the ready cash , you ought 
 to ' ear the way they laugh an ' joke ; they be tricky an ' they be funny 
 when they have   get the ready money , - ow ! but see them when they be all 
 stone - broke . ' 

 then he sit down to pour out his heart to Maisie in a four - sheet letter 
 of counsel and encouragement , and register an oath that he would get 
 to work with an undivided heart as soon as Bessie should reappear . 

 the girl keep her appointment unpainted and unadorned , afraid and 
 overbold by turn . when she find that she be merely expect to sit 
 still , she grow calm , and criticise the appointment of the studio 
 with freedom and some point . she like the warmth and the comfort and 
 the release from fear of physical pain . Dick make two or three study 
 of her head in monochrome , but the actual notion of the Melancolia would 
 not arrive . 

 ' what a mess you keep your thing in ! ' say Bessie , some day later , 
 when she feel herself thoroughly at home . ' I s'pose your clothe be 
 just as bad . 

 gentleman never think what button and tape be make for . ' 

 ' I buy thing to wear , and wear them till they go to piece . I do not   know 
 what Torpenhow do . ' 

 Bessie make diligent inquiry in the latter 's room , and unearth a bale 
 of disreputable sock . ' some of these I will mend now , ' she say , ' and 
 some I will take home . d'you know , I sit all day long at home do 
 nothing , just like a lady , and no more notice they other girl in 
 the house than if they be so many fly . I do not   have any unnecessary 
 word , but I put them down quick , I can tell you , when they talk to I . 
 no ; it be quite nice these day . I lock my door , and they can only 
 call I name through the keyhole , and I sit inside , just like a lady , 
 mending sock . Mr. Torpenhow wear his sock out both end at once . ' 

 ' three quid a week from I , and the delight of my society . no sock 
 mend . nothing from Torp except a nod on the landing now and again , and 
 all his sock mend . Bessie be very much a woman , ' think Dick ; and he 
 look at she between half - shut eye . food and rest have transform the 
 girl , as Dick know they would . 

 ' what be you look at I like that for ? ' she say quickly . ' do not . 
 you look reg'lar bad when you look that way . you do not   think much o ' I , 
 do you ? ' 

 ' that depend on how you behave . ' 

 Bessie behave beautifully . only it be difficult at the end of a 
 sit to bid she go out into the gray street . she very much preferred 
 the studio and a big chair by the stove , with some sock in her lap as 
 an excuse for delay . then Torpenhow would come in , and Bessie would 
 be move to tell strange and wonderful story of her past , and still 
 stranger one of her present improved circumstance . she would make they 
 tea as though she have a right to make it ; and once or twice on these 
 occasion Dick catch Torpenhow 's eye fix on the trim little figure , 
 and because Bessie 's flitting about the room make Dick ardently long 
 for Maisie , he realise whither Torpenhow 's thought be tend . and 
 Bessie be exceedingly careful of the condition of Torpenhow 's linen . 
 she speak very little to he , but sometimes they talk together on the 
 landing . 

 ' I be a great fool , ' Dick say to himself . ' I know what red firelight 
 look like when a man 's tramping through a strange town ; and our be a 
 lonely , selfish sort of life at the good . I wonder Maisie do not   feel 
 that sometimes . but I can not   order Bessie away . that be the bad of 
 begin thing . one never know where they stop . ' 

 one evening , after a sitting prolong to the last limit of the light , 
 Dick be rouse from a nap by a broken voice in Torpenhow 's room . he 
 jump to his foot . ' now what ought I to do ? it look foolish to go 
 in . - oh , bless you , Binkie ! ' the little terri thrust Torpenhow 's door 
 open with his nose and come out to take possession of Dick 's chair . the 
 door swing wide unheeded , and Dick across the landing could see Bessie 
 in the half - light make her little supplication to Torpenhow . she be 
 kneeling by his side , and her hand be clasp across his knee . 

 ' I know , - I know , ' she say thickly . " tisn't   right o ' I to do this , 
 but I can not   help it ; and you be so kind , - so kind ; and you never take 
 any notice o ' I . and I have   mend all your thing so carefully , - I do . 
 oh , please , ' tisn't   as if I be ask you to marry I . I would not   think 
 of it . 

 but you - could not   you take and live with I till Miss Right come along ? 
 I be only Miss Wrong , I know , but I would work my hand to the bare bone for 
 you . and I be not ugly to look at . say you will ! ' 

 Dick hardly recognise Torpenhow 's voice in reply - ' but look here . it be 
 no use . I be liable to be order off anywhere at a minute 's notice if a 
 war break out . at a minute 's notice - dear . ' 

 ' what do that matter ? until you go , then . until you go . ' tisn't   much 
 I be ask , and - you do not   know how good I can cook . ' she have put an arm 
 round his neck and be draw his head down . 

 ' until - I - go , then . ' 

 ' Torp , ' say Dick , across the landing . he could hardly steady his voice . 

 ' come here a minute , old man . I be in trouble ' - ' Heaven send he will listen 
 to I ! ' there be something very like an oath from Bessie 's lip . she 
 be afraid of Dick , and disappear down the staircase in panic , but 
 it seem an age before Torpenhow enter the studio . he go to the 
 mantelpiece , bury his head on his arm , and groan like a wounded 
 bull . 

 ' what the devil right have you to interfere ? ' he say , at last . 

 ' who be interfere with which ? your own sense tell you long ago you 
 could not   be such a fool . it be a tough rack , St. Anthony , but you be 
 all right now . ' 

 ' I ought not   to have see she move about these room as if they 
 belong to she . that be what upset I . it give a lonely man a sort of 
 hankering , do not   it ? ' say Torpenhow , piteously . 

 ' now you talk sense . it do . but , since you be not   in a condition 
 to discuss the disadvantage of double housekeeping , do you know what 
 you be go to do ? ' 

 ' I do not . I wish I do . ' 

 ' you be go away for a season on a brilliant tour to regain tone . 
 you be go to Brighton , or Scarborough , or Prawle Point , to see the 
 ship go by . and you be go at once . be not   it odd ? I will take care of 
 Binkie , but out you go immediately . never resist the devil . he hold the 
 bank . fly from he . pack your thing and go . ' 

 ' I believe you be right . where shall I go ? ' 

 ' and you call yourself a special correspondent ! pack first and inquire 
 afterwards . ' 

 an hour later Torpenhow be despatch into the night for a hansom . 

 ' you will probably think of some place to go to while you be move , ' say 
 Dick . ' on to Euston , to begin with , and - oh yes - get drunk to - night . ' 

 he return to the studio , and light more candle , for he find the 
 room very dark . 

 ' oh , you Jezebel ! you futile little Jezebel ! will not   you hate I 
 to - morrow ! - Binkie , come here . ' 

 Binkie turn over on his back on the hearth - rug , and Dick stir he 
 with a meditative foot . 

 ' I say she be not immoral . I be wrong . she say she could cook . that 
 show premeditate sin . oh , Binkie , if you be a man you will go to 
 perdition ; but if you be a woman , and say that you can cook , you will 
 go to a much bad place . ' 





 CHAPTER X 

  what be you that follow at my side ? - 
  the foe that ye must fight , my lord . - 
  that hirple swift as I can ride ? - 
  the shadow of the night , my lord . - 
  then wheel my horse against the foe ! - 
  he be down and overpast , my lord . 

  Ye war against the sunset glow ; 
  the darkness gather fast , my lord . 

  - the Fight of Heriot 's Ford . 
 ' this be a cheerful life , ' say Dick , some day later . ' Torp be away ; 
 Bessie hat I ; I can not   get at the notion of the Melancolia ; Maisie 's 
 letter be scrappy ; and I believe I have indigestion . what give a man 
 pain across the head and spot before his eye , Binkie ? shall we take 
 some liver pill ? ' 

 Dick have just go through a lively scene with Bessie . she have for the 
 fiftieth time reproach he for send Torpenhow away . she explain 
 her endure hatred for Dick , and make it clear to he that she only sit 
 for the sake of his money . ' and Mr. Torpenhow 's ten time a well man 
 than you , ' she conclude . 

 ' he be . that be why he go away . I should have stay and make love to 
 you . ' 

 the girl sit with her chin on her hand , scowl . ' to I ! I would like to 
 catch you ! if I be not   afraid o ' be hang I would kill you . that be what 
 I would do . 

 d'you believe I ? ' 

 Dick smile wearily . it be not pleasant to live in the company of a 
 notion that will not work out , a fox - terrier that can not talk , and a 
 woman who talk too much . he would have answer , but at that moment 
 there unroll itself from one corner of the studio a veil , as it be , 
 of the flimsiest gauze . he rub his eye , but the gray haze would not 
 go . 

 ' this be disgraceful indigestion . Binkie , we will go to a medicine - man . 
 we can not   have our eye interfere with , for by these we get our bread ; 
 also mutton - chop bone for little dog . ' 

 the doctor be an affable local practitioner with white hair , and he 
 say nothing till Dick begin to describe the gray film in the studio . 

 ' we all want a little patching and repair from time to time , ' he 
 chirp . ' like a ship , my dear sir , - exactly like a ship . sometimes the 
 hull be out of order , and we consult the surgeon ; sometimes the 
 rigging , and then I advise ; sometimes the engine , and we go to the 
 brain - specialist ; sometimes the look - out on the bridge be tired , and 
 then we see an oculist . I should recommend you to see an oculist . a 
 little patching and repair from time to time be all we want . an 
 oculist , by all mean . ' 

 Dick seek an oculist , - the good in London . he be certain that the 
 local practitioner do not know anything about his trade , and more 
 certain that Maisie would laugh at he if he be force to wear 
 spectacle . 

 ' I have   neglect the warning of my lord the stomach too long . hence 
 these spot before the eye , Binkie . I can see as well as I ever could . ' 

 as he enter the dark hall that lead to the consulting - room a man 
 cannon against he . Dick see the face as it hurry out into the 
 street . 

 ' that be the writer - type . he have the same modelling of the forehead as 
 Torp . he look very sick . probably hear something he do not   like . ' 

 even as he think , a great fear come upon Dick , a fear that make he 
 hold his breath as he walk into the oculist 's waiting room , with the 
 heavy carve furniture , the dark - green paper , and the sober - hue print 
 on the wall . he recognise a reproduction of one of his own sketch . 

 many people be wait their turn before he . his eye be catch by a 
 flame red - and - gold Christmas - carol book . little child come to that 
 eye - doctor , and they need large - type amusement . 

 ' that be idolatrous bad art , ' he say , draw the book towards himself . 

 ' from the anatomy of the angel , it have be make in Germany . ' he open 
 in mechanically , and there leap to his eye a verse print in red 
 ink - 

  the next good joy that Mary have , 
  it be the joy of three , 
  to see her good Son Jesus Christ 
  make the blind to see ; 
  make the blind to see , good Lord , 
  and happy we may be . 

  Praise Father , Son , and Holy Ghost 
  to all eternity ! 
 Dick read and re - read the verse till his turn come , and the doctor 
 be bend above he seat in an arm - chair . the blaze of the 
 gas - microscope in his eye make he wince . the doctor 's hand touch the 
 scar of the sword - cut on Dick 's head , and Dick explain briefly how he 
 have come by it . when the flame be remove , Dick see the doctor 's face , 
 and the fear come upon he again . the doctor wrap himself in a 
 mist of word . Dick catch allusion to ' scar , ' ' frontal bone , ' ' optic 
 nerve , ' ' extreme caution , ' and the ' avoidance of mental anxiety . ' 

 ' Verdict ? ' he say faintly . ' my business be paint , and I dare not 
 waste time . what do you make of it ? ' 

 again the whirl of word , but this time they convey a meaning . 

 ' can you give I anything to drink ? ' 

 many sentence be pronounce in that darken room , and the prisoner 
 often need cheer . Dick find a glass of liqueur brandy in his hand . 

 ' as far as I can gather , ' he say , cough above the spirit , ' you call 
 it decay of the optic nerve , or something , and therefore hopeless . what 
 be my time - limit , avoid all strain and worry ? ' 

 ' perhaps one year . ' 

 ' my God ! and if I do not   take care of myself ? ' 

 ' I really could not say . one can not ascertain the exact amount of injury 
 inflict by the sword - cut . the scar be an old one , and - exposure to the 
 strong light of the desert , do you say ? - with excessive application to 
 fine work ? I really could not say ? ' 

 ' I beg your pardon , but it have come without any warning . if you will 
 let I , I will sit here for a minute , and then I will go . you have be very 
 good in tell I the truth . without any warning ; without any warning . 

 thank . ' 

 Dick go into the street , and be rapturously receive by Binkie . 

 ' we have   get it very badly , little dog ! just as badly as we can get it . 
 we will go to the Park to think it out . ' 

 they head for a certain tree that Dick know well , and they sit down to 
 thin , because his leg be tremble under he and there be cold fear 
 at the pit of his stomach . 

 ' how could it have come without any warning ? it be as sudden as be 
 shoot . it be the live death , Binkie . we be to be shut up in the dark in 
 one year if we be careful , and we shall not   see anybody , and we shall 
 never have anything we want , not though we live to be a hundred ! ' Binkie 
 wag his tail joyously . ' binkie , we must think . let us see how it 
 feel to be blind . ' Dick shut his eye , and flame comma and 
 catherine - wheel float inside the lid . yet when he look across the 
 Park the scope of his vision be not contract . he could see perfectly , 
 until a procession of slow - wheel firework defile across his 
 eyeball . 

 ' little dorglum , we be not   at all well . let us go home . if only Torp 
 be back , now ! ' 

 but Torpenhow be in the south of England , inspect dockyard in the 
 company of the Nilghai . his letter be brief and full of mystery . 

 Dick have never ask anybody to help he in his joy or his sorrow . he 
 argue , in the loneliness of his studio , henceforward to be decorate 
 with a film of gray gauze in one corner , that , if his fate be 
 blindness , all the Torpenhows in the world could not save he . ' I can not 
 call he off his trip to sit down and sympathise with I . I must pull 
 through this business alone , ' he say . he be lie on the sofa , eat 
 his moustache and wonder what the darkness of the night would be 
 like . then come to his mind the memory of a quaint scene in the Soudan . 
 a soldier have be nearly hack in two by a broad - bladed arab spear . 
 for one instant the man feel no pain . look down , he see that his 
 life - blood be go from he . the stupid bewilderment on his face 
 be so intensely comic that both Dick and Torpenhow , still pant and 
 unstrung from a fight for life , have roar with laughter , in which the 
 man seem as if he would join , but , as his lip part in a sheepish 
 grin , the agony of death come upon he , and he pitch grunt at their 
 foot . Dick laugh again , remember the horror . it seem so exactly 
 like his own case . 

 ' but I have a little more time allow I , ' he say . he pace up and 
 down the room , quietly at first , but afterwards with the hurried foot of 
 fear . it be as though a black shadow stand at his elbow and urge he 
 to go forward ; and there be only weave circle and float pin - dot 
 before his eye . 

 ' we need to be calm , Binkie ; we must be calm . ' he talk aloud for the 
 sake of distraction . ' this be not   nice at all . what shall we do ? we must 
 do something . our time be short . I should not   have believe that this 
 morning ; but now thing be different . Binkie , where be Moses when the 
 light go out ? ' 

 Binkie smile from ear to ear , as a well - breed terri should , but make 
 no suggestion . 

 ' " be there but world enough and time , this coyness , Binkie , be not 
 crime .... but at my back I always hear - - " ' he wipe his forehead , 
 which be unpleasantly damp . ' what can I do ? what can I do ? I have not 
 any notion leave , and I can not   think connectedly , but I must do 
 something , or I shall go off my head . ' 

 the hurried walk recommence , Dick stop every now and again to drag 
 forth long - neglect canvas and old note - book ; for he turn to his 
 work by instinct , as a thing that could not fail . ' you will not   do , and you 
 will not   do , ' he say , at each inspection . ' no more soldier . I could not 
 paint them . sudden death come home too nearly , and this be battle and 
 murder for I . ' 

 the day be fail , and Dick think for a moment that the twilight 
 of the blind have come upon he unaware . ' Allah Almighty ! ' he cry 
 despairingly , ' help I through the time of waiting , and I will not   whine 
 when my punishment come . what can I do now , before the light go ? ' 

 there be no answer . Dick wait till he could regain some sort of 
 control over himself . his hand be shake , and he pride himself on 
 their steadiness ; he could feel that his lip be quiver , and the 
 sweat be run down his face . he be lash by fear , drive forward 
 by the desire to get to work at once and accomplish something , and 
 madden by the refusal of his brain to do more than repeat the news 
 that he be about to go blind . ' it be a humiliating exhibition , ' he 
 think , ' and I be glad Torp be not   here to see . the doctor say I be to 
 avoid mental worry . 

 come here and let I pet you , Binkie . ' 

 the little dog yelp because Dick nearly squeeze the bark out of he . 

 then he hear the man speak in the twilight , and , doglike , understand 
 that his trouble stand off from he - ' Allah be good , Binkie . not quite 
 so gentle as we could wish , but we will discuss that later . I think I see 
 my way to it now . all those study of Bessie 's head be nonsense , and 
 they nearly bring your master into a scrape . I hold the notion now as 
 clear as crystal , - " the Melancolia that transcend all wit . " there shall 
 be Maisie in that head , because I shall never get Maisie ; and Bess , of 
 course , because she know all about Melancolia , though she do not   know 
 she know ; and there shall be some drawing in it , and it shall all end 
 up with a laugh . that be for myself . shall she giggle or grin ? no , she 
 shall laugh right out of the canvas , and every man and woman that ever 
 have a sorrow of their own shall - what be it the poem say ? - 

  ' understand the speech and feel a stir 
  of fellowship in all disastrous fight . 
 " in all disastrous fight " ? that be well than paint the thing merely 
 to pique Maisie . I can do it now because I have it inside I . Binkie , 
 I be go to hold you up by your tail . you be an omen . come here . ' 

 Binkie swung head downward for a moment without speak . 

 ' rather like hold a guinea - pig ; but you be a brave little dog , and 
 you do not   yelp when you be hang up . it be an omen . ' 

 Binkie go to his own chair , and as often as he look see Dick walk 
 up and down , rub his hand and chuckle . that night Dick write a 
 letter to Maisie full of the tender regard for her health , but say 
 very little about his own , and dream of the Melancolia to be bear . not 
 till morning do he remember that something might happen to he in the 
 future . 

 he fall to work , whistle softly , and be swallow up in the clean , 
 clear joy of creation , which do not come to man too often , lest he 
 should consider himself the equal of his God , and so refuse to die at 
 the appoint time . he forget Maisie , Torpenhow , and Binkie at his foot , 
 but remember to stir Bessie , who need very little stirring , into a 
 tremendous rage , that he might watch the smoulder light in her eye . 

 he throw himself without reservation into his work , and do not think of 
 the doom that be to overtake he , for he be possess with his notion , 
 and the thing of this world have no power upon he . 

 ' you be pleased to - day , ' say Bessie . 

 Dick wave his mahl - stick in mystic circle and go to the sideboard 
 for a drink . in the evening , when the exaltation of the day have die 
 down , he go to the sideboard again , and after some visit become 
 convinced that the eye - doctor be a liar , since he could still see 
 everything very clearly . 

 he be of opinion that he would even make a home for Maisie , and that 
 whether she like it or not she should be his wife . the mood pass next 
 morning , but the sideboard and all upon it remain for his comfort . 

 again he set to work , and his eye trouble he with spot and dash 
 and blur till he have take counsel with the sideboard , and the 
 Melancolia both on the canvas and in his own mind appear lovely than 
 ever . there be a delightful sense of irresponsibility upon he , such 
 as they feel who walk among their fellow - man know that the 
 death - sentence of disease be upon they , and , see that fear be but 
 waste of the little time leave , be riotously happy . the day pass 
 without event . 

 Bessie arrive punctually always , and , though her voice seem to Dick 
 to come from a distance , her face be always very near . the Melancolia 
 begin to flame on the canvas , in the likeness of a woman who have know 
 all the sorrow in the world and be laugh at it . it be true that the 
 corner of the studio drape themselves in gray film and retire into 
 the darkness , that the spot in his eye and the pain across his head 
 be very troublesome , and that Maisie 's letter be hard to read and 
 hard still to answer . he could not tell she of his trouble , and he 
 could not laugh at her account of her own melancolia which be always 
 go to be finish . but the furious day of toil and the night of 
 wild dream make amend for all , and the sideboard be his good friend 
 on earth . 

 Bessie be singularly dull . she use to shriek with rage when Dick 
 star at she between half - close eye . now she sulk , or watch he 
 with disgust , say very little . 

 Torpenhow have be absent for six week . an incoherent note herald his 
 return . ' News ! great news ! ' he write . ' the Nilghai know , and so 
 do the Keneu . we be all back on Thursday . get lunch and clean your 
 accoutrement . ' 

 Dick show Bessie the letter , and she abuse he for that he have ever 
 send Torpenhow away and ruin her life . 

 ' well , ' say Dick , brutally , ' you be well as you be , instead of 
 make love to some drunken beast in the street . ' he feel that he have 
 rescue Torpenhow from great temptation . 

 ' I do not   know if that be any bad than sit to a drunken beast in a 
 studio . you have not   be sober for three week . you have   be soak the 
 whole time ; and yet you pretend you be well than I ! ' 

 ' what d'you mean ? ' say Dick . 

 ' mean ! you will see when Mr. Torpenhow come back . ' 

 it be not long to wait . torpenhow meet Bessie on the staircase without a 
 sign of feeling . he have news that be more to he than many Bessies , and 
 the Keneu and the Nilghai be trample behind he , call for Dick . 

 ' drink like a fish , ' Bessie whisper . ' he be be at it for nearly a 
 month . ' she follow the man stealthily to hear judgment do . 

 they come into the studio , rejoice , to be welcome over effusively by 
 a draw , line , shrunken , haggard wreck , - unshaven , blue - white about 
 the nostril , stoop in the shoulder , and peer under his eyebrow 
 nervously . the drink have be at work as steadily as Dick . 

 ' be this you ? ' say Torpenhow . 

 ' all that be leave of I . sit down . Binkie 's quite well , and I have   be 
 do some good work . ' he reel where he stand . 

 ' you have   do some of the bad work you have   ever do in your life . man 
 alive , you be - - ' 

 Torpenhow turn to his companion appealingly , and they leave the room 
 to find lunch elsewhere . then he speak ; but , since the reproof of a 
 friend be much too sacred and intimate a thing to be print , and since 
 Torpenhow use figure and metaphor which be unseemly , and contempt 
 untranslatable , it will never be know what be actually say to Dick , 
 who blink and wink and pick at his hand . after a time the culprit 
 begin to feel the need of a little self - respect . he be quite sure that 
 he have not in any way depart from virtue , and there be reason , too , 
 of which torpenhow know nothing . he would explain . 

 he rise , try to straighten his shoulder , and speak to the face he 
 could hardly see . 

 ' you be right , ' he say . ' but I be right , too . after you go away I 
 have some trouble with my eye . so I go to an oculist , and he turn a 
 gasogene - I mean a gas - engine - into my eye . that be very long ago . he 
 say , " Scar on the head , - sword - cut and optic nerve . " make a note of 
 that . so I be go blind . I have some work to do before I go blind , and 
 I suppose that I must do it . I can not see much now , but I can see well 
 when I be drunk . I do not know I be drunk till I be tell , but I must 
 go on with my work . if you want to see it , there it be . ' he point to 
 the all but finish Melancolia and look for applause . 

 Torpenhow say nothing , and Dick begin to whimper feebly , for joy at 
 see Torpenhow again , for grief at misdeed - if indeed they be 
 misdeed - that make torpenhow remote and unsympathetic , and for childish 
 vanity hurt , since Torpenhow have not give a word of praise to his 
 wonderful picture . 

 Bessie look through the keyhole after a long pause , and see the two 
 walk up and down as usual , Torpenhow 's hand on Dick 's shoulder . 

 Hereat she say something so improper that it shock even Binkie , 
 who be dribble patiently on the landing with the hope of see his 
 master again . 





 CHAPTER XI 

  the lark will make her hymn to God , 
  the partridge call she brood , 
  while I forget the heath I trod , 
  the field wherein I stand . 

  ' tis dule to know not night from morn , 
  but deep dule to know 
  I can but hear the hunter 's horn 
  that once I use to blow . 

  - the only Son . 
 it be the third day after Torpenhow 's return , and his heart be heavy . 

 ' do you mean to tell I that you can not   see to work without whiskey ? it be 
 generally the other way about . ' 

 ' can a drunkard swear on his honour ? ' say Dick . 

 ' yes , if he have be as good a man as you . ' 

 ' then I give you my word of honour , ' say Dick , speak hurriedly 
 through parch lip . ' old man , I can hardly see your face now . you have 
 keep I sober for two day , - if I ever be drunk , - and I have   do no 
 work . 

 do not   keep I back any more . I do not   know when my eye may give out . 

 the spot and dot and the pain and thing be crowd bad than 
 ever . I swear I can see all right when I be - when I be moderately screw , 
 as you say . give I three more sitting from Bessie and all - the stuff 
 I want , and the picture will be do . I can not   kill myself in three day . 
 it only mean a touch of D. T. at the bad . ' 

 ' if I give you three day more will you promise I to stop work and - the 
 other thing , whether the picture 's finished or not ? ' 

 ' I can not . you do not   know what that picture mean to I . but surely you 
 could get the Nilghai to help you , and knock I down and tie I up . I 
 should not   fight for the whiskey , but I should for the work . ' 

 ' go on , then . I give you three day ; but you be nearly break my 
 heart . ' 

 Dick return to his work , toil as one possess ; and the yellow 
 devil of whiskey stand by he and chase away the spot in his eye . the 
 Melancolia be nearly finish , and be all or nearly all that he have 
 hop she would be . Dick jest with Bessie , who remind he that he 
 be ' a drunken beast ' ; but the reproof do not move he . 

 ' you can not   understand , Bess . we be in sight of land now , and soon we 
 shall lie back and think about what we have   do . I will give you three 
 month ' pay when the picture 's finished , and next time I have any more 
 work in hand - but that do not   matter . will not   three month ' pay make you 
 hate I less ? ' 

 ' no , it will not ! I hate you , and I will go on hat you . Mr. Torpenhow 
 will not   speak to I any more . he be always look at map . ' 

 Bessie do not say that she have again lay siege to Torpenhow , or that 
 at the end of our passionate pleading he have pick she up , give she a 
 kiss , and put she outside the door with the recommendation not to be a 
 little fool . he spend most of his time in the company of the Nilghai , 
 and their talk be of war in the near future , the hiring of transport , 
 and secret preparation among the dockyard . he do not wish to see Dick 
 till the picture be finish . 

 ' he be do first - class work , ' he say to the Nilghai , ' and it be quite 
 out of his regular line . but , for the matter of that , so be his infernal 
 soaking . ' 

 ' never mind . leave he alone . when he have come to his sens again we will 
 carry he off from this place and let he breathe clean air . Poor Dick ! 
 I do not   envy you , Torp , when his eye fail . ' 

 ' yes , it will be a case of " God help the man who be chain to our 
 Davie . " the bad be that we do not   know when it will happen , and I 
 believe the uncertainty and the waiting have send Dick to the whiskey 
 more than anything else . ' 

 ' how the Arab who cut his head open would grin if he know ! ' 

 ' he be at perfect liberty to grin if he can . he be dead . that be poor 
 consolation now . ' 

 in the afternoon of the third day Torpenhow hear Dick call for he . 

 ' all finish ! ' he shout . ' I have   do it ! come in ! be not   she a beauty ? 
 be not   she a darling ? I have   be down to hell to get she ; but be not   she 
 worth it ? ' 

 Torpenhow look at the head of a woman who laugh , - a full - lipped , 
 hollow - eyed woman who laugh from out of the canvas as Dick have 
 intend she would . 

 ' who teach you how to do it ? ' say Torpenhow . ' the touch and notion 
 have nothing to do with your regular work . what a face it be ! what eye , 
 and what insolence ! ' unconsciously he throw back his head and laugh 
 with she . ' she be see the game play out , - I do not   think she have a good 
 time of it , - and now she do not   care . be not   that the idea ? ' 

 ' exactly . ' 

 ' where do you get the mouth and chin from ? they do not   belong to Bess . ' 

 ' they be - some one else 's . but be not   it good ? be not   it thunder good ? 
 be not   it worth the whiskey ? I do it . alone I do it , and it be the good 
 I can do . ' he draw his breath sharply , and whisper , ' just God ! what 
 could I not do ten year hence , if I can do this now ! - by the way , what 
 do you think of it , Bess ? ' 

 the girl be bite her lip . she loathe Torpenhow because he have take 
 no notice of she . 

 ' I think it be just the horrid , beastliest thing I ever see , ' she 
 answer , and turn away . 

 ' More than you will be of that way of thinking , young woman . - Dick , 
 there be a sort of murderous , viperine suggestion in the poise of the 
 head that I do not   understand , ' say Torpenhow . 

 that be trick - work , ' say Dick , chuckle with delight at be 
 completely understand . ' I could not   resist one little bit of sheer 
 swagger . it be a french trick , and you would not   understand ; but it be get 
 at by slew round the head a trifle , and a tiny , tiny foreshortening 
 of one side of the face from the angle of the chin to the top of the 
 leave ear . that , and deepen the shadow under the lobe of the ear . it 
 be flagrant trick - work ; but , have the notion fix , I feel entitle 
 to play with it , - oh , you beauty ! ' 

 ' amen ! she be a beauty . I can feel it . ' 

 ' so will every man who have any sorrow of his own , ' say Dick , slap 
 his thigh . ' he shall see his trouble there , and , by the Lord Harry , just 
 when he be feel properly sorry for himself he shall throw back his 
 head and laugh , - as she be laugh . I have   put the life of my heart 
 and the light of my eye into she , and I do not   care what come .... I be 
 tired , - awfully tired . I think I will get to sleep . take away the whiskey , 
 it have serve its turn , and give Bessie thirty - six quid , and three over 
 for luck . cover the picture . ' 

 he drop asleep in the long chair , hid face white and haggard , almost 
 before he have finish the sentence . Bessie try to take Torpenhow 's 
 hand . ' be not   you never go to speak to I any more ? ' she say ; but 
 Torpenhow be look at Dick . 

 ' what a stock of vanity the man have ! I will take he in hand to - morrow and 
 make much of he . he deserve it . - eh ! what be that , Bess ? ' 

 ' nothing . I will put thing tidy here a little , and then I will go . you 
 could not   give I that three month ' pay now , could you ? he say you be 
 to . ' 

 Torpenhow give she a check and go to his own room . Bessie faithfully 
 tidy up the studio , set the door ajar for flight , empty half a 
 bottle of turpentine on a duster , and begin to scrub the face of the 
 Melancolia viciously . the paint do not smudge quickly enough . she take 
 a palette - knife and scrap , follow each stroke with the wet duster . 
 in five minute the picture be a formless , scarred muddle of colour . 
 she throw the paint - stain duster into the studio stove , stick out her 
 tongue at the sleeper , and whisper , ' bilk ! ' as she turn to run 
 down the staircase . she would never see Torpenhow any more , but she have 
 at least do harm to the man who have come between she and her desire 
 and who use to make fun of she . cash the check be the very cream of 
 the jest to Bessie . then the little privateer sail across the Thames , 
 to be swallow up in the gray wilderness of South - the - Water . 

 Dick sleep till late in the evening , when Torpenhow drag he off 
 to bed . his eye be as bright as his voice be hoarse . ' let us have 
 another look at the picture , ' he say , insistently as a child . 

 ' you - go - to - bed , ' say Torpenhow . ' you be not   at all well , though you 
 may not   know it . you be as jumpy as a cat . ' 

 ' I reform to - morrow . good - night . ' 

 as he repasse through the studio , Torpenhow lift the cloth above the 
 picture , and almost betray himself by outcry : ' wipe out ! - scrap 
 out and turpe out ! he be on the verge of jump as it be . that be 
 Bess , - the little fiend ! only a woman could have do that!-with the ink 
 not dry on the check , too ! Dick will be rave mad to - morrow . it be all 
 my fault for try to help gutter - devil . oh , my poor Dick , the Lord be 
 hit you very hard ! ' 

 Dick could not sleep that night , partly for pure joy , and partly because 
 the well - know Catherine - wheel inside his eye have give place to 
 crackling volcano of many - coloured fire . ' spout away , ' he say aloud . 

 ' I have   do my work , and now you can do what you please . ' he lie still , 
 star at the ceiling , the long - pen - up delirium of drink in his 
 vein , his brain on fire with racing thought that would not stay to be 
 consider , and his hand crisp and dry . he have just discover that 
 he be paint the face of the Melancolia on a revolving dome rib 
 with million of light , and that all his wondrous thought stand 
 embody hundred of foot below his tiny swing plank , shout 
 together in his honour , when something crack inside his temple like 
 an overstrained bowstring , the glitter dome break inward , and he be 
 alone in the thick night . 

 ' I will go to sleep . the room 's very dark . let us light a lamp and see how 
 the Melancolia look . there ought to have be a moon . ' 

 it be then that Torpenhow hear his name call by a voice that he do 
 not know , - in the rattle accent of deadly fear . 

 ' he be look at the picture , ' be his first thought , as he hurry 
 into the bedroom and find Dick sit up and beat the air with his 
 hand . 

 ' Torp ! Torp ! where be you ? for pity 's sake , come to I ! ' 

 ' what be the matter ? ' 

 Dick clutch at his shoulder . ' Matter ! I have   be lie here for hour 
 in the dark , and you never hear I . Torp , old man , do not   go away . I be 
 all in the dark . in the dark , I tell you ! ' 

 torpenhow hold the candle within a foot of Dick 's eye , but there be no 
 light in those eye . he light the gas , and Dick hear the flame catch . the 
 grip of his finger on Torpenhow 's shoulder make torpenhow wince . 

 ' do not   leave I . you would not   leave I alone now , would you ? I can not 
 see . D'you understand ? it be black , - quite black , - and I feel as if I be 
 fall through it all . ' 

 ' Steady do it . ' torpenhow put his arm round Dick and begin to rock he 
 gently to and fro . 

 ' that be good . now do not   talk . if I keep very quiet for a while , this 
 darkness will lift . it seem just on the point of breaking . h'sh ! ' Dick 
 knit his brow and star desperately in front of he . the night air be 
 chill Torpenhow 's toe . 

 ' can you stay like that a minute ? ' he say . ' I will get my dressing - gown 
 and some slipper . ' 

 Dick clutch the bed - head with both hand and wait for the darkness 
 to clear away . ' what a time you have   be ! ' he cry , when Torpenhow 
 return . ' it be as black as ever . what be you bang about in the 
 door - way ? ' 

 ' long chair , - horse - blanket , - pillow . go to sleep by you . lie down 
 now ; you will be well in the morning . ' 

 ' I shall not ! ' the voice rise to a wail . ' my God ! I be blind ! I be blind , and 
 the darkness will never go away . ' he make as if to leap from the bed , 
 but Torpenhow 's arm be round he , and Torpenhow 's chin be on his 
 shoulder , and his breath be squeeze out of he . he could only gasp , 
 ' blind ! ' and wriggle feebly . 

 ' Steady , Dickie , steady ! ' say the deep voice in his ear , and the grip 
 tighten . ' bite on the bullet , old man , and do not   let they think you be 
 afraid , ' the grip could draw no close . both man be breathe heavily . 

 Dick throw his head from side to side and groan . 

 ' let I go , ' he pant . ' you be crack my rib . we - we must not   let they 
 think we be afraid , must we , - all the power of darkness and that lot ? ' 

 ' lie down . it be all over now . ' 

 ' yes , ' say Dick , obediently . ' but would you mind let I hold your 
 hand ? I feel as if I want something to hold on to . one drop through 
 the dark so . ' 

 torpenhow thrust out a large and hairy paw from the long chair . Dick 
 clutch it tightly , and in half an hour have fall asleep . torpenhow 
 withdraw his hand , and , stoop over Dick , kiss he lightly on the 
 forehead , as man do sometimes kiss a wound comrade in the hour of 
 death , to ease his departure . 

 in the gray dawn Torpenhow hear Dick talk to himself . he be adrift 
 on the shoreless tide of delirium , speak very quickly - ' it be a 
 pity , - a great pity ; but it be help , and it must be eat , Master 
 George . sufficient unto the day be the blindness thereof , and , far , 
 put aside all Melancolias and false humour , it be of obvious 
 notoriety - such as mine be - that the queen can do no wrong . Torp 
 do not   know that . I will tell he when we be a little far into the 
 desert . 

 what a bungle those boatman be make of the steamer - rope ! they will 
 have that four - inch hawser chafe through in a minute . I tell you 
 so - there she go ! white foam on green water , and the steamer slewing 
 round . how good that look ! I will sketch it . no , I can not . I be afflict 
 with ophthalmia . that be one of the ten plague of Egypt , and it 
 extend up the Nile in the shape of cataract . ha ! that be a joke , Torp . 
 Laugh , you graven image , and stand clear of the hawser .... it will knock 
 you into the water and make your dress all dirty , Maisie dear . ' 

 ' oh ! ' say Torpenhow . ' this happen before . that night on the river . ' 

 ' she will be sure to say it be my fault if you get muddy , and you be quite 
 near enough to the breakwater . Maisie , that be not fair . ah ! I know you would 
 miss . 

 Low and to the left , dear . but you have   no conviction . do not   be angry , 
 darling . I would cut my hand off if it would give you anything more than 
 obstinacy . my right hand , if it would serve . ' 

 ' now we must not   listen . here be an island shout across sea of 
 misunderstanding with a vengeance . but it be shout truth , I fancy , ' 
 say Torpenhow . 

 the babble continue . it all bear upon Maisie . sometimes Dick lecture 
 at length on his craft , then he curse himself for his folly in be 
 enslave . he plead to Maisie for a kiss - only one kiss - before she 
 go away , and call to she to come back from Vitry - sur - Marne , if she 
 would ; but through all his raving he bid heaven and earth witness that 
 the queen could do no wrong . 

 Torpenhow listen attentively , and learn every detail of Dick 's life 
 that have be hide from he . for three day Dick rave through the 
 past , and then a natural sleep . ' what a strain he have be run 
 under , poor chap ! ' say Torpenhow . ' Dick , of all man , hand himself 
 over like a dog ! and I be lecture he on arrogance ! I ought to have 
 know that it be no use to judge a man . but I do it . what a demon that 
 girl must be ! Dick 's give she his life , - confound he ! - and she be give 
 he one kiss apparently . ' 

 ' Torp , ' say Dick , from the bed , ' go out for a walk . you have   be here 
 too long . I will get up . hi ! this be annoying . I can not   dress myself . oh , 
 it be too absurd ! ' 

 Torpenhow help he into his clothe and lead he to the big chair 
 in the studio . he sit quietly wait under strained nerve for 
 the darkness to lift . it do not lift that day , nor the next . Dick 
 adventure on a voyage round the wall . he hit his shin against the 
 stove , and this suggest to he that it would be well to crawl on all 
 four , one hand in front of he . torpenhow find he on the floor . 

 ' I be try to get the geography of my new possession , ' say he . ' d'you 
 remember that nigger you gouge in the square ? pity you do not   keep the 
 odd eye . it would have be useful . any letter for I ? give I all the 
 one in fat gray envelope with a sort of crown thing outside . they be 
 of no importance . ' 

 Torpenhow give he a letter with a black M. on the envelope flap . Dick 
 put it into his pocket . there be nothing in it that Torpenhow might 
 not have read , but it belong to himself and to Maisie , who would never 
 belong to he . 

 ' when she find that I do not   write , she will stop write . it be well 
 so . I could not   be any use to she now , ' Dick argue , and the tempter 
 suggest that he should make known his condition . every nerve in he 
 revolt . ' I have fall low enough already . I be not go to beg for 
 pity . besides , it would be cruel to she . ' he strive to put Maisie out of 
 his thought ; but the blind have many opportunity for thinking , and as 
 the tide of his strength come back to he in the long employless day 
 of dead darkness , Dick 's soul be troubled to the core . another letter , 
 and another , come from Maisie . then there be silence , and Dick sit by 
 the window , the pulse of summer in the air , and picture she be win 
 by another man , strong than himself . his imagination , the keener for 
 the dark background it work against , spar he no single detail that 
 might send he rag up and down the studio , to stumble over the stove 
 that seem to be in four place at once . bad of all , tobacco would 
 not taste in the darkness . the arrogance of the man have disappear , and 
 in its place be settle despair that torpenhow know , and blind passion 
 that Dick confide to his pillow at night . the interval between 
 the paroxysm be fill with intolerable waiting and the weight of 
 intolerable darkness . 

 ' come out into the Park , ' say Torpenhow . ' you have not   stir out since 
 the beginning of thing . ' 

 ' what be the use ? there be no movement in the dark ; and , besides , ' - he 
 pause irresolutely at the head of the stair , - ' something will run over 
 I . ' 

 ' not if I be with you . proceed gingerly . ' 

 the roar of the street fill Dick with nervous terror , and he cling to 
 Torpenhow 's arm . ' fancy have to feel for a gutter with your foot ! ' he 
 say petulantly , as he turn into the Park . ' let us curse God and die . ' 

 ' sentry be forbid to pay unauthorised compliment . by Jove , there 
 be the Guards ! ' 

 Dick 's figure straighten . ' let us get near them . let us go in and look . 
 let us get on the grass and run . I can smell the tree . ' 

 ' mind the low railing . that be all right ! ' torpenhow kick out a tuft 
 of grass with his heel . ' smell that , ' he say . ' be not   it good ? ' Dick 
 sniff luxuriously . ' now pick up your foot and run . ' they approach 
 as near to the regiment as be possible . the clank of bayonet be 
 unfixed make Dick 's nostril quiver . 

 ' let us get near . they be in column , be not   they ? ' 

 ' yes . how do you know ? ' 

 ' felt it . oh , my man ! - my beautiful man ! ' he edge forward as though he 
 could see . ' I could draw those chap once . who will draw them now ? ' 

 ' they will move off in a minute . do not   jump when the band begin . ' 

 ' huh ! I be not a new charger . it be the silence that hurt . Nearer , 
 Torp ! - nearer ! oh , my God , what would not   I give to see them for a 
 minute ! - one half - minute ! ' 

 he could hear the armed life almost within reach of he , could hear the 
 sling tighten across the bandsman 's chest as he heave the big drum 
 from the ground . 

 ' stick cross above his head , ' whisper Torpenhow . 

 ' I know . I know ! who should know if I do not ? h'sh ! ' 

 the drum - stick fall with a boom , and the man swing forward to the crash 
 of the band . Dick feel the wind of the massed movement in his face , 
 hear the madden tramp of foot and the friction of the pouch on the 
 belt . the big drum pound out the tune . it be a music - hall refrain 
 that make a perfect quickstep - 

  he must be a man of decent height , 
  he must be a man of weight , 
  he must come home on a Saturday night 
  in a thoroughly sober state ; 
  he must know how to love I , 
  and he must know how to kiss ; 
  and if he be enough to keep we both 
  I can not   refuse he bliss . 
 ' what be the matter ? ' say Torpenhow , as he see Dick 's head fall when the 
 last of the regiment have depart . 

 ' nothing . I feel a little bit out of the running , - that be all . Torp , 
 take I back . why do you bring I out ? ' 





 CHAPTER XII 

  there be three friend that bury the fourth , 
  the mould in his mouth and the dust in his eye 
  and they go south and east , and north , - 
  the strong man fight , but the sick man die . 

  there be three friend that speak of the dead , - 
  the strong man fight , but the sick man die . - 
  ' and would he be with we now , ' they say , 
  ' the sun in our face and the wind in our eye . ' 

  - Ballad . 
 the NILGHAI be angry with Torpenhow . Dick have be send to bed , - blind 
 man be ever under the order of those who can see , - and since he have 
 return from the Park have fluently swear at Torpenhow because he be 
 alive , and all the world because it be alive and could see , while he , 
 Dick , be dead in the death of the blind , who , at the good , be only 
 burden upon their associate . torpenhow have say something about a Mrs. 
 Gummidge , and Dick have retire in a black fury to handle and re - handle 
 three unopened letter from Maisie . 

 the Nilghai , fat , burly , and aggressive , be in Torpenhow 's room . 

 behind he sit the Keneu , the Great War Eagle , and between they lay a 
 large map embellish with black - and - white - head pin . 

 ' I be wrong about the Balkans , ' say the Nilghai . ' but I be not wrong 
 about this business . the whole of our work in the Southern Soudan 
 must be do over again . the public do not   care , of course , but the 
 government do , and they be make their arrangement quietly . you 
 know that as well as I do . ' 

 ' I remember how the people curse we when our troop withdraw from 
 Omdurman . it be bind to crop up soon or later . but I can not   go , ' say 
 Torpenhow . he point through the open door ; it be a hot night . ' can 
 you blame I ? ' 

 the Keneu purr above his pipe like a large and very happy cat - ' do not 
 blame you in the least . it be uncommonly good of you , and all the rest 
 of it , but every man - even you , Torp - must consider his work . I know it 
 sound brutal , but Dick be out of the race , - down , - gastado expend , 
 finish , do for . he have a little money of his own . he will not   starve , 
 and you can not   pull out of your slide for his sake . think of your own 
 reputation . ' 

 ' Dick 's be five time big than mine and yours put together . ' 

 ' that be because he sign his name to everything he do . it be all 
 end now . you must hold yourself in readiness to move out . you can 
 command your own price , and you do well work than any three of we . ' 

 ' do not   tell I how tempting it be . I will stay here to look after Dick 
 for a while . he be as cheerful as a bear with a sore head , but I think he 
 like to have I near he . ' 

 the Nilghai say something uncomplimentary about soft - head fool who 
 throw away their career for other fool . torpenhow flush angrily . the 
 constant strain of attendance on Dick have wear his nerve thin . 

 ' there remain a third fate , ' say the Keneu , thoughtfully . ' consider 
 this , and be not large fool than necessary . Dick be - or rather 
 be - an able - bodied man of moderate attraction and a certain amount of 
 audacity . ' 

 ' oho ! ' say the Nilghai , who remember an affair at Cairo . ' I begin to 
 see , - Torp , I be sorry . ' 

 Torpenhow nod forgiveness : ' you be more sorry when he cut you out , 
 though . - go on , Keneu . ' 

 ' I have   often think , when I have   see man die out in the desert , that if 
 the news could be send through the world , and the mean of transport 
 be quick enough , there would be one woman at least at each man 's 
 bedside . ' 

 ' there would be some mighty quaint revelation . let we be grateful 
 thing be as they be , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' let we rather reverently consider whether Torp 's three - cornered 
 ministration be exactly what Dick need just now . - what do you think 
 yourself , Torp ? ' 

 ' I know they be not . but what can I do ? ' 

 ' Lay the matter before the board . we be all Dick 's friend here . you have 
 be most in his life . ' 

 ' but I pick it up when he be off his head . ' 

 ' the great chance of its be true . I think we should arrive . who 
 be she ? ' 

 then Torpenhow tell a tale in plain word , as a special correspondent 
 who know how to make a verbal precis should tell it . the man listen 
 without interruption . 

 ' be it possible that a man can come back across the year to his 
 calf - love ? ' say the Keneu . ' be it possible ? ' 

 ' I give the fact . he say nothing about it now , but he sit fumble 
 three letter from she when he think I be not look . what be I to do ? ' 

 ' speak to he , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' oh yes ! write to she , - I do not   know her full name , remember , - and ask 
 she to accept he out of pity . I believe you once tell Dick you be 
 sorry for he , Nilghai . you remember what happen , eh ? go into the 
 bedroom and suggest full confession and an appeal to this Maisie 
 girl , whoever she be . I honestly believe he would try to kill you ; and the 
 blindness have make he rather muscular . ' 

 ' Torpenhow 's course be perfectly clear , ' say the Keneu . ' he will go to 
 Vitry - sur - Marne , which be on the Bezieres - Landes Railway , - single track 
 from Tourgas . the Prussians shell it out in ' 70 because there be a 
 poplar on the top of a hill eighteen hundred yard from the church spire 
 there be a squadron of cavalry quarter there , - or ought to be . where 
 this studio Torp speak about may be I can not tell . that be Torp 's 
 business . I have give he his route . he will dispassionately explain 
 the situation to the girl , and she will come back to Dick , - the more 
 especially because , to use Dick 's word , " there be nothing but she 
 damned obstinacy to keep they apart . " ' 

 ' and they have four hundred and twenty pound a year between them . 

 Dick never lose his head for figure , even in his delirium . you have not 
 the shadow of an excuse for not go , ' say the Nilghai . 

 Torpenhow look very uncomfortable . ' but it be absurd and impossible . I 
 can not   drag she back by the hair . ' 

 ' our business - the business for which we draw our money - be to do absurd 
 and impossible thing , - generally with no reason whatever except to 
 amuse the public . here we have a reason . the rest do not   matter . I 
 shall share these room with the Nilghai till torpenhow return . there 
 will be a batch of unbridled ' special " come to town in a little 
 while , and these will serve as their headquarter . another reason for 
 send Torpenhow away . thus Providence help those who help other , 
 and ' - here the Keneu drop his measured speech - ' we can not   have you 
 tie by the leg to Dick when the trouble begin . it be your only chance 
 of get away ; and Dick will be grateful . ' 

 ' he will , - bad luck ! I can but go and try . I can not   conceive a woman in 
 her sens refuse Dick . ' 

 ' talk that out with the girl . I have see you wheedle an angry Mahdieh 
 woman into give you date . this will not   be a tithe as difficult . you have 
 well not be here to - morrow afternoon , because the Nilghai and I will 
 be in possession . it be an order . obey . ' 

 ' Dick , ' say Torpenhow , next morning , ' can I do anything for you ? ' 

 ' no ! leave I alone . how often must I remind you that I be blind ? ' 

 ' nothing I could go for to fetch for to carry for to bring ? ' 

 ' no . take those infernal creak boot of yours away . ' 

 ' poor chap ! ' say torpenhow to himself . ' I must have be sit on his 
 nerve lately . he want a light step . ' then , aloud , ' very well . since 
 you be so independent , I be go off for four or five day . say good - bye 
 at least . the housekeeper will look after you , and Keneu have my room . ' 

 Dick 's face fall . ' you will not   be long than a week at the outside ? I 
 know I be touch in the temper , but I can not   get on without you . ' 

 ' can not   you ? you will have to do without I in a little time , and you will be 
 glad I be go . ' 

 Dick feel his way back to the big chair , and wonder what these thing 
 might mean . he do not wish to be tend by the housekeeper , and yet 
 Torpenhow 's constant tenderness jar on he . he do not exactly know 
 what he want . the darkness would not lift , and Maisie 's unopened 
 letter feel worn and old from much handling . he could never read they 
 for himself as long as life endure ; but Maisie might have send he some 
 fresh one to play with . the Nilghai enter with a gift , - a piece of 
 red modelling - wax . he fancy that Dick might find interest in use his 
 hand . Dick poke and pat the stuff for a few minute , and , ' be it 
 like anything in the world ? ' he say drearily . ' take it away . I may get 
 the touch of the blind in fifty year . do you know where Torpenhow have 
 go ? ' 

 the Nilghai know nothing . ' we be stay in his room till he come 
 back . can we do anything for you ? ' 

 ' I would like to be leave alone , please . do not   think I be ungrateful ; but I be 
 well alone . ' 

 the Nilghai chuckle , and Dick resume his drowsy brood and sullen 
 rebellion against fate . he have long since cease to think about the work 
 he have do in the old day , and the desire to do more work have depart 
 from he . he be exceedingly sorry for himself , and the completeness 
 of his tender grief soothe he . but his soul and his body cry for 
 Maisie - Maisie who would understand . his mind point out that Maisie , 
 have her own work to do , would not care . his experience have teach he 
 that when money be exhausted woman go away , and that when a man be 
 knock out of the race the other trample on he . ' then at the least , ' 
 say Dick , in reply , ' she could use I as I use Binat , - for some sort 
 of a study . I would not   ask more than to be near she again , even though I 
 know that another man be make love to she . ugh ! what a dog I be ! ' 

 a voice on the staircase begin to sing joyfully - 

 ' when we go - go - go away from here , our creditor will weep and they 
 will wail , our absence much regretting when they find that they have   be 
 get out of England by next Tuesday 's indian mail . ' 

 follow the trampling of foot , slamming of Torpenhow 's door , and the 
 sound of voice in strenuous debate , some one squeak , ' and see , you 
 good fellow , I have find a new water - bottle - firs'-class patent - eh , 
 how you say ? open himself inside out . ' 

 Dick spring to his foot . he know the voice well . ' that be Cassavetti , 
 come back from the continent . now I know why Torp go away . there be a 
 row somewhere , and - I be out of it ! ' 

 the Nilghai command silence in vain . ' that be for my sake , ' Dick say 
 bitterly . ' the bird be get ready to fly , and they would not 
 tell I . I can hear Morten - Sutherland and Mackaye . half the War 
 Correspondents in London be there ; - and I be out of it . ' 

 he stumble across the landing and plunge into Torpenhow 's room . he 
 could feel that it be full of man . ' where be the trouble ? ' say he . ' in 
 the Balkans at last ? why do not   some one tell I ? ' 

 ' we think you would not   be interested , ' say the Nilghai , shamefacedly . 

 ' it be in the Soudan , as usual . ' 

 ' you lucky dog ! let I sit here while you talk . I shall not   be a skeleton 
 at the feast . - Cassavetti , where be you ? your English be as bad as 
 ever . ' 

 Dick be lead into a chair . he hear the rustle of the map , and the talk 
 sweep forward , carry he with it . everybody speak at once , discuss 
 press censorship , railway - route , transport , water - supply , the 
 capacity of general , - these in language that would have horrify a 
 trusting public , - range , assert , denouncing , and laugh at the 
 top of their voice . there be the glorious certainty of war in the 
 Soudan at any moment . the Nilghai say so , and it be well to be in 
 readiness . the Keneu have telegraph to Cairo for horse ; Cassavetti 
 have steal a perfectly inaccurate list of troop that would be order 
 forward , and be read it out amid profane interruption , and the 
 Keneu introduce to Dick some man unknown who would be employ as war 
 artist by the Central Southern Syndicate . ' it be his first outing , ' say 
 the Keneu . ' give he some tip - about rid camel . ' 

 ' oh , those camel ! ' groan Cassavetti . ' I shall learn to ride he 
 again , and now I be so much all soft ! listen , you good fellow . I know 
 your military arrangement very well . there will go the Royal Argalshire 
 Sutherlanders . so it be read to I upon good authority . ' 

 a roar of laughter interrupt he . 

 ' sit down , ' say the Nilghai . ' the list be not   even make out in the War 
 Office . ' 

 ' will there be any force at Suakin ? ' say a voice . 

 then the outcry redouble , and grow mixed , thus : ' how many egyptian 
 troop will they use ? - God help the Fellaheen ! - there be a railway 
 in Plumstead marsh do duty as a five - court . - we shall have the 
 Suakin - Berber line build at last . - canadian voyageur be too careful . 
 give I a half - drunk Krooman in a whale - boat . - who command the Desert 
 column ? - no , they never blow up the big rock in the Ghineh bend . we 
 shall have to be haul up , as usual . - somebody tell I if there be an 
 indian contingent , or I will break everybody 's head . - do not   tear the 
 map in two . - it be a war of occupation , I tell you , to connect with the 
 african company in the South . - there be Guinea - worm in most of the 
 well on that route . ' then the Nilghai , despair of peace , bellow 
 like a fog - horn and beat upon the table with both hand . 

 ' but what become of Torpenhow ? ' say Dick , in the silence that 
 follow . 

 ' Torp 's in abeyance just now . he be off love - make somewhere , I 
 suppose , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' he say he be go to stay at home , ' say the Keneu . 

 ' be he ? ' say Dick , with an oath . ' he will not . I be not much good now , but 
 if you and the Nilghai hold he down I will engage to trample on he till 
 he see reason . he will stay behind , indeed ! he be the good of you all . 
 there will be some tough work by Omdurman . we shall come there to stay , 
 this time . 

 but I forget . I wish I be go with you . ' 

 ' so do we all , Dickie , ' say the Keneu . 

 ' and I most of all , ' say the new artist of the Central Southern 
 Syndicate . 

 ' could you tell I - - ' 

 ' I will give you one piece of advice , ' Dick answer , move towards 
 the door . ' if you happen to be cut over the head in a scrimmage , do not 
 guard . 

 tell the man to go on cutting . you will find it cheap in the end . 
 thank for let I look in . ' 

 ' there 's grit in Dick , ' say the Nilghai , an hour later , when the room 
 be empty of all save the Keneu . 

 ' it be the sacred call of the war - trumpet . do you notice how he 
 answer to it ? poor fellow ! let us look at he , ' say the Keneu . 

 the excitement of the talk have die away . Dick be sit by the studio 
 table , with his head on his arm , when the man come in . he do not 
 change his position . 

 ' it hurt , ' he moan . ' God forgive I , but it hurt cruelly ; and yet , 
 y'know , the world have a knack of spin round all by itself . shall I 
 see Torp before he go ? ' 

 ' oh , yes . you will see he , ' say the Nilghai . 





 CHAPTER XIII 

  the sun go down an hour ago , 
  I wonder if I face towards home ; 
  if I lose my way in the light of day 
  how shall I find it now night be come ? 

  - Old Song . 
 ' MAISIE , come to bed . ' 

 ' it be so hot I can not   sleep . do not   worry . ' 

 Maisie put her elbow on the window - sill and look at the moonlight on 
 the straight , poplar - flank road . summer have come upon Vitry - sur - Marne 
 and parch it to the bone . the grass be dry - burn in the meadow , the 
 clay by the bank of the river be cake to brick , the roadside flower 
 be long since dead , and the rose in the garden hung wither on their 
 stalk . the heat in the little low bedroom under the eave be almost 
 intolerable . the very moonlight on the wall of Kami 's studio across 
 the road seem to make the night hotter , and the shadow of the big 
 bell - handle by the closed gate cast a bar of inky black that catch 
 Maisie 's eye and annoy she . 

 ' Horrid thing ! it should be all white , ' she murmur . ' and the gate 
 be not   in the middle of the wall , either . I never notice that before . ' 

 Maisie be hard to please at that hour . first , the heat of the past few 
 week have wear she down ; secondly , her work , and particularly the study 
 of a female head intend to represent the Melancolia and not finish 
 in time for the Salon , be unsatisfactory ; thirdly , Kami have say as 
 much two day before ; fourthly , - but so completely fourthly that it be 
 hardly worth think about , - Dick , her property , have not write to 
 she for more than six week . she be angry with the heat , with Kami , and 
 with her work , but she be exceedingly angry with Dick . 

 she have write to he three time , - each time propose a fresh 
 treatment of her Melancolia . Dick have take no notice of these 
 communication . she have resolve to write no more . when she return 
 to England in the autumn - for her pride 's sake she could not return 
 early - she would speak to he . she miss the Sunday afternoon 
 conference more than she care to admit . all that Kami say be , 
 ' Continuez , mademoiselle , continuez toujour , ' and he have be repeat 
 the wearisome counsel through the hot summer , exactly like a cicada , - an 
 old gray cicada in a black alpaca coat , white trouser , and a huge feel 
 hat . 

 but Dick have tramp masterfully up and down her little studio north 
 of the cool green London park , and have say thing ten time bad than 
 continuez , before he snatch the brush out of her hand and show she 
 where the error lay . his last letter , Maisie remember , contain 
 some trivial advice about not sketch in the sun or drinking water at 
 wayside farmhouse ; and he have say that not once , but three time , - as 
 if he do not know that Maisie could take care of herself . 

 but what be he do , that he could not trouble to write ? a murmur of 
 voice in the road make she lean from the window . a cavalryman of the 
 little garrison in the town be talk to Kami 's cook . the moonlight 
 glitter on the scabbard of his sabre , which he be hold in his hand 
 lest it should clank inopportunely . the cook 's cap cast deep shadow on 
 her face , which be close to the conscript 's . he slide his arm round her 
 waist , and there follow the sound of a kiss . 

 ' Faugh ! ' say Maisie , step back . 

 ' what be that ? ' say the red - haired girl , who be toss uneasily 
 outside her bed . 

 ' only a conscript kissing the cook , ' say Maisie . 

 ' they have   go away now . ' she lean out of the window again , and put a 
 shawl over her nightgown to guard against chill . there be a very small 
 night - breeze abroad , and a sun - baked rise below nod its head as one 
 who know unutterable secret . be it possible that Dick should turn his 
 thought from her work and his own and descend to the degradation of 
 Suzanne and the conscript ? he could not ! the rose nod its head and 
 one leaf therewith . it look like a naughty little devil scratch its 
 ear . 

 Dick could not , ' because , ' think Maisie , ' he be mine , - mine , - mine . he 
 say he be . I be sure I do not   care what he do . it will only spoil his 
 work if he do ; and it will spoil mine too . ' 

 the rise continue to nod in the futile way peculiar to flower . there 
 be no earthly reason why Dick should not disport himself as he choose , 
 except that he be call by Providence , which be Maisie , to assist 
 Maisie in her work . and her work be the preparation of picture that 
 go sometimes to english provincial exhibition , as the notice in the 
 scrap - book prove , and that be invariably reject by the Salon when 
 Kami be plague into allow she to send they up . her work in the 
 future , it seem , would be the preparation of picture on exactly 
 similar line which would be reject in exactly the same way - - the 
 red - haired girl thresh distressfully across the sheet . ' it be too hot 
 to sleep , ' she moan ; and the interruption jar . 

 exactly the same way . then she would divide her year between the little 
 studio in England and Kami 's big studio at Vitry - sur - Marne . no , she 
 would go to another master , who should force she into the success that 
 be her right , if patient toil and desperate endeavour give one a 
 right to anything . Dick have tell she that he have work ten year to 
 understand his craft . she have work ten year , and ten year be 
 nothing . Dick have say that ten year be nothing , - but that be in 
 regard to herself only . he have say - this very man who could not find 
 time to write - that he would wait ten year for she , and that she be 
 bind to come back to he soon or later . he have say this in the 
 absurd letter about sunstroke and diphtheria ; and then he have stop 
 writing . he be wander up and down moonlit street , kiss cook . 
 she would like to lecture he now , - not in her nightgown , of course , 
 but properly dress , severely and from a height . yet if he be kiss 
 other girl he certainly would not care whether she lecture he or not . 
 he would laugh at she . very good . 

 she would go back to her studio and prepare picture that go , etc . , 
 etc . 

 the mill - wheel of thought swung round slowly , that no section of it 
 might be slur over , and the red - haired girl toss and turn behind 
 she . 

 Maisie put her chin in her hand and decide that there could be no 
 doubt whatever of the villainy of Dick . to justify herself , she begin , 
 unwomanly , to weigh the evidence . there be a boy , and he have say he 
 love she . and he kiss she , - kiss she on the cheek , - by a yellow 
 sea - poppy that nod its head exactly like the madden dry rise in 
 the garden . then there be an interval , and man have tell she that they 
 love she - just when she be busy with her work . then the boy come 
 back , and at their very second meeting have tell she that he love she . 
 then he have - - but there be no end to the thing he have do . he 
 have give she his time and his power . he have speak to she of 
 Art , housekeeping , technique , teacup , the abuse of pickle as a 
 stimulant , - that be rude , - sable hair - brush , - he have give she the 
 good in her stock , - she use they daily ; he have give her advice that 
 she profit by , and now and again - a look . such a look ! the look of a 
 beat hound wait for the word to crawl to his mistress 's foot . in 
 return she have give he nothing whatever , except - here she brush she 
 mouth against the open - work sleeve f her nightgown - the privilege of 
 kiss she once . and on the mouth , too . disgraceful ! be that not 
 enough , and more than enough ? and if it be not , have he not cancel 
 the debt by not write and - probably kiss other girl ? ' maisie , 
 you will catch a chill . do go and lie down , ' say the weary voice of her 
 companion . ' I can not   sleep a wink with you at the window . ' 

 Maisie shrug her shoulder and do not answer . she be reflect 
 on the meanness of Dick , and on other meanness with which he have 
 nothing to do . the moonlight would not let her sleep . it lie on the 
 skylight of the studio across the road in cold silver ; she star at it 
 intently and her thought begin to slide one into the other . the shadow 
 of the big bell - handle in the wall grow short , lengthen again , and 
 fade out as the moon go down behind the pasture and a hare come 
 limp home across the road . then the dawn - wind wash through the 
 upland grass , and bring coolness with it , and the cattle low by 
 the drought - shrunk river . Maisie 's head fall forward on the window - sill , 
 and the tangle of black hair cover her arm . 

 ' maisie , wake up . you will catch a chill . ' 

 ' yes , dear ; yes , dear . ' she stagger to her bed like a wearied child , 
 and as she bury her face in the pillow she mutter , ' I think - I 
 think .... 

 but he ought to have write . ' 

 Day bring the routine of the studio , the smell of paint and 
 turpentine , and the monotone wisdom of Kami , who be a leaden artist , 
 but a golden teacher if the pupil be only in sympathy with he . Maisie 
 be not in sympathy that day , and she wait impatiently for the end of 
 the work . 

 she know when it be come ; for Kami would gather his black alpaca 
 coat into a bunch behind he , and , with fade blue eye that see neither 
 pupil nor canvas , look back into the past to recall the history of one 
 Binat . ' you have all do not so badly , ' he would say . ' but you shall 
 remember that it be not enough to have the method , and the art , and 
 the power , nor even that which be touch , but you shall have also 
 the conviction that nail the work to the wall . of the so many I 
 teach , ' - here the student would begin to unfix drawing - pin or get 
 their tube together , - ' the very so many that I have teach , the good 
 be Binat . all that come of the study and the work and the knowledge 
 be to he even when he come . after he leave I he should have do all 
 that could be do with the colour , the form , and the knowledge . only , 
 he have not the conviction . so to - day I hear no more of Binat , - the good 
 of my pupil , - and that be long ago . so to - day , too , you will be glad 
 to hear no more of I . Continuez , mademoiselle , and , above all , with 
 conviction . ' 

 he go into the garden to smoke and mourn over the lose Binat as the 
 pupil disperse to their several cottage or loitered in the studio to 
 make plan for the cool of the afternoon . 

 Maisie look at her very unhappy Melancolia , restrain a desire to 
 grimace before it , and be hurry across the road to write a letter 
 to Dick , when she be aware of a large man on a white troop - horse . how 
 Torpenhow have manage in the course of twenty hour to find his way to 
 the heart of the cavalry officer in quarter at Vitry - sur - Marne , to 
 discuss with they the certainty of a glorious revenge for France , to 
 reduce the colonel to tear of pure affability , and to borrow the good 
 horse in the squadron for the journey to Kami 's studio , be a mystery 
 that only special correspondent can unravel . 

 ' I beg your pardon , ' say he . ' it seem an absurd question to ask , but 
 the fact be that I do not   know she by any other name : be there any young 
 lady here that be call Maisie ? ' 

 ' I be maisie , ' be the answer from the depth of a great sun - hat . 

 ' I ought to introduce myself , ' he say , as the horse caper in the 
 blind white dust . ' my name be Torpenhow . Dick Heldar be my good 
 friend , and - and - the fact be that he have go blind . ' 

 ' blind ! ' say Maisie , stupidly . ' he can not   be blind . ' 

 ' he have be stone - blind for nearly two month . ' 

 Maisie lift up her face , and it be pearly white . ' no ! no ! not blind ! 
 I will not   have he blind ! ' 

 ' would you care to see for yourself ? ' say Torpenhow . 

 ' now , - at once ? ' 

 ' oh , no ! the Paris train do not   go through this place till to - night . 
 there will be ample time . ' 

 ' do Mr. Heldar send you to I ? ' 

 ' certainly not . Dick would not   do that sort of thing . he be sit in 
 his studio , turn over some letter that he can not   read because he be 
 blind . ' 

 there be a sound of choke from the sun - hat . Maisie bow her head 
 and go into the cottage , where the red - haired girl be on a sofa , 
 complain of a headache . 

 ' Dick 's blind ! ' say Maisie , take she breath quickly as she steady 
 herself against a chair - back . ' my Dick 's blind ! ' 

 ' what ? ' the girl be on the sofa no long . 

 ' a man have come from England to tell I . he have not   write to I for six 
 week . ' 

 ' be you go to he ? ' 

 ' I must think . ' 

 ' think ! I should go back to London and see he and I should kiss his 
 eye and kiss they and kiss they until they get well again ! if you do not 
 go I shall . oh , what be I talk about ? you wicke little idiot ! go to 
 he at once . go ! ' 

 Torpenhow 's neck be blister , but he preserve a smile of infinite 
 patience as Maisie appear bareheade in the sunshine . 

 ' I be come , ' say she , her eye on the ground . 

 ' you will be at Vitry Station , then , at seven this evening . ' this be 
 an order deliver by one who be use to be obey . Maisie say 
 nothing , but she feel grateful that there be no chance of dispute 
 with this big man who take everything for grant and manage a 
 squealing horse with one hand . she return to the red - haired girl , 
 who be weep bitterly , and between tear , kiss , - very few of 
 those , - menthol , packing , and an interview with Kami , the sultry 
 afternoon wear away . 

 Thought might come afterwards . her present duty be to go to Dick , - Dick 
 who own the wondrous friend and sit in the dark playing with her 
 unopened letter . 

 ' but what will you do , ' she say to her companion . 

 ' I ? oh , I shall stay here and - finish your Melancolia , ' she say , 
 smile pitifully . ' write to I afterwards . ' 

 that night there run a legend through Vitry - sur - marne of a mad 
 Englishman , doubtless suffering from sunstroke , who have drink all the 
 officer of the garrison under the table , have borrow a horse from the 
 line , and have then and there elope , after the english custom , with one 
 of those more mad english girl who draw picture down there under the 
 care of that good Monsieur Kami . 

 ' they be very droll , ' say Suzanne to the conscript in the moonlight 
 by the studio wall . ' she walk always with those big eye that see 
 nothing , and yet she kiss I on both cheek as though she be my 
 sister , and give I - see - ten franc ! ' 

 the conscript levy a contribution on both gift ; for he pride himself 
 on be a good soldier . 

 Torpenhow speak very little to Maisie during the journey to Calais ; 
 but he be careful to attend to all her want , to get she a compartment 
 entirely to herself , and to leave she alone . he be amazed of the ease 
 with which the matter have be accomplish . 

 ' the safe thing would be to let she think thing out . by Dick 's 
 showing , - when he be off his head , - she must have order he about 
 very thoroughly . wonder how she like be under order . ' 

 Maisie never tell . she sit in the empty compartment often with her eye 
 shut , that she might realise the sensation of blindness . it be an order 
 that she should return to London swiftly , and she find herself at last 
 almost begin to enjoy the situation . this be well than look 
 after luggage and a red - haired friend who never take any interest in her 
 surrounding . but there appear to be a feeling in the air that she , 
 Maisie , - of all people , - be in disgrace . therefore she justify she 
 conduct to herself with great success , till Torpenhow come up to she 
 on the steamer and without preface begin to tell the story of Dick 's 
 blindness , suppress a few detail , but dwelling at length on the 
 misery of delirium . he stop before he reach the end , as though he 
 have lose interest in the subject , and go forward to smoke . Maisie be 
 furious with he and with herself . 

 she be hurry on from Dover to London almost before she could ask for 
 breakfast , and - she be past any feeling of indignation now - be bid 
 curtly to wait in a hall at the foot of some lead - cover stair while 
 Torpenhow go up to make inquiry . again the knowledge that she be 
 be treat like a naughty little girl make her pale cheek flame . it 
 be all Dick 's fault for be so stupid as to go blind . 

 Torpenhow lead she up to a shut door , which he open very softly . Dick 
 be sit by the window , with his chin on his chest . there be three 
 envelope in his hand , and he turn they over and over . the big man 
 who give order be no long by her side , and the studio door snap 
 behind she . 

 Dick thrust the letter into his pocket as he hear the sound . ' Hullo , 
 Torp ! be that you ? I have   be so lonely . ' 

 his voice have take the peculiar flatness of the blind . Maisie press 
 herself up into a corner of the room . her heart be beat furiously , 
 and she put one hand on her breast to keep it quiet . Dick be star 
 directly at she , and she realise for the first time that he be blind . 

 shut her eye in a rail - way carriage to open they when she please 
 be child 's play . this man be blind though his eye be wide open . 

 ' Torp , be that you ? they say you be come . ' Dick look puzzled and 
 a little irritated at the silence . 

 ' no ; it be only I , ' be the answer , in a strained little whisper . Maisie 
 could hardly move her lip . 

 ' H'm ! ' say Dick , composedly , without move . ' this be a new phenomenon . 
 darkness I be get use to ; but I object to hear voice . ' 

 be he mad , then , as well as blind , that he talk to himself ? Maisie 's 
 heart beat more wildly , and she breathe in gasp . Dick rise and begin 
 to feel his way across the room , touch each table and chair as he 
 pass . once he catch his foot on a rug , and swore , drop on his 
 knee to feel what the obstruction might be . Maisie remember he 
 walk in the Park as though all the earth belong to he , tramp 
 up and down her studio two month ago , and fly up the gangway of the 
 Channel steamer . the beating of her heart be make her sick , and Dick 
 be come near , guide by the sound of her breathing . she put out a 
 hand mechanically to ward he off or to draw he to herself , she do not 
 know which . it touch his chest , and he step back as though he have 
 be shoot . 

 ' it be Maisie ! ' say he , with a dry sob . ' what be you do here ? ' 

 ' I come - I come - to see you , please . ' 

 Dick 's lip close firmly . 

 ' will not   you sit down , then ? you see , I have   have some bother with my eye , 
 and - - ' 

 ' I know . I know . why do not   you tell I ? ' 

 ' I could not   write . ' 

 ' you might have tell Mr. Torpenhow . ' 

 ' what have he to do with my affair ? ' 

 ' he - he bring I from Vitry - sur - Marne . he think I ought to see you . ' 

 ' why , what have happen ? can I do anything for you ? no , I can not . I 
 forget . ' 

 ' oh , Dick , I be so sorry ! I have   come to tell you , and - - let I take you 
 back to your chair . ' 

 ' do not ! I be not a child . you only do that out of pity . I never mean to 
 tell you anything about it . I be no good now . I be down and do for . let 
 I alone ! ' 

 he grope back to his chair , his chest labour as he sit down . 

 Maisie watch he , and the fear go out of her heart , to be follow 
 by a very bitter shame . he have speak a truth that have be hide from 
 the girl through every step of the impetuous flight to London ; for he 
 be , indeed , down and do for - masterful no long but rather a little 
 abject ; neither an artist strong than she , nor a man to be look up 
 to - only some blind one that sit in a chair and seem on the point of 
 cry . she be immensely and unfeignedly sorry for he - more sorry than 
 she have ever be for any one in her life , but not sorry enough to deny 
 his word . 

 so she stand still and feel ashamed and a little hurt , because she have 
 honestly intend that her journey should end triumphantly ; and now she 
 be only fill with pity most startlingly distinct from love . 

 ' well ? ' say Dick , his face steadily turn away . ' I never mean to 
 worry you any more . what be the matter ? ' 

 he be conscious that Maisie be catch her breath , but be as 
 unprepared as herself for the torrent of emotion that follow . she have 
 drop into a chair and be sob with her face hide in her hand . 

 ' I can not   - I can not ! ' she cry desperately . ' indeed , I can not . it be not   my 
 fault . 

 I be so sorry . oh , Dickie , I be so sorry . ' 

 Dick 's shoulder straighten again , for the word lash like a whip . 

 still the sobbing continue . it be not good to realise that you have 
 fail in the hour of trial or flinch before the mere possibility of 
 make sacrifice . 

 ' I do despise myself - indeed I do . but I can not . oh , Dickie , you would not 
 ask I - would you ? ' wail Maisie . 

 she look up for a minute , and by chance it happen that Dick 's eye 
 fall on her . the unshaven face be very white and set , and the lip 
 be try to force themselves into a smile . but it be the wear - out 
 eye that Maisie fear . her Dick have go blind and leave in his place 
 some one that she could hardly recognise till he speak . 

 ' who be ask you to do anything , Maisie ? I tell you how it would be . 

 what be the use of worry ? for pity 's sake do not   cry like that ; it 
 be not   worth it . ' 

 ' you do not   know how I hate myself . oh , Dick , help I - help I ! ' the 
 passion of tear have grow beyond her control and be begin to alarm 
 the man . he stumble forward and put his arm round she , and her head 
 fall on his shoulder . 

 ' hush , dear , hush ! do not   cry . you be quite right , and you have   nothing to 
 reproach yourself with - you never have . you be only a little upset by the 
 journey , and I do not   suppose you have   have any breakfast . what a brute Torp 
 be to bring you over . ' 

 ' I want to come . I do indeed , ' she protest . 

 ' very well . and now you have   come and see , and I be - immensely grateful . 

 when you be well you shall go away and get something to eat . what sort 
 of a passage do you have come over ? ' 

 Maisie be cry more subduedly , for the first time in her life glad 
 that she have something to lean against . Dick pat she on the shoulder 
 tenderly but clumsily , for he be not quite sure where her shoulder 
 might be . 

 she draw herself out of his arm at last and wait , tremble and most 
 unhappy . he have feel his way to the window to put the width of the room 
 between they , and to quiet a little the tumult in his heart . 

 ' be you well now ? ' he say . 

 ' yes , but - do not   you hate I ? ' 

 ' I hate you ? my God ! I ? ' 

 ' be not   - be not   there anything I could do for you , then ? I will stay here 
 in England to do it , if you like . perhaps I could come and see you 
 sometimes . ' 

 ' I think not , dear . it would be kind not to see I any more , please . 
 I do not   want to seem rude , but - do not   you think - perhaps you have almost 
 well go now . ' 

 he be conscious that he could not bear himself as a man if the strain 
 continue much long . 

 ' I do not   deserve anything else . I will go , Dick . oh , I be so miserable . ' 

 ' nonsense . you have   nothing to worry about ; I would tell you if you have . wait 
 a moment , dear . I have   get something to give you first . I mean it for 
 you ever since this little trouble begin . it be my Melancolia ; she be a 
 beauty when I last see she . you can keep she for I , and if ever you be 
 poor you can sell she . she be worth a few hundred at any state of the 
 market . ' he grope among his canvas . ' she be frame in black . be this 
 a black frame that I have my hand on ? there she be . what do you think of 
 she ? ' 

 he turn a scarred formless muddle of paint towards Maisie , and the 
 eye strain as though they would catch her wonder and surprise . one 
 thing and one thing only could she do for he . 

 ' well ? ' 

 the voice be full and more rounded , because the man know he be 
 speak of his good work . Maisie look at the blur , and a lunatic 
 desire to laugh catch she by the throat . but for Dick 's sake - whatever 
 this mad blankness might mean - she must make no sign . her voice choke 
 with hard - hold tear as she answer , still gaze at the wreck - ' oh , 
 Dick , it be good ! ' 

 he hear the little hysterical gulp and take it for tribute . ' will not   you 
 have it , then ? I will send it over to your house if you will . ' 

 ' I ? oh yes - thank you . ha ! ha ! ' if she do not fly at once the laughter 
 that be bad than tear would kill she . she turn and run , choke 
 and blind , down the staircase that be empty of life to take refuge 
 in a cab and go to her house across the Parks . there she sit down in the 
 dismantle drawing - room and thought of Dick in his blindness , useless 
 till the end of life , and of herself in her own eye . behind the sorrow , 
 the shame , and the humiliation , lie fear of the cold wrath of the 
 red - haired girl when Maisie should return . Maisie have never fear she 
 companion before . not until she find herself say , ' well , he never 
 ask I , ' do she realise she scorn of herself . 

 and that be the end of Maisie . 

 for Dick be reserve more searching torment . he could not realise at 
 first that Maisie , whom he have order to go have leave he without a word 
 of farewell . he be savagely angry against Torpenhow , who have bring 
 upon he this humiliation and trouble his miserable peace . then his 
 dark hour come and he be alone with himself and his desire to get what 
 help he could from the darkness . the queen could do no wrong , but in 
 follow the right , so far as it serve her work , she have wound she 
 one subject more than his own brain would let he know . 

 ' it be all I have and I have   lose it , ' he say , as soon as the misery 
 permit clear thinking . ' and Torp will think that he have be so 
 infernally clever that I shall not   have the heart to tell he . I must think 
 this out quietly . ' 

 ' Hullo ! ' say Torpenhow , enter the studio after Dick have enjoy two 
 hour of thought . ' I be back . be you feel any well ? ' 

 ' Torp , I do not   know what to say . come here . ' Dick cough huskily , 
 wonder , indeed , what he should say , and how to say it temperately . 

 ' what be the need for say anything ? get up and tramp . ' torpenhow be 
 perfectly satisfied . 

 they walk up and down as of custom , Torpenhow 's hand on Dick 's 
 shoulder , and Dick bury in his own thought . 

 ' how in the world do you find it all out ? ' say Dick , at last . 

 ' you should not   go off your head if you want to keep secret , Dickie . it 
 be absolutely impertinent on my part ; but if you have see I rocket 
 about on a half - train french troop - horse under a blaze sun you would 
 have laugh . there will be a charivari in my room to - night . seven 
 other devil - - ' 

 ' I know - the row in the Southern Soudan . I surprise their council the 
 other day , and it make I unhappy . have you fix your flint to go ? who 
 d'you work for ? ' 

 ' have not   sign any contract yet . I want to see how your business 
 would turn out . ' 

 ' would you have stay with I , then , if - thing have go wrong ? ' he put 
 his question cautiously . 

 ' do not   ask I too much . I be only a man . ' 

 ' you have   try to be an angel very successfully . ' 

 ' oh ye - es ! ... well , do you attend the function to - night ? we shall 
 be half screw before the morning . all the man believe the war 's a 
 certainty . ' 

 ' I do not   think I will , old man , if it be all the same to you . I will stay 
 quiet here . ' 

 ' and meditate ? I do not   blame you . you observe a good time if ever a man 
 do . ' 

 that night there be a tumult on the stair . the correspondent pour 
 in from theatre , dinner , and music - hall to Torpenhow 's room that they 
 might discuss their plan of campaign in the event of military operation 
 become a certainty . Torpenhow , the Keneu , and the Nilghai have bid 
 all the man they have work with to the orgy ; and Mr. Beeton , the 
 housekeeper , declare that never before in his checker experience have 
 he see quite such a fancy lot of gentleman . they wake the chamber 
 with shouting and song ; and the elder man be quite as bad as the 
 young . for the chance of war be in front of they , and all know what 
 those mean . 

 sit in his own room a little perplex by the noise across the 
 landing , Dick suddenly begin to laugh to himself . 

 ' when one come to think of it the situation be intensely comic . 
 Maisie 's quite right - poor little thing . I do not   know she could cry 
 like that before ; but now I know what Torp think , I be sure he would be 
 quite fool enough to stay at home and try to console I - if he know . 
 besides , it be not   nice to own that you have   be throw over like a break 
 chair . I must carry this business through alone - as usual . if there 
 be not   a war , and Torp find out , I shall look foolish , that be all . if 
 there be a way I must not   interfere with another man 's chance . business 
 be business , and I want to be alone - I want to be alone . what a row 
 they be make ! ' 

 somebody hammer at the studio door . 

 ' come out and frolic , Dickie , ' say the Nilghai . 

 ' I should like to , but I can not . I be not feel frolicsome . ' 

 ' then , I will tell the boy and they will drag you like a badger . ' 

 ' please not , old man . on my word , I would soon be leave alone just now . ' 

 ' very good . can we send anything in to you ? fizz , for instance . 

 Cassavetti be begin to sing song of the sunny South already . ' 

 for one minute Dick consider the proposition seriously . 

 ' no , thank , I have   a headache already . ' 

 ' virtuous child . that be the effect of emotion on the young . all my 
 congratulation , Dick . I also be concern in the conspiracy for your 
 welfare . ' 

 ' go to the devil - oh , send Binkie in here . ' 

 the little dog enter on elastic foot , riotous from have be 
 make much of all the evening . he have help to sing the chorus ; 
 but scarcely inside the studio he realise that this be no place for 
 tail - wagging , and settle himself on Dick 's lap till it be bedtime . 
 then he go to bed with Dick , who count every hour as it strike , and 
 rise in the morning with a painfully clear head to receive Torpenhow 's 
 more formal congratulation and a particular account of the last night 's 
 revel . 

 ' you be not   look very happy for a newly accept man , ' say 
 Torpenhow . 

 ' never mind that - it be my own affair , and I be all right . do you really 
 go ? ' 

 ' yes . with the old Central Southern as usual . they wire , and I accept 
 on well term than before . ' 

 ' when do you start ? ' 

 ' the day after to - morrow - for Brindisi . ' 

 ' thank God . ' Dick speak from the bottom of his heart . 

 ' well , that be not a pretty way of say you be glad to get rid of I . 
 but man in your condition be allow to be selfish . ' 

 ' I do not   mean that . will you get a hundred pound cash for I before 
 you leave ? ' 

 ' that be a slender amount for housekeeping , be not   it ? ' 

 ' oh , it be only for - marriage expense . ' 

 Torpenhow bring he the money , count it out in five and ten , and 
 carefully put it away in the writing table . 

 ' now I suppose I shall have to listen to his raving about his girl 
 until I go . Heaven send we patience with a man in love ! ' he say to 
 himself . 

 but never a word do Dick say of Maisie or marriage . he hang in the 
 doorway of Torpenhow 's room when the latter be pack and ask 
 innumerable question about the come campaign , till Torpenhow begin to 
 feel annoyed . 

 ' you be a secretive animal , Dickie , and you consume your own smoke , 
 do not   you ? ' he say on the last evening . 

 ' i - I suppose so . by the way , how long do you think this war will last ? ' 

 ' day , week , or month . one can never tell . it may go on for year . ' 

 ' I wish I be go . ' 

 ' Good Heavens ! you be the most unaccountable creature ! have not   it 
 occur to you that you be go to be marry - thank to I ? ' 

 ' of course , yes . I be go to be marry - so I be . go to be marry . 

 I be awfully grateful to you . have not   I tell you that ? ' 

 ' you might be go to be hang by the look of you , ' say Torpenhow . 

 and the next day torpenhow bid he good - bye and leave he to the 
 loneliness he have so much desire . 





 CHAPTER XIV 

  yet at the last , ere our spearman have find he , 
  yet at the last , ere a sword - thrust could save , 
  yet at the last , with his master around he , 
  he of the faith speak as master to slave ; 
  yet at the last , tho ' the Kafirs have maim he , 
  break by bondage and wreck by the reiver , - 
  yet at the last , tho ' the darkness have claim he , 
  he call upon Allah and die a believer . 

  - Kizzilbashi . 
 ' BEG your pardon , Mr. Heldar , but - but be not   nothing go to happen ? ' 
 say Mr. Beeton . 

 ' no ! ' Dick have just wake to another morning of blank despair and his 
 temper be of the short . 

 " tain't   my regular business , o ' course , sir ; and what I say be , " mind 
 your own business and let other people mind theirs ; " but just before Mr. 

 Torpenhow go away he give I to understand , like , that you might be 
 move into a house of your own , so to speak - a sort of house with room 
 upstairs and downstair where you would be well attend to , though I try 
 to act just by all our tenant . do not   I ? ' 

 ' ah ! that must have be a mad - house . I shall not   trouble you to take I 
 there yet . get I my breakfast , please , and leave I alone . ' 

 ' I hope I have not   do anything wrong , sir , but you know I hope that as 
 far as a man can I try to do the proper thing by all the gentleman in 
 chamber - and more particular those whose lot be hard - such as you , for 
 instance , Mr. Heldar . you like soft - roe bloater , do not   you ? soft - roe 
 bloater be scarcer than hard - roe , but what I say be , " never mind a 
 little extra trouble so long as you give satisfaction to the tenant . " ' 

 Mr. Beeton withdraw and leave Dick to himself . torpenhow have be long 
 away ; there be no more rioting in the chamber , and Dick have settle 
 down to his new life , which he be weak enough to consider nothing 
 well than death . 

 it be hard to live alone in the dark , confuse the day and night ; 
 drop to sleep through sheer weariness at mid - day , and rise 
 restless in the chill of the dawn . at first Dick , on his awakening , 
 would grope along the corridor of the chamber till he hear some one 
 snore . then he would know that the day have not yet come , and return 
 wearily to his bedroom . 

 later he learn not to stir till there be a noise and movement in the 
 house and Mr. Beeton advise he to get up . once dress - and dressing , 
 now that torpenhow be away , be a lengthy business , because collar , 
 tie , and the like hide themselves in far corner of the room , and search 
 mean head - beat against chair and trunk - once dress , there be 
 nothing whatever to do except to sit still and brood till the three 
 daily meal come . century separate breakfast from lunch and lunch 
 from dinner , and though a man pray for hundred of year that his 
 mind might be take from he , God would never hear . rather the mind 
 be quicken and the revolve thought ground against each other as 
 millstone grind when there be no corn between ; and yet the brain would 
 not wear out and give he rest . it continue to think , at length , with 
 imagery and all manner of reminiscence . it recall Maisie and past 
 success , reckless travel by land and sea , the glory of do work and 
 feeling that it be good , and suggest all that might have happen have 
 the eye only be faithful to their duty . when think cease 
 through sheer weariness , there pour into Dick 's soul tide on tide of 
 overwhelming , purposeless fear - dread of starvation always , terror 
 lest the unseen ceiling should crush down upon he , fear of fire in the 
 chamber and a louse 's death in red flame , and agony of fiercer horror 
 that have nothing to do with any fear of death . then Dick bow his head , 
 and clutch the arm of his chair fight with his sweat self till 
 the tinkle of plate tell he that something to eat be be set before 
 he . 

 Mr. Beeton would bring the meal when he have time to spare , and 
 Dick learn to hang upon his speech , which deal with badly fit 
 gas - plug , waste - pipe out of repair , little trick for drive 
 picture - nail into wall , and the sin of the charwoman or the 
 housemaid . in the lack of well thing the small gossip of a servant 's 
 hall become immensely interesting , and the screwing of a washer on a 
 tap an event to be talk over for day . 

 once or twice a week , too , Mr. Beeton would take Dick out with he when 
 he go market in the morning to haggle with tradesman over fish , 
 lamp - wick , mustard , tapioca , and so forth , while Dick rest his weight 
 first on one foot and then on the other and play aimlessly with the 
 tin and string - ball on the counter . then they would perhaps meet one of 
 Mr. Beeton 's friend , and Dick , stand aside a little , would hold his 
 peace till Mr. Beeton be willing to go on again . 

 the life do not increase his self - respect . he abandon shaving as a 
 dangerous exercise , and be shave in a barber 's shop mean exposure 
 of his infirmity . he could not see that his clothe be properly 
 brush , and since he have never take any care of his personal 
 appearance he become every know variety of sloven . a blind man can not 
 deal with cleanliness till he have be some month use to the darkness . 
 if he demand attendance and grow angry at the want of it , he must assert 
 himself and stand upright . then the mean menial can see that he be 
 blind and , therefore , of no consequence . a wise man will keep his eye 
 on the floor and sit still . for amusement he may pick coal lump by lump 
 out of the scuttle with the tong and pile it in a little heap in the 
 fender , keep count of the lump , which must all be put back again , 
 one by one and very carefully . he may set himself sum if he care to 
 work they out ; he may talk to himself or to the cat if she choose to 
 visit he ; and if his trade have be that of an artist , he may sketch 
 in the air with his forefinger ; but that be too much like draw a pig 
 with the eye shut . he may go to his bookshelf and count his book , 
 range they in order of their size ; or to his wardrobe and count his 
 shirt , lay they in pile of two or three on the bed , as they suffer 
 from fray cuff or lose button . 

 even this entertainment wearie after a time ; and all the time be 
 very , very long . 

 Dick be allow to sort a tool - chest where Mr. Beeton keep hammer , 
 tap and nut , length of gas - pipe , oil - bottle , and string . 

 ' if I do not   have everything just where I know where to look for it , why , 
 then , I can not   find anything when I do want it . you have   no idea , sir , the 
 amount of little thing that these chamber use up , ' say Mr. Beeton . 

 fumble at the handle of the door as he go out : ' it be hard on you , 
 sir , I do think it be hard on you . ai not   you go to do anything , sir ? ' 

 ' I will pay my rent and messing . be not   that enough ? ' 

 ' I be not   doubt for a moment that you could not   pay your way , sir ; but 
 I ' ave often say to my wife , " it be ' ard on ' I m because it be not   as 
 if he be an old man , nor yet a middle - aged one , but quite a young 
 gentleman . that be where it come so ' ard . " ' 

 ' I suppose so , ' say Dick , absently . this particular nerve through long 
 battering have cease to feel - much . 

 ' I be think , ' continue Mr. Beeton , still make as if to go , ' that 
 you might like to hear my boy Alf read you the paper sometimes of an 
 evening . he do read beautiful , see he be only nine . ' 

 ' I should be very grateful , ' say Dick . ' only let I make it worth his 
 while . ' 

 ' we be not   think of that , sir , but of course it be in your own ' and ; 
 but only to ' ear alf sing " a Boy 's good Friend be ' be mother ! " ah ! ' 

 ' I will hear he sing that too . let he come this evening with the 
 newspaper . ' 

 Alf be not a nice child , be puff up with many school - board 
 certificate for good conduct , and inordinately proud of his singing . 
 Mr. Beeton remain , beam , while the child wail his way through 
 a song of some eight eight - line verse in the usual whine of a young 
 Cockney , and , after compliment , leave he to read Dick the foreign 
 telegram . ten minute later Alf return to his parent rather pale and 
 scar . 

 " E say ' e could not   stand it no more , ' he explain . 

 ' he never say you read badly , Alf ? ' Mrs. Beeton speak . 

 ' no . ' E say I read beautiful . say ' e never ' eard any one read like 
 that , but ' e say ' e could not   abide the stuff in the paper . ' 

 ' p'rap he be lose some money in the stock . be you readin ' he about 
 stock , Alf ? ' 

 ' no ; it be all about fightin ' out there where the soldier be go - a 
 great long piece with all the line close together and very hard word 
 in it . ' E give I ' arf a crown because I read so well . and ' e say the 
 next time there be anything ' e want read ' e'll send for I . ' 

 ' that be good hearing , but I do think for all the half - crown - put it into 
 the kicking - donkey money - box , Alf , and let I see you do it - he might 
 have keep you long . why , he could not   have begin to understand how 
 beautiful you read . ' 

 ' he be well leave to hisself - gentleman always be when they be 
 downhearted , ' say Mr. Beeton . 

 Alf 's rigorously limited power of comprehend Torpenhow 's special 
 correspondence have wake the devil of unrest in Dick . he could hear , 
 through the boy 's nasal chant , the camel grunt in the square behind 
 the soldier outside Suakin ; could hear the man swear and chaff 
 across the cooking pot , and could smell the acrid wood - smoke as it 
 drift over camp before the wind of the desert . 

 that night he pray to God that his mind might be take from he , 
 offer for proof that he be worthy of this favour the fact that he 
 have not shoot himself long ago . that prayer be not answer , and indeed 
 Dick know in his heart of heart that only a lingering sense of humour 
 and no special virtue have keep he alive . Suicide , he have persuade 
 himself , would be a ludicrous insult to the gravity of the situation as 
 well as a weak - kneed confession of fear . 

 ' just for the fun of the thing , ' he say to the cat , who have take 
 Binkie 's place in his establishment , ' I should like to know how long 
 this be go to last . I can live for a year on the hundred pound 
 Torp cash for I . I must have two or three thousand at least in the 
 Bank - twenty or thirty year more provide for , that be to say . then I 
 fall back on my hundred and twenty a year , which will be more by that 
 time . let us consider . 

 twenty - five - thirty - five - a man 's in his prime then , 
 they say - forty - five - a middle - aged man just enter 
 politic - fifty - five - " die at the comparatively early age of 
 fifty - five , " accord to the newspaper . bah ! how these Christians funk 
 death ! sixty - five - we be only get on in year . seventy - five be 
 just possible , though . great hell , cat O ! fifty year more of solitary 
 confinement in the dark ! you will die , and Beeton will die , and Torp will 
 die , and Mai - everybody else will die , but I shall be alive and kick 
 with nothing to do . I be very sorry for myself . I should like some one 
 else to be sorry for I . evidently I be not go mad before I die , but 
 the pain be just as bad as ever . some day when you be vivisect , cat O ! 
 they will tie you down on a little table and cut you open - but do not   be 
 afraid ; they will take precious good care that you do not   die . you will live , 
 and you will be very sorry then that you be not   sorry for I . perhaps 
 Torp will come back or ... I wish I could go to Torp and the Nilghai , 
 even though I be in their way . ' 

 Pussy leave the room before the speech be end , and Alf , as he enter , 
 find Dick address the empty hearth - rug . 

 ' there be a letter for you , sir , ' he say . ' perhaps you would like I to read 
 it . ' 

 ' lend it to I for a minute and I will tell you . ' 

 the outstretched hand shake just a little and the voice be not 
 over - steady . it be within the limit of human possibility that - that 
 be no letter from Maisie . he know the heft of three closed envelope 
 only too well . it be a foolish hope that the girl should write to 
 he , for he do not realise that there be a wrong which admit of no 
 reparation though the evildoer may with tear and the heart 's good love 
 strive to mend all . it be good to forget that wrong whether it be cause 
 or endure , since it be as remediless as bad work once put forward . 

 ' read it , then , ' say Dick , and Alf begin intone accord to the 
 rule of the Board School - ' " I could have give you love , I could have 
 give you loyalty , such as you never dream of . do you suppose I care 
 what you be ? but you choose to whistle everything down the wind for 
 nothing . my only excuse for you be that you be so young . " ' that be all , ' 
 he say , return the paper to be drop into the fire . 

 ' what be in the letter ? ' ask Mrs. Beeton , when Alf return . 

 ' I do not   know . I think it be a circular or a tract about not whistlin ' 
 at everything when you be young . ' 

 ' I must have step on something when I be alive and walk about and 
 it have bounce up and hit I . God help it , whatever it be - unless it be 
 all a joke . but I do not   know any one who would take the trouble to play a 
 joke on I .... love and loyalty for nothing . it sound tempting enough . 

 I wonder whether I have lose anything really ? ' 

 Dick consider for a long time but could not remember when or how he 
 have put himself in the way of win these trifle at a woman 's hand . 

 still , the letter as touch on matter that he prefer not to think 
 about sting he into a fit of frenzy that last for a day and night . 
 when his heart be so full of despair that it would hold no more , 
 body and soul together seem to be drop without check through the 
 darkness . 

 then come fear of darkness and desperate attempt to reach the light 
 again . but there be no light to be reach . when that agony have leave 
 he sweating and breathless , the downward flight would recommence till 
 the gather torture of it spur he into another fight as hopeless 
 as the first . follow some few minute of sleep in which he dream 
 that he see . then the procession of event would repeat itself till he 
 be utterly wear out and the brain take up its everlasting consideration 
 of Maisie and might - have - been . 

 at the end of everything Mr. Beeton come to his room and volunteer to 
 take he out . ' not market this time , but we will go into the Parks if 
 you like . ' 

 ' be damned if I do , ' quoth Dick . ' keep to the street and walk up and 
 down . I like to hear the people round I . ' 

 this be not altogether true . the blind in the first stage of their 
 infirmity dislike those who can move with a free stride and unlifted 
 arm - but Dick have no earthly desire to go to the Parks . once and 
 only once since Maisie have shut her door he have go there under Alf 's 
 charge . Alf forget he and fish for minnow in the Serpentine with 
 some companion . after half an hour 's wait Dick , almost weep with 
 rage and wrath , catch a passer - by , who introduce he to a friendly 
 policeman , who lead he to a four - wheeler opposite the Albert Hall . he 
 never tell Mr. Beeton of Alf 's forgetfulness , but ... this be not the 
 manner in which he be use to walk the Parks aforetime . 

 ' what street would you like to walk down , then ? ' say Mr. Beeton , 
 sympathetically . his own idea of a riotous holiday mean picnic 
 on the grass of Green Park with his family , and half a dozen paper bag 
 full of food . 

 ' keep to the river , ' say Dick , and they keep to the river , and the rush 
 of it be in his ear till they come to Blackfriars Bridge and strike 
 thence on to the Waterloo Road , Mr. Beeton explain the beauty of 
 the scenery as he go on . 

 ' and walk on the other side of the pavement , ' say he , ' unless I be 
 much mistaken , be the young woman that use to come to your room to 
 be draw . I never forget a face and I never remember a name , except 
 pay tenant , o ' course ! ' 

 ' stop she , ' say Dick . ' it be Bessie Broke . tell she I would like to speak to 
 she again . quick , man ! ' 

 Mr. Beeton cross the road under the nose of the omnibus and 
 arrest Bessie then on her way northward . she recognise he as the 
 man in authority who use to glare at she when she pass up Dick 's 
 staircase , and her first impulse be to run . 

 ' be not   you Mr. Heldar 's model ? ' say Mr. Beeton , plant himself in 
 front of she . ' you be . he be on the other side of the road and he would like 
 to see you . ' 

 ' why ? ' say Bessie , faintly . she remember - indeed have never for long 
 forget - an affair connect with a newly finish picture . 

 ' because he have ask I to do so , and because he be most particular 
 blind . ' 

 ' Drunk ? ' 

 ' no . ' orspital blind . he can not   see . that be he over there . ' 

 Dick be lean against the parapet of the bridge as Mr. Beeton point 
 he out - a stub - beard , bow creature wear a dirty magenta - colour 
 neckcloth outside an unbrushed coat . there be nothing to fear from such 
 an one . even if he chase she , Bessie think , he could not follow far . 
 she cross over , and Dick 's face light up . it be long since a woman 
 of any kind have take the trouble to speak to he . 

 ' I hope you be well , Mr. Heldar ? ' say Bessie , a little puzzle . Mr. 
 Beeton stand by with the air of an ambassador and breathe responsibly . 

 ' I be very well indeed , and , by Jove ! I be glad to see - hear you , I mean , 
 Bess . you never think it worth while to turn up and see we again after 
 you get your money . I do not   know why you should . be you go anywhere 
 in particular just now ? ' 

 ' I be go for a walk , ' say Bessie . 

 ' not the old business ? ' Dick speak under his breath . 

 ' Lor , no ! I pay my premium ' - Bessie be very proud of that word - ' for a 
 barmaid , sleep in , and I be at the bar now quite respectable . indeed I 
 be . ' 

 Mr. Beeton have no special reason to believe in the loftiness of human 
 nature . therefore he dissolve himself like a mist and return to his 
 gas - plug without a word of apology . Bessie watch the flight with a 
 certain uneasiness ; but so long as Dick appear to be ignorant of the 
 harm that have be do to he ... 

 ' it be hard work pull the beer - handle , ' she go on , ' and they have   get 
 one of they penny - in - the - slot cash - machine , so if you get wrong by a 
 penny at the end of the day - but then I do not   believe the machinery be 
 right . do you ? ' 

 ' I have   only see it work . Mr. Beeton . ' 

 ' he be go . 

 ' I be afraid I must ask you to help I home , then . I will make it worth 
 your while . you see . ' the sightless eye turn towards she and Bessie 
 see . 

 ' it be not   take you out of your way ? ' he say hesitatingly . ' I can ask 
 a policeman if it be . ' 

 ' not at all . I come on at seven and I be off at four . that be easy hour . ' 

 ' Good God ! - but I be on all the time . I wish I have some work to do too . 

 let us go home , Bess . ' 

 he turn and cannon into a man on the sidewalk , recoil with an 
 oath . Bessie take his arm and say nothing - as she have say nothing when 
 he have order she to turn her face a little more to the light . they 
 walk for some time in silence , the girl steer he deftly through 
 the crowd . 

 ' and where be - where be Mr. Torpenhow ? ' she inquire at last . 

 ' he have go away to the desert . ' 

 ' where be that ? ' 

 Dick point to the right . ' east - out of the mouth of the river , ' say 
 he . 

 ' then west , then south , and then east again , all along the under - side 
 of Europe . then south again , God know how far . ' the explanation do 
 not enlighten Bessie in the least , but she hold her tongue and look to 
 Dick 's patch till they come to the chamber . 

 ' we will have tea and muffin , ' he say joyously . ' I can not   tell you , 
 Bessie , how glad I be to find you again . what make you go away so 
 suddenly ? ' 

 ' I do not   think you would want I any more , ' she say , embolden by his 
 ignorance . 

 ' I do not , as a matter of fact - but afterwards - at any rate I be glad 
 you have   come . you know the stair . ' 

 so Bessie lead he home to his own place - there be no one to hinder - and 
 shut the door of the studio . 

 ' what a mess ! ' be her first word . ' all these thing have not   be look 
 after for month and month . ' 

 ' no , only week , Bess . you can not   expect they to care . ' 

 ' I do not   know what you expect they to do . they ought to know what you have 
 pay they for . the dust 's just awful . it be all over the easel . ' 

 ' I do not   use it much now . ' 

 ' all over the picture and the floor , and all over your coat . I would like 
 to speak to they housemaid . ' 

 ' ring for tea , then . ' Dick feel his way to the one chair he use by 
 custom . 

 Bessie see the action and , as far as in her lay , be touch . but there 
 remain always a keen sense of new - find superiority , and it be in her 
 voice when she speak . 

 ' how long have you be like this ? ' she say wrathfully , as though the 
 blindness be some fault of the housemaid . 

 ' how ? ' 

 ' as you be . ' 

 ' the day after you go away with the check , almost as soon as my 
 picture be finish ; I hardly see her alive . ' 

 ' then they have   be cheat you ever since , that be all . I know their 
 nice little way . ' 

 a woman may love one man and despise another , but on general feminine 
 principle she will do she good to save the man she despise from be 
 defraud . her love one can look to himself , but the other man , be 
 obviously an idiot , need protection . 

 ' I do not   think Mr. Beeton cheat much , ' say Dick . Bessie be flounce 
 up and down the room , and he be conscious of a keen sense of enjoyment 
 as he hear the swish of her skirt and the light step between . 

 ' Tea and muffin , ' she say shortly , when the ring at the bell be 
 answer ; ' two teaspoonful and one over for the pot . I do not   want 
 the old teapot that be here when I use to come . it do not   draw . get 
 another . ' 

 the housemaid go away scandalise , and Dick chuckle . then he begin to 
 cough as Bessie bang up and down the studio disturb the dust . 

 ' what be you try to do ? ' 

 ' put thing straight . this be like unfurnished lodging . how could you 
 let it go so ? ' 

 ' how could I help it ? dust away . ' 

 she dust furiously , and in the midst of all the pother enter Mrs. 
 Beeton . her husband on his return have explain the situation , wind 
 up with the peculiarly felicitous proverb , ' do unto other as you would 
 be do by . ' she have descend to put into her place the person who 
 demand muffin and an uncracked teapot as though she have a right to 
 both . 

 ' muffin ready yet ? ' say Bess , still dust . she be no long a drab 
 of the street but a young lady who , thank to Dick 's check , have pay 
 her premium and be entitle to pull beer - handle with the good . be 
 neatly dress in black she do not hesitate to face Mrs. Beeton , and 
 there pass between the two woman certain regard that Dick would have 
 appreciate . the situation adjust itself by eye . Bessie have win , and 
 Mrs. Beeton return to cook muffin and make scathing remark about 
 model , hussie , trollop , and the like , to her husband . 

 ' there be nothing to be get of interfere with he , Liza , ' he say . 
 ' Alf , you go along into the street to play . when he be not   cross he be 
 as kindly as kind , but when he be cross he be the devil and all . we take 
 too many little thing out of his room since he be blind to be that 
 particular about what he do . they be not   no object to a blind man , of 
 course , but if it be to come into court we would get the sack . yes , I do 
 introduce he to that girl because I be a feelin ' man myself . ' 

 ' much too feelin ' ! ' Mrs. Beeton slap the muffin into the dish , and 
 think of comely housemaid long since dismiss on suspicion . 

 ' I be not   ashamed of it , and it be not   for we to judge he hard so long 
 as he pay quiet and regular as he do . I know how to manage young 
 gentleman , you know how to cook for they , and what I say be , let each 
 stick to his own business and then there will not   be any trouble . take they 
 muffin down , Liza , and be sure you have no word with that young woman . 
 his lot be cruel hard , and if he be cross he do swear bad than any 
 one I have   ever serve . ' 

 ' that be a little well , ' say Bessie , sit down to the tea . ' you 
 need not   wait , thank you , Mrs. Beeton . ' 

 ' I have no intention of do such , I do assure you . ' 

 Bessie make no answer whatever . this , she know , be the way in 
 which real lady rout their foe , and when one be a barmaid at a 
 first - class public - house one may become a real lady at ten minute ' 
 notice . 

 her eye fall on Dick opposite she and she be both shocked and 
 displeased . there be dropping of food all down the front of his 
 coat ; the mouth under the ragged ill - grow beard droop sullenly ; the 
 forehead be line and contract ; and on the lean temple the hair be 
 a dusty indeterminate colour that might or might not have be call 
 gray . the utter misery and self - abandonment of the man appeal to 
 she , and at the bottom of her heart lie the wicked feeling that he be 
 humble and bring low who have once humble she . 

 ' oh ! it be good to hear you move about , ' say Dick , rub his hand . 

 ' tell we all about your bar success , Bessie , and the way you live 
 now . ' 

 ' never mind that . I be quite respectable , as you would see by look at I . 

 you do not   seem to live too well . what make you go blind that sudden ? why 
 be not   there any one to look after you ? ' 

 Dick be too thankful for the sound of her voice to resent the tone of 
 it . 

 ' I be cut across the head a long time ago , and that ruin my eye . I 
 do not   suppose anybody think it worth while to look after I any more . 

 why should they ? - and Mr. Beeton really do everything I want . ' 

 ' do not   you know any gentleman and lady , then , while you be - well ? ' 

 ' a few , but I do not   care to have they look at I . ' 

 ' I suppose that be why you have   grow a beard . take it off , it do not 
 become you . ' 

 ' good gracious , child , do you imagine that I think of what become of I 
 these day ? ' 

 ' you ought . get that take off before I come here again . I suppose I can 
 come , can not   I ? ' 

 ' I would be only too grateful if you do . I do not   think I treat you very 
 well in the old day . I use to make you angry . ' 

 ' very angry , you do . ' 

 ' I be sorry for it , then . come and see I when you can and as often as 
 you can . God know , there be not   a soul in the world to take that trouble 
 except you and Mr. Beeton . ' 

 ' a lot of trouble he be take and she too . ' this with a toss of the 
 head . 

 ' they have   let you do anyhow and they have not   do anything for you . I have 
 only to look and see that much . I will come , and I will be glad to come , but 
 you must go and be shave , and you must get some other clothe - those 
 one be not   fit to be see . ' 

 ' I have heap somewhere , ' he say helplessly . 

 ' I know you have . tell Mr. Beeton to give you a new suit and I will brush 
 it and keep it clean . you may be as blind as a barn - door , Mr. Heldar , 
 but it do not   excuse you look like a sweep . ' 

 ' do I look like a sweep , then ? ' 

 ' oh , I be sorry for you . I be that sorry for you ! ' she cry impulsively , 
 and take Dick 's hand . mechanically , he lower his head as if to 
 kiss - she be the only woman who have take pity on he , and he be not 
 too proud for a little pity now . she stand up to go . 

 ' nothing o ' that kind till you look more like a gentleman . it be quite 
 easy when you get shave , and some clothe . ' 

 he could hear she draw on her glove and rise to say good - bye . she 
 pass behind he , kiss he audaciously on the back of the neck , and 
 run away as swiftly as on the day when she have destroy the Melancolia . 

 ' to think of I kiss Mr. Heldar , ' she say to herself , ' after all 
 he be do to I and all ! well , I be sorry for he , and if he be shave 
 he would not   be so bad to look at , but ... oh they Beetons , how shameful 
 they have   treat he ! I know Beeton 's wear his shirt on his back 
 to - day just as well as if I have air it . to - morrow , I will see ... I wonder 
 if he have much of his own . it might be worth more than the bar - I 
 would not   have to do any work - and just as respectable as if no one 
 know . ' 

 Dick be not grateful to Bessie for her parting gift . he be acutely 
 conscious of it in the nape of his neck throughout the night , but it 
 seem , among very many other thing , to enforce the wisdom of get 
 shave . 

 he be shave accordingly in the morning , and feel the well for it . a 
 fresh suit of clothe , white linen , and the knowledge that some one in 
 the world say that she take an interest in his personal appearance make 
 he carry himself almost upright ; for the brain be relieve for a while 
 from thinking of Maisie , who , under other circumstance , might have 
 give that kiss and a million other . 

 ' let we consider , ' say he , after lunch . ' the girl can not   care , and it be 
 a toss - up whether she come again or not , but if money can buy she to 
 look after I she shall be buy . nobody else in the world would take 
 the trouble , and I can make it worth her while . she be a child of the 
 gutter holding brevet rank as a barmaid ; so she shall have everything 
 she want if she will only come and talk and look after I . ' he rub his 
 newly shorn chin and begin to perplex himself with the thought of she 
 not come . ' I suppose I do look rather a sweep , ' he go on . ' I have 
 no reason to look otherwise . I know thing drop on my clothe , but 
 it do not   matter . it would be cruel if she do not   come . she must . Maisie 
 come once , and that be enough for she . she be quite right . she have 
 something to work for . this creature have only beer - handle to pull , 
 unless she have delude some young man into keep company with she . 

 Fancy be cheat for the sake of a counter - jumper ! we be fall 
 pretty low . ' 

 something cry aloud within he : - this will hurt more than anything 
 that have go before . it will recall and remind and suggest and 
 tantalise , and in the end drive you mad . 

 ' I know it , I know it ! ' Dick cry , clench his hand despairingly ; 
 ' but , good heavens ! be a poor blind beggar never to get anything out of 
 his life except three meal a day and a greasy waistcoat ? I wish she would 
 come . ' 

 early in the afternoon time she come , because there be no young man in 
 her life just then , and she think of material advantage which would 
 allow she to be idle for the rest of her day . 

 ' I should not   have know you , ' she say approvingly . ' you look as you 
 use to look - a gentleman that be proud of himself . ' 

 ' do not   you think I deserve another kiss , then ? ' say Dick , flush a 
 little . 

 ' maybe - but you will not   get it yet . sit down and let us see what I can do 
 for you . I be certain sure Mr. Beeton cheat you , now that you can not   go 
 through the housekeeping book every month . be not   that true ? ' 

 ' you would well come and housekeep for I then , Bessie . ' 

 ' could not   do it in these chamber - you know that as well as I do . ' 

 ' I know , but we might go somewhere else , if you think it worth your 
 while . ' 

 ' I would try to look after you , anyhow ; but I should not   care to have to work 
 for both of we . ' this be tentative . 

 Dick laugh . 

 ' do you remember where I use to keep my bank - book ? ' say he . ' Torp take 
 it to be balance just before he go away . look and see . ' 

 ' it be generally under the tobacco - jar . ah ! ' 

 ' well ? ' 

 ' oh ! four thousand two hundred and ten pound nine shilling and a 
 penny ! oh my ! ' 

 ' you can have the penny . that be not bad for one year 's work . be that and 
 a hundred and twenty pound a year good enough ? ' 

 the idleness and the pretty clothe be almost within her reach now , 
 but she must , by be housewifely , show that she deserve they . 

 ' yes ; but you would have to move , and if we take an inventory , I think we would 
 find that Mr. Beeton have be prig little thing out of the room 
 here and there . they do not   look as full as they use . ' 

 ' never mind , we will let he have they . the only thing I be particularly 
 anxious to take away be that picture I use you for - when you use to 
 swear at I . we will pull out of this place , Bess , and get away as far as 
 ever we can . ' 

 ' oh yes , ' she say uneasily . 

 ' I do not   know where I can go to get away from myself , but I will try , 
 and you shall have all the pretty frock that you care for . you will like 
 that . 

 give I that kiss now , Bess . ye god ! it be good to put one 's arm round a 
 woman 's waist again . ' 

 then come the fulfilment of the prophecy within the brain . if his arm 
 be thus round Maisie 's waist and a kiss have just be give and take 
 between they , - why then ... he press the girl more closely to himself 
 because the pain whip he . she be wonder how to explain a little 
 accident to the Melancolia . at any rate , if this man really desire the 
 solace of her company - and certainly he would relapse into his original 
 slough if she withdraw it - he would not be more than just a little 
 vex . 

 it would be delightful at least to see what would happen , and by 
 her teaching it be good for a man to stand in certain awe of his 
 companion . 

 she laugh nervously , and slip out of his reach . 

 ' I should not   worrit about that picture if I be you , ' she begin , in the 
 hope of turn his attention . 

 ' it be at the back of all my canvas somewhere . find it , Bess ; you know 
 it as well as I do . ' 

 ' I know - but - ' 

 ' but what ? you have   wit enough to manage the sale of it to a dealer . 

 woman haggle much well than man . it might be a matter of eight or nine 
 hundred pound to - to we . I simply do not   like to think about it for 
 a long time . it be mix up with my life so . - but we will cover up 
 our track and get rid of everything , eh ? make a fresh start from the 
 beginning , Bess . ' 

 then she begin to repent very much indeed , because she know the value of 
 money . still , it be probable that the blind man be overestimate the 
 value of his work . gentleman , she know , be absurdly particular about 
 their thing . she giggle as a nervous housemaid giggle when she try 
 to explain the breakage of a pipe . 

 ' I be very sorry , but you remember I be - I be angry with you before Mr. 
 Torpenhow go away ? ' 

 ' you be very angry , child ; and on my word I think you have some right 
 to be . ' 

 ' then I - but be not   you sure Mr. Torpenhow do not   tell you ? ' 

 ' tell I what ? good gracious , what be you make such a fuss about when 
 you might just as well be give I another kiss ? ' 

 he be begin to learn , not for the first time in his experience , 
 that kissing be a cumulative poison . the more you get of it , the more 
 you want . 

 Bessie give the kiss promptly , whispering , as she do so , ' I be so 
 angry I rub out that picture with the turpentine . you be not   angry , 
 be you ? ' 

 ' what ? say that again . ' the man 's hand have close on her wrist . 

 ' I rub it out with turps and the knife , ' falter Bessie . ' I think 
 you would only have to do it over again . you do do it over again , do not 
 you ? oh , let go of my wrist ; you be hurt I . ' 

 ' be not   there anything leave of the thing ? ' 

 ' N'nothing that look like anything . I be sorry - I do not   know you would take 
 on about it ; I only mean to do it in fun . you be not   go to hit I ? ' 

 ' hit you ! no ! let us think . ' 

 he do not relax his hold upon her wrist but stand star at the 
 carpet . 

 then he shake his head as a young steer shake it when the lash of the 
 stock - whip cross his nose warn he back to the path on to the shamble 
 that he would escape . for week he have force himself not to think of 
 the Melancolia , because she be a part of his dead life . with Bessie 's 
 return and certain new prospect that have develop themselves , the 
 Melancolia - lovelier in his imagination than she have ever be on 
 canvas - reappear . by her aid he might have procure mor money 
 wherewith to amuse Bess and to forget Maisie , as well as another 
 taste of an almost forget success . now , thank to a vicious little 
 housemaid 's folly , there be nothing to look for - not even the hope that 
 he might some day take an abide interest in the housemaid . bad of 
 all , he have be make to appear ridiculous in Maisie 's eye . a woman 
 will forgive the man who have ruin her life 's work so long as he give 
 her love ; a man may forgive those who ruin the love of his life , but he 
 will never forgive the destruction of his work . 

 ' Tck - tck - tck , ' say Dick between his tooth , and then laugh softly . 
 ' it be an omen , Bessie , and - a good many thing consider , it serve I 
 right for do what I have do . by Jove ! that account for Maisie 's 
 run away . she must have think I perfectly mad - small blame to 
 she ! the whole picture ruin , be not   it so ? what make you do it ? ' 

 ' because I be that angry . I be not angry now - I be awful sorry . ' 

 ' I wonder . - it do not   matter , anyhow . I be to blame for make the 
 mistake . ' 

 ' what mistake ? ' 

 ' something you would not   understand , dear . great heaven ! to think that 
 a little piece of dirt like you could throw I out of stride ! ' Dick be 
 talk to himself as Bessie try to shake off his grip on her wrist . 

 ' I be not   a piece of dirt , and you should not   call I so ! I do it 'cause 
 I hat you , and I be only sorry now 'cause you be - 'cause you be - - ' 

 ' exactly - because I be blind . there be note like tact in little thing . ' 

 Bessie begin to sob . she do not like be shackle against her will ; 
 she be afraid of the blind face and the look upon it , and be sorry too 
 that her great revenge have only make Dick laugh . 

 ' do not   cry , ' he say , and take she into his arm . ' you only do what you 
 think right . ' 

 ' i - I be not   a little piece of dirt , and if you say that I will never come 
 to you again . ' 

 ' you do not   know what you have   do to I . I be not angry - indeed , I be not . 

 be quiet for a minute . ' 

 Bessie remain in his arm shrink . Dick 's first thought be 
 connect with Maisie , and it hurt he as white - hot iron hurt an open 
 sore . 

 not for nothing be a man permit to ally himself to the wrong woman . 

 the first pang - the first sense of thing lose be but the prelude to 
 the play , for the very just Providence who delight in cause pain have 
 decree that the agony shall return , and that in the midst of keenest 
 pleasure . 

 they know this pain equally who have forsake or be forsake by 
 the love of their life , and in their new wife ' arm be compel to 
 realise it . 

 it be well to remain alone and suffer only the misery of be alone , 
 so long as it be possible to find distraction in daily work . when that 
 resource go the man be to be pity and leave alone . 

 these thing and some other Dick consider while he be hold Bessie 
 to his heart . 

 ' though you may not   know it , ' he say , raise his head , ' the Lord be a 
 just and a terrible God , Bess ; with a very strong sense of humour . it 
 serve I right - how it serve I right ! Torp could understand it if 
 he be here ; he must have suffer something at your hand , child , but 
 only for a minute or so . I save he . Set that to my credit , some one . ' 

 ' let I go , ' say Bess , her face darken . ' let I go . ' 

 ' all in good time . do you ever attend Sunday school ? ' 

 ' never . let I go , I tell you ; you be make fun of I . ' 

 ' indeed , I be not . I be make fun of myself .... thus . " he save other , 
 himself he can not save . " it be not   exactly a school - board text . ' he 
 release her wrist , but since he be between she and the door , she could 
 not escape . ' what an enormous amount of mischief one little woman can 
 do ! ' 

 ' I be sorry ; I be awful sorry about the picture . ' 

 ' I be not . I be grateful to you for spoil it .... what be we talk 
 about before you mention the thing ? ' 

 ' about get away - and money . I and you go away . ' 

 ' of course . we will get away - that be to say , I will . ' 

 ' and I ? ' 

 ' you shall have fifty whole pound for spoil a picture . ' 

 ' then you will not   - - ? ' 

 ' I be afraid not , dear . think of fifty pound for pretty thing all to 
 yourself . ' 

 ' you say you could not   do anything without I . ' 

 ' that be true a little while ago . I be well now , thank you . get I my 
 hat . ' 

 ' s'pose I do not ? ' 

 ' Beeton will , and you will lose fifty pound . that be all . get it . ' 

 Bessie curse under her breath . she have pity the man sincerely , have 
 kiss he with almost equal sincerity , for he be not unhandsome ; it 
 please she to be in a way and for a time his protector , and above all 
 there be four thousand pound to be handle by some one . now through 
 a slip of the tongue and a little feminine desire to give a little , 
 not too much , pain she have lose the money , the bless idleness and the 
 pretty thing , the companionship , and the chance of look outwardly as 
 respectable as a real lady . 

 ' now fill I a pipe . tobacco do not   taste , but it do not   matter , and 
 I will think thing out . what be the day of the week , Bess ? ' 

 ' Tuesday . ' 

 ' then Thursday 's mail - day . what a fool - what a blind fool I have be ! 

 twenty - two pound cover my passage home again . allow ten for additional 
 expense . we must put up at Madam Binat 's for old time 's sake . 
 thirty - two pound altogether . add a hundred for the cost of the last 
 trip - Gad , will not   Torp stare to see I ! - a hundred and thirty - two leaf 
 seventy - eight for baksheesh - I shall need it - and to play with . 

 what be you cry for , Bess ? it be not   your fault , child ; it be mine 
 altogether . oh , you funny little opossum , mop your eye and take I out ! 

 I want the pass - book and the check - book . stop a minute . four thousand 
 pound at four per cent - that be safe interest - mean a hundred and sixty 
 pound a year ; one hundred and twenty pound a year - also safe - be two 
 eighty , and two hundred and eighty pound add to three hundred a year 
 mean gild luxury for a single woman . Bess , we will go to the bank . ' 

 Richer by two hundred and ten pound store in his money - belt , Dick 
 cause Bessie , now thoroughly bewilder , to hurry from the bank to the 
 P. and O. office , where he explain thing tersely . 

 ' Port Said , single first ; cabin as close to the baggage - hatch as 
 possible . 

 what ship be go ? ' 

 ' the Colgong , ' say the clerk . 

 ' she be a wet little hooker . be it Tilbury and a tender , or galleon and 
 the dock ? ' 

 ' galleon . twelve - forty , Thursday . ' 

 ' thank . change , please . I can not   see very well - will you count it into 
 my hand ? ' 

 ' if they all take their passage like that instead of talk about 
 their trunk , life would be worth something , ' say the clerk to his 
 neighbour , who be try to explain to a harassed mother of many that 
 condense milk be just as good for babe at sea as daily dairy . be 
 nineteen and unmarried , he speak with conviction . 

 ' we be now , ' quoth Dick , as they return to the studio , pat the 
 place where his money - belt cover ticket and money , ' beyond the reach 
 of man , or devil , or woman - which be much more important . I have   have three 
 little affair to carry through before Thursday , but I need not   ask you 
 to help , Bess . come here on Thursday morning at nine . we will breakfast , 
 and you shall take I down to Galleons Station . ' 

 ' what be you go to do ? ' 

 ' go away , of course . what should I stay for ? ' 

 ' but you can not   look after yourself ? ' 

 ' I can do anything . I do not   realise it before , but I can . I have   do a 
 great deal already . resolution shall be treat to one kiss if Bessie 
 do not   object . ' strangely enough , Bessie object and Dick laugh . 
 ' I suppose you be right . well , come at nine the day after to - morrow and 
 you will get your money . ' 

 ' shall I sure ? ' 

 ' I do not   bilk , and you will not   know whether I do or not unless you come . 

 oh , but it be long and long to wait ! good - bye , Bessie , - send Beeton here 
 as you go out . ' 

 the housekeeper come . 

 ' what be all the fitting of my room worth ? ' say Dick , imperiously . 

 " tisn't   for I to say , sir . some thing be very pretty and some be wear 
 out dreadful . ' 

 ' I be insure for two hundred and seventy . ' 

 ' insurance policy be no criterion , though I do not   say - - ' 

 ' oh , damn your longwindedness ! you have   make your picking out of I and 
 the other tenant . why , you talk of retire and buy a public - house 
 the other day . give a straight answer to a straight question . ' 

 ' fifty , ' say Mr. Beeton , without a moment 's hesitation . 

 ' double it ; or I will break up half my stick and burn the rest . ' 

 he feel his way to a bookstand that support a pile of sketch - book , 
 and wrench out one of the mahogany pillar . 

 ' that be sinful , sir , ' say the housekeeper , alarm . 

 ' it be my own . one hundred or - - ' 

 ' one hundred it be . it will cost I three and six to get that there 
 pilaster mend . ' 

 ' I think so . what an out and out swindler you must have be to spring 
 that price at once ! ' 

 ' I hope I have   do nothing to dissatisfy any of the tenant , least of all 
 you , sir . ' 

 ' never mind that . get I the money to - morrow , and see that all my 
 clothe be pack in the little brown bullock - trunk . I be go . ' 

 ' but the quarter 's notice ? ' 

 ' I will pay forfeit . look after the packing and leave I alone . ' 

 Mr. Beeton discuss this new departure with his wife , who decide that 
 Bessie be at the bottom of it all . her husband take a more charitable 
 view . 

 ' it be very sudden - but then he be always sudden in his way . listen to 
 he now ! ' 

 there be a sound of chant from Dick 's room . 

  ' we will never come back any more , boy , 
  we will never come back no more ; 
  we will go to the deuce on any excuse , 
  and never come back no more ! 

  oh say we be afloat or ashore , boy , 
  oh say we be afloat or ashore ; 
  but we will never come back any more , boy , 
  we will never come back no more ! ' 
 ' Mr. Beeton ! Mr. Beeton ! where the deuce be my pistol ? ' 

 ' quick , he be go to shoot himself - ' avin ' go mad ! ' say Mrs. Beeton . 

 Mr. Beeton address Dick soothingly , but it be some time before the 
 latter , thresh up and down his bedroom , could realise the intention 
 of the promise to ' find everything to - morrow , sir . ' 

 ' oh , you copper - nosed old fool - you impotent Academician ! ' he shout 
 at last . ' do you suppose I want to shoot myself ? take the pistol in your 
 silly shake hand then . if you touch it , it will go off , because it be 
 loaded . 

 it be among my campaign - kit somewhere - in the parcel at the bottom of the 
 trunk . ' 

 long ago Dick have carefully possess himself of a forty - pound weight 
 field - equipment construct by the knowledge of his own experience . it 
 be this put - away treasure that he be try to find and rehandle . Mr. 
 Beeton whip the revolver out of its place on the top of the package , 
 and Dick drive his hand among the khaki coat and breech , the blue 
 cloth leg - band , and the heavy flannel shirt double over a pair of 
 swan - neck spur . under these and the water - bottle lie a sketch - book and 
 a pigskin case of stationery . 

 ' these we do not   want ; you can have they , Mr. Beeton . everything else 
 I will keep . pack them on the top right - hand side of my trunk . when you have 
 do that come into the studio with your wife . I want you both . wait a 
 minute ; get I a pen and a sheet of notepaper . ' 

 it be not an easy thing to write when you can not see , and Dick have 
 particular reason for wish that his work should be clear . so he 
 begin , follow his right hand with his left : ' " the badness of this 
 writing be because I be blind and can not see my pen . " H'mph ! - even a 
 lawyer can not   mistake that . it must be sign , I suppose , but it 
 need not   be witness . now an inch lower - why do I never learn to use 
 a type - writer ? - " this be the last will and testament of I , Richard 
 Heldar . I be in sound bodily and mental health , and there be no previous 
 will to revoke . " - that be all right . damn the pen ! whereabout on the 
 paper be I ? - " I leave everything that I possess in the world , include 
 four thousand pound , and two thousand seven hundred and twenty eight 
 pound hold for I " - oh , I can not   get this straight . ' he tear off half 
 the sheet and begin again with the caution about the handwriting . 
 then : ' I leave all the money I possess in the world to ' - here follow 
 Maisie 's name , and the name of the two bank that hold the money . 

 ' it may not   be quite regular , but no one have a shadow of a right to 
 dispute it , and I have   give Maisie 's address . come in , Mr. Beeton . 
 this be my signature ; I want you and your wife to witness it . thank . 
 to - morrow you must take I to the landlord and I will pay forfeit for 
 leave without notice , and I will lodge this paper with he in case 
 anything happen while I be away . now we be go to light up the studio 
 stove . stay with I , and give I my paper as I want them . ' 

 no one know until he have try how fine a blaze a year 's accumulation 
 of bill , letter , and docket can make . Dick stuff into the stove 
 every document in the studio - save only three unopened letter ; 
 destroy sketch - book , rough note - book , new and half - finish canvas 
 alike . 

 ' what a lot of rubbish a tenant get about he if he stay long enough 
 in one place , to be sure , ' say Mr. Beeton , at last . 

 ' he do . be there anything more left ? ' Dick feel round the wall . 

 ' not a thing , and the stove 's nigh red - hot . ' 

 ' excellent , and you have   lose about a thousand pound ' worth of sketch . 

 Ho ! ho ! quite a thousand pound ' worth , if I can remember what I use to 
 be . ' 

 ' yes , sir , ' politely . Mr. Beeton be quite sure that Dick have go mad , 
 otherwise he would have never part with his excellent furniture for a 
 song . the canvas thing take up storage room and be much well out of 
 the way . 

 there remain only to leave the little will in safe hand : that could 
 not be accomplish till to - morrow . Dick grope about the floor pick 
 up the last piece of paper , assure himself again and again that there 
 remain no write word or sign of his past life in drawer or desk , 
 and sit down before the stove till the fire die out and the contracting 
 iron crack in the silence of the night . 





 CHAPTER XV 

  with a heart of furious fancy , 
  Whereof I be commander ; 
  with a burn spear and a horse of air , 
  to the wilderness I wander . 

  with a knight of ghost and shadow 
  I summon be to tourney - 
  ten league beyond the wide world 's end , 
  methink it be no journey . 

  - Tom a ' Bedlam 's Song . 
 ' GOOD - BYE , Bess ; I promise you fifty . here be a hundred - all that I get 
 for my furniture from Beeton . that will keep you in pretty frock for 
 some time . you have   be a good little girl , all thing consider , but 
 you have   give I and Torpenhow a fair amount of trouble . ' 

 ' give Mr. Torpenhow my love if you see he , will not   you ? ' 

 ' of course I will , dear . now take I up the gang - plank and into the 
 cabin . once aboard the lugger and the maid be - and I be free , I mean . ' 

 ' who will look after you on this ship ? ' 

 ' the head - steward , if there be any use in money . the doctor when we come 
 to Port Said , if I know anything of P. and O. doctor . after that , the 
 Lord will provide , as he use to do . ' 

 Bess find Dick his cabin in the wild turmoil of a ship full of 
 leavetaker and weep relative . then he kiss she , and lay himself 
 down in his bunk until the deck should be clear . he who have take so 
 long to move about his own darken room well understand the geography 
 of a ship , and the necessity of see to his own comfort be as wine 
 to he . 

 before the screw begin to thrash the ship along the dock he have be 
 introduce to the head - steward , have royally tip he , secure a good 
 place at table , open out his baggage , and settle himself down with 
 joy in the cabin . it be scarcely necessary to feel his way as he move 
 about , for he know everything so well . then God be very kind : a deep 
 sleep of weariness come upon he just as he would have think of 
 Maisie , and he sleep till the steamer have clear the mouth of the 
 Thames and be lift to the pulse of the Channel . 

 the rattle of the engine , the reek of oil and paint , and a very 
 familiar sound in the next cabin rouse he to his new inheritance . 

 ' oh , it be good to be alive again ! ' he yawn , stretch himself 
 vigorously , and go on deck to be tell that they be almost abreast of 
 the light of Brighton . this be no more open water than Trafalgar Square 
 be a common ; the free level begin at Ushant ; but none the less Dick 
 could feel the healing of the sea at work upon he already . a boisterous 
 little cross - swell swing the steamer disrespectfully by the nose ; and 
 one wave break far aft spatter the quarterdeck and the pile of new 
 deck - chair . he hear the foam fall with the clash of broken glass , be 
 sting in the face by a cupful , and sniff luxuriously , feel his way to 
 the smoking - room by the wheel . there a strong breeze find he , blow 
 his cap off and leave he bareheade in the doorway , and the smoking - room 
 steward , understand that he be a voyager of experience , say that 
 the weather would be stiff in the chop off the Channel and more than 
 half a gale in the Bay . these thing fall as they be foretold , and 
 Dick enjoy himself to the utmost . it be allowable and even necessary 
 at sea to lay firm hold upon table , stanchion , and rope in move 
 from place to place . on land the man who feel with his hand be 
 patently blind . at sea even a blind man who be not sea - sick can jest 
 with the doctor over the weakness of his fellow . Dick tell the doctor 
 many tale - and these be coin of more value than silver if properly 
 handle - smoke with he till unholy hour of the night , and so win his 
 short - live regard that he promise Dick a few hour of his time when 
 they come to Port Said . 

 and the sea roar or be still as the wind blow , and the engine sing 
 their song day and night , and the sun grow strong day by day , and 
 Tom the Lascar barber shave Dick of a morning under the open 
 hatch - grating where the cool wind blow , and the awning be spread and 
 the passenger make merry , and at last they come to Port Said . 

 ' take I , ' say Dick , to the doctor , ' to Madame Binat 's - if you know 
 where that be . ' 

 ' whew ! ' say the doctor , ' I do . there be not much to choose between them ; 
 but I suppose you be aware that that be one of the bad house in the 
 place . they will rob you to begin with , and knife you later . ' 

 ' not they . take I there , and I can look after myself . ' 

 so he be bring to Madame Binat 's and fill his nostril with the 
 well - remember smell of the East , that run without a change from the 
 Canal head to Hong - Kong , and his mouth with the villainous Lingua Franca 
 of the Levant . the heat smite he between the shoulder - blade with 
 the buffet of an old friend , his foot slip on the sand , and his 
 coat - sleeve be warm as new - bake bread when he lift it to his nose . 

 Madame Binat smile with the smile that know no astonishment when Dick 
 enter the drinking - shop which be one source of her gain . but for a 
 little accident of complete darkness he could hardly realise that he 
 have ever quit the old life that hum in his ear . somebody open 
 a bottle of peculiarly strong Schiedam . the smell remind Dick of 
 Monsieur Binat , who , by the way , have speak of art and degradation . 

 Binat be dead ; Madame say as much when the doctor depart , 
 scandalise , so far as a ship 's doctor can be , at the warmth of Dick 's 
 reception . Dick be delighted at it . ' they remember I here after a 
 year . they have forget I across the water by this time . Madame , I 
 want a long talk with you when you be at liberty . it be good to be back 
 again . ' 

 in the evening she set an iron - top cafe - table out on the sand , and 
 Dick and she sit by it , while the house behind they fill with riot , 
 merriment , oath , and threat . the star come out and the light of the 
 shipping in the harbour twinkle by the head of the Canal . 

 ' yes . the war be good for trade , my friend ; but what dost thou do here ? 
 we have not forget thee . ' 

 ' I be over there in England and I go blind . ' 

 ' but there be the glory first . we hear of it here , even here - I 
 and Binat ; and thou hast use the head of Yellow ' Tina - she be still 
 alive - so often and so well that ' Tina laugh when the paper arrive 
 by the mail - boat . it be always something that we here could recognise 
 in the painting . and then there be always the glory and the money for 
 thee . ' 

 ' I be not poor - I shall pay you well . ' 

 ' not to I . Thou hast pay for everything . ' under her breath , ' Mon Dieu , 
 to be blind and so young ! what horror ! ' 

 Dick could not see her face with the pity on it , or his own with the 
 discolour hair at the temple . he do not feel the need of pity ; he 
 be too anxious to get to the front once more , and explain his desire . 

 ' and where ? the Canal be full of the english ship . sometimes they fire 
 as they use to do when the war be here - ten year ago . beyond Cairo 
 there be fight , but how canst thou go there without a correspondent 's 
 passport ? and in the desert there be always fight , but that be 
 impossible also , ' say she . 

 ' I must go to Suakin . ' he know , thank to Alf 's reading , that Torpenhow 
 be at work with the column that be protect the construction of the 
 Suakin - Berber line . P. and O. steamer do not touch at that port , and , 
 besides , Madame Binat know everybody whose help or advice be worth 
 anything . they be not respectable folk , but they could cause thing to 
 be accomplish , which be much more important when there be work toward . 

 ' but at Suakin they be always fight . that desert breed man 
 always - and always more man . and they be so bold ! why to Suakin ? ' 

 ' my friend be there . 

 ' Thy friend ! Chtt ! Thy friend be death , then . ' 

 Madame Binat drop a fat arm on the table - top , fill Dick 's glass 
 anew , and look at he closely under the star . there be no need that 
 he should bow his head in assent and say - ' no . he be a man , but - if it 
 should arrive ... blamest thou ? ' 

 ' I blame ? ' she laugh shrilly . ' who be I that I should blame any 
 one - except those who try to cheat I over their consommation . but it 
 be very terrible . ' 

 ' I must go to Suakin . think for I . a great deal have change within the 
 year , and the man I know be not here . the egyptian lighthouse steamer 
 go down the Canal to Suakin - and the post - boat - but even then - - ' 

 ' do not think any long . I know , and it be for I to think . Thou shalt 
 go - thou shalt go and see thy friend . be wise . sit here until the house 
 be a little quiet - I must attend to my guest - and afterwards go to bed . 
 thou shalt go , in truth , thou shalt go . ' 

 ' to - morrow ? ' 

 ' as soon as may be . ' she be talk as though he be a child . 

 he sit at the table listen to the voice in the harbour and the 
 street , and wonder how soon the end would come , till Madame Binat 
 carry he off to bed and order he to sleep . the house shout and 
 sing and dance and revel , Madame Binat move through it with 
 one eye on the liquor payment and the girl and the other on Dick 's 
 interest . to this latter end she smile upon scowling and furtive 
 turkish officer of fellaheen regiment , and more than kind to camel 
 agent of no nationality whatever . 

 in the early morning , be then appropriately dressed in a flame 
 red silk ball - dress , with a front of tarnished gold embroidery and a 
 necklace of plate - glass diamond , she make chocolate and carry it in 
 to Dick . 

 ' it be only I , and I be of discreet age , eh ? drink and eat the roll too . 
 thus in France mother bring their son , when those behave wisely , the 
 morning chocolate . ' she sit down on the side of the bed whispering : - ' it 
 be all arrange . thou wilt go by the lighthouse boat . that be a bribe 
 of ten pound English . the captain be never pay by the Government . the 
 boat come to Suakin in four day . there will go with thee George , a 
 greek muleteer . another bribe of ten pound . I will pay ; they must not 
 know of thy money . George will go with thee as far as he go with his 
 mule . then he come back to I , for his well - beloved be here , and if 
 I do not receive a telegram from Suakin say that thou art well , the 
 girl answer for George . ' 

 ' thank you . ' he reach out sleepily for the cup . ' you be much too 
 kind , Madame . ' 

 ' if there be anything that I might do I would say , stay here and be 
 wise ; but I do not think that would be good for thee . ' she look at her 
 liquor - stain dress with a sad smile . ' nay , thou shalt go , in truth , 
 thou shalt go . it be good so . my boy , it be good so . ' 

 she stoop and kiss Dick between the eye . ' that be for 
 good - morning , ' she say , go away . ' when thou art dress we will 
 speak to George and make everything ready . but first we must open the 
 little trunk . give I the key . ' 

 ' the amount of kissing lately have be simply scandalous . I shall expect 
 Torp to kiss I next . he be more likely to swear at I for get in 
 his way , though . well , it will not   last long . - Ohe , Madame , help I to my 
 toilette of the guillotine ! there will be no chance of dress properly 
 out yonder . ' 

 he be rummage among his new campaign - kit , and rowel his hand 
 with the spur . there be two way of wear well - oil ankle - jack , 
 spotless blue band , khaki coat and breech , and a perfectly pipeclaye 
 helmet . the right way be the way of the untired man , master of himself , 
 set out upon an expedition , well please . 

 ' everything must be very correct , ' Dick explain . ' it will become dirty 
 afterwards , but now it be good to feel well dressed . be everything as it 
 should be ? ' 

 he pat the revolver neatly hide under the fulness of the blouse on 
 the right hip and finger his collar . 

 ' I can do no more , ' Madame say , between laugh and cry . ' look at 
 thyself - but I forget . ' 

 ' I be very content . ' he stroke the creaseless spiral of his legging . 

 ' now let we go and see the captain and George and the lighthouse boat . 

 be quick , Madame . ' 

 ' but thou canst not be see by the harbour walk with I in the 
 daylight . figure to yourself if some english lady - - ' 

 ' there be no english lady ; and if there be , I have forget they . 

 take I there . ' 

 in spite of this burn impatience it be nearly evening ere the 
 lighthouse boat begin to move . Madame have say a great deal both to 
 George and the captain touch the arrangement that be to be make 
 for Dick 's benefit . very few man who have the honour of her acquaintance 
 care to disregard Madame 's advice . that sort of contempt might end in 
 be knife by a stranger in a gambling hell upon surprisingly short 
 provocation . 

 for six day - two of they be waste in the crowded Canal - the 
 little steamer work her way to Suakin , where she be to pick up the 
 superintendent of the lighthouse ; and Dick make it his business to 
 propitiate George , who be distract with fear for the safety of his 
 light - of - love and half inclined to make Dick responsible for his own 
 discomfort . when they arrive George take he under his wing , and 
 together they enter the red - hot seaport , encumber with the material 
 and wastage of the Suakin - Berger line , from locomotive in disconsolate 
 fragment to mound of chair and pot - sleeper . 

 ' if you keep with I , ' say George , ' nobody will ask for passport or 
 what you do . they be all very busy . ' 

 ' yes ; but I should like to hear some of the Englishmen talk . they might 
 remember I . I be know here a long time ago - when I be some one 
 indeed . ' 

 ' a long time ago be a very long time ago here . the graveyard be full . 

 now listen . this new railway run out so far as Tanai - el - Hassan - that be 
 seven mile . then there be a camp . they say that beyond Tanai - el - Hassan 
 the english troop go forward , and everything that they require will be 
 bring to they by this line . ' 

 ' ah ! base camp . I see . that be a well business than fight fuzzie in 
 the open . ' 

 ' for this reason even the mule go up in the iron - train . ' 

 ' iron what ? ' 

 ' it be all cover with iron , because it be still be shoot at . ' 

 ' an armoured train . well and well ! go on , faithful George . ' 

 ' and I go up with my mule to - night . only those who particularly require 
 to go to the camp go out with the train . they begin to shoot not far 
 from the city . ' 

 ' the dear - they always use to ! ' Dick snuff the smell of parch 
 dust , heated iron , and flake paint with delight . certainly the old 
 life be welcome he back most generously . 

 ' when I have get my mule together I go up to - night , but you must first 
 send a telegram of Port Said , declare that I have do you no harm . ' 

 ' Madame have you well in hand . would you stick a knife into I if you have 
 the chance ? ' 

 ' I have no chance , ' say the Greek . ' she be there with that woman . ' 

 ' I see . it be a bad thing to be divide between love of woman and the 
 chance of loot . I sympathise with you , George . ' 

 they go to the telegraph - office unquestione , for all the world be 
 desperately busy and have scarcely time to turn its head , and Suakin be 
 the last place under sky that would be choose for holiday - ground . on 
 their return the voice of an English subaltern ask Dick what he be 
 do . the blue goggle be over his eye and he walk with his hand 
 on George 's elbow as he reply - ' Egyptian Government - mule . my order 
 be to give they over to the a. C. G. at Tanai - el - Hassan . any occasion 
 to show my paper ? ' 

 ' oh , certainly not . I beg your pardon . I have no right to ask , but not 
 see your face before I - - ' 

 ' I go out in the train to - night , I suppose , ' say Dick , boldly . ' there 
 will be no difficulty in load up the mule , will there ? ' 

 ' you can see the horse - platform from here . you must have they load up 
 early . ' the young man go away wonder what sort of break - down 
 waif this might be who talk like a gentleman and consort with greek 
 muleteer . Dick feel unhappy . to outface an english officer be no small 
 thing , but the bluff lose relish when one play it from the utter dark , 
 and stumble up and down rough way , think and eternally think 
 of what might have be if thing have fall out otherwise , and all have 
 be as it be not . 

 George share his meal with Dick and go off to the mule - line . his 
 charge sit alone in a shed with his face in his hand . before his 
 tight - shut eye dance the face of Maisie , laughing , with part lip . 
 there be a great bustle and clamour about he . he grow afraid and 
 almost call for George . 

 ' I say , have you get your mule ready ? ' it be the voice of the 
 subaltern over his shoulder . 

 ' my man 's look after they . the - the fact be I have   a touch of 
 ophthalmia and can not   see very well . 

 ' by Jove ! that be bad . you ought to lie up in hospital for a while . I have 
 have a turn of it myself . it be as bad as be blind . ' 

 ' so I find it . when do this armoured train go ? ' 

 ' at six o'clock . it take an hour to cover the seven mile . ' 

 ' be the fuzzie on the rampage - eh ? ' 

 ' about three night a week . fact be I be in act command of the 
 night - train . it generally run back empty to tanai for the night . ' 

 ' big camp at Tanai , I suppose ? ' 

 ' pretty big . it have to feed our desert - column somehow . ' 

 ' be that far off ? ' 

 ' between thirty and forty mile - in an infernal thirsty country . ' 

 ' be the country quiet between Tanai and our man ? ' 

 ' more or less . I should not   care to cross it alone , or with a subaltern 's 
 command for the matter of that , but the scout get through it in some 
 extraordinary fashion . ' 

 ' they always do . ' 

 ' have you be here before , then ? ' 

 ' I be through most of the trouble when it first break out . ' 

 ' in the service and cashier , ' be the subaltern 's first thought , so he 
 refrain from put any question . 

 ' there be your man come up with the mule . it seem rather queer - - ' 

 ' that I should be mule - lead ? ' say Dick . 

 ' I do not   mean to say so , but it be . forgive I - it be beastly 
 impertinence I know , but you speak like a man who have be at a public 
 school . there be no mistaking the tone . ' 

 ' I be a public school man . ' 

 ' I think so . I say , I do not   want to hurt your feeling , but you be a 
 little down on your luck , be not   you ? I see you sit with your head 
 in your hand , and that be why I speak . ' 

 ' thank . I be about as thoroughly and completely break as a man need 
 be . ' 

 ' suppose - I mean I be a public school man myself . could not   I 
 perhaps - take it as a loan y'know and - - ' 

 ' you be much too good , but on my honour I have   as much money as I want . 

 ... I tell you what you could do for I , though , and put I under an 
 everlasting obligation . let I come into the bogie truck of the train . 

 there be a fore - truck , be not   there ? ' 

 ' yes . how d'you know ? ' 

 ' I have   be in an armoured train before . only let I see - hear some 
 of the fun I mean , and I will be grateful . I go at my own risk as a 
 non - combatant . ' 

 the young man think for a minute . ' all right , ' he say . ' we be 
 suppose to be an empty train , and there be no one to blow I up at the 
 other end . ' 

 George and a horde of yell amateur assistant have load up the 
 mule , and the narrow - gauge armoured train , plat with three - eighth 
 inch boiler - plate till it look like one long coffin , stand ready to 
 start . 

 two bogie truck run before the locomotive be completely cover 
 in with plating , except that the lead one be pierce in front for 
 the muzzle of a machine - gun , and the second at either side for lateral 
 fire . 

 the truck together make one long iron - vault chamber in which a score 
 of artilleryman be riot . 

 ' Whitechapel - last train ! ah , I see yer kissin ' in the first class 
 there ! ' somebody shout , just as Dick be clamour into the forward 
 truck . 

 ' Lordy ! ' Ere be a real live passenger for the Kew , Tanai , Acton , and 
 Ealin ' train . Echo , sir . Speshul edition ! Star , sir . ' - ' shall I get you 
 a foot - warmer ? ' say another . 

 ' thank . I will pay my footing , ' say Dick , and relation of the most 
 amiable be establish ere silence come with the arrival of the 
 subaltern , and the train jolt out over the rough track . 

 ' this be an immense improvement on shoot the unimpressionable Fuzzy 
 in the open , ' say Dick , from his place in the corner . 

 ' oh , but he be still unimpressed . there he go ! ' say the subaltern , as 
 a bullet strike the outside of the truck . ' we always have at least 
 one demonstration against the night - train . generally they attack the 
 rear - truck , where my junior command . he get all the fun of the fair . ' 

 ' not to - night though ! listen ! ' say Dick . a flight of heavy - handed 
 bullet be succeed by yell and shout . the child of the desert 
 value their nightly amusement , and the train be an excellent mark . 

 ' be it worth give they half a hopper full ? ' the subaltern ask of the 
 engine , which be drive by a Lieutenant of Sappers . 

 ' I should think so ! this be my section of the line . they will be play 
 old Harry with my permanent way if we do not   stop them . ' 

 ' Right o ! ' 

 ' Hrrmph ! ' say the machine gun through all its five nose as the 
 subaltern draw the lever home . the empty cartridge clash on the floor 
 and the smoke blow back through the truck . there be indiscriminate 
 firing at the rear of the train , and return fire from the darkness 
 without and unlimited howling . Dick stretch himself on the floor , wild 
 with delight at the sound and the smell . 

 ' God be very good - I never think I would hear this again . give them hell , 
 man . oh , give them hell ! ' he cry . 

 the train stop for some obstruction on the line ahead and a party 
 go out to reconnoitre , but come back , curse , for spade . the 
 child of the desert have pile sand and gravel on the rail , and 
 twenty minute be lose in clear it away . then the slow progress 
 recommence , to be varied with more shot , more shouting , the steady 
 clack and kick of the machine gun , and a final difficulty with a 
 half - lift rail ere the train come under the protection of the roaring 
 camp at Tanai - el - Hassan . 

 ' now , you see why it take an hour and a half to fetch she through , ' 
 say the subaltern , unship the cartridge - hopper above his pet gun . 

 ' it be a lark , though . I only wish it have last twice as long . 
 how superb it must have look from outside ! ' say Dick , sigh 
 regretfully . 

 ' it pall after the first few night . by the way , when you have   settle 
 about your mule , come and see what we can find to eat in my tent . I be 
 Bennil of the Gunners - in the artillery line - and mind you do not   fall 
 over my tent - rope in the dark . ' 

 but it be all dark to Dick . he could only smell the camel , the 
 hay - bale , the cooking , the smoky fire , and the tan canvas of the 
 tent as he stand , where he have drop from the train , shout for 
 George . there be a sound of light - hearted kicking on the iron skin of 
 the rear truck , with squealing and grunt . George be unload the 
 mule . 

 the engine be blow off steam nearly in Dick 's ear ; a cold wind of 
 the desert dance between his leg ; he be hungry , and feel tired and 
 dirty - so dirty that he try to brush his coat with his hand . that be 
 a hopeless job ; he thrust his hand into his pocket and begin to count 
 over the many time that he have wait in strange or remote place for 
 train or camel , mule or horse , to carry he to his business . in 
 those day he could see - few man more clearly - and the spectacle of an 
 armed camp at dinner under the star be an ever fresh pleasure to the 
 eye . there be colour , light , and motion , without which no man have much 
 pleasure in living . this night there remain for he only one more 
 journey through the darkness that never lift to tell a man how far he 
 have travel . then he would grip Torpenhow 's hand again - Torpenhow , who 
 be alive and strong , and live in the midst of the action that have once 
 make the reputation of a man call Dick Heldar : not in the least to be 
 confuse with the blind , bewildered vagabond who seem to answer to 
 the same name . yes , he would find Torpenhow , and come as near to the old 
 life as might be . afterwards he would forget everything : Bessie , who have 
 wreck the Melancolia and so nearly wreck his life ; Beeton , who live 
 in a strange unreal city full of tin - tack and gas - plug and matter 
 that no man need ; that irrational being who have offer he love 
 and loyalty for nothing , but have not sign her name ; and most of all 
 Maisie , who , from her own point of view , be undeniably right in all she 
 do , but oh , at this distance , so tantalisingly fair . 

 George 's hand on his arm pull he back to the situation . 

 ' and what now ? ' say George . 

 ' oh yes of course . what now ? take I to the camel - man . take I to where 
 the scout sit when they come in from the desert . they sit by their 
 camel , and the camel eat grain out of a black blanket hold up at the 
 corner , and the man eat by their side just like camel . take I there ! ' 

 the camp be rough and rutty , and Dick stumble many time over the 
 stump of scrub . the scout be sit by their beast , as Dick know 
 they would . the light of the dung - fire flicker on their bearded 
 face , and the camel bubble and mumble beside they at rest . it be no 
 part of Dick 's policy to go into the desert with a convoy of 
 supply . that would lead to impertinent question , and since a blind 
 non - combatant be not need at the front , he would probably be force to 
 return to Suakin . 

 he must go up alone , and go immediately . 

 ' now for one last bluff - the big of all , ' he say . ' peace be with 
 you , brother ! ' the watchful George steer he to the circle of the 
 near fire . the head of the camel - sheiks bow gravely , and the 
 camel , scent a European , look sideways curiously like brood 
 hen , half ready to get to their foot . 

 ' a beast and a driver to go to the fight line to - night , ' say Dick . 

 ' a Mulaid ? ' say a voice , scornfully name the good baggage - breed that 
 he know . 

 ' a Bisharin , ' return Dick , with perfect gravity . ' a Bisharin without 
 saddle - gall . therefore no charge of thine , shock - head . ' 

 two or three minute pass . then - ' we be knee - haltered for the night . 
 there be no go out from the camp . ' 

 ' not for money ? ' 

 ' H'm ! ah ! english money ? ' 

 another depressing interval of silence . 

 ' how much ? ' 

 ' twenty - five pound English pay into the hand of the driver at my 
 journey 's end , and as much more into the hand of the camel - sheik here , 
 to be pay when the driver return . ' 

 this be royal payment , and the sheik , who know that he would get his 
 commission on this deposit , stir in Dick 's behalf . 

 ' for scarcely one night 's journey - fifty pound . land and well and 
 good tree and wife to make a man content for the rest of his day . who 
 speak ? ' say Dick . 

 ' I , ' say a voice . ' I will go - but there be no go from the camp . ' 

 ' Fool ! I know that a camel can break his knee - halter , and the sentry 
 do not fire if one go in chase . twenty - five pound and another 
 twenty - five pound . but the beast must be a good bisharin ; I will take 
 no baggage - camel . ' 

 then the bargaining begin , and at the end of half an hour the first 
 deposit be pay over to the sheik , who talk in low tone to the 
 driver . 

 Dick hear the latter say : ' a little way out only . any baggage - beast 
 will serve . be I a fool to waste my cattle for a blind man ? ' 

 ' and though I can not see ' - Dick lift his voice a little - ' yet I carry 
 that which have six eye , and the driver will sit before I . if we do not 
 reach the english troop in the dawn he will be dead . ' 

 ' but where , in God 's name , be the troop ? ' 

 ' unless thou know let another man ride . dost thou know ? remember it 
 will be life or death to thee . ' 

 ' I know , ' say the driver , sullenly . ' stand back from my beast . I be 
 go to slip he . ' 

 ' not so swiftly . George , hold the camel 's head a moment . I want to feel 
 his cheek . ' the hand wander over the hide till they find the 
 brand half - circle that be the mark of the Biharin , the light - build 
 riding - camel . 

 ' that be well . cut this one loose . remember no blessing of God come on 
 those who try to cheat the blind . ' 

 the man chuckle by the fire at the camel - driver 's discomfiture . he have 
 intend to substitute a slow , saddle - gall baggage - colt . 

 ' stand back ! ' one shout , lash the Biharin under the belly with a 
 quirt . Dick obey as soon as he feel the nose - string tighten in his 
 hand , - and a cry go up , ' Illaha ! aho ! he be loose . ' 

 with a roar and a grunt the Biharin rise to his foot and plunge forward 
 toward the desert , his driver follow with shout and lamentation . 

 George catch Dick 's arm and hurry he stumble and trip past a 
 disgusted sentry who be use to stampede camel . 

 ' what be the row now ? ' he cry . 

 ' every stitch of my kit on that blast dromedary , ' Dick answer , after 
 the manner of a common soldier . 

 ' go on , and take care your throat 's not cut out side - you and your 
 dromedary 's . ' 

 the outcry cease when the camel have disappear behind a hillock , and 
 his driver have call he back and make he kneel down . 

 ' Mount first , ' say Dick . then climb into the second seat and gently 
 screw the pistol muzzle into the small of his companion 's back , ' go 
 on in God 's name , and swiftly . good - bye , George . remember I to Madame , 
 and have a good time with your girl . get forward , child of the Pit ! ' 

 a few minute later he be shut up in a great silence , hardly break by 
 the creaking of the saddle and the soft pad of the tireless foot . Dick 
 adjust himself comfortably to the rock and pitch of the pace , girth 
 his belt tighter , and feel the darkness slide past . for an hour he be 
 conscious only of the sense of rapid progress . 

 ' a good camel , ' he say at last . 

 ' he be never underfed . he be my own and clean breed , ' the driver 
 reply . 

 ' go on . ' 

 his head drop on his chest and he try to think , but the tenor of 
 his thought be break because he be very sleepy . in the half doze in 
 seem that he be learn a punishment hymn at Mrs. Jennett 's . he have 
 commit some crime as bad as Sabbath - breaking , and she have lock he 
 up in his bedroom . but he could never repeat more than the first two 
 line of the hymn - 

 when Israel of the Lord believe out of the land of bondage come . 

 he say they over and over thousand of time . the driver turn in the 
 saddle to see if there be any chance of capture the revolver and 
 end the ride . Dick rouse , strike he over the head with the 
 butt , and storm himself wide awake . somebody hide in a clump of 
 camel - thorn shout as the camel toil up rise ground . a shot be 
 fire , and the silence shut down again , bring the desire to sleep . 
 Dick could think no long . he be too tired and stiff and cramp to 
 do more than nod uneasily from time to time , wake with a start and 
 punch the driver with the pistol . 

 ' be there a moon ? ' he ask drowsily . 

 ' she be near her setting . ' 

 ' I wish that I could see she . halt the camel . at least let I hear the 
 desert talk . ' 

 the man obey . out of the utter stillness come one breath of wind . 
 it rattle the dead leaf of a shrub some distance away and cease . a 
 handful of dry earth detach itself from the edge of a rail trench and 
 crumble softly to the bottom . 

 ' go on . the night be very cold . ' 

 those who have watch till the morning know how the last hour before 
 the light lengthen itself into many eternity . it seem to Dick that 
 he have never since the beginning of original darkness do anything at 
 all save jolt through the air . once in a thousand year he would 
 finger the nailhead on the saddle - front and count they all carefully . 
 century later he would shift his revolver from his right hand to his 
 left and allow the eased arm to drop down at his side . from the safe 
 distance of London he be watch himself thus employ , - watch 
 critically . yet whenever he put out his hand to the canvas that he might 
 paint the tawny yellow desert under the glare of the sink moon , the 
 black shadow of a camel and the two bow figure atop , that hand hold a 
 revolver and the arm be numb from wrist to collar - bone . moreover , he 
 be in the dark , and could see no canvas of any kind whatever . 

 the driver grunt , and Dick be conscious of a change in the air . 

 ' I smell the dawn , ' he whisper . 

 ' it be here , and yonder be the troop . have I do well ? ' 

 the camel stretch out its neck and roar as there come down wind the 
 pungent reek of camel in the square . 

 ' go on . we must get there swiftly . go on . ' 

 ' they be move in their camp . there be so much dust that I can not see 
 what they do . ' 

 ' be I in well case ? go forward . ' 

 they could hear the hum of voice ahead , the howling and the bubble of 
 the beast and the hoarse cry of the soldier girth up for the day . 

 two or three shot be fire . 

 ' be that at we ? surely they can see that I be english , ' Dick speak 
 angrily . 

 ' Nay , it be from the desert , ' the driver answer , cower in his 
 saddle . 

 ' go forward , my child ! well it be that the dawn do not uncover we an 
 hour ago . ' 

 the camel head straight for the column and the shot behind 
 multiply . the child of the desert have arrange that most 
 uncomfortable of surprise , a dawn attack for the english troop , and 
 be get their distance by snap - shot at the only move object 
 without the square . 

 ' what luck ! what stupendous and imperial luck ! ' say Dick . ' it be " just 
 before the battle , mother . " oh , God have be most good to I ! 

 only ' - the agony of the thought make he screw up his eye for an 
 instant - ' Maisie ... ' 

 ' Allahu ! we be in , ' say the man , as he drive into the rearguard and 
 the camel knelt . 

 ' who the deuce be you ? despatch or what ? what be the strength of the 
 enemy behind that ridge ? how do you get through ? ' ask a dozen voice . 
 for all answer Dick take a long breath , unbuckle his belt , and shout 
 from the saddle at the top of a wearied and dusty voice , ' Torpenhow ! 
 Ohe , Torp ! Coo - ee , Tor - pen - how . ' 

 a bearded man rake in the ash of a fire for a light to his pipe 
 move very swiftly towards that cry , as the rearguard , face about , 
 begin to fire at the puff of smoke from the hillock around . gradually 
 the scatter white cloudlet draw out into the long line of banked 
 white that hang heavily in the stillness of the dawn before they turn 
 over wave - like and glide into the valley . the soldier in the square 
 be cough and swear as their own smoke obstruct their view , and 
 they edge forward to get beyond it . a wounded camel leap to its foot 
 and roar aloud , the cry end in a bubble grunt . some one have 
 cut its throat to prevent confusion . then come the thick sob of a 
 man receive his death - wound from a bullet ; then a yell of agony and 
 redouble firing . 

 there be no time to ask any question . 

 ' get down , man ! get down behind the camel ! ' 

 ' no . put I , I pray , in the forefront of the battle . ' Dick turn his 
 face to Torpenhow and raise his hand to set his helmet straight , but , 
 miscalculating the distance , knock it off . torpenhow see that his hair 
 be gray on the temple , and that his face be the face of an old man . 

 ' come down , you damn fool ! Dickie , come off ! ' 

 and Dick come obediently , but as a tree fall , pitch sideways from 
 the Bisharin 's saddle at Torpenhow 's foot . his luck have hold to the 
 last , even to the crown mercy of a kindly bullet through his head . 

 torpenhow kneel under the lee of the camel , with Dick 's body in his 
 arm . 
