Kim 
 by Rudyard Kipling 
 chapter I 
 o ye who tread the Narrow Way 
 by Tophet - flare to judgment Day , 
 be gentle when ' the heathen ' pray 
 to Buddha at Kamakura ! 
 Buddha at Kamakura . 
 he sit , in defiance of municipal order , astride the gun Zam 
 Zammah on her brick platform opposite the old Ajaib - Gher - 
 the Wonder House , as the native call the Lahore Museum . 
 who hold Zam - Zammah , that ' fire - breathing dragon ' , hold the 
 Punjab , for the great green - bronze piece be always first of the 
 conqueror 's loot . 
 there be some justification for Kim - he have kick Lala 
 Dinanath 's boy off the trunnion - since the English hold the 
 Punjab and Kim be English . though he be burn black as any 
 native ; though he speak the vernacular by preference , and his 
 mother - tongue in a clipped uncertain sing - song ; though he 
 consort on term of perfect equality with the small boy of the 
 bazar ; Kim be white - a poor white of the very poor . the 
 half - caste woman who look after he   she smoke opium , and 
 pretend to keep a second - hand furniture shop by the square 
 where the cheap cab wait   tell the missionary that she be 
 Kim 's mother 's sister ; but his mother have be nursemaid in a 
 Colonel 's family and have marry Kimball O'Hara , a young colour- 
 sergeant of the Mavericks , an irish regiment . he afterwards take 
 a post on the sind , Punjab , and Delhi Railway , and his regiment 
 go home without he . the wife die of cholera in Ferozepore , 
 and O'Hara fall to drink and loaf up and down the line with 
 the keen - eyed three - year - old baby . society and chaplain , 
 anxious for the child , try to catch he , but O'Hara drift 
 away , till he come across the woman who take opium and learn 
 the taste from she , and die as poor white die in India . his 
 estate at death consist of three paper - one he call his ' ne 
 varietur ' because those word be write below his signature 
 thereon , and another his ' clearance - certificate ' . the third be 
 Kim 's birth - certificate . those thing , he be use to say , in his 
 glorious opium - hour , would yet make little Kimball a man . on no 
 account be Kim to part with they , for they belong to a great 
 piece of magic - such magic as man practise over yonder behind 
 the Museum , in the big blue - and - white Jadoo - Gher - the Magic 
 House , as we name the Masonic Lodge . it would , he say , all come 
 right some day , and Kim 's horn would be exalt between pillar - 
 monstrous pillar - of beauty and strength . the Colonel himself , 
 rid on a horse , at the head of the fine Regiment in the 
 world , would attend to Kim - little Kim that should have be 
 well off than his father . nine hundred first - class devil , 
 whose God be a Red Bull on a green field , would attend to Kim , 
 if they have not forget O'Hara - poor O'Hara that be gang- 
 foreman on the Ferozepore line . then he would weep bitterly in 
 the break rush chair on the veranda . so it come about after his 
 death that the woman sew parchment , paper , and birth- 
 certificate into a leather amulet - case which she string round 
 Kim 's neck . 
 ' and some day , ' she say , confusedly remember O'Hara 's 
 prophecy , ' there will come for you a great Red Bull on a green 
 field , and the Colonel rid on his tall horse , yes , and ' 
 drop into English - ' nine hundred devil . ' 
 ' ah , ' say Kim , ' I shall remember . a Red Bull and a Colonel on a 
 horse will come , but first , my father say , will come the two man 
 make ready the ground for these matter . that be how my father 
 say they always do ; and it be always so when man work magic . ' 
 if the woman have send Kim up to the local Jadoo - Gher with those 
 paper , he would , of course , have be take over by the 
 Provincial Lodge , and send to the Masonic Orphanage in the Hills ; 
 but what she have hear of magic she distrust . Kim , too , hold 
 view of his own . as he reach the year of indiscretion , he 
 learn to avoid missionary and white man of serious aspect who 
 ask who he be , and what he do . for Kim do nothing with an 
 immense success . true , he know the wonderful walled city of 
 Lahore from the Delhi Gate to the outer Fort Ditch ; be hand in 
 glove with man who lead life strange than anything Haroun al 
 Raschid dream of ; and he live in a life wild as that of the 
 Arabian Nights , but missionary and secretary of charitable 
 society could not see the beauty of it . his nickname through 
 the ward be ' Little Friend of all the world ' ; and very often , 
 be lithe and inconspicuous , he execute commission by night 
 on the crowded housetop for sleek and shiny young man of 
 fashion . it be intrigue , - of course he know that much , as he 
 have know all evil since he could speak , - but what he love be 
 the game for its own sake - the stealthy prowl through the dark 
 gully and lane , the crawl up a waterpipe , the sight and 
 sound of the woman 's world on the flat roof , and the headlong 
 flight from housetop to housetop under cover of the hot dark . 
 then there be holy man , ash - smear fakir by their brick 
 shrine under the tree at the riverside , with whom he be quite 
 familiar - greet they as they return from begging - tour , 
 and , when no one be by , eat from the same dish . the woman who 
 look after he insist with tear that he should wear european 
 clothe - trouser , a shirt and a battered hat . Kim find it 
 easy to slip into Hindu or Mohammedan garb when engage on 
 certain business . one of the young man of fashion - he who be 
 find dead at the bottom of a well on the night of the earthquake - 
 have once give he a complete suit of Hindu kit , the costume 
 of a lowcaste street boy , and Kim store it in a secret place 
 under some baulk in Nila Ram 's timber - yard , beyond the Punjab 
 High Court , where the fragrant deodar log lie season after 
 they have drive down the Ravi . when there be business or frolic 
 afoot , Kim would use his property , return at dawn to the 
 veranda , all tired out from shout at the heel of a marriage 
 procession , or yell at a Hindu festival . sometimes there be 
 food in the house , more often there be not , and then Kim go 
 out again to eat with his native friend . 
 as he drum his heel against Zam - Zammah he turn now and 
 again from his king - of - the - castle game with little Chota Lal and 
 Abdullah the sweetmeat - seller 's son , to make a rude remark to the 
 native policeman on guard over row of shoe at the Museum door . 
 the big punjabi grin tolerantly : he know Kim of old . so do 
 the water - carrier , sluice water on the dry road from his goat- 
 skin bag . so do Jawahir Singh , the Museum carpenter , bend over 
 new packing - case . so do everybody in sight except the peasant 
 from the country , hurry up to the Wonder House to view the 
 thing that man make in their own province and elsewhere . the 
 Museum be give up to indian art and manufacture , and anybody 
 who seek wisdom could ask the Curator to explain . 
 ' Off ! Off ! let I up ! ' cry Abdullah , climb up Zam - Zammah 's 
 wheel . 
 ' Thy father be a pastry - cook , Thy mother steal the ghi " sing 
 Kim . ' all Mussalmans fall off Zam - Zammah long ago ! ' 
 ' let I up ! ' shrill little Chota Lal in his gilt - embroider 
 cap . his father be worth perhaps half a million sterling , but 
 India be the only democratic land in the world . 
 ' the Hindus fall off Zam - Zammah too . the Mussalmans push they 
 off . Thy father be a pastry - cook - ' 
 he stop ; for there shuffle round the corner , from the roar 
 Motee Bazar , such a man as Kim , who think he know all caste , 
 have never see . he be nearly six foot high , dress in fold upon 
 fold of dingy stuff like horse - blanketing , and not one fold of it 
 could Kim refer to any know trade or profession . at his belt 
 hang a long open - work iron pencase and a wooden rosary such as 
 holy man wear . on his head be a gigantic sort of tam - o'-shanter . 
 his face be yellow and wrinkle , like that of Fook Shing , the 
 chinese bootmaker in the bazar . his eye turn up at the corner 
 and look like little slit of onyx . 
 ' who be that ? ' say Kim to his companion . 
 ' perhaps it be a man , ' say Abdullah , finger in mouth , star . 
 ' without doubt . ' return Kim ; ' but he be no man of India that I 
 have ever see . ' 
 ' a priest , perhaps , ' say Chota Lal , spy the rosary . ' see ! he 
 go into the Wonder House ! ' 
 ' Nay , nay , ' say the policeman , shake his head . ' I do not 
 understand your talk . ' the constable speak Punjabi . ' o friend of 
 all the World , what do he say ? ' 
 ' send he hither , ' say Kim , drop from Zam - Zammah , 
 flourish his bare heel . ' he be a foreigner , and thou art a 
 buffalo . ' 
 the man turn helplessly and drift towards the boy . he be 
 old , and his woollen gaberdine still reek of the stinking 
 artemisia of the mountain pass . 
 ' o Children , what be that big house ? ' he say in very fair Urdu . 
 ' the Ajaib - Gher , the Wonder House ! ' Kim give he no title - such 
 as Lala or Mian . he could not divine the man 's creed . 
 ' ah ! the Wonder House ! can any enter ? ' 
 ' it be write above the door - all can enter . ' 
 ' without payment ? ' 
 ' I go in and out . I be no banker , ' laugh Kim . 
 ' alas ! I be an old man . I do not know . ' then , finger his 
 rosary , he half turn to the Museum . 
 ' what be your caste ? where be your house ? have you come far ? ' Kim 
 ask . 
 ' I come by Kulu - from beyond the Kailas - but what know you ? 
 from the Hills where ' - he sigh - ' the air and water be fresh 
 and cool . ' 
 ' aha ! Khitai   a Chinaman , ' say Abdullah proudly . Fook Shing have 
 once chase he out of his shop for spit at the joss above 
 the boot . 
 ' Pahari   a hillman , ' say little Chota Lal . 
 ' aye , child - a hillman from hill thou'lt never see . didst hear 
 of Bhotiyal   Tibet ? I be no Khitai , but a Bhotiya   Tibetan , 
 since you must know - a lama - or , say , a guru in your tongue . ' 
 ' a guru from Tibet , ' say Kim . ' I have not see such a man . they 
 be Hindus in Tibet , then ? ' 
 ' we be follower of the Middle Way , live in peace in our 
 lamasserie , and I go to see the Four Holy Places before I die . 
 now do you , who be child , know as much as I do who be old . ' 
 he smile benignantly on the boy . 
 ' Hast thou eat ? ' 
 he fumble in his bosom and draw forth a worn , wooden begging- 
 bowl . the boy nod . all priest of their acquaintance beg . 
 ' I do not wish to eat yet . ' he turn his head like an old 
 tortoise in the sunlight . ' be it true that there be many image 
 in the Wonder House of Lahore ? ' he repeat the last word as one 
 make sure of an address . 
 ' that be true , ' say Abdullah . ' it be full of heathen bust . Thou 
 also art an idolater . ' 
 ' never mind he , ' say . Kim . ' that be the Government 's house and 
 there be no idolatry in it , but only a Sahib with a white beard . 
 come with I and I will show . ' 
 ' strange priest eat boy , ' whisper Chota Lal . 
 ' and he be a stranger and a but - parast   idolater , ' say 
 Abdullah , the Mohammedan . 
 Kim laugh . ' he be new . run to your mother ' lap , and be safe . 
 come ! ' 
 Kim click round the self - register turnstile ; the old man 
 follow and halt amazed . in the entrance - hall stand the large 
 figure of the Greco - buddhist sculpture do , savant know how 
 long since , by forget workman whose hand be feel , and 
 not unskilfully , for the mysteriously transmit grecian touch . 
 there be hundred of piece , frieze of figure in relief , 
 fragment of statue and slab crowd with figure that have 
 encrust the brick wall of the buddhist stupa and vihara of 
 the North Country and now , dig up and label , make the pride of 
 the Museum . in open - mouthed wonder the lama turn to this and 
 that , and finally check in rapt attention before a large alto- 
 relief represent a coronation or apotheosis of the Lord 
 Buddha . the Master be represent seat on a lotus the petal 
 of which be so deeply undercut as to show almost detach . 
 round he be an adore hierarchy of king , elder , and old - time 
 buddha . below be lotus - cover water with fish and water- 
 bird . two butterfly - wing devas hold a wreath over his head ; 
 above they another pair support an umbrella surmount by the 
 jewel headdress of the Bodhisat . 
 ' the Lord ! the Lord ! it be Sakya Muni himself , ' the lama half 
 sob ; and under his breath begin the wonderful buddhist 
 invocation : 
 to he the Way , the Law , apart , whom Maya hold beneath her heart , 
 Ananda 's Lord , the Bodhisat . 
 ' and he be here ! the most Excellent Law be here also . my 
 pilgrimage be well begun . and what work ! what work ! ' 
 ' yonder be the Sahib . ' say Kim , and dodge sideway among the 
 case of the art and manufacturer wing . a white - bearded 
 Englishman be look at the lama , who gravely turn and 
 salute he and after some fumbling draw forth a note - book and a 
 scrap of paper . 
 ' yes , that be my name , ' smile at the clumsy , childish print . 
 ' one of we who have make pilgrimage to the Holy Places - he be now 
 Abbot of the Lung - Cho Monastery - give it I , ' stammer the 
 lama . ' he speak of these . ' his lean hand move tremulously round . 
 ' welcome , then , o lama from Tibet . here be the image , and I be 
 here ' - he glance at the lama 's face - ' to gather knowledge . 
 come to my office awhile . ' the old man be tremble with 
 excitement . 
 the office be but a little wooden cubicle partition off from 
 the sculpture - line gallery . Kim lay himself down , his ear 
 against a crack in the heat - split cedar door , and , follow his 
 instinct , stretch out to listen and watch . 
 Most of the talk be altogether above his head . the lama , 
 haltingly at first , speak to the Curator of his own lamassery , 
 the such - zen , opposite the Painted Rocks , four month ' march 
 away . the Curator bring out a huge book of photo and show 
 he that very place , perch on its crag , overlook the 
 gigantic valley of many - hue strata . 
 ' ay , ay ! ' the lama mount a pair of horn - rim spectacle of 
 chinese work . ' here be the little door through which we bring 
 wood before winter . and thou - the english know of these thing ? 
 he who be now Abbot of Lung - Cho tell I , but I do not believe . 
 the Lord - the Excellent One - he have honour here too ? and his 
 life be know ? ' 
 ' it be all carven upon the stone . come and see , if thou art 
 rest . ' 
 out shuffle the lama to the main hall , and , the Curator beside 
 he , go through the collection with the reverence of a devotee 
 and the appreciative instinct of a craftsman . 
 Incident by incident in the beautiful story he identify on the 
 blur stone , puzzle here and there by the unfamiliar Greek 
 convention , but delight as a child at each new trove . where the 
 sequence fail , as in the Annunciation , the Curator supply it 
 from his mound of book - french and German , with photograph and 
 reproduction . 
 here be the devout Asita , the pendant of Simeon in the Christian 
 story , hold the Holy Child on his knee while mother and father 
 listen ; and here be incident in the legend of the cousin 
 Devadatta . here be the wicked woman who accuse the Master of 
 impurity , all confound ; here be the teaching in the Deer - park ; 
 the miracle that stun the fire - worshipper ; here be the 
 Bodhisat in royal state as a prince ; the miraculous birth ; the 
 death at Kusinagara , where the weak disciple faint ; while there 
 be almost countless repetition of the meditation under the 
 Bodhi tree ; and the adoration of the alm - bowl be everywhere . in 
 a few minute the Curator see that his guest be no mere bead- 
 tell mendicant , but a scholar of part . and they go at it 
 all over again , the lama take snuff , wipe his spectacle , and 
 talk at railway speed in a bewilder mixture of Urdu and 
 Tibetan . he have hear of the travel of the chinese pilgrim , Fu- 
 Hiouen and Hwen - Tsiang , and be anxious to know if there be any 
 translation of their record . he draw in his breath as he turn 
 helplessly over the page of Beal and Stanislas Julien . " tis all 
 here . a treasure lock . ' then he compose himself reverently to 
 listen to fragment hastily render into Urdu . for the first 
 time he hear of the labour of european scholar , who by the 
 help of these and a hundred other document have identify the 
 Holy Places of Buddhism . then he be show a mighty map , spot 
 and trace with yellow . the brown finger follow the Curator 's 
 pencil from point to point . here be Kapilavastu , here the Middle 
 Kingdom , and here Mahabodhi , the Mecca of Buddhism ; and here be 
 Kusinagara , sad place of the Holy One 's death . the old man bow 
 his head over the sheet in silence for a while , and the Curator 
 light another pipe . Kim have fall asleep . when he wake , the talk , 
 still in spate , be more within his comprehension . 
 ' and thus it be , o Fountain of Wisdom , that I decide to go to 
 the Holy Places which his foot have trod - to the birthplace , even 
 to Kapila ; then to Mahabodhi , which be Buddh Gaya - to the 
 Monastery - to the Deer - park -to the place of his death . ' 
 the lama lower his voice . ' and I come here alone . for five - 
 seven - eighteen - forty year it be in my mind that the Old Law 
 be not well follow ; be overlay , as thou know , with 
 devildom , charm , and idolatry . even as the child outside say 
 but now . ay , even as the child say , with but - parasti . ' 
 ' so it come with all faith . ' 
 ' thinkest thou ? the book of my lamassery I read , and they be 
 dry pith ; and the later ritual with which we of the Reformed 
 Law have cumber ourselves - that , too , have no worth to these 
 old eye . even the follower of the Excellent One be at feud on 
 feud with one another . it be all illusion . ay , maya , illusion . 
 but I have another desire ' - the seam yellow face draw within 
 three inch of the Curator , and the long forefinger - nail tap 
 on the table . ' your scholar , by these book , have follow the 
 bless Feet in all their wandering ; but there be thing which 
 they have not seek out . I know nothing - nothing do I know - 
 but I go to free myself from the Wheel of Things by a broad and 
 open road . ' he smile with most simple triumph . ' as a pilgrim to 
 the Holy Places I acquire merit . but there be more . listen to a 
 true thing . when our gracious Lord , be as yet a youth , seek 
 a mate , man say , in his father 's Court , that he be too tender 
 for marriage . Thou know ? ' 
 the Curator nod , wonder what would come next . 
 ' so they make the triple trial of strength against all comer . 
 and at the test of the Bow , our Lord first break that which 
 they give he , call for such a bow as none might bend . Thou 
 know ? ' 
 ' it be write . I have read . ' 
 ' and , overshoot all other mark , the arrow pass far and far 
 beyond sight . at the last it fall ; and , where it touch earth , 
 there break out a stream which presently become a River , whose 
 nature , by our Lord 's beneficence , and that merit he acquire ere 
 he free himself , be that whoso bathe in it wash away all 
 taint and speckle of sin . ' 
 ' so it be write , ' say the Curator sadly . 
 the lama draw a long breath . " where be that River ? fountain of 
 Wisdom , where fall the arrow ? " 
 ' alas , my brother , I do not know , ' say the Curator . 
 ' Nay , if it please thee to forget - the one thing only that thou 
 hast not tell I . surely thou must know ? see , I be an old man ! I 
 ask with my head between thy foot , o Fountain of Wisdom . we know 
 he draw the bow ! we know the arrow fall ! we know the stream 
 gush ! where , then , be the River ? my dream tell I to find it . 
 so I come . I be here . but where be the River ? ' 
 ' if I know , think you I would not cry it aloud ? ' 
 ' by it one attain freedom from the Wheel of thing , ' the lama 
 go on , unheede . ' the River of the Arrow ! think again ! some 
 little stream , maybe - dry in the heat ? but the Holy One would 
 never so cheat an old man . ' 
 ' I do not know . I do not know . ' 
 the lama bring his thousand - wrinkle face once more a 
 handsbreadth from the Englishman 's . ' I see thou dost not know . 
 not be of the Law , the matter be hide from thee . ' 
 ' ay - hide - hidden . ' 
 ' we be both bind , thou and I , my brother . but I ' - he rise with 
 a sweep of the soft thick drapery - ' I go to cut myself free . 
 come also ! ' 
 ' I be bind , ' say the Curator . ' but whither goest thou ? ' 
 ' first to Kashi   Benares : where else ? there I shall meet one of 
 the pure faith in a Jain temple of that city . he also be a Seeker 
 in secret , and from he haply I may learn . maybe he will go with 
 I to Buddh Gaya . thence north and west to Kapilavastu , and there 
 will I seek for the River . Nay , I will seek everywhere as I go - 
 for the place be not know where the arrow fall . ' 
 ' and how wilt thou go ? it be a far cry to Delhi , and far to 
 benare . ' 
 ' by road and the train . from Pathankot , have leave the Hills , I 
 come hither in a te - rain . it go swiftly . at first I be amazed 
 to see those tall pole by the side of the road snatch up and 
 snatch up their thread , ' - he illustrate the stoop and whirl 
 of a telegraph - pole flashing past the train . ' but later , I be 
 cramp and desire to walk , as I be use . ' 
 ' and thou art sure of thy road ? ' say the Curator . 
 ' oh , for that one but ask a question and pay money , and the 
 appoint person despatch all to the appoint place . that much 
 I know in my lamassery from sure report , ' say the lama proudly . 
 ' and when dost thou go ? ' the Curator smile at the mixture of 
 old - world piety and modern progress that be the note of India 
 today . 
 ' as soon as may be . I follow the place of his life till I come 
 to the River of the Arrow . there be , moreover , a write paper of 
 the hour of the train that go south . ' 
 ' and for food ? ' Lamas , as a rule , have good store of money 
 somewhere about they , but the Curator wish to make sure . 
 ' for the journey , I take up the Master 's begging - bowl . yes . even 
 as he go so go I , forsake the ease of my monastery . there be 
 with I when I leave the hill a chela   disciple   who beg for 
 I as the Rule demand , but halt in Kulu awhile a fever take 
 he and he die . I have now no chela , but I will take the alms- 
 bowl and thus enable the charitable to acquire merit . ' he nod 
 his head valiantly . learn doctor of a lamassery do not beg , 
 but the lama be an enthusiast in this quest . 
 ' be it so , ' say the Curator , smile . ' suffer I now to acquire 
 merit . we be craftsman together , thou and I. here be a new book 
 of white english paper : here be sharpen pencil two and three - 
 thick and thin , all good for a scribe . now lend I thy spectacle . ' 
 the Curator look through they . they be heavily scratch , but 
 the power be almost exactly that of his own pair , which he slide 
 into the lama 's hand , say : ' try these . ' 
 ' a feather ! a very feather upon the face . ' the old man turn his 
 head delightedly and wrinkle up his nose . ' how scarcely do I 
 feel they ! how clearly do I see ! ' 
 ' they be bilaur - crystal - and will never scratch . may they 
 help thee to thy River , for they be thine . ' 
 ' I will take they and the pencil and the white note - book , ' say 
 the lama , ' as a sign of friendship between priest and priest - 
 and now - ' he fumble at his belt , detach the open - work iron 
 pincer , and lay it on the Curator 's table . ' that be for a 
 memory between thee and I - my pencase . it be something old - 
 even as I be . ' 
 it be a piece of ancient design , Chinese , of an iron that be not 
 smelt these day ; and the collector 's heart in the Curator 's 
 bosom have go out to it from the first . for no persuasion would 
 the lama resume his gift . 
 ' when I return , have find the River , I will bring thee a 
 write picture of the Padma Samthora such as I use to make on 
 silk at the lamassery . yes - and of the Wheel of Life , ' he 
 chuckle , ' for we be craftsman together , thou and I. ' 
 the Curator would have detain he : they be few in the world 
 who still have the secret of the conventional brush - pen buddhist 
 picture which be , as it be , half write and half draw . but 
 the lama stride out , head high in air , and pause an instant 
 before the great statue of a Bodhisat in meditation , brush 
 through the turnstile . 
 Kim follow like a shadow . what he have overhear excited he 
 wildly . this man be entirely new to all his experience , and he 
 mean to investigate far , precisely as he would have 
 investigate a new building or a strange festival in Lahore city . 
 the lama be his trove , and he purpose to take possession . Kim 's 
 mother have be irish , too . 
 the old man halt by Zam - Zammah and look round till his eye 
 fall on Kim . the inspiration of his pilgrimage have leave he for 
 awhile , and he feel old , forlorn , and very empty . 
 ' do not sit under that gun , ' say the policeman loftily . 
 ' Huh ! owl ! ' be Kim 's retort on the lama 's behalf . ' sit under that 
 gun if it please thee . when didst thou steal the milkwoman 's 
 slipper , Dunnoo ? ' 
 that be an utterly unfounded charge spring on the spur of the 
 moment , but it silence Dunnoo , who know that Kim 's clear yell 
 could call up legion of bad bazaar boy if nee arise . 
 ' and whom didst thou worship within ? ' say Kim affably , squat 
 in the shade beside the lama . 
 ' I worship none , child . I bow before the Excellent Law . ' 
 Kim accept this new God without emotion . he know already a few 
 score . 
 ' and what dost thou do ? ' 
 ' I beg . I remember now it be long since I have eat or drunk . 
 what be the custom of charity in this town ? in silence , as we do 
 of Tibet , or speak aloud ? ' 
 ' those who beg in silence starve in silence , ' say Kim , quote a 
 native proverb . the lama try to rise , but sink back again , 
 sigh for his disciple , dead in far - away Kulu . Kim watch head 
 to one side , consider and interested . 
 ' give I the bowl . I know the people of this city - all who be 
 charitable . Give , and I will bring it back fill . ' 
 simply as a child the old man hand he the bowl . 
 ' Rest , thou . I know the people . ' 
 he trot off to the open shop of a kunjri , a low - caste 
 vegetable - seller , which lie opposite the belt - tramway line down 
 the Motee Bazar . she know Kim of old . 
 ' Oho , hast thou turn yogi with thy begging - bowl ? ' she cry . 
 ' Nay . ' say Kim proudly . ' there be a new priest in the city - a man 
 such as I have never see . ' 
 ' old priest - young tiger , ' say the woman angrily . ' I be tired 
 of new priest ! they settle on our ware like fly . be the 
 father of my son a well of charity to give to all who ask ? ' 
 ' no , ' say Kim . ' Thy man be rather yagi   bad - temper   than yogi 
  a holy man . but this priest be new . the Sahib in the Wonder 
 House have talk to he like a brother . o my mother , fill I this 
 bowl . he wait . ' 
 ' that bowl indeed ! that cow - belly basket ! thou hast as much 
 grace as the holy bull of Shiv . he have take the good of a basket 
 of onion already , this morn ; and forsooth , I must fill thy bowl . 
 he come here again . ' 
 the huge , mouse - colour Brahmini bull of the ward be 
 shoulder his way through the many - colour crowd , a steal 
 plantain hang out of his mouth . he head straight for the 
 shop , well know his privilege as a sacred beast , lower his 
 head , and puff heavily along the line of basket ere make his 
 choice . up fly Kim 's hard little heel and catch he on his 
 moist blue nose . he snort indignantly , and walk away across 
 the tram - rail , his hump quiver with rage . 
 ' see ! I have save more than the bowl will cost thrice over . now , 
 mother , a little rice and some dry fish atop - yes , and some 
 vegetable curry . ' 
 a growl come out of the back of the shop , where a man lie . 
 ' he drive away the bull , ' say the woman in an undertone . ' it be 
 good to give to the poor . ' she take the bowl and return it full 
 of hot rice . 
 ' but my yogi be not a cow , ' say Kim gravely , make a hole with 
 his finger in the top of the mound . ' a little curry be good , and 
 a fried cake , and a morsel of conserve would please he , I 
 think . ' 
 ' it be a hole as big as thy head , ' say the woman fretfully . but 
 she fill it , none the less , with good , steam vegetable 
 curry , clap a fried cake atop , and a morsel of clarify 
 butter on the cake , dab a lump of sour tamarind conserve at 
 the side ; and Kim look at the load lovingly . 
 ' that be good . when I be in the bazar the bull shall not come to 
 this house . he be a bold beggar - man . ' 
 ' and thou ? ' laugh the woman . ' but speak well of bull . Hast 
 thou not tell I that some day a Red Bull will come out of a 
 field to help thee ? now hold all straight and ask for the holy 
 man 's blessing upon I . perhaps , too , he know a cure for my 
 daughter 's sore eye . ask . he that also , o thou Little Friend 
 of all the World . ' 
 but Kim have dance off ere the end of the sentence , dodge 
 pariah dog and hungry acquaintance . 
 ' thus do we beg who know the way of it , ' say he proudly to the 
 lama , who open his eye at the content of the bowl . ' eat now 
 and - I will eat with thee . Ohe , bhisti ! ' he call to the water- 
 carrier , sluice the croton by the Museum . ' give water here . we 
 man be thirsty . ' 
 ' we man ! ' say the bhisti , laugh . ' be one skinful enough for 
 such a pair ? drink , then , in the name of the Compassionate . ' 
 he loose a thin stream into Kim 's hand , who drink native fashion ; 
 but the lama must need pull out a cup from his inexhaustible 
 upper drapery and drink ceremonially . 
 ' Pardesi   a foreigner , ' Kim explain , as the old man deliver 
 in an unknown tongue what be evidently a blessing . 
 they eat together in great content , clear the beggingbowl . 
 then the lama take snuff from a portentous wooden snuff - gourd , 
 finger his rosary awhile , and so drop into the easy sleep of 
 age , as the shadow of Zam - Zammah grow long . 
 Kim loaf over to the near tobacco - seller , a rather lively 
 young mohammedan woman , and beg a rank cigar of the brand that 
 they sell to student of the Punjab University who copy english 
 custom . then he smoke and think , knee to chin , under the 
 belly of the gun , and the outcome of his thought be a sudden 
 and stealthy departure in the direction of Nila Ram 's timber- 
 yard . 
 the lama do not wake till the evening life of the city have begin 
 with lamp - lighting and the return of white - rob clerk and 
 subordinate from the Government office . he star dizzily in 
 all direction , but none look at he save a Hindu urchin in a 
 dirty turban and Isabella - colour clothe . suddenly he bow his 
 head on his knee and wail . 
 ' what be this ? ' say the boy , stand before he . ' hast thou 
 be rob ? ' 
 ' it be my new chela   disciple   that be go away from I , and I 
 know not where he be . ' 
 ' and what like of man be thy disciple ? ' 
 ' it be a boy who come to I in place of he who die , on account 
 of the merit which I have gain when I bow before the law 
 within there . ' he point towards the Museum . ' he come upon I to 
 show I a road which I have lose . he lead I into the Wonder House , 
 and by his talk embolden I to speak to the Keeper of the 
 Images , so that I be cheer and make strong . and when I be 
 faint with hunger he beg for I , as would a chela for his 
 teacher . suddenly be he send . suddenly have he go away . it be 
 in my mind to have teach he the Law upon the road to Benares . ' 
 Kim stand amazed at this , because he have overhear the talk in 
 the Museum , and know that the old man be speak the truth , 
 which be a thing a native on the road seldom present to a 
 stranger . 
 ' but I see now that he be but send for a purpose . by this I know 
 that I shall find a certain River for which I seek . ' 
 ' the River of the Arrow ? ' say Kim , with a superior smile . 
 ' be this yet another send ? ' cry the lama . ' to none have I 
 speak of my search , save to the Priest of the Images . who art 
 thou ? ' 
 ' Thy chela , ' say Kim simply , sit on his heel . ' I have never 
 see anyone like to thee in all this my life . I go with thee to 
 benare . and , too , I think that so old a man as thou , speak 
 the truth to chance - meet people at dusk , be in great need of a 
 disciple . ' 
 ' but the River - the River of the Arrow ? ' 
 ' oh , that I hear when thou wast speak to the Englishman . I 
 lie against the door . ' 
 the lama sigh . ' I think thou hadst be a guide permit . 
 such thing fall sometimes - but I be not worthy . Thou dost not , 
 then , know the River ? ' 
 ' not i , " Kim laugh uneasily . ' I go to look for - for a bull - a 
 Red . bull on a green field who shall help I . ' Boylike , if an 
 acquaintance have a scheme , Kim be quite ready with one of his own ; 
 and , boylike , he have really think for as much as twenty minute at a 
 time of his father 's prophecy . 
 ' to what , child ? ' say the lama . 
 ' God know , but so my father tell I ' . I hear thy talk in the 
 Wonder House of all those new strange place in the Hills , and if 
 one so old and so little - so used to truth - telling - may go out 
 for the small matter of a river , it seem to I that I too must 
 go a - travelling . if it be our fate to find those thing we shall 
 find they - thou , thy River ; and I , my Bull , and the Strong 
 Pillars and some other matter that I forget . ' 
 ' it be not pillar but a Wheel from which I would be free , ' say 
 the lama . 
 ' that be all one . perhaps they will make I a king , ' say Kim , 
 serenely prepare for anything . 
 ' I will teach thee other and well desire upon the road , ' the 
 lama reply in the voice of authority . ' let we go to Benares . ' 
 ' not by night . thief be abroad . wait till the day . ' 
 ' but there be no place to sleep . ' the old man be use to the 
 order of his monastery , and though he sleep on the ground , as the 
 Rule decree , prefer a decency in these thing . 
 ' we shall get good lodging at the Kashmir Serai , ' say Kim , 
 laugh at his perplexity . ' I have a friend there . come ! ' 
 the hot and crowded bazar blaze with light as they make their 
 way through the press of all the race in Upper India , and the 
 lama moon through it like a man in a dream . it be his first 
 experience of a large manufacture city , and the crowded tram- 
 car with its continually squealing brake frighten he . half 
 push , half tow , he arrive at the high gate of the Kashmir 
 Serai : that huge open square over against the railway station , 
 surround with arched cloister , where the camel and horse 
 caravans put up on their return from Central Asia . here be all 
 manner of northern folk , tend tethered pony and kneeling 
 camel ; loading and unload bale and bundle ; draw water 
 for the evening meal at the creak well - windlass ; pile 
 grass before the shrieking , wild - eyed stallion ; cuff the 
 surly caravan dog ; pay off camel - driver ; take on new 
 groom ; swearing , shouting , arguing , and chaffer in the pack 
 square . the cloister , reach by three or four masonry step , 
 make a haven of refuge around this turbulent sea . Most of they 
 be rent to trader , as we rent the arch of a viaduct ; the 
 space between pillar and pillar be bricke or board off into 
 room , which be guard by heavy wooden door and cumbrous 
 native padlock . locked door show that the owner be away , and 
 a few rude - sometimes very rude - chalk or paint scratch tell 
 where he have go . thus : ' Lutuf Ullah be go to Kurdistan . ' 
 below , in coarse verse : ' o Allah , who sufferest lice to live on 
 the coat of a Kabuli , why hast thou allow this louse Lutuf to 
 live so long ? ' 
 Kim , fend the lama between excited man and excited beast , 
 sidle along the cloister to the far end , near therailway 
 station , where Mahbub Ali , the horse - trader , live when he come 
 in from that mysterious land beyond the Passes of the North . 
 Kim have have many dealing with Mahbub in his little life , 
 especially between his tenth and his thirteenth year - and the 
 big burly Afghan , his beard dye scarlet with lime   for he be 
 elderly and do not wish his grey hair to show , know the boy 's 
 value as a gossip . sometimes he would tell Kim to watch a man who 
 have nothing whatever to do with horse : to follow he for one 
 whole day and report every soul with whom he talk . Kim would 
 deliver himself of his tale at evening , and Mahbub would listen 
 without a word or gesture . it be intrigue of some kind , Kim 
 know ; but its worth lie in say nothing whatever to anyone 
 except Mahbub , who give he beautiful meal all hot from the 
 cookshop at the head of the serai , and once as much as eight 
 annas in money . 
 ' he be here , ' say Kim , hit a bad - temper camel on the nose . 
 ' Ohe . Mahbub Ali ! ' he halt at a dark arch and slip behind 
 the bewildered lama . 
 the horse - trader , his deep , embroider Bokhariot belt unloose , 
 be lie on a pair of silk carpet saddle - bag , pull lazily at 
 an immense silver hookah . he turn his head very slightly at the 
 cry ; and see only the tall silent figure , chuckle in his 
 deep chest . 
 ' Allah ! a lama ! a red Lama ! it be far from Lahore to the Passes . 
 what dost thou do here ? ' 
 the lama hold out the begging - bowl mechanically . 
 ' God 's curse on all unbeliever ! ' say Mahbub . ' I do not give to 
 a lousy Tibetan ; but ask my Baltis over yonder behind the camel . 
 they may value your blessing . oh , horseboy , here be a 
 countryman of your . see if he be hungry . ' 
 a shaven , crouch Balti , who have come down with the horse , and 
 who be nominally some sort of degrade Buddhist , fawn upon the 
 priest , and in thick guttural besought the Holy One to sit at 
 the horseboy ' fire . 
 ' go ! ' say Kim , push he lightly , and the lama stride away , 
 leave Kim at the edge of the cloister . 
 ' go ! ' say Mahbub Ali , return to his hookah . ' Little Hindu , 
 run away . God 's curse on all unbeliever ! beg from those of my 
 tail who be of thy faith . ' 
 ' Maharaj , ' whine Kim , use the Hindu form of address , and 
 thoroughly enjoy the situation ; ' my father be dead - my mother 
 be dead - my stomach be empty . ' 
 ' beg from my man among the horse , I say . there must be some 
 Hindus in my tail . ' 
 ' oh , Mahbub Ali , but be I a Hindu ? ' say Kim in English . 
 the trader give no sign of astonishment , but look under shaggy 
 eyebrow . 
 ' Little Friend of all the world , ' say he , ' what be this ? ' 
 ' nothing . I be now that holy man 's disciple ; and we go a 
 pilgrimage together - to Benares , he say . he be quite mad , and I 
 be tired of Lahore city . I wish new air and water . ' 
 ' but for whom dost thou work ? why come to I ? ' the voice be 
 harsh with suspicion . 
 ' to whom else should I come ? I have no money . it be not good to 
 go about without money . thou wilt sell many horse to the 
 officer . they be very fine horse , these new one : I have see 
 they . give I a rupee , Mahbub Ali , and when I come to my wealth I 
 will give thee a bond and pay . ' 
 ' um ! ' say Mahbub Ali , think swiftly . ' thou hast never before 
 lie to I . call that lama - stand back in the dark . ' 
 ' oh , our tale will agree , ' say Kim , laugh . 
 ' we go to Benares , ' say the lama , as soon as he understand the 
 drift of Mahbub Ali 's question . ' the boy and I , I go to seek for 
 a certain River . ' 
 ' maybe - but the boy ? ' 
 ' he be my disciple . he be send , I think , to guide I to that 
 River . sit under a gun be I when he come suddenly . such 
 thing have befall the fortunate to whom guidance be allow . 
 but I remember now , he say he be of this world - a Hindu . ' 
 ' and his name ? ' 
 ' that I do not ask . be he not my disciple ? ' 
 ' his country - his race - his village ? Mussalman - Sikh Hindu - 
 Jain - low caste or high ? ' 
 ' why should I ask ? there be neither high nor low in the middle 
 Way . if he be my chela - do - will - can anyone take he from 
 I ? for , look you , without he I shall not find my River . ' he 
 wag his head solemnly . 
 ' none shall take he from thee . go , sit among my baltis , ' say 
 Mahbub Ali , and the lama drift off , soothe by the promise . 
 ' be he not quite mad ? ' say Kim , come forward to the light 
 again . ' why should I lie to thee , Hajji ? ' 
 Mahbub puff his hookah in silence . then he begin , almost 
 whispering : ' Umballa be on the road to Benares - if indeed ye two 
 go there . ' 
 ' Tck ! Tck ! I tell thee he do not know how to lie - as we two 
 know . ' 
 ' and if thou wilt carry a message for I as far as Umballa , I 
 will give thee money . it concern a horse - a white stallion 
 which I have sell to an officer upon the last time I return 
 from the Passes . but then - stand near and hold up hand as 
 beg -the pedigree of the white stallion be not fully 
 establish , and that officer , who be now at Umballa , bid I 
 make it clear . '   Mahbub here describe the horse and the 
 appearance of the officer .   ' so the message to that officer will 
 be : " the pedigree of the white stallion be fully establish . " by 
 this will he know that thou comest from I . he will then say 
 " what proof hast thou ? " and thou wilt answer : " Mahbub Ali have 
 give I the proof . " ' 
 ' and all for the sake of a white stallion , ' say Kim , with a 
 giggle , his eye aflame . 
 ' that pedigree I will give thee now - in my own fashion and some 
 hard word as well . ' a shadow pass behind Kim , and a feeding 
 camel . Mahbub Ali raise his voice . 
 ' Allah ! art thou the only beggar in the city ? Thy mother be dead . 
 Thy father be dead . so be it with all of they . well , well - ' 
 he turn as feel on the floor beside he and toss a flap of 
 soft , greasy Mussalman bread to the boy . ' go and lie down among 
 my horseboy for tonight - thou and the lama . tomorrow I may give 
 thee service . ' 
 Kim slunk away , his tooth in the bread , and , as he expect , he 
 find a small wad of fold tissue - paper wrap in oilskin , with 
 three silver rupee - enormous largesse . he smile and thrust 
 money and paper into his leather amulet - case . the lama , 
 sumptuously feed by Mahbub 's Baltis , be already asleep in a 
 corner of one of the stall . Kim lie down beside he and laugh . 
 he know he have render a service to Mahbub Ali , and not for one 
 little minute do he believe the tale of the stallion 's pedigree . 
 but Kim do not suspect that Mahbub Ali , know as one of the good 
 horse - dealer in the Punjab , a wealthy and enterprise trader , 
 whose caravan penetrate far and far into the back of Beyond , 
 be register in one of the locked book of the Indian Survey 
 Department as C25 IB . twice or thrice yearly C25 would send in a 
 little story , baldly tell but most interesting , and generally - 
 it be check by the statement of R17 and m4 - quite true . it 
 concern all manner of out - of - the - way mountain principality , 
 explorer of nationality other than English , and the guntrade - 
 be , in brief , a small portion of that vast mass of ' information 
 receive ' on which the indian Government act . but , recently , 
 five confederate king , who have no business to confederate , have 
 be inform by a kindly Northern Power that there be a leakage 
 of news from their territory into British India . so those 
 king ' Prime Ministers be seriously annoy and take step , 
 after the oriental fashion . they suspect , among many other , 
 the bullying , red - bearded horsedealer whose caravan plough 
 through their fastness belly - deep in snow . at least , his 
 caravan that season have be ambush and shoot at twice on the 
 way down , when Mahbub 's man account for three strange ruffian 
 who might , or might not , have be hire for the job . therefore 
 Mahbub have avoid halt at the insalubrious city of Peshawur , 
 and have come through without stop to Lahore , where , know his 
 country - people , he anticipate curious development . 
 and there be that on Mahbub Ali which he do not wish to keep an 
 hour long than be necessary - a wad of closely fold tissue- 
 paper , wrap in oilskin - an impersonal , unaddresse statement , 
 with five microscopic pin - hole in one corner , that most 
 scandalously betray the five confederate king , the 
 sympathetic Northern Power , a Hindu banker in Peshawur , a firm of 
 gun - maker in Belgium , and an important , semi - independent 
 mohammedan ruler to the south . this last be R17 's work , which 
 Mahbub have pick up beyond the Dora Pass and be carry in for 
 R17 , who , owe to circumstance over which he have no control , 
 could not leave his post of observation . Dynamite be milky and 
 innocuous beside that report of C25 ; and even an oriental , with 
 an oriental 's view of the value of time , could see that the 
 soon it be in the proper hand the well . Mahbub have no 
 particular desire to die by violence , because two or three family 
 blood - feud across the Border hang unfinished on his hand , and 
 when these score be clear he intend to settle down as a 
 more or less virtuous citizen . he have never pass the serai gate 
 since his arrival two day ago , but have be ostentatious in 
 send telegram to Bombay , where he bank some of his money ; 
 to Delhi , where a sub - partner of his own clan be sell horse 
 to the agent of a Rajputana state ; and to Umballa , where an 
 Englishman be excitedly demand the pedigree of a white 
 stallion . the public letter - writer , who know English , compose 
 excellent telegram , such as : ' Creighton , Laurel Bank , Umballa . 
 horse be arabian as already advise . Sorrowful delay pedigree 
 which be translate . ' and later to the same address : ' much 
 sorrowful delay . will forward pedigree . ' to his sub - partner at 
 Delhi he wire : ' Lutuf Ullah . have wire two thousand rupee your 
 credit Luchman Narain 's bank- ' this be entirely in the way of 
 trade , but every one of those telegram be discuss and re- 
 discuss , by party who conceive themselves to be interested , 
 before they go over to the railway station in charge of a 
 foolish Balti , who allow all sort of people to read they on 
 the road . 
 when , in Mahbub 's own picturesque language , he have muddy the 
 well of inquiry with the stick of precaution , Kim have drop on 
 he , send from Heaven ; and , be as prompt as he be 
 unscrupulous , Mahbub Ali use to take all sort of gusty 
 chance , press he into service on the spot . 
 a wandering lama with a low - caste boy - servant might attract a 
 moment 's interest as they wander about India , the land of 
 pilgrim ; but no one would suspect they or , what be more to the 
 point , rob . 
 he call for a new light - ball to his hookah , and consider the 
 case . if the bad come to the bad , and the boy come to harm , 
 the paper would incriminate nobody . and he would go up to Umballa 
 leisurely and - at a certain risk of exciting fresh suspicion - 
 repeat his tale by word of mouth to the people concern . 
 but R17 's report be the kernel of the whole affair , and it would 
 be distinctly inconvenient if that fail to come to hand . 
 however , God be great , and Mahbub Ali feel he have do all he 
 could for the time be . Kim be the one soul in the world who 
 have never tell he a lie . that would have be a fatal blot on 
 Kim 's character if Mahbub have not know that to other , for his 
 own end or Mahbub 's business , Kim could lie like an oriental . 
 then Mahbub Ali roll across the serai to the Gate of the 
 Harpies who paint their eye and trap the stranger , and be at 
 some pain to call on the one girl who , he have reason to believe , 
 be a particular friend of a smooth - faced Kashmiri pundit who have 
 waylay his simple Balti in the matter of the telegram . it be 
 an utterly foolish thing to do ; because they fall to drink 
 perfume brandy against the Law of the Prophet , and Mahbub grow 
 wonderfully drunk , and the gate of his mouth be loosen , and 
 he pursue the Flower of Delight with the foot of intoxication 
 till he fall flat among the cushion , where the Flower of 
 Delight , aid by a smooth - faced Kashmiri pundit , search he 
 from head to foot most thoroughly . 
 about the same hour Kim hear soft foot in Mahbub 's deserted 
 stall . the horse - trader , curiously enough , have leave his door 
 unlocked , and his man be busy celebrate their return to India 
 with a whole sheep of Mahbub 's bounty . a sleek young gentleman 
 from Delhi , arm with a bunch of key which the Flower have 
 unshackle from the senseless one 's belt , go through every 
 single box , bundle , mat , and saddle - bag in Mahbub 's possession 
 even more systematically than the Flower and the pundit be 
 search the owner . 
 ' and I think . ' say the Flower scornfully an hour later , one 
 rounded elbow on the snore carcass , ' that he be no more than a 
 pig of an afghan horse - dealer , with no thought except woman and 
 horse . moreover , he may have send it away by now - if ever there 
 be such a thing . ' 
 ' Nay - in a matter touch five king it would be next his black 
 heart , ' say the pundit . ' be there nothing ? ' 
 the Delhi man laugh and resettle his turban as he enter . ' I 
 search between the sol of his slipper as the Flower search 
 his clothe . this be not the man but another . I leave little 
 unseen . ' 
 ' they do not say he be the very man , ' say the pundit 
 thoughtfully . ' they say , " look if he be the man , since our 
 counsel be troubled . " ' 
 ' that North country be full of horse - dealer as an old coat of 
 lice . there be Sikandar Khan , Nur Ali Beg , and Farrukh Shah all 
 head of kafilas   caravans   - who deal there , ' say the Flower . 
 ' they have not yet come in , ' say the pundit . ' Thou must ensnare 
 they later . ' 
 Phew ! ' say the Flower with deep disgust , roll Mahbub 's head 
 from her lap . ' I earn my money . Farrukh Shah be a bear , Ali Beg a 
 swashbuckler , and old Sikandar Khan - yaie ! go ! I sleep now . this 
 swine will not stir till dawn . ' 
 when Mahbub wake , the Flower talk to he severely on the sin of 
 drunkenness . asiatic do not wink when they have outmanoeuvre an 
 enemy , but as Mahbub Ali clear his throat , tighten his belt , 
 and stagger forth under the early morning star , he come very 
 near to it . 
 ' what a colt 's trick ! ' say he to himself . ' as if every girl in 
 Peshawur do not use it ! but ' twa prettily do . now God he 
 know how many more there be upon the Road who have order to 
 test I - perhaps with the knife . so it stand that the boy must 
 go to Umballa - and by rail - for the writing be something 
 urgent . I abide here , follow the Flower and drink wine as 
 an afghan coper should . ' 
 he halt at the stall next but one to his own . his man lay there 
 heavy with sleep . there be no sign of Kim or the lama . 
 ' up ! ' he stir a sleeper . ' Whither go those who lay here last 
 even - the lama and the boy ? be aught miss ? ' 
 ' Nay , ' grunt the man , ' the old madman rise at second cockcrow 
 say he would go to Benares , and the young one lead he away . ' 
 ' the curse of Allah on all unbeliever ! ' say Mahbub heartily , 
 and climb into his own stall , growl in his beard . 
 but it be Kim who have waken the lama - Kim with one eye lay 
 against a knot - hole in the planking , who have see the Delhi man 's 
 search through the box . this be no common thief that turn 
 over letter , bill , and saddle - no mere burglar who run a 
 little knife sideways into the sol of Mahbub 's slipper , or 
 pick the seam of the saddle - bag so deftly . at first Kim have 
 be minded to give the alarm - the long - draw 
 choor - choor ! 
  thief ! thief !   that set the serai ablaze of night ; but he 
 look more carefully , and , hand on amulet , draw his own 
 conclusion . 
 ' it must be the pedigree of that make - up horse - lie , ' say he , 
 ' the thing that I carry to Umballa . well that we go now . those 
 who search bag with knife may presently search belly with 
 knife . surely there be a woman behind this . Hai ! Hai ! in a 
 whisper to the light - sleep old man . ' come . it be time - time 
 to go to Benares . ' 
 the lama rise obediently , and they pass out of the serai like 
 shadow . 
 chapter 2 
 and whoso will , from Pride release ; 
 Contemning neither creed nor priest , 
 may feel the Soul of all the East . 
 about he at Kamakura . 
 Buddha at Kamakura . 
 they enter the fort - like railway station , black in the end of 
 night ; the electric sizzle over the good - yard where they 
 handle the heavy northern grain - traffic . 
 ' this be the work of devil ! ' say the lama , recoil from the 
 hollow echo darkness , the glimmer of rail between the masonry 
 platform , and the maze of girder above . he stand in a gigantic 
 stone hall pave , it seem , with the sheeted dead third - class 
 passenger who have take their ticket overnight and be 
 sleep in the waiting - room . all hour of the twenty - four be 
 alike to Orientals , and their passenger traffic be regulate 
 accordingly . 
 ' this be where the fire - carriage come . one stand behind that 
 hole ' - Kim point to the ticket - office - ' who will give thee a 
 paper to take thee to Umballa . ' 
 ' but we go to Benares , ' he reply petulantly . 
 ' all one . benare then . quick : she come ! ' 
 ' take thou the purse . ' 
 the lama , not so well use to train as he have pretend , start 
 as the 3.25 a.m. south - bind roar in . the sleeper spring to 
 life , and the station fill with clamour and shouting , cry of 
 water and sweetmeat vendor , shout of native policeman , and 
 shrill yell of woman gather up their basket , their family , 
 and their husband . 
 ' it be the train - only the te - rain . it will not come here . 
 wait ! ' amazed at the lama 's immense simplicity   he have hand 
 he a small bag full of rupee , Kim ask and pay for a ticket 
 to Umballa . a sleepy clerk grunt and fling out a ticket to the 
 next station , just six mile distant . 
 ' Nay , ' say Kim , scan it with a grin . ' this may serve for 
 farmer , but I live in the city of Lahore . it be cleverly do , 
 Babu . now give the ticket to Umballa . ' 
 the Babu scowl and deal the proper ticket . 
 ' now another to Amritzar , ' say Kim , who have no notion of 
 spend Mahbub Ali 's money on anything so crude as a pay ride 
 to Umballa . ' the price be so much . the small money in return be 
 just so much . I know the way of the te - rain ... never do yogi 
 need chela as thou dost , ' he go on merrily to the bewildered 
 lama . ' they would have fling thee out at Mian Mir but for I . 
 this way ! come ! ' he return the money , keep only one anna in 
 each rupee of the price of the Umballa ticket as his commission - 
 the immemorial commission of Asia . 
 the lama jibbed at the open door of a crowded third - class 
 carriage . ' be it not well to walk ? ' say he weakly . 
 a burly Sikh artisan thrust forth his bearded head . ' be he 
 afraid ? do not be afraid . I remember the time when I be afraid 
 of the te - rain . enter ! this thing be the work of the Government . ' 
 ' I do not fear , ' say the lama . ' have ye room within for two ? ' 
 ' there be no room even for a mouse , ' shrill the wife of a 
 well - to - do cultivator - a Hindu Jat from the rich Jullundur , district . 
 our night train be not as well look after as the day one , 
 where the sex be very strictly keep to separate carriage . 
 ' oh , mother of my son , we can make space , ' say the blueturbane 
 husband . ' pick up the child . it be a holy man , see'st thou ? ' 
 ' and my lap full of seventy time seven bundle ! why not bid he 
 sit on my knee , Shameless ? but man be ever thus ! ' she look 
 round for approval . an Amritzar courtesan near the window sniff 
 behind her head drapery . 
 ' Enter ! enter ! ' cry a fat Hindu money - lender , his fold 
 account - book in a cloth under his arm . with an oily smirk : ' it be 
 well to be kind to the poor . ' 
 ' ay , at seven per cent a month with a mortgage on the unborn 
 calf , ' say a young Dogra soldier go south on leave ; and they 
 all laugh . 
 ' will it travel to benare ? ' say the lama . 
 ' assuredly . else why should we come ? enter , or we be leave , ' 
 cry Kim . 
 ' see ! ' shrill the Amritzar girl . ' he have never enter a train . 
 oh , see ! ' 
 ' Nay , help , ' say the cultivator , put out a large brown hand 
 and haul he in . ' thus be it do , father . ' 
 ' but - but - I sit on the floor . it be against the Rule to sit on 
 a bench , ' say the lama . ' moreover , it cramp I . ' 
 ' I say , ' begin the money - lender , purse his lip , ' that there be 
 not one rule of right living which these te - rain do not cause we 
 to break . we sit , for example , side by side with all caste and 
 people . ' 
 ' yea , and with most outrageously shameless one , ' say the wife , 
 scowl at the Amritzar girl make eye at the young sepoy . 
 ' I say we might have go by cart along the road , ' say the 
 husband , ' and thus have save some money . ' 
 ' yes - and spend twice over what we save on food by the way . 
 that be talk out ten thousand time . ' 
 ' ay , by ten thousand tongue , ' grunt he . 
 ' the Gods help we poor woman if we may not speak . Oho ! he be of 
 that sort which may not look at or reply to a woman . ' for the 
 lama , constrain by his Rule , take not the faint notice of 
 she . ' and his disciple be like he ? ' 
 ' nay , mother , ' say Kim most promptly . ' not when the woman be 
 well - look and above all charitable to the hungry . ' 
 ' a beggar 's answer , ' say the Sikh , laugh . ' thou hast bring 
 it on thyself , sister ! ' Kim 's hand be crook in supplication . 
 ' and whither goest thou ? ' say the woman , hand he the half of 
 a cake from a greasy package . 
 ' even to Benares . ' 
 ' juggler belike ? ' the young soldier suggest . ' have ye any 
 trick to pass the time ? why do not that yellow man answer ? ' 
 ' because , ' say Kim stoutly , ' he be holy , and think upon matter 
 hide from thee . ' 
 ' that may be well . we of the Ludhiana Sikhs ' - he roll it out 
 sonorously -'do not trouble our head with doctrine . we fight . ' 
 ' my sister 's brother 's son be naik   corporal   in that regiment , ' 
 say the Sikh craftsman quietly . ' there be also some Dogra 
 company there . ' the soldier glare , for a Dogra be of other 
 caste than a Sikh , and the banker titter . 
 ' they be all one to I , ' say the Amritzar girl . 
 ' that we believe , ' snort the cultivator 's wife malignantly . 
 ' Nay , but all who serve the Sirkar with weapon in their hand 
 be , as it be , one brotherhood . there be one brotherhood of the 
 caste , but beyond that again ' - she look round timidly -'the 
 bond of the Pulton - the Regiment - eh ? ' 
 ' my brother be in a Jat regiment , ' say the cultivator . ' Dogras 
 be good man . ' 
 ' Thy Sikhs at least be of that opinion , ' say the soldier , with 
 a scowl at the placid old man in the corner . ' Thy Sikhs think 
 so when our two company come to help they at the Pirzai Kotal 
 in the face of eight afridi standard on the ridge not three 
 month go . ' 
 he tell the story of a Border action in which the Dogra company 
 of the Ludhiana Sikhs have acquit themselves well . the Amritzar 
 girl smile ; for she know the talk 
 be to win her approval . 
 ' alas ! ' say the cultivator 's wife at the end . ' so their village 
 be burn and their little child make homeless ? ' 
 ' they have mark our dead . they pay a great payment after we of 
 the Sikhs have school they . so it be . be this Amritzar ? ' 
 ' ay , and here they cut our ticket , ' say the banker , fumble at 
 his belt . 
 the lamp be pal in the dawn when the half - caste guard come 
 round . ticket - collecting be a slow business in the East , where 
 people secrete their ticket in all sort of curious place . Kim 
 produce his and be tell to get out . 
 ' but I go to Umballa , ' he protest . ' I go with this holy man . ' 
 ' thou canst go to Jehannum for aught I care . this ticket be only - ' 
 Kim burst into a flood of tear , protest that the lama be his 
 father and his mother , that he be the prop of the lama 's 
 decline year , and that the lama would die without his care . 
 all the carriage bade the guard be merciful - the banker be 
 specially eloquent here - but the guard haul Kim on to the 
 platform . the lama blink - he could not overtake the situation 
 and Kim lift up his voice and weep outside the carriage 
 window . 
 ' I be very poor . my father be dead - my mother be dead . o 
 charitable one , if I be leave here , who shall tend that old man ? ' 
 ' what - what be this ? ' the lama repeat . ' he must go to Benares . 
 he must come with I . he be my chela . if there be money to be 
 pay - ' 
 ' oh , be silent , ' whisper Kim ; ' be we Rajahs to throw away good 
 silver when the world be so charitable ? ' 
 the Amritzar girl step out with her bundle , and it be on she 
 that Kim keep his watchful eye . lady of that persuasion , he 
 know , be generous . 
 ' a ticket - a little tikkut to Umballa - O Breaker of Hearts ! ' 
 she laugh . ' Hast thou no charity ? ' 
 ' do the holy man come from the North ? ' 
 ' from far and far in the North he come , ' cry Kim . ' from among 
 the hill . ' 
 ' there be snow among the pine - tree in the North - in the hill 
 there be snow . my mother be from Kulu . get thee a ticket . ask 
 he for a blessing . ' 
 ' ten thousand blessing , ' shrill Kim . ' o Holy One , a woman have 
 give we in charity so that I can come with thee - a woman with a 
 golden heart . I run for the tikkut . ' 
 the girl look up at the lama , who have mechanically follow Kim 
 to the platform . he bow his head that he might not see she , and 
 mutter in Tibetan as she pass on with the crowd . 
 ' light come - light go , ' say the cultivator 's wife viciously . 
 ' she have acquire merit , ' return the lama . ' beyond doubt it be 
 a nun . ' 
 ' there be ten thousand such nun in Amritzar alone . return , 
 old man , or the te - rain may depart without thee , ' cry the 
 banker . 
 ' not only be it sufficient for the ticket , but for a little food 
 also , ' say Kim , leap to his place . ' now eat , Holy One . look . 
 Day come ! ' 
 Golden , rise , saffron , and pink , the morning mist smoke away 
 across the flat green level . all the rich Punjab lie out in the 
 splendour of the keen sun . the lama flinch a little as the 
 telegraph - post swing by . 
 ' Great be the speed of the te - rain , ' say the banker , with a 
 patronizing grin . ' we have go far since Lahore than thou 
 couldst walk in two day : at even , we shall enter Umballa . ' 
 ' and that be still far from benare , ' say the lama wearily , 
 mumble over the cake that Kim offer . they all unloose their 
 bundle and make their morning meal . then the banker , the 
 cultivator , and the soldier prepare their pipe and wrap the 
 compartment in choke , acrid smoke , spit and cough and 
 enjoy themselves . the Sikh and the cultivator 's wife chew 
 pan ; the lama take snuff and tell his bead , while Kim , 
 cross - legged , smile over the comfort of a full stomach . 
 ' what river have ye by benare ? ' say the lama of a sudden to 
 the carriage at large . 
 ' we have Gunga , ' return the banker , when the little titter have 
 subside . 
 ' what other ? ' 
 ' what other than Gunga ? ' 
 ' Nay , but in my mind be the thought of a certain River of 
 healing . ' 
 ' that be Gunga . who bath in she be make clean and go to the 
 Gods . Thrice have I make pilgrimage to Gunga . ' he look round 
 proudly . 
 ' there be need , ' say the young sepoy drily , and the traveller ' 
 laugh turn against the banker . 
 ' Clean - to return again to the Gods , ' the lama mutter . ' and to 
 go forth on the round of life anew - still tie to the Wheel . ' 
 he shake his head testily . ' but maybe there be a mistake . who , 
 then , make Gunga in the beginning ? ' 
 ' the Gods . of what know faith art thou ? ' the banker say , 
 appalled . 
 ' I follow the Law - the most Excellent Law . so it be the Gods 
 that make Gunga . what like of Gods be they ? ' 
 the carriage look at he in amazement . it be inconceivable 
 that anyone should be ignorant of Gunga . 
 ' what - what be thy God ? ' say the money - lender at last . 
 ' hear ! ' say the lama , shift the rosary to his hand . ' hear : 
 for I speak of he now ! o people of Hind , listen ! ' 
 he begin in Urdu the tale of the Lord Buddha , but , bear by his 
 own thought , slide into tibetan and long - drone text from a 
 chinese book of the Buddha 's life . the gentle , tolerant folk 
 look on reverently . all India be full of holy man stammer 
 gospel in strange tongue ; shake and consume in the fire of 
 their own zeal ; dreamer , babbler , and visionary : as it have 
 be from the beginning and will continue to the end . 
 ' um ! ' say the soldier of the Ludhiana Sikhs . ' there be a 
 Mohammedan regiment lie next to we at the Pirzai Kotal , and a 
 priest of theirs - he be , as I remember , a naik - when the fit 
 be on he , spake prophecy . but the mad all be in God 's 
 keep . his officer overlook much in that man . ' 
 the lama fall back on Urdu , remember that he be in a strange 
 land . ' hear the tale of the Arrow which our Lord loose from the 
 bow , ' he say . 
 this be much more to their taste , and they listen curiously 
 while he tell it . ' now , o people of Hind , I go to seek that 
 River . know ye aught that may guide I , for we be all man and 
 woman in evil case . ' 
 ' there be Gunga - and Gunga alone - who wash away sin . ' run the 
 murmur round the carriage . 
 ' though past question we have good Gods Jullundur - way , ' say the 
 cultivator 's wife , look out of the window . ' see how they have 
 bless the crop . ' 
 ' to search every river in the Punjab be no small matter , ' say 
 her husband . ' for I , a stream that leave good silt on my land 
 suffice , and I thank Bhumia , the God of the home - stead . ' he 
 shrug one knot , bronzed shoulder . 
 ' think you our Lord come so far North ? ' say the lama , turn to 
 Kim . 
 ' it may be , ' Kim reply soothingly , as he spit red pan - juice on 
 the floor . 
 ' the last of the Great Ones , ' say the Sikh with authority , ' be 
 Sikander Julkarn   Alexander the Great . he pave the street of 
 Jullundur and build a great tank near Umballa . that pavement 
 hold to this day ; and the tank be there also . I never hear of 
 thy God . ' 
 ' let thy hair grow long and talk Punjabi , ' say the young soldier 
 jestingly to Kim , quote a northern proverb . ' that be all that 
 make a Sikh . ' but he do not say this very loud . 
 the lama sigh and shrink into himself , a dingy , shapeless mass . 
 in the pause of their talk they could hear the low droning ' om 
 mane pudme hum ! Om mane pudme hum ! ' - and the thick click of the 
 wooden rosary bead . 
 ' it irk I , ' he say at last . ' the speed and the clatter irk I . 
 moreover , my chela , I think that maybe we have over - pass that 
 River . ' 
 ' peace , peace , ' say Kim . ' be not the River near Benares ? we be 
 yet far from the place . ' 
 ' but - if our Lord come North , it may be any one of these little 
 one that we have run across . ' 
 ' I do not know . ' 
 ' but thou wast send to I - wast thou send to I ? - for the merit 
 I have acquire over yonder at such - zen . from beside the cannon 
 didst thou come - bear two face - and two garb . ' 
 ' Peace . one must not speak of these thing here , ' whisper Kim . 
 ' there be but one of I . think again and thou wilt remember . a 
 boy - a Hindu boy - by the great green cannon . ' 
 ' but be there not also an Englishman with a white beard holy 
 among image - who himself make more sure my assurance of the 
 River of the Arrow ? ' 
 ' he - we - go to the Ajaib - Gher in Lahore to pray before the 
 Gods there , ' Kim explain to the openly listen company . ' and 
 the Sahib of the Wonder House talk to he - yes , this be truth 
 as a brother . he be a very holy man , from far beyond the Hills . 
 Rest , thou . in time we come to Umballa . ' 
 ' but my River - the River of my healing ? ' 
 ' and then , if it please thee , we will go hunt for that River 
 on foot . so that we miss nothing - not even a little rivulet in a 
 field - side . ' 
 ' but thou hast a Search of thine own ? ' the lama - very pleased 
 that he remember so well - sit bolt upright . 
 ' ay , ' say Kim , humour he . the boy be entirely happy to be 
 out chew pan and see new people in the great good - temper 
 world . 
 ' it be a bull - a Red Bull that shall come and help thee and 
 carry thee - whither ? I have forget . a Red Bull on a green 
 field , be it not ? ' 
 ' Nay , it will carry I nowhere , ' say Kim . ' it be but a tale I 
 tell thee . ' 
 ' what be this ? ' the cultivator 's wife lean forward , her 
 bracelet clink on her arm . ' do ye both dream dream ? a Red 
 Bull on a green field , that shall carry thee to the heaven or 
 what ? be it a vision ? do one make a prophecy ? we have a Red 
 Bull in our village behind Jullundur city , and he graze by 
 choice in the very greenest of our field ! ' 
 ' give a woman an old wife 's tale and a weaver - bird a leaf and a 
 thread ' , they will weave wonderful thing , ' say the Sikh . ' all 
 holy man dream dream , and by follow holy man their disciple 
 attain that power . ' 
 ' a Red Bull on a green field , be it ? ' the lama repeat . ' in a 
 former life it may be thou hast acquire merit , and the Bull will 
 come to reward thee . ' 
 ' nay - nay - it be but a tale one tell to I - for a jest 
 belike . but I will seek the Bull about Umballa , and thou canst 
 look for thy River and rest from the clatter of the train . ' 
 ' it may be that the Bull know - that he be send to guide we 
 both . ' say the lama , hopefully as a child . then to the company , 
 indicate Kim : ' this one be send to I but yesterday . he be 
 not , I think , of this world . ' 
 ' beggar aplenty have I meet , and holy man to boot , but never such 
 a yogi nor such a disciple , ' say the woman . 
 her husband touch his forehead lightly with one finger 
 and smile . but the next time the lama would eat they take care 
 to give he of their good . 
 and at last - tired , sleepy , and dusty - they reach Umballa 
 City Station . 
 ' we abide here upon a law - suit , ' say the cultivator 's wife to 
 Kim . ' we lodge with my man 's cousin 's young brother . there be 
 room also in the courtyard for thy yogi and for thee . will - will 
 he give I a blessing ? ' 
 ' o holy man ! a woman with a heart of gold give we lodge for 
 the night . it be a kindly land , this land of the South . see how 
 we have be help since the dawn ! ' 
 the lama bow his head in benediction . 
 ' to fill my cousin 's young brother 's house with wastrel - ' the 
 husband begin , as he shoulder his heavy bamboo staff . 
 ' Thy cousin 's young brother owe my father 's cousin something 
 yet on his daughter 's marriage - feast , ' say the woman crisply . 
 ' let he put their food to that account . the yogi will beg , I 
 doubt not . ' 
 ' ay , I beg for he , ' say Kim , anxious only to get the lama under 
 shelter for the night , that he might seek Mahbub Ali 's Englishman 
 and deliver himself of the white stallion 's pedigree . 
 ' now , ' say he , when the lama have come to an anchor in the inner 
 courtyard of a decent Hindu house behind the cantonment , ' I go 
 away for a while - to - to buy we victual in the bazar . do not 
 stray abroad till I return . ' 
 ' thou wilt return ? thou wilt surely return ? ' the old man catch 
 at his wrist . ' and thou wilt return in this very same shape ? be 
 it too late to look tonight for the River ? ' 
 ' too late and too dark . be comfort . think how far thou art on 
 the road - an hundred mile from Lahore already . ' 
 ' yea - and far from my monastery . alas ! it be a great and 
 terrible world . ' 
 Kim steal out and away , as unremarkable a figure as ever carry 
 his own and a few score thousand other folk 's fate sling round 
 his neck . Mahbub Ali 's direction leave he little doubt of the 
 house in which his Englishman live ; and a groom , bring a dog- 
 cart home from the Club , make he quite sure . it remain only to 
 identify his man , and Kim slip through the garden hedge and 
 hide in a clump of plume grass close to the veranda . the house 
 blaze with light , and servant move about table dress with 
 flower , glass , and silver . presently forth come an Englishman , 
 dress in black and white , hum a tune . it be too dark to 
 see his face , so Kim , beggar - wise , try an old experiment . 
 ' Protector of the Poor ! ' 
 the man back towards the voice . 
 ' Mahbub Ali say - ' 
 ' hah ! what say Mahbub Ali ? ' he make no attempt to look for the 
 speaker , and that show Kim that he know . 
 ' the pedigree of the white stallion be fully establish . ' 
 ' what proof be there ? ' the Englishman switch at the rose - hedge 
 in the side of the drive . 
 ' Mahbub Ali have give I this proof . ' Kim flip the wad of 
 fold paper into the air , and it fall in the path beside the 
 man , who put his foot on it as a gardener come round the corner . 
 when the servant pass he pick it up , drop a rupee - Kim 
 could hear the clink - and strode into the house , never turn 
 round . Swiftly Kim take up the money ; but for all his training , 
 he be irish enough by birth to reckon silver the least part of 
 any game . what he desire be the visible effect of action ; so , 
 instead of slink away , he lie close in the grass and worm 
 nearer to the house . 
 he see - indian bungalow be open through and through - the 
 Englishman return to a small dressing - room , in a comer of the 
 veranda , that be half office , litter with paper and despatch- 
 box , and sit down to study Mahbub Ali 's message . his face , by 
 the full ray of the kerosene lamp , change and darken , and Kim , 
 use as every beggar must be to watch countenance , take good 
 note . 
 ' will ! will , dear ! ' call a woman 's voice . ' you ought to be in 
 the drawing - room . they will be here in a minute . ' 
 the man still read intently . 
 ' will ! ' say the voice , five minute later . ' he be come . I can 
 hear the trooper in the drive . ' 
 the man dash out bareheade as a big landau with four native 
 trooper behind it halt at the veranda , and a tall , black 
 haired man , erect as an arrow , swing out , precede by a young 
 officer who laugh pleasantly . 
 flat on his belly lie Kim , almost touch the high wheel . his 
 man and the black stranger exchange two sentence . 
 ' certainly , sir , ' say the young officer promptly . ' everything 
 wait while a horse be concern . ' 
 ' we shall not   be more than twenty minute , ' say Kim 's man . ' you can 
 do the honours -keep them amuse , and all that . ' 
 ' tell one of the trooper to wait , ' say the tall man , and they 
 both pass into the dressing - room together as the landau roll 
 away . Kim see their head bent over Mahbub Ali 's message , and 
 hear the voice - one low and deferential , the other sharp and 
 decisive . 
 ' it be not   a question of week . it be a question of day - hour 
 almost , ' say the elder . ' I have be expect it for some time , 
 but this ' - he tap Mahbub Ali 's paper - ' clinch it . Grogan 's 
 dining here to - night , be not   he ? ' 
 ' yes , sir , and Macklin too . ' 
 ' very good . I will speak to they myself . the matter will be 
 refer to the Council , of course , but this be a case where one 
 be justify in assume that we take action at once . warn the 
 Pined and Peshawar brigade . it will disorganize all the summer 
 relief , but we can not   help that . this come of not smash they 
 thoroughly the first time . eight thousand should be enough . ' 
 ' what about artillery , sir ? ' 
 ' I must consult Macklin . ' 
 ' then it mean war ? ' 
 ' no . punishment . when a man be bind by the action of his 
 predecessor - ' 
 ' but C25 may have lie . ' 
 ' he bear out the other 's information . practically , they show 
 their hand six month back . but Devenish would have it there be 
 a chance of peace . of course they use it to make themselves 
 strong . send off those telegram at once - the new code , not 
 the old - mine and Wharton 's . I do not   think we need keep the 
 lady wait any long . we can settle the rest over the 
 cigar . I think it be come . it be punishment - not war . ' 
 as the trooper canter off , Kim crawl round to the back of the 
 house , where , go on his Lahore experience , he judge there 
 would be food - and information . the kitchen be crowd with 
 excited scullion , one of whom kick he . 
 ' Aie , ' say Kim , feign tear . ' I come only to wash dish in 
 return for a bellyful . ' 
 ' all Umballa be on the same errand . get hence . they go in now 
 with the soup . think you that we who serve Creighton Sahib need 
 strange scullion to help we through a big dinner ? ' 
 ' it be a very big dinner , ' say Kim , look at the plate . 
 ' small wonder . the guest of honour be none other than the Jang - i- 
 Lat Sahib   the Commander - in - chief . ' 
 ' Ho ! ' say Kim , with the correct guttural note of wonder . he have 
 learn what he want , and when the scullion turn he be go . 
 ' and all that trouble , ' say he to himself , think as usual in 
 Hindustani , ' for a horse 's pedigree ! Mahbub Ali should have come 
 to I to learn a little lying . every time before that I have 
 bear a message it concern a woman . now it be man . well . the 
 tall man say that they will loose a great army to punish someone 
 - somewhere - the news go to Pindi and Peshawur . there be also 
 gun . would I have creep nearer . it be big news ! ' 
 he return to find the cultivator 's cousin 's young brother 
 discuss the family law - suit in all its bearing with the 
 cultivator and his wife and a few friend , while the lama doze . 
 after the evening meal some one pass he a water - pipe ; and Kim 
 feel very much of a man as he pull at the smooth coconut - shell , 
 his leg spread abroad in the moonlight , his tongue click in 
 remark from time to time . his host be most polite ; for the 
 cultivator 's wife have tell they of his vision of the Red Bull , 
 and of his probable descent from another world . moreover , the 
 lama be a great and venerable curiosity . 
 the family priest , an old , tolerant Sarsut Brahmin , drop in 
 later , and naturally start a theological argument to impress 
 the family . by creed , of course , they be all on their priest 's 
 side , but the lama be the guest and the novelty . his gentle 
 kindliness , and his impressive chinese quotation , that sound 
 like spell , delight they hugely ; and in this sympathetic , 
 simple air , he expand like the Bodhisat 's own lotus , speak 
 of his life in the great hill of such - zen , before , as he say , 
 ' I rise up to seek enlightenment . ' 
 then it come out that in those worldly day he have be a master- 
 hand at cast horoscope and nativity ; and the family priest 
 lead he on to describe his method ; each give the planet name 
 that the other could not understand , and point upwards as the 
 big star sail across the dark . the child of the house 
 tug unrebuked at his rosary ; and he clean forget the Rule 
 which forbid look at woman as he talk of endure snow , 
 landslip , block pass , the remote cliff where man find 
 sapphire and turquoise , and that wonderful upland road that 
 lead at last into Great China itself . 
 ' how think thou of this one ? ' say the cultivator aside to the 
 priest . 
 ' a holy man - a holy man indeed . his Gods be not the Gods , but 
 his foot be upon the way , ' be the answer . ' and his method of 
 nativity , though that be beyond thee , be wise and sure . ' 
 ' tell I , ' say Kim lazily , ' whether I find my Red Bull on a 
 green field , as be promise I . ' 
 ' what knowledge hast thou of thy birth - hour ? ' the priest ask , 
 swell with importance . 
 ' between first and second cockcrow of the first night in May . ' 
 ' of what year ? ' 
 ' I do not know ; but upon the hour that I cry first fall the 
 great earthquake in Srinagar which be in Kashmir . ' this Kim have 
 from the woman who take care of he , and she again from Kimball 
 O'Hara . the earthquake have be feel in India , and for long stand 
 a lead date in the Punjab . 
 ' ai ! ' say a woman excitedly . this seem to make Kim 's 
 supernatural origin more certain . " be not such an one 's daughter 
 bear then - ' 
 ' and her mother bear her husband four son in four year all 
 likely boy , ' cry the cultivator 's wife , sit outside the 
 circle in the shadow . 
 ' none rear in the knowledge , ' say the family priest , ' forget 
 how the planet stand in their house upon that night . ' he begin 
 to draw in the dust of the courtyard . ' at least thou hast good 
 claim to a half of the House of the Bull . how run thy prophecy ? ' 
 ' upon a day , ' say Kim , delight at the sensation he be 
 create , ' I shall be make great by mean of a Red Bull on a 
 green field , but first there will enter two man make all thing 
 ready . ' 
 ' yes : thus ever at the opening of a vision . a thick darkness that 
 clear slowly ; anon one enter with a broom make ready the 
 place . then begin the Sight . two man - thou sayest ? ay , ay . the 
 Sun , leave the House of the Bull , enter that of the Twins . 
 hence the two man of the prophecy . let we now consider . fetch I 
 a twig , little one . ' 
 he knit his brow , scratch , smooth out , and scratch 
 again in the dust mysterious sign - to the wonder of all save 
 the lama , who , with fine instinct , forbore to interfere . 
 at the end of half an hour , he toss the twig from he with a 
 grunt . 
 ' hm ! thus say the star . within three day come the two man to 
 make all thing ready . after they follow the Bull ; but the sign 
 over against he be the sign of War and armed man . ' 
 ' there be indeed a man of the Ludhiana Sikhs in the carriage 
 from Lahore , ' say the cultivator 's wife hopefully . 
 ' Tck ! armed man - many hundred . what concern hast thou with 
 war ? ' say the priest to Kim . ' thine be a red and an angry sign 
 of War to be loose very soon . ' 
 ' none - none . ' say the lama earnestly . ' we seek only peace and 
 our River . ' 
 Kim smile , remember what he have overhear in the dressing- 
 room . decidedly he be a favourite of the star . 
 the priest brush his foot over the rude horoscope . ' More than 
 this I can not see . in three day come the Bull to thee , boy . ' 
 ' and my River , my River , ' plead the lama . ' I have hop his Bull 
 would lead we both to the River . ' 
 ' alas , for that wondrous River , my brother , ' the priest reply . 
 ' such thing be not common . ' 
 next morning , though they be press to stay , the lama insist 
 on departure . they give Kim a large bundle of good food and 
 nearly three anna in copper money for the need of the road , and 
 with many blessing watch the two go southward in the dawn . 
 ' pity it be that these and such as these could not be free from - ' 
 ' Nay , then would only evil people be leave on the earth , and who 
 would give we meat and shelter ? ' quoth Kim , step merrily 
 under his burden . 
 ' yonder be a small stream . let we look , ' say the lama , and he 
 lead from the white road across the field ; walk into a very 
 hornet ' nest of pariah dog . 
 chapter 3 
 Yea , voice of every Soul that clung 
 to life that strove from rung to rung 
 when Devadatta 's rule be young , 
 the warm wind bring Kamakura . 
 Buddha at Kamakura . 
 behind they an angry farmer brandish a bamboo pole . he be a 
 market - gardener , Arain by caste , grow vegetable and flower 
 for Umballa city , and well Kim know the breed . 
 ' such an one , ' say the lama , disregard the dog , ' be impolite 
 to stranger , intemperate of speech and uncharitable . be warn 
 by his demeanour , my disciple . ' 
 ' ho , shameless beggar ! ' shout the farmer . ' begone ! get hence ! ' 
 ' we go , ' the lama return , with quiet dignity . ' we go from these 
 unblessed field . ' 
 ' ah , ' say Kim , suck in his breath . ' if the next crop fail , 
 thou canst only blame thine own tongue . ' 
 the man shuffle uneasily in his slipper . ' the land be full of 
 beggar , ' he begin , half apologetically . 
 ' and by what sign didst thou know that we would beg from thee , O 
 Mali ? ' say Kim tartly , use the name that a market - gardener 
 least like . ' all we seek be to look at that river beyond the 
 field there . ' 
 ' River , forsooth ! ' the man snort . ' what city do ye hail from 
 not to know a canal - cut ? it run as straight as an arrow , and I 
 pay for the water as though it be molten silver . there be a 
 branch of a river beyond . but if ye need water I can give that - 
 and milk . ' 
 ' Nay , we will go to the river , ' say the lama , stride out . 
 ' milk and a meal . ' the man stammer , as he look at the strange 
 tall figure . ' I - I would not draw evil upon myself - or my 
 crop . but beggar be so many in these hard day . ' 
 ' take notice . ' the lama turn to Kim . ' he be lead to speak 
 harshly by the Red Mist of anger . that clearing from his eye , he 
 become courteous and of an affable heart . may his field be 
 bless ! beware not to judge man too hastily , o farmer . ' 
 ' I have meet holy one who would have curse thee from hearthstone 
 to byre , ' say Kim to the abash man . ' be he not wise and holy ? 
 I be his disciple . ' 
 he cock his nose in the air loftily and step across the 
 narrow field - border with great dignity . 
 ' there be no pride , ' say the lama , after a pause , ' there be no 
 pride among such as follow the Middle Way . ' 
 ' but thou hast say he be low - caste and discourteous . ' 
 ' low - caste I do not say , for how can that be which be not ? 
 afterwards he amend his discourtesy , and I forget the offence . 
 moreover , he be as we be , bind upon the Wheel of Things ; but he 
 do not tread the way of deliverance . ' he halt at a little 
 runlet among the field , and consider the hoof - pit bank . 
 ' now , how wilt thou know thy River ? ' say Kim , squat in the 
 shade of some tall sugar - cane . 
 ' when I find it , an enlightenment will surely be give . this , I 
 feel , be not the place . o littlest among the water , if only thou 
 couldst tell I where run my River ! but be thou blessed to make 
 the field bear ! ' 
 ' look ! look ! ' Kim spring to his side and drag he back . a 
 yellow - and - brown streak glide from the purple rustling stem to 
 the bank , stretch its neck to the water , drank , and lie still - 
 a big cobra with fix , lidless eye . 
 ' I have no stick - I have no stick , ' say Kim . ' 1 will get I one 
 and break his back . ' 
 ' why ? he be upon the Wheel as we be - a life ascend or 
 descending - very far from deliverance . great evil must the soul 
 have do that be cast into this shape . ' 
 ' I hate all snake , ' say Kim . no native training can quench the 
 white man 's horror of the Serpent . 
 ' let he live out his life . ' the coiled thing hiss and half 
 open its hood . ' may thy release come soon , brother ! ' the lama 
 continue placidly . ' hast thou knowledge , by chance , of my 
 River ? ' 
 ' never have I see such a man as thou art , ' Kim whisper , 
 overwhelmed . ' do the very snake understand thy talk ? ' 
 ' who know ? ' he pass within a foot of the cobra 's poise head . 
 it flatten itself among the dusty coil . 
 ' come , thou ! ' he call over his shoulder . 
 ' not I , ' say Kim ' . ' I go round . ' 
 ' come . he do no hurt . ' 
 Kim hesitate for a moment . the lama back his order by some 
 drone chinese quotation which Kim take for a charm . he obey 
 and bound across the rivulet , and the snake , indeed , make no 
 sign . 
 ' never have I see such a man . ' Kim wipe the sweat from his 
 forehead . ' and now , whither go we ? ' 
 ' that be for thee to say . I be old , and a stranger - far from my 
 own place . but that the rail - carriage fill my head with noise of 
 devil - drum I would go in it to benare now ... yet by so go 
 we may miss the River . let we find another river . ' 
 where the hard - work soil give three and even four crop a year 
 through patch of sugar - cane , tobacco , long white radish , 
 and nol - kol , all that day they stroll on , turn aside to 
 every glimpse of water ; rouse village dog and sleeping 
 village at noonday ; the lama reply to the volley question 
 with an unswerve simplicity . they seek a River : a River of 
 miraculous healing . have any one knowledge of such a stream ? 
 sometimes man laugh , but more often hear the story out to the 
 end and offer they a place in the shade , a drink of milk , and a 
 meal . the woman be always kind , and the little child as 
 child be the world over , alternately shy and venturesome . 
 evening find they at rest under the village tree of a mud - wall , mud - roof hamlet , talk to 
 the headman as the cattle 
 come in from the grazing - ground and the woman prepare the day 's 
 last meal . they have pass beyond the belt of market - garden 
 round hungry Umballa , and be among the mile - wide green of the 
 staple crop . 
 he be a white - bearded and affable elder , use to entertain 
 stranger . he drag out a string bedstead for the lama , set 
 warm cook food before he , prepare he a pipe , and , the 
 evening ceremony be finish in the village temple , send for 
 the village priest . 
 Kim tell the old child tale of the size and beauty of 
 Lahore , of railway travel , and such - like city thing , while the 
 man talk , slowly as their cattle chew the cud . 
 ' I can not fathom it , ' say the headman at last to the priest . 
 ' how read thou this talk ? ' the lama , his tale tell , be 
 silently tell his bead . 
 ' he be a Seeker . ' the priest answer . ' the land be full of such . 
 remember he who come only last , month - the fakir with the 
 tortoise ? ' 
 ' ay , but that man have right and reason , for Krishna himself 
 appear in a vision promise he Paradise without the burning- 
 pyre if he journey to Prayag . this man seek no God who be 
 within my knowledge . ' 
 ' peace , he be old : he come from far off , and he be mad , ' the 
 smooth - shaven priest reply . ' hear I . ' he turn to the lama . 
 ' three koss   six mile   to the westward run the great road to 
 Calcutta . ' 
 ' but I would go to Benares - to Benares . ' 
 ' and to Benares also . it cross all stream on this side of 
 Hind . now my word to thee , Holy One , be rest here till tomorrow . 
 then take the road '   it be the Grand Trunk Road he mean   ' and 
 test each stream that it overpasse ; for , as I understand , the 
 virtue of thy River lie neither in one pool nor place , but 
 throughout its length . then , if thy god will , be assure that 
 thou wilt come upon thy freedom . ' 
 ' that be well say . ' the lama be much impressed by the plan . ' we 
 will begin tomorrow , and a blessing on thee for show old foot 
 such a near road . ' a deep , sing - song chinese half - chant close 
 the sentence . even the priest be impressed , and the headman 
 fear an evil spell : but none could look at the lama 's simple , 
 eager face and doubt he long . 
 ' seest thou my chela ? ' he say , dive into his snuff - gourd with 
 an important sniff . it be his duty to repay courtesy with 
 courtesy . 
 ' I see - and hear . ' the headman roll his eye where Kim be 
 chat to a girl in blue as she lay crackling thorn on a 
 fire . 
 ' he also have a search of his own . no river , but a Bull . Yea , a 
 Red Bull on a green field will some day raise he to honour . he 
 be , I think , not altogether of this world . he be send of a 
 sudden to aid I in this search , and his name be Friend of all 
 the World . ' 
 the priest smile . ' ho , there , Friend of all the world , ' he cry 
 across the sharp - smell smoke , ' what art thou ? ' 
 ' this Holy One 's disciple , ' say Kim . 
 ' he say thou be a but   a spirit . ' 
 ' can but eat ? ' say Kim , with a twinkle . ' for I be hungry . ' 
 ' it be no jest , ' cry the lama . ' a certain astrologer of that city 
 whose name I have forget - ' 
 ' that be no more than the city of Umballa where we sleep last 
 night , ' Kim whisper to the priest . 
 ' ay , Umballa be it ? he cast a horoscope and declare that my 
 chela should find his desire within two day . but what say he of 
 the meaning of the star , Friend of all the World ? ' 
 Kim clear his throat and look around at the village 
 greybeard . 
 ' the meaning of my Star be War , ' he reply pompously . 
 somebody laugh at the little tattered figure strut on the 
 brickwork plinth under the great tree . where a native would have 
 lain down , Kim 's white blood set he upon his foot . 
 ' ay , War , ' he answer . 
 ' that be a sure prophecy , ' rumble a deep voice . ' for there be 
 always war along the border - as I know . ' 
 it be an old , withered man , who have serve the Government in the 
 day of the Mutiny as a native officer in a newly raise cavalry 
 regiment . the Government have give he a good holding in the 
 village , and though the demand of his son , now grey - bearded 
 officer on their own account , have impoverish he , he be still 
 a person of consequence . english official - Deputy Commissioners 
 even - turn aside from the main road to visit he , and on those 
 occasion he dress himself in the uniform of ancient day , and 
 stand up like a ramrod . 
 ' but this shall be a great war - a war of eight thousand . ' Kim 's 
 voice shrill across the quick - gather crowd , astonishing 
 himself . 
 ' Redcoats or our own regiment ? ' the old man snap , as though 
 he be ask an equal . his tone make man respect Kim . 
 ' Redcoats , ' say Kim at a venture . ' redcoat and gun . ' 
 ' but - but the astrologer say no word of this , ' cry the lama , 
 snuff prodigiously in his excitement . 
 ' but I know . the word have come to I , who be this Holy One 's 
 disciple . there will rise a war - a war of eight thousand redcoat . 
 from Pindi and Peshawur they will be draw . this be 
 sure . ' 
 ' the boy have hear bazar - talk , ' say the priest . 
 ' but he be always by my side , ' say the lama . ' how should he know ? 
 I do not know . ' 
 ' he will make a clever juggler when the old man be dead , ' mutter 
 the priest to the headman . ' what new trick be this ? ' 
 ' a sign . give I a sign , ' thunder the old soldier suddenly . ' if 
 there be war my son would have tell I . ' 
 ' when all be ready , thy son , doubt not , will be tell . but it be a 
 long road from thy son to the man in whose hand these thing 
 lie . ' Kim warm to the game , for it remind he of experience 
 in the letter - carry line , when , for the sake of a few pice , he 
 pretend to know more than he know . but now he be play for 
 large thing - the sheer excitement and the sense of power . he 
 draw a new breath and go on . 
 ' old man , give I a sign . do underling order the going of eight 
 thousand redcoat - with gun ? ' 
 ' no . ' still the old man answer as though Kim be an equal . 
 ' dost thou know who he be , then , that give the order ? ' 
 ' I have see he . ' 
 ' to know again ? ' 
 ' I have know he since he be a lieutenant in the topkhana   the 
 Artillery . ' 
 ' a tall man . a tall man with black hair , walk thus ? ' Kim take 
 a few pace in a stiff , wooden style . 
 ' ay . but that anyone may have see . ' the crowd be breathless - 
 still through all this talk . 
 ' that be true , ' say Kim . ' but I will say more . look now . first 
 the great man walk thus . then he think thus . '   Kim draw a 
 forefinger over his forehead and downward till it come to rest 
 by the angle of the jaw .   ' Anon he twitch his finger thus . 
 Anon he thrust his hat under his left armpit . ' Kim illustrate 
 the motion and stand like a stork . 
 the old man groan , inarticulate with amazement ; and the crowd 
 shiver . 
 ' so - so - so . but what do he when he be about to give an order ? ' 
 ' he rub the skin at the back of his neck - thus . then fall one 
 finger on the table and he make a small sniff noise through 
 his nose . then he speak , say : " Loose such and such a regiment . 
 call out such gun . " ' 
 the old man rise stiffly and salute . 
 ' " for " ' - Kim translate into the vernacular the clinching 
 sentence he have hear in the dressing - room at Umballa - ' " for , " 
 say he , " we should have do this long ago . it be not war - it be 
 a chastisement . snff ! " ' 
 ' Enough . I believe . I have see he thus in the smoke of battle . 
 see and hear . it be he ! ' 
 ' I see no smoke ' - Kim 's voice shift to the rapt sing - song of the 
 wayside fortune - teller . ' I see this in darkness . first come a man 
 to make thing clear . then come horseman . then come he stand in 
 a ring of light . the rest follow as I have say . old man , have I 
 speak truth ? ' 
 ' it be he . past all doubt it be he . ' 
 the crowd draw a long , quaver breath , star alternately at the 
 old man , still at attention , and rag Kim against the purple 
 twilight . 
 ' say I not - say I not he be from the other world ? ' cry the 
 lama proudly . ' he be the Friend of all the World . he be the 
 Friend of the Stars ! ' 
 ' at least it do not concern we , ' a man cry . ' o thou young 
 soothsayer , if the gift abide with thee at all season , I have a 
 red - spot cow . she may be sister to thy Bull for aught I know - ' 
 ' or I care , ' say Kim . ' my star do not concern themselves with thy 
 cattle . ' 
 ' Nay , but she be very sick , ' a woman strike in . ' my man be a 
 buffalo , or he would have choose his word well . tell I if she 
 recover ? ' 
 have Kim be at all an ordinary boy , he would have carry on the 
 play ; but one do not know Lahore city , and least of all the 
 fakir by the Taksali Gate , for thirteen year without also know 
 human nature . 
 the priest look at he sideways , something bitterly - a dry and 
 blight smile . 
 ' be there no priest , then , in the village ? I think I have see a 
 great one even now , ' cry Kim . 
 ' ay - but - ' the woman begin . 
 ' but thou and thy husband hop to get the cow cure for a handful 
 of thank . ' the shot tell : they be notoriously the close - fiste 
 couple in the village . ' it be not well to cheat the temple . give a 
 young calf to thine own priest , and , unless thy Gods be angry past 
 recall , she will give milk within a month . ' 
 ' a master - beggar art thou , ' purr the priest approvingly . ' not the 
 cunning of forty year could have do well . surely thou hast 
 make the old man rich ? ' 
 ' a little flour , a little butter and a mouthful of cardamom , ' Kim 
 retort , flush with the praise , but still cautious - ' do one 
 grow rich on that ? and , as thou canst see , he be mad . but it serve 
 I while I learn the road at least . " 
 he know what the fakir of the Taksali Gate be like when they 
 talk among themselves , and copy the very inflection of their 
 lewd disciple . 
 ' be his search , then , truth or a cloak to other end ? it may be 
 treasure . ' 
 ' he be mad - many time mad . there be nothing else . ' 
 here the old soldier bobble up and ask if Kim would accept his 
 hospitality for the night . the priest recommend he to do so , but 
 insist that the honour of entertain the lama belong to the 
 temple - at which the lama smile guilelessly . Kim glance from one 
 face to the other , and draw his own conclusion . 
 ' where be the money ? ' he whisper , beckon the old man off into 
 the darkness . 
 ' in my bosom . where else ? ' 
 ' give it I . quietly and swiftly give it I . ' 
 ' but why ? here be no ticket to buy . ' 
 ' be I thy chela , or be I not ? do I not safeguard thy old foot about 
 the way ? give I the money and at dawn I will return it . ' he 
 slip his hand above the lama 's girdle and bring away the 
 purse . 
 ' be it so - be it so . ' the old man nod his head . ' this be a 
 great and terrible world . I never know there be so many man alive 
 in it . ' 
 next morning the priest be in a very bad temper , but the lama be 
 quite happy ; and Kim have enjoy a most interesting evening with 
 the old man , who bring out his cavalry sabre and , balance it on 
 his dry knee , tell tale of the Mutiny and young captain thirty 
 year in their graf , till Kim drop off to sleep . 
 ' certainly the air of this country be good , ' say the lama . ' I 
 sleep lightly , as do all old man ; but last night I sleep unwake 
 till broad day . even now I be heavy . ' 
 ' drink a draught of hot milk , ' say Kim , who have carry not a few 
 such remedy to opium - smoker of his acquaintance . ' it be time to 
 take the Road again . ' 
 ' the long road that overpasse all the river of Hind , ' say the 
 lama gaily . ' let we go . but how think thou , chela , to recompense 
 these people , and especially the priest , for their great kindness ? 
 truly they be but parast , but in other life , maybe , they will 
 receive enlightenment . a rupee to the temple ? the thing within be 
 no more than stone and red paint , but the heart of man we must 
 acknowledge when and where it be good . ' 
 ' Holy One , hast thou ever take the Road alone ? ' Kim look up 
 sharply , like the indian crow so busy about the field . 
 ' surely , child : from Kulu to Pathankot - from Kulu , where my first 
 chela die . when man be kind to we we make offering , and all man 
 be well - dispose throughout all the Hills . ' 
 ' it be otherwise in Hind , ' say Kim drily . ' their Gods be many- 
 armed and malignant . let they alone . ' 
 ' I would set thee on thy road for a little , Friend of all the World , 
 thou and thy yellow man . ' the old soldier amble up the village 
 street , all shadowy in the dawn , on a punt , scissor - hock pony . 
 ' last night break up the fountain of remembrance in my so - dry 
 heart , and it be as a blessing to I . truly there be war abroad in 
 the air . I smell it . see ! I have bring my sword . ' 
 he sit long - legged on the little beast , with the big sword at his 
 side - hand drop on the pommel - star fiercely over the flat 
 land towards the North . ' tell I again how he show in thy 
 vision . come up and sit behind I . the beast will carry two . ' 
 ' I be this Holy One 's disciple , ' say Kim , as they clear the 
 village - gate . the villager seem almost sorry to be rid of they , 
 but the priest 's farewell be cold and distant . he have waste some 
 opium on a man who carry no money . 
 ' that be well speak . I be not much use to holy man , but respect 
 be always good . there be no respect in these day - not even when 
 a Commissioner Sahib come to see I . but why should one whose 
 Star lead he to war follow a holy man ? ' 
 ' but he be a holy man , ' say Kim earnestly . ' in truth , and in talk 
 and in act , holy . he be not like the other . I have never see such 
 an one . we be not fortune - teller , or juggler , or beggar . ' 
 ' thou art not . that I can see . but I do not know that other . he 
 march well , though . ' 
 the first freshness of the day carry the lama forward with long , 
 easy , camel - like stride . he be deep in meditation , mechanically 
 click his rosary . 
 they follow the rutted and worn country road that wound across 
 the flat between the great dark - green mango - grove , the line of the 
 snowcappe Himalayas faint to the eastward . all India be at work 
 in the field , to the creaking of well - wheel , the shouting of 
 plowman behind their cattle , and the clamour of the crow . even 
 the pony feel the good influence and almost break into a trot as 
 Kim lay a hand on the stirrup - leather . 
 ' it repent I that I do not give a rupee to the shrine , ' say the 
 lama on the last bead of his eighty - one . 
 the old soldier growl in his beard , so that the lama for the 
 first time be aware of he . 
 ' seek thou the River also ? ' say he , turn . 
 ' the day be new , ' be the reply . ' what need of a river save to 
 water at before sundown ? I come to show thee a short lane to the 
 Big Road . ' 
 ' that be a courtesy to be remember , o man of good will . but why 
 the sword ? ' 
 the old soldier look as abash as a child interrupt in his 
 game of make - believe . 
 ' the sword , ' he say , fumble it . ' oh , that be a fancy of mine 
 an old man 's fancy . truly the police order be that no man must 
 bear weapon throughout Hind , but ' - he cheer up and slap the 
 hilt - ' all the constabeel hereabout know I . ' 
 ' it be not a good fancy , ' say the lama . ' what profit to kill man ? ' 
 ' very little - as I know ; but if evil man be not now and then 
 slay it would not be a good world for weaponless dreamer . I do 
 not speak without knowledge who have see the land from Delhi south 
 awash with blood . ' 
 ' what madness be that , then ? ' 
 ' the Gods , who send it for a plague , alone know . a madness eat 
 into all the Army , and they turn against their officer . that 
 be the first evil , but not past remedy if they have then hold their 
 hand . but they choose to kill the Sahibs ' wife and child . then 
 come the Sahibs from over the sea and call they to most strict 
 account . ' 
 ' some such rumour , I believe , reach I once long ago . they 
 call it the Black Year , as I remember . ' 
 ' what manner of life hast thou lead , not to know the Year ? a rumour 
 indeed ! all earth know , and tremble ! ' 
 ' our earth never shake but once - upon the day that the Excellent 
 one receive Enlightenment . ' 
 ' Umph ! I see Delhi shake at least- and Delhi be the navel of the 
 world . ' 
 ' so they turn against woman and child ? that be a bad deed , 
 for which the punishment can not be avoid . ' 
 ' many strove to do so , but with very small profit . I be then in 
 a regiment of cavalry . it break . of six hundred and eighty sabre 
 stand fast to their salt - how many , think you ? three . of whom I 
 be one . ' 
 ' the great merit . ' 
 ' Merit ! we do not consider it merit in those day . my people , my 
 friend , my brother fall from I . they say : " the time of the 
 English be accomplish . let each strike out a little holding for 
 himself . " but I have talk with the man of Sobraon , of 
 Chilianwallah , of Moodkee and Ferozeshah . I say : " abide a little 
 and the wind turn . there be no blessing in this work . " in those 
 day I ride seventy mile with an English Memsahib and her babe on 
 my saddle - bow .   wow ! that be a horse fit for a man !   I place they 
 in safety , and back come I to my officer - the one that be not 
 kill of our five . " give I work , " say I , " for I be an outcast 
 among my own kind , and my cousin 's blood be wet on my sabre . " " be 
 content , " say he . " there be great work forward . when this madness 
 be over there be a recompense . " ' 
 ' ay , there be a recompense when the madness be over , surely ? ' the 
 lama mutter half to himself . 
 ' they do not hang medal in those day on all who by accident have 
 hear a gun fire . no ! in nineteen pitch battle be I ; in six- 
 and - forty skirmish of horse ; and in small affair without number . 
 nine wound I bear ; a medal and four clasp and the medal of an 
 Order , for my captain , who be now general , remember I when 
 the Kaisar - i - Hind have accomplish fifty year of her reign , and 
 all the land rejoice . they say : " give he the Order of Berittish 
 India . " I carry it upon my neck now . I have also my jaghir 
  holding   from the hand of the State - a free gift to I and mine . 
 the man of the old day -they be now commissioner - come riding 
 to I through the crop - high upon horse so that all the village 
 see - and we talk out the old skirmish , one dead man 's name 
 lead to another . ' 
 ' and after ? ' say the lama . 
 ' oh , afterwards they go away , but not before my village have see . ' 
 ' and at the last what wilt thou do ? ' 
 ' at the last I shall die . ' 
 ' and after ? ' 
 ' let the Gods order it . I have never pester they with prayer . 
 I do not think they will pester I . look you , I have notice in my 
 long life that those who eternally break in upon those Above with 
 complaint and report and bellowing and weeping be presently 
 send for in haste , as our Colonel use to send for slack - jaw 
 down - country man who talk too much . no , I have never weary the 
 Gods . they will remember this , and give I a quiet place where I 
 can drive my lance in the shade , and wait to welcome my son : I 
 have no less than three Rissaldar - major all - in the regiment . ' 
 ' and they likewise , bind upon the Wheel , go forth from life to 
 life - from despair to despair , ' say the lama below his breath , 
 ' hot , uneasy , snatch . ' 
 ' ay , ' the old soldier chuckle . ' three Rissaldar -major in three 
 regiment . gambler a little , but so be I. they must be well 
 mount ; and one can not take the horse as in the old day one take 
 woman . well , well , my holding can pay for all . how think thou ? 
 it be a well - water strip , but my man cheat I . I do not know how 
 to ask save at the lance 's point . ugh ! I grow angry and I curse 
 they , and they feign penitence , but behind my back I know they call 
 I a toothless old ape . ' 
 ' Hast thou never desire any other thing ? ' 
 ' yes - yes - a thousand time ! a straight back and a close - cling 
 knee once more ; a quick wrist and a keen eye ; and the marrow that 
 make a man . oh , the old day - the good day of my strength ! ' 
 ' that strength be weakness . ' 
 ' it have turn so ; but fifty year since I could have prove it 
 otherwise , ' the old soldier retort , drive his stirrup - edge into 
 the pony 's lean flank . 
 ' but I know a River of great healing . ' 
 ' I have drink Gunga - water to the edge of dropsy . all she give I 
 be a flux , and no sort of strength . ' 
 ' it be not Gunga . the River that I know wash from all taint of 
 sin . ascend the far bank one be assure of Freedom . I do not 
 know thy life , but thy face be the face of the honourable and 
 courteous . thou hast clung to thy Way , render fidelity when it 
 be hard to give , in that Black Year of which I now remember 
 other tale . enter now upon the Middle Way which be the path to 
 Freedom . hear the most Excellent Law , and do not follow dream . ' 
 ' speak , then , old man , ' the soldier smile , half salute . ' we be 
 all babbler at our age . ' 
 the lama squat under the shade of a mango , whose shadow play 
 checkerwise over his face ; the soldier sit stiffly on the pony ; 
 and Kim , make sure that there be no snake , lie down in the 
 crotch of the twisted root . 
 there be a drowsy buzz of small life in hot sunshine , a cooing 
 of dove , and a sleepy drone of well - wheel across the field . 
 slowly and impressively the lama begin . at the end of ten minute 
 the old soldier slide from his pony , to hear well as he say , 
 and sit with the rein round his wrist . the lama 's voice falter , 
 the period lengthen . Kim be busy watch a grey squirrel . 
 when the little scold bunch of fur , close press to the 
 branch , disappear , preacher and audience be fast asleep , the 
 old officer 's strong - cut head pillow on his arm , the lama 's 
 throw back against the tree - bole , where it show like yellow 
 ivory . a naked child toddle up , star , and , move by some quick 
 impulse of reverence , make a solemn little obeisance before the 
 lama - only the child be so short and fat that it topple over 
 sideways , and Kim laugh at the sprawling , chubby leg . the 
 child , scared and indignant , yell aloud . 
 ' Hai ! Hai ! ' say the soldier , leap to his foot . ' what be it ? 
 what order ? ... it be ... a child ! I dream it be an alarm . 
 little one - little one - do not cry . have I sleep ? that be 
 discourteous indeed ! ' 
 ' I fear ! I be afraid ! ' roar the child . 
 ' what be it to fear ? two old man and a boy ? how wilt thou ever make 
 a soldier , princele ? ' 
 the lama have wake too , but , take no direct notice of the child , 
 click his rosary . 
 ' what be that ? ' say the child , stop a yell midway . ' I have 
 never see such thing . give they I . ' 
 ' aha . ' say the lama , smile , and trail a loop of it on the 
 grass : 
 this be a handful of cardamom , 
 this be a lump of ghi : 
 this be millet and chilli and rice , 
 a supper for thee and I ! 
 the child shriek with joy , and snatch at the dark , glancing 
 bead . 
 ' Oho ! ' say the old soldier . ' whence hadst thou that song , despiser 
 of this world ? ' 
 ' I learn it in Pathankot - sit on a doorstep , ' say the lama 
 shyly . ' it be good to be kind to babe . ' 
 ' as I remember , before the sleep come on we , thou hadst tell I 
 that marriage and bearing be darkener of the true light , 
 stumble - block upon the Way . do child drop from Heaven in thy 
 country ? be it the way to sing they song ? ' 
 ' no man be all perfect , ' say the lama gravely , recoil the 
 rosary . ' run now to thy mother , little one . ' 
 ' hear he ! ' say the soldier to Kim . ' he be ashamed for that he have 
 make a child happy . there be a very good householder lose in thee , 
 my brother . Hai , child ! ' he throw it a pice . ' sweetmeat be always 
 sweet . ' and as the little figure caper away into the sunshine : 
 ' they grow up and become man . Holy One , I grieve that I sleep in 
 the midst of thy preaching . forgive I . ' 
 ' we be two old man , ' say the lama . ' the fault be mine . I listen 
 to thy talk of the world and its madness , and one fault lead to the 
 next . ' 
 ' hear he ! what harm do thy Gods suffer from play with a babe ? and 
 that song be very well sung . let we go on and I will sing thee the 
 song of Nikal Seyn before Delhi - the old song . ' 
 and they fare out from the gloom of the mango tope , the old man 's 
 high , shrill voice ring across the field , as wail by long - draw 
 wail he unfold the story of Nikal Seyn   Nicholson   - the song 
 that man sing in the Punjab to this day . Kim be delighted , and the 
 lama listen with deep interest . 
 ' Ahi ! Nikal Seyn be dead - he die before Delhi ! lance of the 
 North , take vengeance for Nikal Seyn . ' he quaver it out to the 
 end , mark the trill with the flat of his sword on the pony 's 
 rump . 
 ' and now we come to the Big Road , ' say he , after receive the 
 compliment of Kim ; for the lama be markedly silent . ' it be long 
 since I have ride this way , but thy boy 's talk stir I . see , 
 Holy One - the Great Road which be the backbone of all Hind . for 
 the most part it be shade , as here , with four line of tree ; the 
 middle road - all hard - take the quick traffic . in the day before 
 rail - carriage the Sahibs travel up and down here in hundred . 
 now there be only country - cart and such like . left and right be 
 the rougher road for the heavy cart - grain and cotton and timber , 
 fodder , lime and hide . a man go in safety here for at every few 
 koss be a police - station . the police be thief and extortioner 
  I myself would patrol it with cavalry - young recruit under a 
 strong captain , but at least they do not suffer any rival . all 
 caste and kind of man move here . 
 ' look ! brahmin and chumar , banker and tinker , barber and 
 bunnia , pilgrim 
 and potter - all the world go and come . it 
 be to I as a river from which I be withdraw like a log after a 
 flood . ' 
 and truly the Grand Trunk Road be a wonderful spectacle . it run 
 straight , bear without crowd India 's traffic for fifteen 
 hundred mile - such a river of life as nowhere else exist in 
 the world . they look at the green - arched , shade - fleck length 
 of it , the white breadth speckle with slow - pacing folk ; and the 
 two - room police - station opposite . 
 ' who bear arm against the law ? ' a constable call out 
 laughingly , as he catch sight of the soldier 's sword . ' be not 
 the police enough to destroy evil - doer ? ' 
 ' it be because of the police I buy it , ' be the answer . ' do 
 all go well in Hind ? ' 
 ' Rissaldar Sahib , all go well . ' 
 ' I be like an old tortoise , look you , who put his head out from 
 the bank and draw it in again . ay , this be the Road of Hindustan . 
 all man come by this way ... ' 
 ' Son of a swine , be the soft part of the road mean for thee to 
 scratch thy back upon ? Father of all the daughter of shame and 
 husband of ten thousand virtueless one , thy mother be devote 
 to a devil , be lead thereto by her mother . Thy aunt have never 
 have a nose for seven generation ! thy sister - what owl 's folly 
 tell thee to draw thy cart across the road ? a broken wheel ? then 
 take a broken head and put the two together at leisure ! ' 
 the voice and a venomous whip - cracking come out of a pillar of 
 dust fifty yard away , where a cart have break down . a thin , high 
 Kathiawar mare , with eye and nostril aflame , rocket out of 
 the jam , snort and wince as her rider bend she across the 
 road in chase of a shout man . he be tall and grey - bearded , 
 sit the almost mad beast as a piece of she , and scientifically 
 lash his victim between plunge . 
 the old man 's face light with pride . ' my child ! ' say he briefly , and 
 strove to rein the pony 's neck to a fitting arch . 
 ' be I to be beat before the police ? ' cry the carter . ' Justice ! 
 I will have Justice - ' 
 ' be I to be block by a shouting ape who upset ten thousand sack 
 under a young horse 's nose ? that be the way to ruin a mare . ' 
 ' he speak truth . he speak truth . but she follow her man close , ' 
 say the old man . the carter run under the wheel of his cart and 
 thence threaten all sort of vengeance . 
 ' they be strong man , thy son , ' say the policeman serenely , 
 pick his tooth . 
 the horseman deliver one last vicious cut with his whip and come 
 on at a canter . 
 ' my father ! ' he reign back ten yard and dismount . 
 the old man be off his pony in an instant , and they embrace as do 
 father and son in the East . 
 chapter 4 
 Good Luck , she be never a lady , 
 but the cursed quean alive , 
 Tricksy , wincing , and jady - 
 Kittle to lead or drive . 
 Greet she - she be hail a stranger ! 
 meet she - she be busking to leave ! 
 let she alone for a shrew to the bone 
 and the hussy come pluck your sleeve ! 
 Largesse ! Largesse , o Fortune ! 
 give or hold at your will . 
 if I have   no care for Fortune , 
 Fortune must follow I still ! 
 the Wishing - Caps . 
 then , lower their voice , they speak together . Kim come to rest 
 under a tree , but the lama tug impatiently at his elbow . 
 ' let we go on . the River be not here . ' 
 ' Hai mai ! have we not walk enough for a little ? our River will 
 not run away . Patience , and he will give we a dole . ' 
 ' this . ' say the old soldier suddenly , ' be the Friend of the Stars . 
 he bring I the news yesterday . have see the very man himself , 
 in a vision , give order for the war . ' 
 ' hm ! ' say his son , all deep in his broad chest . ' he come by a 
 bazar - rumour and make profit of it . ' 
 his father laugh . ' at least he do not ride to I beg for a 
 new charger , and the Gods know how many rupee . be thy brother ' 
 regiment also under order ? ' 
 ' I do not know . I take leave and come swiftly to thee in case - ' 
 ' in case they run before thee to beg . o gambler and spendthrift 
 all ! but thou hast never yet ride in a charge . a good horse be 
 need there , truly . a good follower and a good pony also for the 
 marching . let we see - let we see . ' he thrum on the pommel . 
 ' this be no place to cast account in , my father . let we go to thy 
 house . ' 
 ' at least pay the boy , then : I have no pice with I , and he bring 
 auspicious news . Ho ! friend of all the World , a war be toward as 
 thou hast say . ' 
 ' Nay , as I know , the war , ' return Kim composedly . 
 ' eh ? ' say the lama , finger his bead , all eager for the road . 
 ' my master do not trouble the star for hire . we bring the news 
 bear witness , we bring the news , and now we go . ' Kim half - crook 
 his hand at his side . 
 the son toss a silver coin through the sunlight , grumble 
 something about beggar and juggler . it be a four - anna piece , and 
 would feed they well for day . the lama , see the flash of the 
 metal , drone a blessing . 
 ' go thy way , Friend of all the world , ' pip the old soldier , 
 wheel his scrawny mount . ' for once in all my day I have meet a 
 true prophet - who be not in the Army . ' 
 Father and son swing round together : the old man sit as erect 
 as the young . 
 a Punjabi constable in yellow linen trouser slouch across the 
 road . he have see the money pass . 
 ' halt ! ' he cry in impressive English . ' know ye not that there be 
 a takkus of two anna a head , which be four anna , on those who 
 enter the Road from this side - road ? it be the order of the Sirkar , 
 and the money be spend for the planting of tree and the 
 beautification of the way . ' 
 ' and the belly of the police , ' say Kim , slip out of arm 's 
 reach . ' consider for a while , man with a mud head . think you we 
 come from the near pond like the frog , thy father - in - law ? Hast 
 thou ever hear the name of thy brother ? ' 
 ' and who be he ? leave the boy alone , ' cry a senior constable , 
 immensely delight , as he squat down to smoke his pipe in the 
 veranda . 
 ' he take a label from a bottle of belaitee - pani   soda - water , and , 
 affix it to a bridge , collect taxis for a month from those who 
 pass , say that it be the Sirkar 's order . then come an 
 Englishman and break his head . ah , brother , I be a town - crow , not a 
 village - crow ! ' 
 the policeman draw back abash , and Kim hoot at he all down the 
 road . 
 ' be there ever such a disciple as I ? ' he cry merrily to the 
 lama . ' all earth would have pick thy bone within ten mile of 
 Lahore city if I have not guard thee . ' 
 ' I consider in my own mind whether thou art a spirit , sometimes , or 
 sometimes an evil imp , ' say the lama , smile slowly . 
 ' I be thy chela . ' Kim drop into step at his side - that 
 indescribable gait of the long - distance tramp all the world over . 
 ' now let we walk , ' mutter the lama , and to the click of his 
 rosary they walk in silence mile upon mile . the lama as usual , 
 be deep in meditation , but Kim 's bright eye be open wide . this 
 broad , smile river of life , he consider , be a vast improvement 
 on the cramped and crowded Lahore street . there be new people 
 and new sight at every stride - caste he know and cast that 
 be altogether out of his experience . 
 they meet a troop of long - haired , strong - scented Sansis with basket 
 of lizard and other unclean food on their back , their lean dog 
 sniff at their heel . these people keep their own side of the 
 road ' , move at a quick , furtive jog - trot , and all other caste 
 give they ample room ; for the Sansi be deep pollution . behind they , 
 walk wide and stiffly across the strong shadow , the memory of 
 his leg - iron still on he , stride one newly release from the 
 jail ; his full stomach and shiny skin to prove that the Government 
 feed its prisoner well than most honest man could feed 
 themselves . Kim know that walk well , and make broad jest of it as 
 they pass . then an Akali , a wild - eye , wild - haired Sikh devotee 
 in the blue - check clothe of his faith , with polished - steel 
 quoit glisten on the cone of his tall blue turban , stalk 
 past , return from a visit to one of the independent Sikh States , 
 where he have be sing the ancient glory of the Khalsa to 
 College - train princeling in top - boot and white - cord breech . 
 Kim be careful not to irritate that man ; for the Akali 's temper be 
 short and his arm quick . here and there they meet or be overtake 
 by the gaily dress crowd of whole village turn out to some 
 local fair ; the woman , with their babe on their hip , walk 
 behind the man , the old boy prance on stick of sugar - cane , 
 drag rude brass model of locomotive such as they sell for a 
 halfpenny , or flash the sun into the eye of their better from 
 cheap toy mirror . one could see at a glance what each have buy ; 
 and if there be any doubt it need only to watch the wife 
 compare , brown arm against brown arm , the newly purchase dull 
 glass bracelet that come from the North - West . these merry - maker 
 step slowly , call one to the other and stop to haggle 
 with sweetmeat - seller , or to make a prayer before one of the 
 wayside shrine - sometimes Hindu , sometimes Mussalman - which the 
 low - caste of both creed share with beautiful impartiality . a solid 
 line of blue , rise and fall like the back of a caterpillar in 
 haste , would swing up through the quivering dust and trot past to a 
 chorus of quick cackling . that be a gang of changar - the woman 
 who have take all the embankment of all the northern railway 
 under their charge - a flat - footed , big - bosomed , strong - limbe , 
 blue - petticoate clan of earth - carrier , hurry north on news of 
 a job , and waste no time by the road . they belong to the caste 
 whose man do not count , and they walk with square elbow , 
 swing hip , and head on high , as suit woman who carry heavy 
 weight . a little later a marriage procession would strike into the 
 Grand Trunk with music and shouting , and a smell of marigold and 
 jasmine strong even than the reek of the dust . one could see the 
 bride 's litter , a blur of red and tinsel , stagger through the 
 haze , while the bridegroom 's bewreathed pony turn aside to snatch 
 a mouthful from a pass fodder - cart . then Kim would join the 
 kentish - fire of good wish and bad joke , wish the couple a 
 hundred son and no daughter , as the saying be . still more 
 interesting and more to be shout over it be when a stroll 
 juggler with some half - train monkey , or a panting , feeble bear , 
 or a woman who tie goat ' horn to her foot , and with these dance 
 on a slack - rope , set the horse to shying and the woman to shrill , 
 long - draw quaver of amazement . 
 the lama never raise his eye . he do not note the money - lender on 
 his goose - rumpe pony , hasten along to collect the cruel 
 interest ; or the long - shout , deep - voice little mob -still in 
 military formation - of native soldier on leave , rejoice to be 
 rid of their breech and puttee , and say the most outrageous 
 thing to the most respectable woman in sight . even the seller of 
 Ganges - water he do not see , and Kim expect that he would at 
 least buy a bottle of that precious stuff . he look steadily at 
 the ground , and strode as steadily hour after hour , his soul busy 
 elsewhere . but Kim be in the seventh heaven of joy . the Grand Trunk 
 at this point be build on an embankment to guard against 
 winter flood from the foothill , so that one walk , as it be , a 
 little above the country , along a stately corridor , see all 
 India spread out to leave and right . it be beautiful to behold the 
 many - yoke grain and cotton wagon crawl over the country road : 
 one could hear their axle , complain a mile away , come nearer , 
 till with shout and yell and bad word they climb up the steep 
 incline and plunge on to the hard main road , carter reviling 
 carter . it be equally beautiful to watch the people , little clump 
 of red and blue and pink and white and saffron , turn aside to go 
 to their own village , disperse and grow small by two and 
 three across the level plain . Kim feel these thing , though he 
 could not give tongue to his feeling , and so content himself 
 with buy peel sugar - cane and spit the pith generously 
 about his path . from time to time the lama take snuff , and at last 
 Kim could endure the silence no long . 
 ' this be a good land - the land of the South ! ' say he . ' the air be 
 good ; the water be good . eh ? ' 
 ' and they be all bind upon the Wheel , ' say the lama . ' bind from 
 life after life . to none of these have the way be show . ' he shake 
 himself back to this world . 
 ' and now we have walk a weary way , ' say Kim . ' surely we shall 
 soon come to a parao   a resting - place . shall we stay there ? look , 
 the sun be slop . ' 
 ' who will receive we this evening ? ' 
 ' that be all one . this country be full of good folk . besides ' he 
 sink his voice beneath a whisper - ' we have money . ' 
 the crowd thicken as they near the resting - place which mark 
 the end of their day 's journey . a line of stall sell very 
 simple food and tobacco , a stack of firewood , a police - station , a 
 well , a horse - trough , a few tree , and , under they , some trample 
 ground dot with the black ash of old fire , be all that mark 
 a parao on the Grand Trunk ; if you except the beggar and the crow 
 - both hungry . 
 by this time the sun be drive broad golden spoke through the 
 low branch of the mango - tree ; the parakeet and dove be 
 come . home in their hundred ; the chattering , grey - back Seven 
 Sisters , talk over the day 's adventure , walk back and forth 
 in two and three almost under the foot of the traveller ; and 
 shuffling and scuffling in the branch show that the bat be 
 ready to go out on the night - picket . swiftly the light gather 
 itself together , paint for an instant the face and the 
 cartwheel and the bullock ' horn as red as blood . then the night 
 fall , change the touch of the air , draw a low , even haze , like 
 a gossamer veil of blue , across the face of the country , and 
 bring out , keen and distinct , the smell of wood - smoke and cattle 
 and the good scent of wheaten cake cook on ash . the evening 
 patrol hurry out of the police - station with important coughing 
 and reiterate order ; and a live charcoal ball in the cup of a 
 wayside carter 's hookah glow red while Kim 's eye mechanically 
 watch the last flicker of the sun on the brass tweezer . 
 the life of the parao be very like that of the Kashmir Serai on a 
 small scale . Kim dive into the happy asiatic disorder which , if 
 you only allow time , will bring you everything that a simple man 
 need . 
 his want be few , because , since the lama have no caste scruple , 
 cook food from the near stall would serve ; but , for luxury 's 
 sake , Kim buy a handful of dung - cake to build a fire . all 
 about , come and go round the little flame , man cry for oil , 
 or grain , or sweetmeat , or tobacco , jostle one another while 
 they wait their turn at the well ; and under the man 's voice you 
 hear from halted , shutter cart the high squeal and giggle of 
 woman whose face should not be see in public . 
 nowadays , well - educate native be of opinion that when their 
 womenfolk travel - and they visit a good deal - it be well to 
 take they quickly by rail in a properly screen compartment ; and 
 that custom be spread . but there be always those of the old 
 rock who hold by the use of their forefather ; and , above all , 
 there be always the old woman - more conservative than the man - 
 who toward the end of their day go on a pilgrimage . they , be 
 withered and undesirable , do not , under certain circumstance , 
 object to unveil . after their long seclusion , during which they 
 have always be in business touch with a thousand outside 
 interest , they love the bustle and stir of the open road , the 
 gathering at the shrine , and the infinite possibility of gossip 
 with like - minded dowager . very often it suit a longsuffering 
 family that a strong - tongue , iron - willed old lady should disport 
 herself about India in this fashion ; for certainly pilgrimage be 
 grateful to the Gods . so all about India , in the most remote 
 place , as in the most public , you find some knot of grizzle 
 servitor in nominal charge of an old lady who be more or less 
 curtain and hide away in a bullock - cart . such man be staid and 
 discreet , and when a european or a high - caste native be near will 
 net their charge with most elaborate precaution ; but in the 
 ordinary haphazard chance of pilgrimage the precaution be not 
 take . the old lady be , after all , intensely human , and live to 
 look upon life . 
 Kim mark down a gaily ornament ruth or family bullock - cart , 
 with a broidered canopy of two dome , like a double - humped camel , 
 which have just be draw into the par . eight man make its retinue , 
 and two of the eight be arm with rusty sabre - sure sign that 
 they follow a person of distinction , for the common folk do not 
 bear arm . an increase cackle of complaint , order , and jest , 
 and what to a European would have be bad language , come from 
 behind the curtain . here be evidently a woman use to command . 
 Kim look over the retinue critically . half of they be thin- 
 legged , grey - bearded Ooryas from down country . the other half be 
 duffle - clothe , feel - hat hillman of the North ; and that mixture 
 tell its own tale , even if he have not overhear the incessant 
 spar between the two division . the old lady be go south on 
 a visit - probably to a rich relative , most probably to a son - in- 
 law , who have send up an escort as a mark of respect . the hillman 
 would be of her own people - Kulu or Kangra folk . it be quite 
 clear that she be not take her daughter down to be wed , or 
 the curtain would have be lace home and the guard would have 
 allow no one near the car . a merry and a high - spirited dame , 
 think Kim , balance the dung - cake in one hand , the cook food 
 in the other , and pilot the lama with a nudging shoulder . 
 something might be make out of the meeting . the lama would give he 
 no help , but , as a conscientious chela , Kim be delighted to beg 
 for two . 
 he build his fire as close to the cart as he dare , wait for one 
 of the escort to order he away . the lama drop wearily to the 
 ground , much as a heavy fruit - eat bat cower , and return to 
 his rosary . 
 ' stand far off , beggar ! ' the order be shout in break 
 Hindustani by one of the hillman . 
 ' huh ! it be only a pahari   a hillman ' , say Kim over his shoulder . 
 ' since when have the hill - ass own all Hindustan ? ' 
 the retort be a swift and brilliant sketch of Kim 's pedigree for 
 three generation . 
 ' ah ! ' Kim 's voice be sweet than ever , as he break the dung - cake 
 into fit piece . ' in my country we call that the beginning of love - talk . ' 
 a harsh , thin cackle behind the curtain put the hillman on his 
 mettle for a second shot . 
 ' not so bad - not so bad , ' say Kim with calm . ' but have a care , my 
 brother , lest we - we , I say - be minded to give a curse or so in 
 return . and our curse have the knack of bite home . ' 
 the Ooryas laugh ; the hillman spring forward threateningly . the 
 lama suddenly raise his head , bring his huge tam - o'-shanter hat 
 into the full light of Kim 's new - start fire . 
 ' what be it ? ' say he . 
 the man halt as though strike to stone . ' I - I - be save from a 
 great sin , ' he stammer . 
 ' the foreigner have find he a priest at last , ' whisper one of 
 the Ooryas . 
 ' Hai ! why be that beggar - brat not well beat ? ' the old woman 
 cry . 
 the hillman draw back to the cart and whisper something to the 
 curtain . there be dead silence , then a muttering . 
 ' this go well , ' think Kim , pretend neither to see nor hear . 
 ' when - when - he have eat ' - the hillman fawn on Kim - ' it - it 
 be request that the Holy One will do the honour to talk to one 
 who would speak to he . ' 
 ' after he have eat he will sleep , ' Kim return loftily . he could 
 not quite see what new turn the game have take , but stand resolute 
 to profit by it . ' now I will get he his food . ' the last sentence , 
 speak loudly , end with a sigh as of faintness . 
 ' i - I myself and the other of my people will look to that - if it 
 be permit . ' 
 ' it be permit , ' say Kim , more loftily than ever . ' Holy One , 
 these people will bring we food . ' 
 ' the land be good . all the country of the South be good - a great 
 and a terrible world , ' mumble the lama drowsily . 
 ' let he sleep , ' say Kim , ' but look to it that we be well feed 
 when he wake . he be a very holy man . ' 
 again one of the Ooryas say something contemptuously . 
 ' he be not a fakir . he be not a down - country beggar , ' Kim go on 
 severely , address the star . ' he be the most holy of holy man . 
 he be above all caste . I be his chela . ' 
 ' come here ! ' say the flat thin voice behind the curtain ; and Kim 
 come , conscious that eye he could not see be star at he . one 
 skinny brown finger heavy with ring lay on the edge of the cart , 
 and the talk go this way : 
 ' who be that one ? ' 
 ' an exceedingly holy one . he come from far off . he come from 
 Tibet . ' 
 ' where in Tibet ? ' 
 ' from behind the snow - from a very far place . he know the star ; 
 he make horoscope ; he read nativity . but he do not do this 
 for money . he do it for kindness and great charity . I be his 
 disciple . I be call also the Friend of the Stars . ' 
 ' thou art no hillman . ' 
 ' ask he . he will tell thee I be send to he from the Stars to 
 show he an end to his pilgrimage . ' 
 ' Humph ! consider , brat , that I be an old woman and not altogether a 
 fool . Lamas I know , and to these I give reverence , but thou art no 
 more a lawful chela than this my finger be the pole of this wagon . 
 thou art a casteless Hindu - a bold and unblushe beggar , 
 attach , belike , to the Holy One for the sake of gain . ' 
 ' do we not all work for gain ? ' Kim change his tone promptly to 
 match that altered voice . ' I have hear ' - this be a bow draw at 
 a venture - ' I have hear - ' 
 ' what hast thou hear ? ' she snap , rap with the finger . 
 ' nothing that I well remember , but some talk in the bazar , which 
 be doubtless a lie , that even Rajahs - small Hill Rajahs - ' 
 ' but none the less of good Rajput blood . ' 
 ' assuredly of good blood . that these even sell the more comely of 
 their womenfolk for gain . down south they sell they - to zemindar 
 and such - all of Oudh . ' 
 if there be one thing in the world that the small Hill Rajahs deny 
 it be just this charge ; but it happen to be one thing that the 
 bazar believe , when they discuss the mysterious slave - traffic of 
 India . the old lady explain to Kim , in a tense , indignant 
 whisper , precisely what manner and fashion of malignant liar he 
 be . have Kim hint this when she be a girl , he would have be 
 pommelled to death that same evening by an elephant . this be 
 perfectly true . 
 ' Ahai ! I be only a beggar 's brat , as the Eye of Beauty have say , ' 
 he wail in extravagant terror . 
 ' Eye of Beauty , forsooth ! who be I that thou shouldst fling 
 beggar - endearment at I ? ' and yet she laugh at the long- 
 forget word . ' forty year ago that might have be say , and not 
 without truth . ay . thirty year ago . but it be the fault of this 
 gad up and down Hind that a king 's widow must jostle all the 
 scum of the land , and be make a mock by beggar . ' 
 ' Great Queen , ' say Kim promptly , for he hear she shake with 
 indignation , ' I be even what the Great Queen say I be ; but none 
 the less be my master holy . he have not yet hear the Great Queen 's 
 order that - ' 
 ' order ? I order a Holy One - a teacher of the Law - to come and 
 speak to a woman ? never ! ' 
 ' pity my stupidity . I think it be give as an order - ' 
 ' it be not . it be a petition . do this make all clear ? ' 
 a silver coin click on the edge of the cart . Kim take it and 
 salaam profoundly . the old lady recognize that , as the eye and 
 the ear of the lama , he be to be propitiate . 
 ' I be but the Holy One 's disciple . when he have eat perhaps he 
 will come . ' 
 ' oh , villain and shameless rogue ! ' the jewelled forefinger shake 
 itself at he reprovingly ; but he could hear the old lady 's 
 chuckle . 
 ' Nay , what be it ? ' he say , drop into his most caressing and 
 confidential tone - the one , he well know , that few could resist . 
 ' be - be there any need of a son in thy family ? speak freely , for 
 we priest - ' that last be a direct plagiarism from a fakir by the 
 Taksali Gate . 
 ' we priest ! thou art not yet old enough to - ' she check the joke 
 with another laugh . ' believe I , now and again , we woman , o priest , 
 think of other matter than son . moreover , my daughter have bear 
 her man - child . ' 
 ' two arrow in the quiver be well than one ; and three be well 
 still . ' Kim quote the proverb with a meditative cough , look 
 discreetly earthward . 
 ' true - oh , true . but perhaps that will come . certainly those down- 
 country Brahmins be utterly useless . I send gift and monie and 
 gift again to they , and they prophesy . ' 
 ' ah , ' drawled Kim , with infinite contempt , ' they prophesy ! ' a 
 professional could have do no well . 
 ' and it be not till I remember my own Gods that my prayer be 
 hear . I choose an auspicious hour , and - perhaps thy Holy One have 
 hear of the Abbot of the Lung - Cho lamassery . it be to he I put 
 the matter , and behold in the due time all come about as I desire . 
 the Brahmin in the house of the father of my daughter 's son have 
 since say that it be through his prayer - which be a little 
 error that I will explain to he when we reach our journey 's end . 
 and so afterwards I go to Buddh Gaya , to make shraddha for the 
 father of my child . ' 
 ' thither go we . ' 
 ' doubly auspicious , ' chirrup the old lady . ' a second son at 
 least ! ' 
 ' o friend of all the World ! ' the lama have wake , and , simply as a 
 child bewilder in a strange bed , call for Kim . 
 ' I come ! I come , Holy One ! ' he dash to the fire , where he find 
 the lama already surround by dish of food , the hillman visibly 
 adore he and the Southerners look sourly . 
 ' go back ! withdraw ! ' Kim cry . ' do we eat publicly like dog ? ' 
 they finish the meal in silence , each turn a little from the 
 other , and Kim top it with a native - make cigarette . 
 ' have I not say an hundred time that the South be a good land ? 
 here be a virtuous and high - bear widow of a Hill Rajah on 
 pilgrimage , she say , to Buddha Gay . she it be send we those 
 dish ; and when thou art well rest she would speak to thee . ' 
 ' be this also thy work ? ' the lama dip deep into his snuff - gourd . 
 ' who else watch over thee since our wonderful journey begin ? ' 
 Kim 's eye dance in his head as he blow the rank smoke through his 
 nostril and stretch he on the dusty ground . ' have I fail to 
 oversee thy comfort , Holy one ? ' 
 ' a blessing on thee . ' the lama incline his solemn head . ' I have 
 know many man in my so long life , and disciple not a few . but to 
 none among man , if so be thou art woman - bear , have my heart go out 
 as it have to thee - thoughtful , wise , and courteous ; but something 
 of a small imp . ' 
 ' and I have never see such a priest as thou . ' Kim consider the 
 benevolent yellow face wrinkle by wrinkle . ' it be less than three 
 day since we take the road together , and it be as though it be a 
 hundred year . ' 
 ' perhaps in a former life it be permit that I should have 
 render thee some service . maybe ' - he smile - ' I free thee from 
 a trap ; or , have catch thee on a hook in the day when I be 
 not enlighten , cast thee back into the river . ' 
 ' maybe , ' say Kim quietly . he have hear this sort of speculation 
 again and again , from the mouth of many whom the English would not 
 consider imaginative . ' now , as regard that 
 woman in the bullock - cart . I think she need a second son for her 
 daughter . ' 
 ' that be no part of the way , ' sigh the lama . ' but at least she be 
 from the Hills . ah , the Hills , and the snow of the Hills ! ' 
 he rise and stalk to the cart . Kim would have give his ear to 
 come too , but the lama do not invite he ; and the few word he 
 catch be in an unknown tongue , for they speak some common speech 
 of the mountain . the woman seem to ask question which the lama 
 turn over in his mind before answer . now and again he hear 
 the singsong cadence of a chinese quotation . it be a strange 
 picture that Kim watch between droop eyelid . the lama , very 
 straight and erect , the deep fold of his yellow clothing slash 
 with black in the light of the parao fire precisely as a knotted 
 tree - trunk be slash with the shadow of the low sun , address a 
 tinsel and lacquered ruth which burn like a many - coloured jewel 
 in the same uncertain light . the pattern on the gold - work 
 curtain run up and down , melt and reform as the fold shake 
 and quiver to the night wind ; and when the talk grow more earnest 
 the jewelled forefinger snap out little spark of light between 
 the embroidery . behind the cart be a wall of uncertain darkness 
 speckle with little flame and alive with half - catch form and 
 face and shadow . the voice of early evening have settle down to 
 one soothe hum whose deep note be the steady chumping of the 
 bullock above their chop straw , and whose high be the 
 tinkle of a Bengali dancing - girl 's sitar . Most man have eat and 
 pull deep at their gurgling , grunt hookah , which in full 
 blast sound like bull - frogs . 
 at last the lama return . a hillman walk behind he with a 
 wad cotton - quilt and spread it carefully by the fire . 
 ' she deserve ten thousand grandchild , ' think Kim . ' none the 
 less , but for I , those gift would not have come . ' 
 ' a virtuous woman - and a wise one . ' the lama slacken off , joint 
 by joint , like a slow camel . ' the world be full of charity to those 
 who follow the way . ' he fling a fair half of the quilt over Kim . 
 ' and what say she ? ' Kim roll up in his share of it . 
 ' she ask I many question and propound many problem - the 
 most of which be idle tale which she have hear from devil- 
 serve priest who pretend to follow the Way . some I answer , and 
 some I say be foolish . many wear the Robe , but few keep the 
 Way . ' 
 ' true . that be true . ' Kim use the thoughtful , conciliatory tone of 
 those who wish to draw confidence . 
 ' but by her light she be most right - minded . she desire greatly 
 that we should go with she to Buddh Gaya ; her road be ours , as I 
 understand , for many day ' journey to the southward . ' 
 ' and ? ' 
 ' patience a little . to this I say that my search come before all 
 thing . she have hear many foolish legend , but this great truth of 
 my River she have never hear . such be the priest of the low 
 hill ! she know the Abbot of Lung - Cho , but she do not know of my 
 River - nor the tale of the Arrow . ' 
 ' and ? ' 
 ' I speak therefore of the search , and of the Way , and of matter 
 that be profitable ; she desire only that I should accompany she 
 and make prayer for a second son . ' 
 ' aha ! " we woman " do not think of anything save child , ' say Kim 
 sleepily . 
 ' now , since our road run together for a while , I do not see that 
 we in any way depart from our search if so be we accompany she - at 
 least as far as - I have forget the name of the city . ' 
 ' Ohe ! ' say Kim , turn and speak in a sharp whisper to one of 
 the Ooryas a few yard away . ' where be your master 's house ? ' 
 ' a little behind Saharunpore , among the fruit garden . ' he name 
 the village . 
 ' that be the place , ' say the lama . ' so far , at least , we can go 
 with she . ' 
 ' fly go to carrion , ' say the Oorya , in an abstract voice . 
 ' for the sick cow a crow ; for the sick man a brahmin . ' Kim breathe 
 the proverb impersonally to the shadow - top of the tree overhead . 
 the Oorya grunt and hold his peace . 
 ' so then we go with she , Holy one ? ' 
 ' be there any reason against ? I can still step aside and try all 
 the river that the road overpass . she desire that I should 
 come . she very greatly desire it . ' 
 Kim stifle a laugh in the quilt . when once that imperious old lady 
 have recover from her natural awe of a lama he think it probable 
 that she would be worth listen to . 
 he be nearly asleep when the lama suddenly quote a proverb : ' the 
 husband of the talkative have a great reward hereafter . ' then Kim 
 hear he snuff thrice , and doze off , still laugh . 
 the diamond - bright dawn wake man and crow and bullock together . 
 Kim sit up and yawn , shake himself , and thrill with delight . 
 this be see the world in real truth ; this be life as he would 
 have it - bustling and shout , the buckling of belt , and beat 
 of bullock and creaking of wheel , lighting of fire and cooking 
 of food , and new sight at every turn of the approve eye . the 
 morning mist sweep off in a whorl of silver , the parrot shoot away 
 to some distant river in shriek green host : all the well - wheel 
 within ear - shot go to work . India be awake , and Kim be in the 
 middle of it , more awake and more excited than anyone , chew on a 
 twig that he would presently use as a toothbrush ; for he borrow 
 right- and left - handedly from all the custom of the country he 
 know and love . there be no need to worry about food - no need to 
 spend a cowrie at the crowded stall . he be the disciple of a holy 
 man annex by a strong - willed old lady . all thing would be 
 prepare for they , and when they be respectfully invite so to do 
 they would sit and eat . for the rest - Kim giggle here as he 
 clean his tooth - his hostess would rather heighten the enjoyment 
 of the road . he inspect her bullock critically , as they come up 
 grunt and blow under the yoke . if they go too fast -it be 
 not likely - there would be a pleasant seat for himself along the 
 pole ; the lama would sit beside the driver . the escort , of course , 
 would walk . the old lady , equally of course , would talk a great 
 deal , and by what he have hear that conversation would not lack 
 salt . she be already order , harangue , rebuking , and , it must 
 be say , curse her servant for delay . 
 ' get her her pipe . in the name of the Gods , get she her pipe and 
 stop her ill - omen mouth , ' cry an Oorya , tie up his shapeless 
 bundle of bed . ' she and the parrot be alike . they screech in 
 the dawn . ' 
 ' the lead - bullock ! Hai ! look to the lead - bullock ! ' they be 
 back and wheeling as a grain - cart 's axle catch they by the 
 horn . " Son of an owl , where dost thou go ? ' this to the grinning 
 carter . 
 ' ai ! yai ! yai ! that within there be the Queen of Delhi go to 
 pray for a son , ' the man call back over his high load . ' room for 
 the queen of Delhi and her Prime Minister the grey monkey climb 
 up his own sword ! ' another cart load with bark for a down - country 
 tannery follow close behind , and its driver add a few 
 compliment as the ruth - bullock back and back again . 
 from behind the shake curtain come one volley of invective . it 
 do not last long , but in kind and quality , in blister , bite 
 appropriateness , it be beyond anything that even Kim have hear . he 
 could see the carter 's bare chest collapse with amazement , as the 
 man salaam reverently to the voice , leap from the pole , and 
 help the escort haul their volcano on to the main road . here the 
 voice tell he truthfully what sort of wife he have wed , and what 
 she be do in his absence . 
 ' oh , shabash ! ' murmur Kim , unable to contain himself , as the man 
 slunk away . 
 ' well do , indeed ? it be a shame and a scandal that a poor woman 
 may not go to make prayer to her Gods except she be jostle and 
 insult by all the refuse of Hindustan - that she must eat gali 
  abuse   as man eat ghi . but I have yet a wag leave to my tongue - a 
 word or two well speak that serve the occasion . and still be I 
 without my tobacco ! who be the one - eyed and luckless son of shame 
 that have not yet prepare my pipe ? ' 
 it be hastily thrust in by a hillman , and a trickle of thick smoke 
 from each corner of the curtain show that peace be restore . 
 if Kim have walk proudly the day before , disciple of a holy man , 
 today he pace with tenfold pride in the train of a semi - royal 
 procession , with a recognize place under the patronage of an old 
 lady of charming manner and infinite resource . the escort , their 
 head tie up native - fashion , fall in on either side the cart , 
 shuffle enormous cloud of dust . 
 the lama and Kim walk a little to one side ; Kim chew his stick 
 of sugarcane , and make way for no one under the status of a 
 priest . they could hear the old lady 's tongue clack as steadily as 
 a rice - husker . she bid the escort tell she what be go on on 
 the road ; and so soon as they be clear of the parao she fling 
 back the curtain and peer out , her veil a third across her face . 
 her man do not eye she directly when she address they , and thus 
 the propriety be more or less observed . 
 a dark , sallowish District Superintendent of Police , faultlessly 
 uniformed , an Englishman , trot by on a tired horse , and , see 
 from her retinue what manner of person she be , chaff she . 
 ' o mother , ' he cry , ' do they do this in the zenanas ? suppose an 
 Englishman come by and see that thou hast no nose ? ' 
 ' what ? ' she shrill back . ' thine own mother have no nose ? why say 
 so , then , on the open road ? ' 
 it be a fair counter . the Englishman throw up his hand with the 
 gesture of a man hit at sword - play . she laugh and nod . 
 ' be this a face to tempt virtue aside ? ' she withdraw all her veil 
 and star at he . 
 it be by no mean lovely , but as the man gather up his rein he 
 call it a Moon of Paradise , a Disturber of Integrity , and a few 
 other fantastic epithet which double she up with mirth . 
 ' that be a nut - cut   rogue , ' she say . ' all police - constable be 
 nut - cut ; but the police - wallah be the bad . Hai , my son , thou 
 hast never learn all that since thou camest from Belait   Europe . 
 who suckle thee ? ' 
 ' a pahareen - a hillwoman of Dalhousie , my mother . keep thy beauty 
 under a shade - o Dispenser of Delights , ' and he be go . 
 ' these be the sort ' - she take a fine judicial tone , and stuff 
 her mouth with pan - ' these be the sort to oversee justice . they 
 know the land and the custom of the land . the other , all new from 
 Europe , suckle by white woman and learn our tongue from book , 
 be bad than the pestilence . they do harm to king . ' then she 
 tell a long , long tale to the world at large , of an ignorant young 
 policeman who have disturb some small Hill Rajah , a ninth cousin 
 of her own , in the matter of a trivial land - case , wind up with a 
 quotation from a work by no mean devotional . 
 then her mood change , and she bid one of the escort ask whether 
 the lama would walk alongside and discuss matter of religion . so 
 Kim drop back into the dust and return to his sugar - cane . for 
 an hour or more the lama 's tam - o'shanter show like a moon through 
 the haze ; and , from all he hear , Kim gather that the old woman 
 weep . one of the Ooryas half apologize for his rudeness overnight , 
 say that he have never know his mistress of so bland a temper , 
 and he ascribe it to the presence of the strange priest . 
 personally , he believe in Brahmins , though , like all native , he 
 be acutely aware of their cunning and their greed . still , when 
 Brahmins but irritate with beg demand the mother of his 
 master 's wife , and when she send they away so angry that they 
 curse the whole retinue   which be the real reason of the second 
 off - side bullock go lame , and of the pole break the night 
 before , he be prepared to accept any priest of any other 
 denomination in or out of India . to this Kim assent with wise 
 nod , and bade the Oorya observe that the lama take no money , and 
 that the cost of his and Kim 's food would be repay a hundred time 
 in the good luck that would attend the caravan henceforward . he 
 also tell story of Lahore city , and sing a song or two which make 
 the escort laugh . as a town - mouse well acquaint with the late 
 song by the most fashionable composer - they be woman for the 
 most part - Kim have a distinct advantage over man from a little 
 fruit - village behind Saharunpore , but he let that advantage be 
 infer . 
 at noon they turn aside to eat , and the meal be good , plentiful , 
 and well - serve on plate of clean leaf , in decency , out of drift 
 of the dust . they give the scrap to certain beggar , that all 
 requirement might be fulfil , and sit down to a long , luxurious 
 smoke . the old lady have retreat behind her curtain , but mixed 
 most freely in the talk , her servant argue with and 
 contradict she as servant do throughout the East . she compare 
 the cool and the pine of the Kangra and Kulu hill with the dust 
 and the mango of the South ; she tell a tale of some old local 
 Gods at the edge of her husband 's territory ; she roundly abuse the 
 tobacco which she be then smoking , revile all Brahmins , and 
 speculate without reserve on the coming of many grandson . 
 chapter 5 
 here come I to my own again 
 Fed , forgive , and know again 
 claim by bone of my bone again , 
 and sib to flesh of my flesh ! 
 the fatted calf be dress for I , 
 but the husk have great zest for I ... 
 I think my pig will be good for I , 
 so I be off to the styes afresh . 
 the Prodigal Son . 
 once more the lazy , string - tie , shuffle procession get under 
 way , and she sleep till they reach the next halting - stage . it be 
 a very short march , and time lack an hour to sundown , so Kim cast 
 about for mean of amusement . 
 ' but why not sit and rest ? ' say one of the escort . ' only the 
 devil and the english walk to and fro without reason . ' 
 ' never make friend with the Devil , a Monkey , or a boy . no man 
 know what they will do next , ' say his fellow . 
 Kim turn a scornful back - he do not want to hear the old story 
 how the Devil play with the boy and repent of it and walk 
 idly across country . 
 the lama strode after he . all that day , whenever they pass a 
 stream , he have turn aside to look at it , but in no case have he 
 receive any warning that he have find his River . insensibly , too , 
 the comfort of speak to someone in a reasonable tongue , and of 
 be properly consider and respect as her spiritual adviser by 
 a well - bear woman , have wean his thought a little from the 
 search . and far , he be prepared to spend serene year in his 
 quest ; have nothing of the white man 's impatience , but a great 
 faith . 
 ' where goest thou ? ' he call after Kim . 
 ' Nowhither - it be a small march , and all this ' - Kim wave his 
 hand abroad - ' be new to I . ' 
 ' she be beyond question a wise and a discern woman . but it be 
 hard to meditate when - ' 
 ' all woman be thus . ' Kim speak as might have Solomon . 
 ' before the lamassery be a broad platform , ' the lama muttered , 
 loop up the well - wear rosary , ' of stone . on that I have leave the 
 mark of my foot - pacing to and fro with these . ' 
 he click the bead , and begin the ' Om mane pudme hum 's of his 
 devotion ; grateful for the cool , the quiet , and the absence of 
 dust . 
 one thing after another draw Kim 's idle eye across the plain . there 
 be no purpose in his wandering , except that the build of the hut 
 near by seem new , and he wish to investigate . 
 they come out on a broad tract of grazing - ground , brown and purple 
 in the afternoon light , with a heavy clump of mango in the 
 centre . it strike Kim as curious that no shrine stand in so 
 eligible a spot : the boy be observe as any priest for these 
 thing . far across the plain walk side by side four man , make 
 small by the distance . he look intently under his curved palm 
 and catch the sheen of brass . 
 ' soldier . white soldier ! ' say he . ' let we see . ' 
 ' it be always soldier when thou and I go out alone together . but I 
 have never see the white soldier . ' 
 ' they do no harm except when they be drunk . keep behind this 
 tree . ' 
 they step behind the thick trunk in the cool dark of the mango- 
 tope . two little figure halt ; the other two come forward 
 uncertainly . they be the advance - party of a regiment on the 
 march , send out , as usual , to mark the camp . they bear five - foot 
 stick with flutter flag , and call to each other as they 
 spread over the flat earth . 
 at last they enter the mango - grove , walk heavily . 
 ' it be here or hereabout - officer ' tent under the tree , I take 
 it , an ' the rest of we can stay outside . have they mark out for 
 the baggage - wagon behind ? ' 
 they cry again to their comrade in the distance , and the rough 
 answer come back faint and mellow . 
 ' shove the flag in here , then , ' say one . 
 ' what do they prepare ? ' say the lama , wonderstruck . ' this be a 
 great and terrible world . what be the device on the flag ? ' 
 a soldier thrust a stave within a few foot of they , grunt 
 discontentedly , pull it up again , confer with his companion , 
 who look up and down the shaded cave of greenery , and return 
 it . 
 Kim star with all his eye , his breath come short and sharp 
 between his tooth . the soldier stamp off into the sunshine . 
 ' o holy one ! ' he gasp . ' my horoscope ! the drawing in the dust by 
 the priest at Umballa ! remember what he say . first come two - 
 ferashe - to make all thing ready - in a dark place , as it be 
 always at the beginning of a vision . ' 
 ' but this be not vision , ' say the lama . ' it be the world 's 
 Illusion , and no more . ' 
 ' and after they come the Bull - the Red Bull on the green field . 
 look ! it be he ! ' 
 he point to the flag that be snap snap in the evening breeze 
 not ten foot away . it be no more than an ordinary camp marking- 
 flag ; but the regiment , always punctilious in matter of millinery , 
 have charge it with the regimental device , the Red Bull , which be 
 the crest of the Mavericks - the great Red Bull on a background of 
 irish green . 
 ' I see , and now I remember . ' say the lama . ' certainly it be thy 
 Bull . certainly , also , the two man come to make all ready . ' 
 ' they be soldier - white soldier . what say the priest ? " the 
 sign over against the Bull be the sign of War and armed man . " Holy 
 one , this thing touch my search . ' 
 ' true . it be true . ' the lama star fixedly at the device that 
 flame like a ruby in the dusk . ' the priest at Umballa say that 
 thine be the sign of War . ' 
 ' what be to do now ? ' 
 ' wait . let we wait . ' 
 ' even now the darkness clear , ' say Kim . it be only natural that 
 the descend sun should at last strike through the tree - trunk , 
 across the grove , fill it with mealy gold light for a few 
 minute ; but to Kim it be the crown of the Umballa Brahmin 's 
 prophecy . 
 ' Hark ! ' say the lama . ' one beat a drum - far off ! ' 
 at first the sound , carry dilute through the still air , 
 resemble the beating of an artery in the head . soon a sharpness 
 be add . 
 ' ah ! the music , ' Kim explain . he know the sound of a regimental 
 band , but it amaze the lama . 
 at the far end of the plain a heavy , dusty column crawl in sight . 
 then the wind bring the tune : 
 we crave your condescension 
 to tell you what we know 
 of march in the Mulligan Guards 
 to Sligo Port below ! 
 here break in the shrill - tongue fife : 
 we shoulder arm , 
 we march - we march away . 
 from Phoenix Park 
 we march to Dublin Bay . 
 the drum and the fife , 
 oh , sweetly they do play , 
 as we march - march - march - with the 
 Mulligan Guards ! 
 it be the band of the maverick play the regiment to camp ; for 
 the man be route - march with their baggage . the ripple column 
 swing into the level - cart behind it divide left and right , run 
 about like an ant - hill , and ... 
 ' but this be sorcery ! ' say the lama . 
 the plain dot itself with tent that seem to rise , all spread , 
 from the cart . another rush of man invade the grove , pitch a 
 huge tent in silence , run up yet eight or nine more by the side of 
 it , unearth cooking - pot , pan , and bundle , which be take 
 possession of by a crowd of native servant ; and behold the mango- 
 tope turn into an orderly town as they watch ! 
 ' let we go , ' say the lama , sink back afraid , as the fire 
 twinkled and white officer with jingle sword stalk into the 
 mess - tent . 
 ' stand back in the shadow . no one can see beyond the light of a 
 fire , ' say Kim , his eye still on the flag . he have never before 
 watch the routine of a seasoned regiment pitching camp in thirty 
 minute . 
 ' look ! look ! look ! ' cluck the lama . ' yonder come a priest . ' it 
 be Bennett , the Church of England Chaplain of the regiment , 
 limp in dusty black . one of his flock have make some rude remark 
 about the Chaplain 's mettle ; and to abash he Bennett have march 
 step by step with the man that day . the black dress , gold cross on 
 the watch - chain , the hairless face , and the soft , black wideawake 
 hat would have mark he as a holy man anywhere in all India . he 
 drop into a camp - chair by the door of the mess - tent and slide off 
 his boot . three or four officer gather round he , laugh and 
 joke over his exploit . 
 ' the talk of white man be wholly lack in dignity , ' say the 
 lama , who judge only by tone . ' but I consider the countenance of 
 that priest and I think he be learn . be it likely that he will 
 understand our talk ? I would talk to he of my search . ' 
 ' never speak to a white man till he be feed , ' say Kim , quote a 
 well - know proverb . ' they will eat now , and - and I do not think 
 they be good to beg from . let we go back to the resting - place . 
 after we have eat we will come again . it certainly be a Red Bull 
 - my Red Bull . ' 
 they be both noticeably absent - minded when the old lady 's retinue 
 set their meal before they ; so none break their reserve , for it be 
 not lucky to annoy guest . 
 ' now , ' say Kim , pick his tooth , ' we will return to that place ; 
 but thou , o Holy One , must wait a little way off , because thy foot 
 be heavy than mine and I be anxious to see more of that Red 
 Bull . ' 
 ' but how canst thou understand the talk ? walk slowly . the road be 
 dark , ' the lama reply uneasily . 
 Kim put the question aside . ' I mark a place near to the tree , ' 
 say he , ' where thou canst sit till I call . Nay , ' as the lama make 
 some sort of protest , ' remember this be my Search - the Search for 
 my Red Bull . the sign in the Stars be not for thee . I know a 
 little of the custom of white soldier , and I always desire to see 
 some new thing . ' 
 ' what dost thou not know of this world ? ' the lama squat 
 obediently in a little hollow of the ground not a hundred yard 
 from the hump of the mango - tree dark against the star - powder 
 sky . 
 ' stay till I call . ' Kim flit into the dusk . he know that in all 
 probability there would be sentry round the camp , and smile to 
 himself as he hear the thick boot of one . a boy who can dodge 
 over the roof of Lahore city on a moonlight night , use every 
 little patch and corner of darkness to discomfit his pursuer , be 
 not likely to be check by a line of well - train soldier . he 
 pay they the compliment of crawl between a couple , and , run 
 and halt , crouch and drop flat , work his way toward the 
 light mess - tent where , close press behind the mango - tree , he 
 wait till some chance word should give he a returnable lead . 
 the one thing now in his mind be further information as to the Red 
 Bull . for aught he know , and Kim 's limitation be as curious and 
 sudden as his expansion , the man , the nine hundred thorough devil 
 of his father 's prophecy , might pray to the beast after dark , as 
 Hindus pray to the Holy Cow . that at least would be entirely right 
 and logical , and the padre with the gold cross would be therefore 
 the man to consult in the matter . on the other hand , remember 
 sober - face padre whom he have avoid in Lahore city , the priest 
 might be an inquisitive nuisance who would bid he learn . but have 
 it not be prove at Umballa that his sign in the high heaven 
 portend War and armed man ? be he not the Friend of the Stars as 
 well as of all the World , cram to the tooth with dreadful 
 secret ? lastly - and firstly as the undercurrent of all his quick 
 thought -thi adventure , though he do not know the english word , 
 be a stupendous lark - a delightful continuation of his old 
 flight across the housetop , as well as the fulfilment of sublime 
 prophecy . he lie belly - flat and wriggle towards the mess - tent 
 door , a hand on the amulet round his neck . 
 it be as he suspect . the Sahibs pray to their God ; for in the 
 centre of the mess - table - its sole ornament when they be on the 
 line of march - stand a golden bull fashion from old - time loot of 
 the Summer Palace at Pekin - a red - gold bull with lower head , 
 ramp upon a field of irish green . to he the Sahibs hold out 
 their glass and cry aloud confusedly . 
 now the Reverend Arthur Bennett always leave Mess after that toast , 
 and be rather tired by his march his movement be more abrupt 
 than usual . Kim , with slightly raise head , be still star at 
 his totem on the table , when the Chaplain step on his right 
 shoulder - blade . Kim flinch under the leather , and , roll 
 sideway , bring down the Chaplain , who , ever a man of action , 
 catch he by the throat and nearly choke the life out of he . Kim 
 then kick he desperately in the stomach . Mr Bennett gasp and 
 double up , but without relax his grip , roll over again , and 
 silently haul Kim to his own tent . the Mavericks be incurable 
 practical joker ; and it occur to the Englishman that silence 
 be good till he have make complete inquiry . 
 ' why , it be a boy ! ' he say , as he draw his prize under the light of 
 the tent - pole lantern , then shake he severely cry : ' what be 
 you do ? you be a thief . choor ? Mallum ? ' his Hindustani be very 
 limited , and the ruffle and disgusted Kim intend to keep to the 
 character lay down for he . as he recover his breath he be 
 invent a beautifully plausible tale of his relation to some 
 scullion , and at the same time keep a keen eye on and a little 
 under the Chaplain 's left arm - pit . the chance come ; he duck for 
 the doorway , but a long arm shoot out and clutch at his neck , 
 snap the amulet - string and closing on the amulet . 
 ' give it I . o , give it I . be it lose ? give I the paper . ' 
 the word be in English - the tinny , saw - cut English of the 
 native - breed , and the Chaplain jump . 
 ' a scapular , ' say he , open his hand . ' no , some sort of heathen 
 charm . why - why , do you speak English ? little boy who steal be 
 beat . you know that ? ' 
 ' I do not - I do not steal . ' Kim dance in agony like a terri at 
 a lift stick . ' oh , give it I . it be my charm . do not thieve it 
 from I . ' 
 the Chaplain take no heed , but , go to the tent door , call 
 aloud . a fattish , clean - shaven man appear . 
 ' I want your advice , Father Victor , ' say Bennett . ' I find this 
 boy in the dark outside the mess - tent . ordinarily , I should have 
 chastise he and let he go , because I believe he to be a thief . 
 but it seem he talk English , and he attach some sort of value 
 to a charm round his neck . I think perhaps you might help I . ' 
 between himself and the Roman Catholic Chaplain of the irish 
 contingent lay , as Bennett believe , an unbridgeable gulf , but it 
 be noticeable that whenever the Church of England deal with a 
 human problem she be very likely to call in the Church of Rome . 
 Bennett 's official abhorrence of the Scarlet Woman and all her way 
 be only equal by his private respect for Father Victor . 
 ' a thief talk English , be it ? let us look at his charm . no , it be 
 not a scapular , Bennett . ' he hold out his hand . 
 ' but have we any right to open it ? a sound whip - ' 
 ' I do not thieve , ' protest Kim . ' you have hit I kick all over 
 my body . now give I my charm and I will go away . ' 
 ' not quite so fast . we will look first , ' say Father Victor , 
 leisurely roll out poor Kimball O'Hara 's ' ne varietur ' 
 parchment , his clearance - certificate , and Kim 's baptismal 
 certificate . on this last O'Hara - with some confused idea that he 
 be do wonder for his son - have scrawl score of time : ' look 
 after the boy . please look after the boy ' - sign his name and 
 regimental number in full . 
 ' Powers of Darkness below ! " say Father Victor , pass all over to 
 Mr Bennett . ' do you know what these thing be ? ' 
 ' yes . ' say Kim . ' they be mine , and I want to go away . ' 
 ' I do not quite understand , ' say Mr Bennett . ' he probably bring 
 they on purpose . it may be a beg trick of some kind . ' 
 ' I never see a beggar less anxious to stay with his company , then . 
 there be the making of a gay mystery here . ye believe in 
 Providence , Bennett ? ' 
 ' I hope so . ' 
 ' well , I believe in miracle , so it come to the same thing . power 
 of Darkness ! Kimball O'Hara ! and his son ! but then he be a native , 
 and I see Kimball marry myself to Annie Shott . how long have you 
 have these thing , boy ? ' 
 ' ever since I be a little baby . ' 
 Father Victor step forward quickly and open the front of Kim 's 
 upper garment . ' you see , Bennett , he be not very black . what be your 
 name ? ' 
 ' Kim . ' 
 ' or Kimball ? ' 
 ' perhaps . will you let I go away ? ' 
 ' what else ? ' 
 ' they call I Kim Rishti ke . that be Kim of the rishti . ' 
 ' what be that - " rishti " ? ' 
 ' eye - rishti - that be the Regiment - my father 's . ' 
 ' Irish - oh , I see . ' 
 ' yess . that be how my father tell I . my father , he have live . ' 
 ' have live where ? ' 
 ' have live . of course he be dead - go - out . ' 
 ' oh ! that be your abrupt way of put it , be it ? ' 
 Bennett interrupt . ' it be possible I have do the boy an 
 injustice . he be certainly white , though evidently neglect . I be 
 sure I must have bruise he . I do not think spirit - ' 
 ' get he a glass of sherry , then , and let he squat on the cot . 
 now , Kim , ' continue Father Victor , ' no one be go to hurt you . 
 drink that down and tell we about yourself . the truth , if you have   no 
 objection . ' 
 Kim cough a little as he put down the empty glass , and 
 consider . this seem a time for caution and fancy . small boy 
 who prowl about camp be generally turn out after a whipping . 
 but he have receive no stripe ; the amulet be evidently work in 
 his favour , and it look as though the Umballa horoscope and the 
 few word that he could remember of his father 's maundering fit 
 in most miraculously . else why do the fat padre seem so impressed , 
 and why the glass of hot yellow drink from the lean one ? 
 ' my father , he be dead in Lahore city since I be very little . the 
 woman , she keep kabarri shop near where the hire - carriage be . ' 
 Kim begin with a plunge , not quite sure how far the truth would 
 serve he . 
 ' your mother ? ' 
 ' no ! ' - with a gesture of disgust . ' she go out when I be bear . 
 my father , he get these paper from the Jadoo - Gher what do you call 
 that ? '   Bennett nod   ' because he be in good - standing . what do 
 you call that ? '   again Bennett nod . ' my father tell I that . he 
 say , too , and also the Brahmin who make the drawing in the dust at 
 Umballa two day ago , he say , that I shall find a Red Bull on a 
 green field and that the Bull shall help I . ' 
 ' a phenomenal little liar , ' mutter Bennett . 
 ' Powers of Darkness below , what a country ! ' murmur Father Victor . 
 ' go on , Kim . ' 
 ' I do not thieve . besides , I be just now disciple of a very holy 
 man . he be sit outside . we see two man come with flag , make 
 the place ready . that be always so in a dream , or on account of a - 
 a - prophecy . so I know it be come true . I see the Red Bull on the 
 green field , and my father he say : " nine hundred pukka devil and 
 the Colonel rid on a horse will look after you when you find the 
 Red Bull ! " I do not know what to do when I see the Bull , but I 
 go away and I come again when it be dark . I want to see the 
 Bull again , and I see the Bull again with the - the Sahibs pray 
 to it . I think the Bull shall help I . the holy man say so too . he 
 be sit outside . will you hurt he , if I call he a shout now ? 
 he be very holy . he can witness to all the thing I say , and he 
 know I be not a thief . ' 
 ' " sahib pray to a bull ! " what in the world do you make of 
 that ? ' say Bennett . " ' disciple of a holy man ! " be the boy mad ? ' 
 ' it be O'Hara 's boy , sure enough . O'Hara 's boy league with all the 
 Powers of Darkness . it be very much what his father would have do 
 if he be drunk . we would well invite the holy man . he may know 
 something . ' 
 ' he do not know anything , ' say Kim . ' I will show you he if you 
 come . he be my master . then afterwards we can go . ' 
 ' Powers of Darkness ! ' be all that Father Victor could say , as 
 Bennett march off , with a firm hand on Kim 's shoulder . 
 they find the lama where he have drop . 
 ' the Search be at an end for I , ' shout Kim in the vernacular . ' I 
 have find the Bull , but God know what come next . they will not 
 hurt you . come to the fat priest 's tent with this thin man and see 
 the end . it be all new , and they can not talk Hindi . they be only 
 uncurried donkey . ' 
 ' then it be not well to make a jest of their ignorance , ' the lama 
 return . ' I be glad if thou art rejoice , chela . ' 
 dignified and unsuspicious , he stride into the little tent , salute 
 the church as a Churchman , and sit down by the open charcoal 
 brazier . the yellow lining of the tent reflect in the lamplight 
 make his face red - gold . 
 Bennett look at he with the triple - ring uninter of the 
 creed that lump nine - tenth of the world under the title of 
 ' heathen ' . 
 ' and what be the end of the search ? what gift have the Red Bull 
 bring ? ' the lama address himself to Kim . 
 ' he say , " what be you go to do ? " ' Bennett be star uneasily 
 at Father Victor , and Kim , for his own end , take upon himself the 
 office of interpreter . 
 ' I do not see what concern this fakir have with the boy , who be 
 probably his dupe or his confederate , ' Bennett begin . ' we can not 
 allow an english boy - assume that he be the son of a Mason , the 
 soon he go to the Masonic Orphanage the well . ' 
 ' ah ! that be your opinion as Secretary to the Regimental Lodge , ' 
 say Father Victor ; ' but we might as well tell the old man what we 
 be go to do . he do not   look like a villain . ' 
 ' my experience be that one can never fathom the oriental mind . now , 
 Kimball , I wish you to tell this man what I say word for word . ' 
 Kim gather the import of the next few sentence and begin thus : 
 ' Holy One , the thin fool who look like a camel say that I be the 
 son of a Sahib . ' 
 ' but how ? ' 
 ' oh , it be true . I know it since my birth , but he could only find 
 it out by rend the amulet from my neck and read all the 
 paper . he think that once a Sahib be always a Sahib , and between 
 the two of they they purpose to keep I in this regiment or to send 
 I to a madrissah   a school . it have happen before . I have always 
 avoid it . the fat fool be of one mind and the camel - like one of 
 another . but that be no odd . I may spend one night here and 
 perhaps the next . it have happen before . then I will run away and 
 return to thee . ' 
 ' but tell they that thou art my chela . tell they how thou didst 
 come to I when I be faint and bewilder . tell they of our 
 search , and they will surely let thee go now . ' 
 ' I have already tell they . they laugh , and they talk of the 
 police . ' 
 ' what be you say ? ' ask Mr Bennett . 
 ' Oah . he only say that if you do not let I go it will stop he in 
 his business - his ur - gent private af - fair . ' this last be a 
 reminiscence of some talk with a eurasian clerk in the Canal 
 Department , but it only draw a smile , which nettle he . ' and if 
 you do know what his business be you would not be in such a 
 beastly hurry to interfere . ' 
 ' what be it then ? ' say Father Victor , not without feel , as he 
 watch the lama 's face . 
 ' there be a River in this country which he wish to find so verree 
 much . it be put out by an Arrow which - ' Kim tap his foot 
 impatiently as he translate in his own mind from the vernacular to 
 his clumsy English . ' Oah , it be make by our Lord God Buddha , you 
 know , and if you wash there you be wash away from all your sin 
 and make as white as cotton - wool . '   Kim have hear mission - talk in 
 his time .   ' I be his disciple , and we must find that River . it be 
 so verree valuable to we . ' 
 ' say that again , ' say Bennett . Kim obey , with amplification . 
 ' but this be gross blasphemy ! ' cry the Church of England . 
 ' Tck ! Tck ! ' say Father Victor sympathetically . ' I would give a good 
 deal to be able to talk the vernacular . a river that wash away 
 sin ! and how long have you two be look for it ? ' 
 ' oh , many day . now we wish to go away and look for it again . it be 
 not here , you see . ' 
 ' I see , ' say Father Victor gravely . ' but he can not   go on in that 
 old man 's company . it would be different , Kim , if you be not a 
 soldier 's son . tell he that the regiment will take care of you and 
 make you as good a man as your - as good a man as can be . tell he 
 that if he believe in miracle he must believe that - ' 
 ' there be no need to play on his credulity , ' Bennett interrupt . 
 ' I be do no such thing . he must believe that the boy be come 
 here -to his own regiment - in search of his Red Bull be in the 
 nature of a miracle . consider the chance against it , Bennett . this 
 one boy in all India , and our regiment of all other on the line o ' 
 march for he to meet with ! it be predestine on the face of it . 
 yes , tell he it be Kismet . Kismet , mallum ?   do you understand ? ' 
 he turn towards the lama , to whom he might as well have talk of 
 Mesopotamia . 
 ' they say , ' - the old man 's eye light at Kim 's speech ' they say 
 that the meaning of my horoscope be now accomplish , and that 
 be lead back - though as thou know I go out of curiosity - 
 to these people and their Red Bull I must need go to a madrissah 
 and be turn into a Sahib . now I make pretence of agreement , for 
 at the bad it will be but a few meal eat away from thee . then 
 I will slip away and follow down the road to Saharunpore . 
 therefore , Holy One , keep with that Kulu woman - on no account 
 stray far from her cart till I come again . past question , my sign 
 be of War and of armed man . see how they have give I wine to 
 drink and set I upon a bed of honour ! my father must have be 
 some great person . so if they raise I to honour among they , good . 
 if not , good again . however it go , I will run back to thee when I 
 be tired . but stay with the Rajputni , or I shall miss thy foot ... 
 Oah yess , ' say the boy , ' I have tell he everything you tell I to 
 say . ' 
 ' and I can not see any need why he should wait , ' say Bennett , 
 feeling in his trouser - pocket . ' we can investigate the detail 
 later - and I will give he a ru - ' 
 ' give he time . maybe he be fond of the lad , ' say Father Victor , 
 half arrest the clergyman 's motion . 
 the lama drag forth his rosary and pull his huge hat - brim over 
 his eye . 
 ' what can he want now ? ' 
 ' he say ' - Kim put up one hand . ' he say : " be quiet . " he want to 
 speak to I by himself . you see , you do not know one little word of 
 what he say , and I think if you talk he will perhaps give you very 
 bad curse . when he take those bead like that , you see , he always 
 want to be quiet . ' 
 the two englishman sit overwhelmed , but there be a look in 
 Bennett 's eye that promise ill for Kim when he should be relax 
 to the religious arm . 
 ' a Sahib and the son of a Sahib - ' the lama 's voice be harsh with 
 pain . ' but no white man know the land and the custom of the land 
 as thou know . how come it this be true ? ' 
 ' what matter , Holy one ? - but remember it be only for a night or 
 two . remember , I can change swiftly . it will all be as it be when 
 I first speak to thee under Zam - Zammah the great gun - ' 
 ' as a boy in the dress of white man - when I first go to the 
 Wonder House . and a second time thou wast a Hindu . what shall the 
 third incarnation be ? ' he chuckle drearily . ' ah , chela , thou have 
 do a wrong to an old man because my heart go out to thee . ' 
 ' and mine to thee . but how could I know that the Red Bull would 
 bring I to this business ? ' 
 the lama cover his face afresh , and nervously rattle the rosary . 
 Kim squat beside he and lay hold upon a fold of his clothing . 
 ' now it be understand that the boy be a Sahib ? ' he go on in a 
 muffle tone . ' such a Sahib as be he who keep the image in the 
 Wonder House . ' the lama 's experience of white man be limited . he 
 seem to be repeat a lesson . ' so then it be not seemly that he 
 should do other than as the Sahibs do . he must go back to his own 
 people . ' 
 ' for a day and a night and a day , ' Kim plead . 
 ' no , ye do not ! ' Father Victor see Kim edge towards the door , and 
 interpose a strong leg . 
 ' I do not understand the custom of white man . the Priest of the 
 Images in the Wonder House in Lahore be more courteous than the 
 thin one here . this boy will be take from I . they will make a 
 Sahib of my disciple ? woe to I ! how shall I find my River ? have 
 they no disciple ? ask . ' 
 ' he say he be very sorree that he can not find the River now any 
 more . he say , why have you no disciple , and stop bother he ? 
 he want to be wash of his sin . ' 
 neither Bennett nor Father Victor find any answer ready . 
 say Kim in English , distressed for the lama 's agony : ' I think if 
 you will let I go now we will walk away quietly and not steal . we 
 will look for that River like before I be catch . I wish I do not 
 come here to find the Red Bull and all that sort of thing . I do not 
 want it . ' 
 ' it be the very good day 's work you ever do for yourself , young 
 man , ' say Bennett . 
 ' Good heaven , I do not   know how to console he , ' say Father 
 Victor , watch the lama intently . ' he can not   take the boy away 
 with he , and yet he be a good man - I be sure he be a good man . 
 Bennett , if you give he that rupee he will curse you root and 
 branch ! ' 
 they listen to each other 's breathing - three - five full 
 minute . then the lama raise his head , and look forth across 
 they into space and emptiness . 
 ' and I be a follower of the way , ' he say bitterly . ' the sin be 
 mine and the punishment be mine . I make believe to myself for now I 
 see it be but make - belief - that thou wast send to I to aid in 
 the search . so my heart go out to thee for thy charity and thy 
 courtesy and the wisdom of thy little year . but those who follow 
 the way must permit not the fire of any desire or attachment , for 
 that be all Illusion . as say ... ' he quote an old , old chinese 
 text , back it with another , and reinforce these with a third . ' I 
 step aside from the Way , my chela . it be no fault of thine . I 
 delight in the sight of life , the new people upon the road , and 
 in thy joy at see these thing . I be pleased with thee who 
 should have consider my search and my search alone . now I be 
 sorrowful because thou art take away and my River be far from I . 
 it be the Law which I have break ! ' 
 ' Powers of Darkness below ! ' say Father Victor , who , wise in the 
 confessional , hear the pain in every sentence . 
 ' I see now that the sign of the Red Bull be a sign for I as well 
 as for thee . all Desire be red - and evil . I will do penance and 
 find my River alone . ' 
 ' at least go back to the Kulu woman , ' say Kim , ' otherwise thou 
 wilt be lose upon the road . she will feed thee till I run back to 
 thee . ' 
 the lama wave a hand to show that the matter be finally settle 
 in his mind . 
 ' now , ' - his tone alter as he turn to Kim , - ' what will they do 
 with thee ? at least I may , acquire merit , wipe out past ill . ' 
 ' make I a Sahib - so they think . the day after tomorrow I return . 
 do not grieve . ' 
 ' of what sort ? such an one as this or that man ? ' he point to 
 Father Victor . ' such an one as those I see this evening , man wear 
 sword and stamp heavily ? ' 
 ' maybe . ' 
 ' that be not well . these man follow desire and come to emptiness . 
 Thou must not be of their sort . ' 
 ' the Umballa priest say that my Star be War , ' Kim interject . ' I 
 will ask these fool - but there be truly no need . I will run away 
 this night , for all I want to see the new thing . ' 
 Kim put two or three question in English to Father Victor , 
 translate the reply to the lama . 
 then : ' he say , " you take he from I and you can not say what you 
 will make he . " he say , " tell I before I go , for it be not a 
 small thing to make a child . " ' 
 ' you will be send to a school . later on , we shall see . Kimball , I 
 suppose you would like to be a soldier ? ' 
 ' Gorah - log   white - folk . no - ah ! no - ah ! ' Kim shake his head 
 violently . there be nothing in his composition to which drill and 
 routine appeal . ' I will not be a soldier . ' 
 ' you will be what you be tell to be , ' say Bennett ; ' and you should 
 be grateful that we be go to help you . ' 
 Kim smile compassionately . if these man lie under the delusion 
 that he would do anything that he do not fancy , so much the 
 well . 
 another long silence follow . Bennett fidget with impatience , 
 and suggest call a sentry to evict the fakir . 
 ' do they give or sell learning among the Sahibs ? ask they , ' say 
 the lama , and Kim interpret . 
 ' they say that money be pay to the teacher - but that money the 
 Regiment will give ... what need ? it be only for a night . ' 
 ' and - the more money be pay the well learning be give ? ' the 
 lama disregard Kim 's plan for an early flight . ' it be no wrong 
 to pay for learn . to help the ignorant to wisdom be always a 
 merit . ' the rosary click furiously as an abacus . then he face 
 his oppressor . 
 ' ask they for how much money do they give a wise and suitable 
 teaching ? and in what city be that teaching give ? ' 
 ' well , ' say Father Victor in English , when Kim have translate , 
 ' that depend . the Regiment would pay for you all the time you be 
 at the Military Orphanage ; or you might go on the Punjab Masonic 
 Orphanage 's list   not that he or you ' ud understand what that 
 mean ; but the good schooling a boy can get in India be , of 
 course , at St Xavier 's in Partibus at Lucknow . ' this take some time 
 to interpret , for Bennett wish to cut it short . 
 ' he want to know how much ? ' say Kim placidly . 
 ' two or three hundred rupee a year . ' Father Victor be long past 
 any sense of amazement . Bennett , impatient , do not understand . 
 ' he say : " write that name and the money upon a paper and give it 
 he . " and he say you must write your name below , because he be 
 go to write a letter in some day to you . he say you be a good 
 man . he say the other man be a fool . he be go away . ' 
 the lama rise suddenly . ' I follow my search , ' he cry , and be 
 go . 
 ' he will run slap into the sentry , ' cry Father Victor , jump up 
 as the lama stalk out ; ' but I can not   leave the boy . ' Kim make 
 swift motion to follow , but check himself . there be no sound of 
 challenge outside . the lama have disappear . 
 Kim settle himself composedly on the Chaplain 's cot . at least the 
 lama have promise that he would stay with the Raiput woman from 
 Kulu , and the rest be of the small importance . it please he 
 that the two padre be so evidently excited . they talk long in 
 undertone , Father Victor urge some scheme on Mr Bennett , who 
 seem incredulous . all this be very new and fascinating , but Kim 
 feel sleepy . they call man into the tent - one of they certainly 
 be the Colonel , as his father have prophesy - and they ask he 
 an infinity of question , chiefly about the woman who look after 
 he , all of which Kim answer truthfully . they do not seem to 
 think the woman a good guardian . 
 after all , this be the new of his experience . soon or later , 
 if he choose , he could escape into great , grey , formless India , 
 beyond tent and padre and colonel . meantime , if the Sahibs be 
 to be impress , he would do his good to impress they . he too be a 
 white man . 
 after much talk that he could not comprehend , they hand he over 
 to a sergeant , who have strict instruction not to let he escape . 
 the Regiment would go on to Umballa , and Kim would be send up , 
 partly at the expense of the Lodge and in part by subscription , to 
 a place call Sanawar . 
 ' it be miraculous past all whoop , Colonel , ' say Father Victor , 
 when he have talk without a break for ten minute . ' his buddhist 
 friend have levant after take my name and address . I can not   quite 
 make out whether he will pay for the boy 's education or whether he be 
 prepare some sort of witchcraft on his own account . ' then to Kim : 
 ' you will live to be grateful to your friend the Red Bull yet . we will 
 make a man of you at Sanawar - even at the price o ' make you a 
 protestant . ' 
 ' certainly - most certainly , ' say Bennett . 
 ' but you will not go to Sanawar , ' say Kim . 
 ' but we will go to Sanawar , little man . that be the order of the 
 Commander - in - Chief , who be a trifle more important than O'Hara 's 
 son . ' 
 ' you will not go to Sanawar . you will go to thee War . ' 
 there be a shout of laughter from the full tent . 
 ' when you know your own regiment a trifle well you will not   confuse 
 the line of march with line of battle , Kim . we hope to go to " thee 
 War " sometime . ' 
 ' Oah , I know all thatt . ' Kim draw his bow again at a venture . if 
 they be not go to the war , at least they do not know what he 
 know of the talk in the veranda at Umballa . 
 ' I know you be not at thee war now ; but I tell you that as soon as 
 you get to Umballa you will be send to the war - the new war . it be 
 a war of eight thousand man , besides the gun . ' 
 ' that be explicit . D'you add prophecy to your other gift ? take he 
 along , sergeant . take up a suit for he from the Drums , an ' take 
 care he do not   slip through your finger . who say the age of 
 miracle be go by ? I think I will go to bed . my poor mind 's 
 weakening . ' 
 at the far end of the camp , silent as a wild animal , an hour later 
 sit Kim , newly wash all over , in a horrible stiff suit that 
 rasp his arm and leg . 
 ' a most amazin ' young bird , ' say the sergeant . ' he turn up in 
 charge of a yellow - head buck - brahmin priest , with his father 's 
 Lodge certificate round his neck , talkin ' God know what all of a 
 red bull . the buck - brahmin evaporate without explanation , an ' the 
 bhoy set cross - legged on the Chaplain 's bed prophesyin ' bloody war 
 to the man at large . Injia be a wild land for a God - fearin ' man . 
 I will just tie his leg to the tent - pole in case he will go through the 
 roof . what do ye say about the war ? ' 
 ' eight thousand man , besides gun , ' say Kim . ' very soon you will 
 see . ' 
 ' you be a consolin ' little imp . lie down between the drum an ' go 
 to bye - bye . those two boy will watch your slumber . ' 
 chapter 6 
 now I remember comrade - 
 old playmate on new seas - 
 Whenas we trade orpiment 
 among the savage . 
 ten thousand league to southward , 
 and thirty year remove - 
 they know not noble Valdez , 
 but I they know and love . 
 Song of Diego Valdez . 
 very early in the morning the white tent come down and disappear 
 as the Mavericks take a side - road to Umballa . it do not skirt the 
 resting - place , and Kim , trudge beside a baggage - cart under fire 
 of comment from soldier ' wife , be not so confident as 
 overnight . he discover that he be closely watch - Father 
 Victor on the one side , and Mr Bennett on the other . 
 in the forenoon the column check . a camel - orderly hand the 
 Colonel a letter . he read it , and speak to a Major . half a mile in 
 the rear , Kim hear a hoarse and joyful clamour roll down on he 
 through the thick dust . then someone beat he on the back , cry : 
 ' tell we how ye know , ye little limb of Satan ? Father dear , see if 
 ye can make he tell . ' 
 a pony range alongside , and he be haul on to the priest 's 
 saddlebow . 
 ' now , my son , your prophecy of last night have come true . our order 
 be to entrain at Umballa for the Front tomorrow . ' 
 ' what be thatt ? ' say Kim , for ' front ' and ' entrain ' be newish 
 word to he . 
 ' we be go to " thee War , " as you call it . ' 
 ' of course you be go to thee War . I say last night . ' 
 ' ye do ; but , Powers o ' darkness , how do ye know ? ' 
 Kim 's eye sparkle . he shut his lip , nod his head , and look 
 unspeakable thing . the Chaplain move on through the dust , and 
 private , sergeant , and subaltern call one another 's attention 
 to the boy . the Colonel , at the head of the column , star at he 
 curiously . ' it be probably some bazar rumour . ' he say ; ' but even 
 then - ' he refer to the paper in his hand . ' hang it all , the 
 thing be only decide within the last forty - eight hour . ' 
 ' be there many more like you in India ? ' say Father Victor , ' or be 
 you by way o ' be a lusus naturae ? ' 
 ' now I have tell you , ' say the boy , ' will you let I go back to my 
 old man ? if he have not stay with that woman from Kulu , I be 
 afraid he will die . ' 
 ' by what I see of he he be as well able to take care of himself as 
 you . no . Ye've   bring we luck , an ' we be go to make a man of 
 you . I will take ye back to your baggage - cart and ye'll come to I 
 this evening . ' 
 for the rest of the day Kim find himself an object of 
 distinguish consideration among a few hundred white man . the 
 story of his appearance in camp , the discovery of his parentage , 
 and his prophecy , have lose nothing in the telling . a big , shapeless 
 white woman on a pile of bed ask he mysteriously whether he 
 think her husband would come back from the war . Kim reflect 
 gravely , and say that he would , and the woman give he food . in 
 many respect , this big procession that play music at interval - 
 this crowd that talk and laugh so easily - resemble a festival 
 in Lahore city . so far , there be no sign of hard work , and he 
 resolve to lend the spectacle his patronage . at evening there come 
 out to meet they band of music , and play the maverick into camp 
 near Umballa railway station . that be an interesting night . man of 
 other regiment come to visit the Mavericks . the Mavericks go 
 visit on their own account . their picket hurry forth to bring 
 they back , meet picket of strange regiment on the same duty ; and , 
 after a while , the bugle blow madly for more picket with officer 
 to control the tumult . the Mavericks have a reputation for 
 liveliness to live up to . but they fall in on the platform next 
 morning in perfect shape and condition ; and Kim , leave behind with 
 the sick , woman , and boy , find himself shout farewell 
 excitedly as the train draw away . life as a Sahib be amusing so 
 far ; but he touch it with a cautious hand . then they march he 
 back in charge of a drummer - boy to empty , lime - wash barrack , 
 whose floor be cover with rubbish and string and paper , and 
 whose ceiling give back his lonely footfall . native - fashion , he 
 curl himself up on a strip cot and go to sleep . an angry man 
 stump down the veranda , wake he up , and say he be a 
 schoolmaster . this be enough for Kim , and he retire into his 
 shell . he could just puzzle out the various English Police notice 
 in Lahore city , because they affect his comfort ; and among the 
 many guest of the woman who look after he have be a queer 
 German who paint scenery for the Parsee travel theatre . he 
 tell Kim that he have be ' on the barricade in ' forty - eight , ' and 
 therefore - at least that be how it strike Kim - he would teach 
 the boy to write in return for food . Kim have be kick as far as 
 single letter , but do not think well of they . 
 ' I do not know anything . go away ! ' say Kim , scent evil . 
 Hereupon the man catch he by the ear , drag he to a room in a 
 far - off wing where a dozen drummer - boy be sit on form , and 
 tell he to be still if he could do nothing else . this he manage 
 very successfully . the man explain something or other with white 
 line on a black board for at least half an hour , and Kim continue 
 his interrupted nap . he much disapprove of the present aspect of 
 affair , for this be the very school and discipline he have spend 
 two - third of his young life in avoid . suddenly a beautiful idea 
 occur to he , and he wonder that he have not think of it 
 before . 
 the man dismiss they , and first to spring through the veranda 
 into the open sunshine be Kim . 
 ' ' Ere , you ! ' alt ! stop ! ' say a high voice at his heel . ' I have   get 
 to look after you . my order be not to let you out of my sight . 
 where be you go ? ' 
 it be the drummer - boy who have be hang round he all the 
 forenoon - a fat and freckled person of about fourteen , and Kim 
 loathe he from the sol of his boot to his cap - ribbon . 
 ' to the bazar - to get sweet - for you , ' say Kim , after thought . 
 ' well , the bazar 's out o ' bound . if we go there we will get a 
 dressing - down . you come back . ' 
 ' how near can we go ? ' Kim do not know what bound mean , but he 
 wish to be polite - for the present . 
 ' ' ow near ? ' ow far , you mean ! we can go as far as that tree down 
 the road . ' 
 ' then I will go there . ' 
 ' all right . I be not   go . it be too ' ot . I can watch you from ' ere . 
 it be no good your runnin ' away . if you do , they would spot you by your 
 clothe . that be regimental stuff you be wearin ' . there be not   a 
 picket in Umballa would not   ' ead you back quick than you start 
 out . ' 
 this do not impress Kim as much as the knowledge that his raiment 
 would tire he out if he try to run . he slouch to the tree at 
 the corner of a bare road lead towards the bazar , and eye the 
 native pass . Most of they be barrack - servant of the low 
 caste . Kim hail a sweeper , who promptly retort with a piece of 
 unnecessary insolence , in the natural belief that the european boy 
 could not follow it . the low , quick answer undeceive he . Kim put 
 his fettered soul into it , thankful for the late chance to abuse 
 somebody in the tongue he know well . ' and now , go to the near 
 letter - writer in the bazar and tell he to come here . I would write 
 a letter . ' 
 ' but - but what manner of white man 's son art thou to need a bazar 
 letter - writer ? be there not a schoolmaster in the barrack ? ' 
 ' ay ; and Hell be full of the same sort . do my order , you - you od ! 
 Thy mother be marry under a basket ! servant of Lal Beg '   Kim 
 know the God of the sweeper , ' run on my business or we will talk 
 again . ' 
 the sweeper shuffle off in haste . ' there be a white boy by the 
 barracks wait under a tree who be not a white boy , ' he stammer 
 to the first bazar letter - writer he come across . ' he need thee . ' 
 ' will he pay ? ' say the spruce scribe , gather up his desk 
 and pen and sealing - wax all in order . 
 ' I do not know . he be not like other boy . go and see . it be 
 well worth . ' 
 Kim dance with impatience when the slim young Kayeth hove in 
 sight . as soon as his voice could carry he curse he volubly . 
 ' first I will take my pay , ' the letter - writer say . ' bad word have 
 make the price high . but who art thou , dress in that fashion , 
 to speak in this fashion ? ' 
 ' aha ! that be in the letter which thou shalt write . never be such 
 a tale . but I be in no haste . another writer will serve I . Umballa 
 city be as full of they as be Lahore . ' 
 ' four anna , ' say the writer , sit down and spread his cloth 
 in the shade of a deserted barrack - wing . 
 mechanically Kim squat beside he - squat as only the native 
 can - in spite of the abominable clinging trouser . 
 the writer regard he sideways . 
 ' that be the price to ask of Sahibs , ' say Kim . ' now fix I a true 
 one . ' 
 ' an anna and a half . how do I know , have write the letter , that 
 thou wilt not run away ? ' 
 I must not go beyond this tree , and there be also the stamp to be 
 consider . ' 
 ' I get no commission on the price of the stamp . once more , what 
 manner of white boy art thou ? ' 
 ' that shall be say in the letter , which be to Mahbub Ali , the 
 horse - dealer in the Kashmir Serai , at Lahore . he be my friend . ' 
 ' wonder on wonder ! ' murmur the letter - writer , dip a reed in 
 the inkstand . ' to be write in Hindi ? ' 
 ' assuredly . to Mahbub Ali then . begin ! I have come down with the 
 old man as far as Umballa in the train . at Umballa I carry the 
 news of the bay mare 's pedigree . ' after what he have see in the 
 garden , he be not go to write of white stallion . 
 ' slower a little . what have a bay mare to do ... be it Mahbub Ali , 
 the great dealer ? ' 
 ' who else ? I have be in his service . take more ink . again . as the 
 order be , so I do it . we then go on foot towards benare , but 
 on the third day we find a certain regiment . be that down ? ' 
 ' ay , pulton , ' murmur the writer , all ear . 
 ' I go into their camp and be catch , and by mean of the charm 
 about my neck , which thou knowest , it be establish that I be 
 the son of some man in the regiment : accord to the prophecy of 
 the Red Bull , which thou know be common talk of our bazar . ' Kim 
 wait for this shaft to sink into the letter - writer 's heart , 
 clear his throat , and continue : ' a priest clothe I and give I 
 a new name ... one priest , however , be a fool . the clothe be 
 very heavy , but I be a Sahib and my heart be heavy too . they send 
 I to a school and beat I . I do not like the air and water here . 
 come then and help I , Mahbub Ali , or send I some money , for I 
 have not sufficient to pay the writer who write this . ' 
 ' " who write this . " it be my own fault that I be trick . Thou 
 art as clever as Husain Bux that forge the Treasury stamp at 
 Nucklao . but what a tale ! what a tale ! be it true by any chance ? ' 
 ' it do not profit to tell lie to Mahbub Ali . it be well to 
 help his friend by lend they a stamp . when the money come I 
 will repay . ' 
 the writer grunt doubtfully , but take a stamp out of his desk , 
 seal the letter , hand it over to Kim , and depart . Mahbub 
 Ali 's be a name of power in Umballa . 
 ' that be the way to win a good account with the Gods , ' Kim shout 
 after he . 
 ' pay I twice over when the money come , ' the man cry over his 
 shoulder . 
 ' what be you bukkin ' to that nigger about ? ' say the drummer - boy 
 when Kim return to the veranda . ' I be watch - in ' you . ' 
 ' I be only talkin ' to he . ' 
 ' you talk the same as a nigger , do not   you ? ' 
 ' no - ah ! no - ah ! I onlee speak a little . what shall we do now ? ' 
 ' the bugles'll go for dinner in arf a minute . my Gawd ! I wish I would 
 go up to the Front with the regiment . it be awful do nothing 
 but school down ' ere . do not   you ' eat it ? ' 
 ' oah yess ! ' 
 I would run away if I know where to go to , but , as the man say , in this 
 bloomin ' Injia you be only a prisoner at large . you can not   desert 
 without bein ' take back at once . I be fair sick of it . ' 
 ' you have be in be - England ? ' 
 ' W'y , I only come out last troopin ' season with my mother . I should 
 think I ' ave be in England . what a ignorant little beggar you 
 be ! you be bring up in the gutter , be not   you ? ' 
 ' oah yess . tell I something about England . my father he come from 
 there . ' 
 though he would not say so , Kim of course disbelieve every word 
 the drummer - boy speak about the Liverpool suburb which be his 
 England . it pass the heavy time till dinner - a most unappetizing 
 meal serve to the boy and a few invalid in a corner of a 
 barrack - room . but that he have write to Mahbub Ali , Kim would have 
 be almost depressed . the indifference of native crowd he be 
 use to ; but this strong loneliness among white man prey on he . 
 he be grateful when , in the course of the afternoon , a big soldier 
 take he over to Father Victor , who live in another wing across 
 another dusty parade - ground . the priest be read an english 
 letter write in purple ink . he look at Kim more curiously than 
 ever . 
 ' An ' how do you like it , my son , as far as you have   go ? not much , 
 eh ? it must be hard - very hard on a wild animal . listen now . I have 
 an amazin ' epistle from your friend . ' 
 ' where be he ? be he well ? Oah ! if he know to write I letter , it 
 be all right . ' 
 ' you be fond of he then ? ' 
 ' of course I be fond of he . he be fond of I . ' 
 ' it seem so by the look of this . he can not   write English , can he ? ' 
 ' oah no . not that I know , but of course he find a letter - writer 
 who can write English verree well , and so he write . I do hope you 
 understand . ' 
 ' that account for it . d'you know anything about his money 
 affair ? ' Kim 's face show that he do not . 
 ' how can I tell ? ' 
 ' that be what I be askin ' . now listen if you can make head or tail o ' 
 this . we will skip the first part ... it be write from Jagadhir 
 Road ... " sit on wayside in grave meditation , trust to be 
 favour with your Honour 's applause of present step , which 
 recommend your Honour to execute for Almighty God 's sake . education 
 be great blessing if of good sort . otherwise no earthly use . " 
 Faith , the old man 's hit the bull' - eye that time ! " if your Honour 
 condescending give my boy good education Xavier "   I suppose 
 that be St Xavier 's in Partibus   " in term of our conversation date 
 in your tent 15th instant "   a business - like touch there !   " then 
 Almighty God bless your Honour 's succeeding to third an ' fourth 
 generation and " - now listen ! -"confide in your Honour 's humble 
 servant for adequate remuneration per hoondi per annum three 
 hundred rupee a year to one expensive education St Xavier , 
 Lucknow , and allow small time to forward same per hoondi send to 
 any part of India as your Honour shall address yourself . this 
 servant of your Honour have presently no place to lay crown of his 
 head , but go to benare by train on account of persecution of 
 old woman talk so much and unanxious reside Saharunpore in any 
 domestic capacity . " now what in the world do that mean ? ' 
 ' she have ask he to be her puro - her clergyman - at Saharunpore , 
 I think . he would not do that on account of his River . she do 
 talk . ' 
 ' it be clear to you , be it ? it beat I altogether . " so go to 
 Benares , where will find address and forward rupee for boy who be 
 apple of eye , and for Almighty God 's sake execute this education , 
 and your petitioner as in duty bind shall ever awfully pray . 
 write by Sobrao Satai , Failed Entrance Allahabad University , for 
 Venerable Teshoo Lama the priest of such - zen look for a River , 
 address care of Tirthankars ' Temple , Benares . P. M. -Please note 
 boy be apple of eye , and rupee shall be send per hoondi three 
 hundred per annum . for God Almighty 's sake . " now , be that ravin ' 
 lunacy or a business proposition ? I ask you , because I be fairly at 
 my wit ' end . ' 
 ' he say he will give I three hundred rupee a year ? so he will 
 give I they . ' 
 ' oh , that be the way you look at it , be it ? ' 
 ' of course . if he say so ! ' 
 the priest whistle ; then he address Kim as an equal . ' I do not 
 believe it ; but we will see . you be go off today to the 
 Military Orphanage at Sanawar , where the regiment would keep you 
 till you be old enough to enlist . Ye'd be bring up to the 
 Church of England . Bennett arrange for that . on the other hand , if 
 ye go to St Xavier 's ye'll get a well education an - an can have 
 the religion . D'ye see my dilemma ? Kim see nothing save a vision 
 of the lama go south in a train with none to beg for he . 
 ' like most people , I be go to temporize . if your friend send the 
 money from Benares - Powers of Darkness below , where be a street- 
 beggar to raise three hundred rupee ? - ye'll go down to Lucknow 
 and I will pay your fare , because I can not   touch the subscription- 
 money if I intend , as I do , to make ye a Catholic . if he do not , 
 ye'll go to the Military Orphanage at the regiment 's expense . I will 
 allow he three day ' grace , though I do not   believe it at all . even 
 then , if he fail in his payment later on ... but it be beyond 
 I . we can only walk one step at a time in this world , praise God ! 
 an ' they send Bennett to the Front an ' leave I behind . Bennett 
 can not   expect everything . ' 
 ' oah yess , ' say Kim vaguely . 
 the priest lean forward . ' I would give a month 's pay to find what be 
 go on inside that little round head of your . ' 
 ' there be nothing , ' say Kim , and scratch it . he be wonder 
 whether Mahbub Ali would send he as much as a whole rupee . then he 
 could pay the letter - writer and write letter to the lama at 
 Benares . perhaps Mahbub Ali would visit he next time he come south 
 with horse . surely he must know that Kim 's delivery of the letter 
 to the officer at Umballa have cause the great war which the man 
 and boy have discuss so loudly over the barrack dinner - table . 
 but if Mahbub Ali do not know this , it would be very unsafe to 
 tell he so . Mahbub Ali be hard upon boy who know , or think 
 they know , too much . 
 ' well , till I get further news ' - Father Victor 's voice interrupt 
 the reverie . ' ye can run along now and play with the other boy . 
 they will teach ye something - but I do not   think ye'll like it . ' 
 the day drag to its weary end . when he wish to sleep he be 
 instruct how to fold up his clothe and set out his boot ; the 
 other boy deride . Bugles wake he in the dawn ; the schoolmaster 
 catch he after breakfast , thrust a page of meaningless character 
 under his nose , give they senseless name and whack he without 
 reason . Kim meditate poison he with opium borrow from a 
 barrack - sweeper , but reflect that , as they all eat at one table 
 in public   this be peculiarly revolt to Kim , who prefer to 
 turn his back on the world at meal , the stroke might be dangerous . 
 then he attempt run off to the village where the priest have try 
 to drug the lama - the village where the old soldier live . but far - see 
 sentry at every exit head back the little scarlet figure . 
 trouser and jacket crippled body and mind alike so he abandon the project and fall back , 
 oriental - fashion , on 
 time and chance . three day of torment pass in the big , echo 
 white room . he walk out of afternoon under escort of the 
 drummer - boy , and all he hear from his companion be the few 
 useless word which seem to make two - third of the white man 's 
 abuse . Kim know and despise they all long ago . the boy resent 
 his silence and lack of interest by beat he , as be only 
 natural . he do not care for any of the bazar which be in 
 bound . he style all native ' nigger ' ; yet servant and sweeper 
 call he abominable name to his face , and , mislead by their 
 deferential attitude , he never understand . this somewhat console 
 Kim for the beating . 
 on the morning of the fourth day a judgement overtake that drummer . 
 they have go out together towards Umballa racecourse . he return 
 alone , weeping , with news that young O'Hara , to whom he have be 
 do nothing in particular , have hail a scarlet - bearded nigger on 
 horseback ; that the nigger have then and there lay into he with a 
 peculiarly adhesive quirt , pick up young O'Hara , and bear he 
 off at full gallop . these tiding come to Father Victor , and he 
 draw down his long upper lip . he be already sufficiently startle 
 by a letter from the Temple of the Tirthankars at Benares , 
 enclose a native banker 's note of hand for three hundred rupee , 
 and an amazing prayer to ' almighty God ' . the lama would have be 
 more annoyed than the priest have he know how the bazar letter- 
 writer have translate his phrase ' to acquire merit . ' 
 ' Powers of Darkness below ! ' Father Victor fumble with the note . 
 ' An ' now he be off with another of his peep - o'-day friend . I do not 
 know whether it will be a great relief to I to get he back or 
 to have he lose . he be beyond my comprehension . how the Divil - 
 yes , he be the man I mean -can a street - beggar raise money to 
 educate white boy ? ' 
 three mile off , on Umballa racecourse , Mahbub Ali , rein a grey 
 Kabuli stallion with Kim in front of he , be say : 
 ' but , Little Friend of all the World , there be my honour and 
 reputation to be consider . all the officer - Sahibs in all the 
 regiment , and all Umballa , know Mahbub Ali . man see I pick thee 
 up and chastise that boy . we be see now from far across this 
 plain . how can I take thee away , or account for thy disappear if 
 I set thee down and let thee run off into the crop ? they would put 
 I in jail . be patient . once a Sahib , always a Sahib . when thou art 
 a man - who know ? - thou wilt be grateful to Mahbub Ali . ' 
 ' take I beyond their sentry where I can change this red . give I 
 money and I will go to Benares and be with my lama again . I do not 
 want to be a Sahib , and remember I do deliver that message . ' 
 the stallion bound wildly . Mahbub Ali have incautiously drive 
 home the sharp - edge stirrup .   he be not the new sort of fluent 
 horse - dealer who wear english boot and spur .   Kim draw his own 
 conclusion from that betrayal . 
 ' that be a small matter . it lie on the straight road to Benares . I 
 and the Sahib have by this time forget it . I send so many 
 letter and message to man who ask question about horse , I 
 can not well remember one from the other . be it some matter of a 
 bay mare that Peters Sahib wish the pedigree of ? ' 
 Kim see the trap at once . if he have say ' bay mare ' Mahbub would 
 have know by his very readiness to fall in with the amendment that 
 the boy suspect something . Kim reply therefore : 
 ' Bay mare . no . I do not forget my message thus . it be a white 
 stallion . ' 
 ' ay , so it be . a white arab stallion . but thou didst write " bay 
 mare " to I . ' 
 ' who care to tell truth to a letter - writer ? ' Kim answer , feel 
 Mahbub 's palm on his heart . 
 ' hi ! Mahbub , you old villain , pull up ! ' cry a voice , and an 
 Englishman race alongside on a little polo - pony . ' I have   be 
 chase you half over the country . that Kabuli of yours can go . for 
 sale , I suppose ? ' 
 ' I have some young stuff come on make by Heaven for the delicate 
 and difficult polo - game . he have no equal . he - ' 
 ' play polo and wait at table . yes . we know all that . what the 
 deuce have you get there ? ' 
 ' a. boy , ' say Mahbub gravely . ' he be be beat by another boy . 
 his father be once a white soldier in the big war . the boy be a 
 child in Lahore city . he play with my horse when he be a babe . 
 now I think they will make he a soldier . he have be newly catch 
 by his father 's regiment that go up to the war last week . but I 
 do not think he want to be a soldier . I take he for a ride . tell 
 I where thy barrack be and I will set thee there . ' 
 ' let I go . I can find the barracks alone . ' 
 ' and if thou runnest away who will say it be not my fault ? ' 
 ' he will run back to his dinner . where have he to run to ? ' the 
 Englishman ask . 
 ' he be bear in the land . he have friend . he go where he choose . 
 he be a chabuk sawai   a sharp chap . it need only to change his 
 clothing , and in a twinkling he would be a low - caste Hindu boy . ' 
 ' the deuce he would ! ' the Englishman look critically at the boy 
 as Mahbub head towards the barrack . Kim grind his tooth . Mahbub 
 be mock he , as faithless Afghans will ; for he go on : 
 ' they will send he to a school and put heavy boot on his foot and 
 swaddle he in these clothe . then he will forget all he know . 
 now , which of the barracks be thine ? ' 
 Kim point - he could not speak - to Father Victor 's wing , all 
 star white near by . 
 ' perhaps he will make a good soldier , ' say Mahbub reflectively . 
 ' he will make a good orderly at least . I send he to deliver a 
 message once from Lahore . a message concern the pedigree of a 
 white stallion . ' 
 here be deadly insult on deadly injury - and the Sahib to whom 
 he have so craftily give that war - wake letter hear it all . Kim 
 beheld Mahbub Ali fry in flame for his treachery , but for 
 himself he see one long grey vista of barrack , school , and 
 barrack again . he gaze imploringly at the clear - cut face in which 
 there be no glimmer of recognition ; but even at this extremity it 
 never occur to he to throw himself on the white man 's mercy or 
 to denounce the Afghan . and Mahbub star deliberately at the 
 Englishman , who star as deliberately at Kim , quivering and 
 tongue - tie . 
 ' my horse be well train , ' say the dealer . ' other would have 
 kick , Sahib . ' 
 ' ah , ' say the Englishman at last , rub his pony 's damp wither 
 with his whip - butt . ' who make the boy a soldier ? ' 
 ' he say the Regiment that find he , and especially the Padre- 
 sahib of that regiment . 
 ' there be the Padre ! ' Kim choke as bare - head Father Victor 
 sail down upon they from the veranda . 
 ' Powers O ' darkness below , O'Hara ! how many more mixed friend do 
 you keep in Asia ? ' he cry , as Kim slide down and stand helplessly 
 before he . 
 ' good morning , Padre , ' the Englishman say cheerily . ' I know you by 
 reputation well enough . mean to have come over and call before 
 this . I be Creighton . ' 
 ' of the Ethnological Survey ? ' say Father Victor . the Englishman 
 nod . ' faith , I be glad to meet ye then ; an ' I owe you some thank 
 for bring back the boy . ' 
 ' no thank to I , Padre . besides , the boy be not   go away . you 
 do not   know old Mahbub Ali . ' the horse - dealer sit impassive in the 
 sunlight . ' you will when you have be in the station a month . he 
 sell we all our crock . that boy be rather a curiosity . can you 
 tell I anything about he ? ' 
 ' can I tell you ? ' puff Father Victor . ' you will be the one man that 
 could help I in my quandary . tell you ! power o ' darkness , I be 
 burst to tell someone who know something o ' the native ! ' 
 a groom come round the corner . Colonel Creighton raise his voice , 
 speak in Urdu . ' very good , Mahbub Ali , but what be the use of 
 tell I all those story about the pony ? not one pice more than 
 three hundred and fifty rupee will I give . ' 
 ' the Sahib be a little hot and angry after rid , ' the horse- 
 dealer return , with the leer of a privileged jester . ' presently , 
 he will see my horse 's point more clearly . I will wait till he have 
 finish his talk with the Padre . I will wait under that tree . ' 
 ' confound you ! ' the Colonel laugh . ' that come of look at one 
 of Mahbub 's horse . he be a regular old leech , Padre . wait , then , if 
 thou hast so much time to spare , Mahbub . now I be at your service , 
 Padre . where be the boy ? oh , he be go off to collogue with Mahbub . 
 Queer sort of boy . might I ask you to send my mare round under 
 cover ? ' 
 he drop into a chair which command a clear view of Kim and 
 Mahbub Ali in conference beneath the tree . the Padre go indoor 
 for cheroot . 
 Creighton hear Kim say bitterly : ' trust a Brahmin before a snake , 
 and a snake before an harlot , and an harlot before a Pathan , Mahbub 
 Ali . ' 
 ' that be all one . ' the great red beard wag solemnly . ' child 
 should not see a carpet on the loom till the pattern be make plain . 
 believe I , Friend of all the World , I do thee great service . they 
 will not make a soldier of thee . ' 
 ' you crafty old sinner ! ' think Creighton . ' but you be not far 
 wrong . that boy must not   be waste if he be as advertise . ' 
 ' excuse I half a minute , ' cry the Padre from within , ' but I be 
 gettin ' the document in the case . ' 
 ' if through I the favour of this bold and wise Colonel Sahib come 
 to thee , and thou art raise to honour , what thank wilt thou give 
 Mahbub Ali when thou art a man ? ' 
 ' Nay , nay ! I beg thee to let I take the Road again , where I 
 should have be safe ; and thou hast sell I back to the English . 
 what will they give thee for blood - money ? ' 
 ' a cheerful young demon ! ' the Colonel bite his cigar , and turn 
 politely to Father Victor . 
 ' what be the letter that the fat priest be wave before the 
 Colonel ? stand behind the stallion as though look at my bridle ! ' 
 say Mahbub Ali . 
 ' a letter from my lama which he write from Jagadhir Road , say 
 that he will pay three hundred rupee by the year for my 
 schooling . ' 
 ' oho ! be old Red Hat of that sort ? at which school ? ' 
 ' God know . I think in Nucklao . ' 
 ' yes . there be a big school there for the son of Sahibs - and 
 half - Sahibs . I have see it when I sell horse there . so the lama 
 also love the Friend of all the World ? ' 
 ' ay ; and he do not tell lie , or return I to captivity . ' 
 ' small wonder the Padre do not know how to unravel the thread . 
 how fast he talk to the Colonel Sahib ! ' Mahbub Ali chuckle . ' by 
 Allah ! ' the keen eye sweep the veranda for an Instant - ' thy lama 
 have send what to I look like a note of hand . I have have some few 
 dealing in hoondis . the Colonel Sahib be look at it . ' 
 ' what good be all this to I ? ' say Kim wearily . ' thou wilt go 
 away , and they will return I to those empty room where there be 
 no good place to sleep and where the boy beat I . ' 
 ' I do not think that . have patience , child . all Pathans be not 
 faithless - except in horseflesh . ' 
 five - ten - fifteen minute pass , Father Victor talk 
 energetically or ask question which the Colonel answer . 
 ' now I have   tell you everything that I know about the boy from 
 beginnin to end ; and it be a blessed relief to I . do ye ever hear 
 the like ? ' 
 ' at any rate , the old man have send the money . Gobind Sahai 's note 
 of hand be good from here to China , ' say the Colonel . ' the more 
 one know about native the less can one say what they will or 
 will not   do . ' 
 ' that be consolin ' - from the head of the Ethnological Survey . it be 
 this mixture of Red Bulls and Rivers of Healing   poor heathen , God 
 help he !   an ' note of hand and Masonic certificate . be you a 
 Mason , by any chance ? ' 
 ' by Jove , I be , now I come to think of it . that be an additional 
 reason , ' say the Colonel absently . 
 ' I be glad ye see a reason in it . but as I say , it be the mixture 
 o ' thing that be beyond I . an ' his prophesyin ' to our Colonel , 
 sit on my bed with his little shimmy tear open show his 
 white skin ; an ' the prophecy comin ' true ! they will cure all that 
 nonsense at St Xavier 's , eh ? ' 
 ' sprinkle he with holy water , ' the Colonel laugh . 
 ' on my word , I fancy I ought to sometimes . but I be hop he will be 
 bring up as a good Catholic . all that trouble I be what will 
 happen if the old beggar - man - ' 
 ' Lama , lama , my dear sir ; and some of they be gentleman in their 
 own country . ' 
 ' the lama , then , fail to pay next year . he be a fine business head 
 to plan on the spur of the moment , but he be bind to die some day . 
 an ' takin ' a heathen 's money to give a child a christian education 
 - ' 
 ' but he say explicitly what he want . as soon as he know the boy 
 be white he seem to have make his arrangement accordingly . I would 
 give a month 's pay to hear how he explain it all at the 
 Tirthankars ' Temple at Benares . look here , Padre , I do not   pretend 
 to know much about native , but if he say he will pay , he will pay - 
 dead or alive . I mean , his heir will assume the debt . my advice to 
 you be , send the boy down to Lucknow . if your Anglican Chaplain 
 think you have   steal a march on he - ' 
 ' bad luck to Bennett ! he be send to the Front instead o ' I . 
 Doughty certify I medically unfit . I will excommunicate Doughty if 
 he come back alive ! surely Bennett ought to be content with - ' 
 ' glory , leave you the religion . quite so ! as a matter of fact I 
 do not   think Bennett will mind . put the blame on I . I - er - 
 strongly recommend send the boy to St Xavier 's . he can go down 
 on pass as a soldier 's orphan , so the railway fare will be save . 
 you can buy he an outfit from the Regimental subscription . the 
 Lodge will be save the expense of his education , and that will put 
 the Lodge in a good temper . it be perfectly easy . I have   get to go 
 down to Lucknow next week . I will look after the boy on the way - 
 give he in charge of my servant , and so on . ' 
 ' you be a good man . ' 
 ' not in the least . do not   make that mistake . the lama have send we 
 money for a definite end . we can not   very well return it . we shall 
 have to do as he say . well , that be settle , be not   it ? shall we say 
 that , Tuesday next , you will hand he over to I at the night train 
 south ? that be only three day . he can not   do much harm in three 
 day . ' 
 ' it be a weight off my mind , but - this thing here ? ' - he 
 wave the note of hand - ' I do not   know Gobind Sahai : or his bank , 
 which may be a hole in a wall . ' 
 ' you have   never be a subaltern in debt . I will cash it if you 
 like , and send you the voucher in proper order . ' 
 ' but with all your own work too ! it be askin ' - ' 
 ' it be not the least trouble indeed . you see , as an 
 ethnologist , the thing be very interesting to I . I would like to make a 
 note of it for some Government work that I be do . the 
 transformation of a regimental badge like your Red Bull into a sort 
 of fetish that the boy follow be very interesting . ' 
 ' but I can not   thank you enough . ' 
 ' there be one thing you can do . all we ethnological man be as 
 jealous as jackdaw of one another 's discovery . they be of no 
 interest to anyone but ourselves , of course , but you know what 
 book - collector be like . well , do not   say a word , directly or 
 indirectly , about the asiatic side of the boy 's character - his 
 adventure and his prophecy , and so on . I will worm they out of the 
 boy later on and - you see ? ' 
 ' I do . Ye'll make a wonderful account of it . never a word will I 
 say to anyone till I see it in print . ' 
 ' thank you . that go straight to an ethnologist 's heart . well , I 
 must be get back to my breakfast . Good Heavens ! Old Mahbub here 
 still ? ' he raise his voice , and the horse - dealer come out from 
 under the shadow of the tree , ' well , what be it ? ' 
 ' as regard that young horse , ' say Mahbub , ' I say that when a colt 
 be bear to be a polo - pony , closely follow the ball without 
 teaching - when such a colt know the game by divination - then I 
 say it be a great wrong to break that colt to a heavy cart , Sahib ! ' 
 ' so say I also , Mahbub . the colt will be enter for polo only . 
  these fellow think of nothing in the world but horse , Padre . 
 I will see you tomorrow , Mahbub , if you have   anything likely for sale . ' 
 the dealer salute , horseman - fashion , with a sweep of the off hand . 
 ' be patient a little , Friend of all the world , ' he whisper to 
 the agonized Kim . ' thy fortune be make . in a little while thou 
 goest to Nucklao , and - here be something to pay the letter - writer . 
 I shall see thee again , I think , many time , ' and he canter off 
 down the road . 
 ' listen to I , ' say the Colonel from the veranda , speak in the 
 vernacular . ' in three day thou wilt go with I to Lucknow , see 
 and hear new thing all the while . therefore sit still for three 
 day and do not run away . thou wilt go to school at Lucknow . ' 
 ' shall I meet my Holy One there ? ' Kim whimper . 
 ' at least Lucknow be near to Benares than Umballa . it may be thou 
 wilt go under my protection . Mahbub Ali know this , and he will be 
 angry if thou returnest to the Road now . remember - much have be 
 tell I which I do not forget . ' 
 ' I will wait , ' say Kim , ' but the boy will beat I . ' 
 then the bugle blow for dinner . 
 chapter 7 
 unto whose use the pregnant sun be poise 
 with idiot moon and star retrace star ? 
 Creep thou betweene - thy coming be all unnoised . 
 Heaven hath her high , as Earth her baser , war . 
 Heir to these tumult , this affright , that fraye 
  by Adam 's , father ' , own , sin bind alway ; 
 peer up , draw out thy horoscope and say 
 which planet mend thy threadbare fate or mar ? 
 Sir John Christie . 
 in the afternoon the red - faced schoolmaster tell Kim that he have 
 be ' strike off the strength ' , which convey no meaning to he 
 till he be order to go away and play . then he run to the bazar , 
 and find the young letter - writer to whom he owe a stamp . 
 ' now I pay , ' say Kim royally , ' and now I need another letter to be 
 write . ' 
 ' Mahbub Ali be in Umballa , ' say the writer jauntily . he be , by 
 virtue of his office , a bureau of general misinformation . 
 ' this be not to Mahbub , but to a priest . take thy pen and write 
 quickly . to Teshoo Lama , the Holy One from Bhotiyal seek for a 
 River , who be now in the Temple of the Tirthankars at Benares . take 
 more ink ! in three day I be to go down to Nucklao to the school at 
 Nucklao . the name of the school be xavi . I do not know where that 
 school be , but it be at Nucklao . ' 
 ' but I know Nucklao , ' the writer interrupt . ' I know the school . ' 
 ' tell he where it be , and I give half an anna . ' 
 the reed pen scratch busily . ' he can not mistake . ' the man lift 
 his head . ' who watch we across the street ? ' 
 Kim look up hurriedly and see Colonel Creighton in tennis- 
 flannel . 
 ' oh , that be some Sahib who know the fat priest in the barrack . 
 he be beckon I . ' 
 ' what dost thou ? ' say the Colonel , when Kim trot up . 
 ' i - I be not run away . I send a letter to my Holy One at 
 Benares . ' 
 ' I have not think of that . Hast thou say that I take thee to 
 Lucknow ? ' 
 ' Nay , I have not . read the letter , if there be a doubt . ' 
 ' then why hast thou leave out my name in write to that Holy one ? ' 
 the Colonel smile a queer smile . Kim take his courage in both 
 hand . 
 ' it be say once to I that it be inexpedient to write the name 
 of stranger concern in any matter , because by the naming of 
 name many good plan be bring to confusion . ' 
 ' Thou hast be well teach , ' the Colonel reply , and Kim flush . 
 ' I have leave my cheroot - case in the Padre 's veranda . bring it to my 
 house this even . ' 
 ' where be the house ? ' say Kim . his quick wit tell he that he be 
 be test in some fashion or another , and he stand on guard . 
 ' ask anyone in the big bazar . ' the Colonel walk on . 
 ' he have forget his cheroot - case , ' say Kim , return . ' I must 
 bring it to he this evening . that be all my letter except , thrice 
 over , come to I ! come to I ! come to I ! now I will pay for a 
 stamp and put it in the post . he rise to go , and as an afterthought 
 ask : ' who be that angry - face Sahib who lose the cheroot - case ? ' 
 ' oh , he be only Creighton Sahib - a very foolish Sahib , who be a 
 Colonel Sahib without a regiment . ' 
 ' what be his business ? ' 
 ' God know . he be always buy horse which he can not ride , and 
 ask riddle about the work of God - such as plant and stone 
 and the custom of people . the dealer call he the father of 
 fool , because he be so easily cheat about a horse . Mahbub Ali 
 say he be madder than most other Sahibs . ' 
 ' oh ! ' say Kim , and depart . his training have give he some small 
 knowledge of character , and he argue that fool be not give 
 information which lead to call out eight thousand man besides 
 gun . the Commander - in - chief of all India do not talk , as Kim have 
 hear he talk , to fool . nor would Mahbub Ali 's tone have change , 
 as it do every time he mention the Colonel 's name , if the 
 Colonel have be a fool . consequently - and this set Kim to 
 skip - there be a mystery somewhere , and Mahbub Ali probably 
 spy for the Colonel much as Kim have spy for Mahbub . and , like 
 the horse - dealer , the Colonel evidently respect people who do 
 not show themselves to be too clever . 
 he rejoice that he have not betray his knowledge of the Colonel 's 
 house ; and when , on his return to barrack , he discover that no 
 cheroot - case have be leave behind , he beam with delight . here be 
 a man after his own heart - a tortuous and indirect person play 
 a hidden game . well , if he could be a fool , so could Kim . 
 he show nothing of his mind when Father Victor , for three long 
 morning , discourse to he of an entirely new set of Gods and 
 Godlings - notably of a Goddess call Mary , who , he gather , be 
 one with Bibi Miriam of Mahbub Ali 's theology . he betray no 
 emotion when , after the lecture , Father Victor drag he from 
 shop to shop buy article of outfit , nor when envious drummer- 
 boy kick he because he be go to a superior school do he 
 complain , but await the play of circumstance with an interested 
 soul . Father Victor , good man , take he to the station , put he 
 into an empty second - class next to Colonel Creighton 's first , and 
 bade he farewell with genuine feeling . 
 ' they will make a man o ' you , O'Hara , at St Xavier 's - a white man , 
 an ' , I hope , a good man . they know all about your comin ' , an ' the 
 Colonel will see that ye're not lose or mislay anywhere on the 
 road . I have   give you a notion of religious matter , - at least I 
 hope so , - and you will remember , when they ask you your religion , 
 that you be a cath'lic . well say roman cath'lic , tho ' I be not 
 fond of the word . ' 
 Kim light a rank cigarette - he have be careful to buy a stock in 
 the bazar - and lie down to think . this solitary passage be very 
 different from that joyful down - journey in the third - class with the 
 lama . ' Sahibs get little pleasure of travel , ' he reflect . 
 ' Hai mai ! I go from one place to another as it might be a kickball . 
 it be my Kismet . no man can escape his Kismet . but I be to pray to 
 Bibi Miriam , and I be a Sahib . ' he look at his boot ruefully . 
 ' no ; I be Kim . this be the great world , and I be only Kim . who be 
 Kim ? ' he consider his own identity , a thing he have never do 
 before , till his head swam . he be one insignificant person in all 
 this roar whirl of India , go southward to he know not what 
 fate . 
 presently the Colonel send for he , and talk for a long time . so 
 far as Kim could gather , he be to be diligent and enter the survey 
 of India as a chain - man . if he be very good , and pass the 
 proper examination , he would be earn thirty rupee a month at 
 seventeen year old , and Colonel Creighton would see that he find 
 suitable employment . 
 Kim pretend at first to understand perhaps one word in three of 
 this talk . then the Colonel , see his mistake , turn to fluent 
 and picturesque Urdu and Kim be content . no man could be a fool 
 who know the language so intimately , who move so gently and 
 silently , and whose eye be so different from the dull fat eye 
 of other Sahibs . 
 ' yes , and thou must learn how to make picture of road and 
 mountain and river , to carry these picture in thine eye till a 
 suitable time come to set they upon paper . perhaps some day , when 
 thou art a chain - man , I may say to thee when we be work 
 together : " go across those hill and see what lie beyond . " then 
 one will say : " there be bad people live in those hill who will 
 slay the chain - man if he be see to look like a Sahib . " what then ? ' 
 Kim think . would it be safe to return the Colonel 's lead ? 
 ' I would tell what that other man have say . ' 
 ' but if I answer : " I will give thee a hundred rupee for 
 knowledge of what be behind those hill - for a picture of a river 
 and a little news of what the people say in the village there " ? ' 
 ' how can I tell ? I be only a boy . wait till I be a man . ' then , 
 see the Colonel 's brow cloud , he go on : ' but I think I 
 should in a few day earn the hundred rupee . ' 
 ' by what road ? ' 
 Kim shake his head resolutely . ' if I say how I would earn they , 
 another man might hear and forestall I . it be not good to sell 
 knowledge for nothing . ' 
 ' tell now . ' the Colonel hold up a rupee . Kim 's hand half reach 
 towards it , and drop . 
 ' Nay , Sahib ; nay . I know the price that will be pay for the 
 answer , but I do not know why the question be ask . ' 
 ' take it for a gift , then , ' say Creighton , toss it over . ' there 
 be a good spirit in thee . do not let it be blunt at St Xavier 's . 
 there be many boy there who despise the black man . ' 
 ' their mother be bazar - woman , ' say Kim . he know well there be 
 no hatred like that of the half - caste for his brother - in - law . 
 ' true ; but thou art a Sahib and the son of a Sahib . therefore , do 
 not at any time be lead to contemn the black man . I have know boy 
 newly enter into the service of the Government who feign not to 
 understand the talk or the custom of black man . their pay be cut 
 for ignorance . there be no sin so great as ignorance . remember 
 this . ' 
 several time in the course of the long twenty - four hour ' run 
 south do the Colonel send for Kim , always develop this latter 
 text . 
 ' we be all on one lead - rope , then , ' say Kim at last , ' the Colonel , 
 Mahbub Ali , and I - when I become a chain - man . he will use I as 
 Mahbub Ali employ I , I think . that be good , if it allow I to 
 return to the Road again . this clothing grow no easy by wear . ' 
 when they come to the crowded Lucknow station there be no sign of 
 the lama . he swallow his disappointment , while the Colonel 
 bundle he into a ticca - gharri with his neat belonging and 
 despatch he alone to St Xavier 's . 
 ' I do not say farewell , because we shall meet again , ' he cry . 
 ' again , and many time , if thou art one of good spirit . but thou 
 art not yet try . ' 
 ' not when I bring thee ' - Kim actually dare to use the turn of 
 equal - ' a white stallion 's pedigree that night ? ' 
 ' much be gain by forget , little brother , ' say the Colonel , 
 with a look that pierce through Kim 's shoulder - blade as he 
 scuttle into the carriage . 
 it take he nearly five minute to recover . then he sniff the new 
 air appreciatively . ' a rich city , ' he say . ' rich than Lahore . 
 how good the bazar must be ! Coachman , drive I a little through 
 the bazar here . ' 
 ' my order be to take thee to the school . ' the driver use the 
 ' thou ' , which be rudeness when apply to a white man . in the 
 clear and most fluent vernacular Kim point out his error , 
 climb on to the box - seat , and , perfect understanding establish , 
 drive for a couple of hour up and down , estimate , compare , and 
 enjoy . there be no city - except Bombay , the queen of all - more 
 beautiful in her garish style than Lucknow , whether you see she 
 from the bridge over the river , or from the top of the Imambara 
 look down on the gilt umbrella of the Chutter Munzil , and the 
 tree in which the town be bed . king have adorn she with 
 fantastic building , endow she with charity , cram she with 
 pensioner , and drench she with blood . she be the centre of all 
 idleness , intrigue , and luxury , and share with Delhi the claim to 
 talk the only pure Urdu . 
 ' a fair city - a beautiful city . ' the driver , as a Lucknow man , be 
 pleased with the compliment , and tell Kim many astounding thing 
 where an english guide would have talk of the Mutiny . 
 ' now we will go to the school , ' say Kim at last . the great old 
 school of St Xavier 's in Partibus , block on block of low white 
 building , stand in vast ground over against the Gumti River , at 
 some distance from the city . 
 ' what like of folk be they within ? ' say Kim . 
 ' Young Sahibs - all devil . but to speak truth , and I drive many of 
 they to and fro from the railway station , I have never see one 
 that have in he the making of a more perfect devil than thou - this 
 young Sahib whom I be now drive . ' 
 naturally , for he be never train to consider they in any way 
 improper , Kim have pass the time of day with one or two frivolous 
 lady at upper window in a certain street , and naturally , in the 
 exchange of compliment , have acquit himself well . he be about 
 to acknowledge the driver 's last insolence , when his eye - it be 
 grow dusk - catch a figure sit by one of the white plaster 
 gate - pillar in the long sweep of wall . 
 ' stop ! ' he cry . ' stay here . I do not go to the school at once . ' 
 ' but what be to pay I for this come and re - come ? ' say the 
 driver petulantly . ' be the boy mad ? last time it be a dancing- 
 girl . this time it be a priest . ' 
 Kim be in the road headlong , pat the dusty foot beneath the 
 dirty yellow robe . 
 ' I have wait here a day and a half , ' the lama 's level voice 
 begin . ' Nay , I have a disciple with I . he that be my friend at the 
 Temple of the Tirthankars give I a guide for this journey . I come 
 from benare in the te - rain , when thy letter be give I . yes , I 
 be well feed . I need nothing . ' 
 ' but why didst thou not stay with the Kulu woman , o Holy one ? in 
 what way didst thou get to benare ? my heart have be heavy since 
 we part . ' 
 ' the woman weary I by constant flux of talk and require charm 
 for child . I separate myself from that company , permit she 
 to acquire merit by gift . she be at least a woman of open hand , 
 and I make a promise to return to her house if need arise . then , 
 perceive myself alone in this great and terrible world , I 
 bethink I of the te - rain to Benares , where I know one abode in 
 the Tirthankars ' Temple who be a Seeker , even as i. ' 
 ' ah ! Thy River , ' say Kim . ' I have forget the River . ' 
 ' so soon , my chela ? I have never forget it . but when I have leave 
 thee it seem well that I should go to the Temple and take 
 counsel , for , look you , India be very large , and it may be that 
 wise man before we , some two or three , have leave a record of the 
 place of our River . there be debate in the Temple of the 
 tirthankar on this matter ; some say one thing , and some 
 another . they be courteous folk . ' 
 ' so be it ; but what dost thou do now ? ' 
 ' I acquire merit in that I help thee , my chela , to wisdom . the 
 priest of that body of man who serve the Red Bull write I that all 
 should be as I desire for thee . I send the money to suffice for 
 one year , and then I come , as thou seest I , to watch for thee 
 go up into the Gates of Learning . a day and a half have I wait , 
 not because I be lead by any affection towards thee - that be no 
 part of the way - but , as they say at the Tirthankars ' Temple , 
 because , money have be pay for learn , it be right that I 
 should oversee the end of the matter . they resolve my doubt most 
 clearly . I have a fear that , perhaps , I come because I wish to see 
 thee - misguided by the Red Mist of affection . it be not so ... 
 moreover , I be trouble by a dream . ' 
 ' but surely , Holy One , thou hast not forget the Road and all 
 that befell on it . surely it be a little to see I that thou didst 
 come ? ' 
 ' the horse be cold , and it be past their feeding - time , ' whine 
 the driver . 
 ' go to Jehannum and abide there with thy reputationless aunt ! ' Kim 
 snarl over his shoulder . ' I be all alone in this land ; I know not 
 where I go nor what shall befall I . my heart be in that letter I 
 send thee . except for Mahbub Ali , and he be a Pathan , I have no 
 friend save thee , Holy One . do not altogether go away . ' 
 ' I have consider that also , ' the lama reply , in a shake 
 voice . ' it be manifest that from time to time I shall acquire merit 
 if before that I have not find my River - by assure myself 
 that thy foot be set on wisdom . what they will teach thee I do 
 not know , but the priest write I that no son of a Sahib in all 
 India will be well teach than thou . so from time to time , 
 therefore , I will come again . maybe thou wilt be such a Sahib as he 
 who give I these spectacle ' - the lama wipe they elaborately - 
 ' in the Wonder House at Lahore . that be my hope , for he be a 
 Fountain of Wisdom - wise than many abbot .... again , maybe thou 
 wilt forget I and our meeting . ' 
 ' if I eat thy bread , ' cry Kim passionately , ' how shall I ever 
 forget thee ? ' 
 ' no - no . ' he put the boy aside . ' I must go back to 
 benare . from time to time , now that I know the custom of letter- 
 writer in this land , I will send thee a letter , and from time to 
 time I will come and see thee . ' 
 ' but whither shall I send my letter ? ' wail Kim , clutch at the 
 robe , all forgetful that he be a Sahib . 
 ' to the Temple of the Tirthankars at Benares . that be the place I 
 have choose till I find my River . do not weep ; for , look you , all 
 Desire be Illusion and a new binding upon the Wheel . go up to the 
 Gates of Learning . let I see thee go ... dost thou love I ? then 
 go , or my heart crack ... I will come again . surely I will come 
 again . 
 the lama watch the ticca - gharri rumble into the compound , and 
 stride off , snuff between each long stride . 
 ' the Gates of Learning ' shut with a clang . 
 the country bear and breed boy have his own manner and custom , 
 which do not resemble those of any other land ; and his teacher 
 approach he by road which an english master would not understand . 
 therefore , you would scarcely be interested in Kim 's experience as 
 a St Xavier 's boy among two or three hundred precocious youth , 
 most of whom have never see the sea . he suffer the usual 
 penalty for break out of bound when there be cholera in the 
 city . this be before he have learn to write fair English , and so 
 be oblige to find a bazar letter - writer . he be , of course , 
 indict for smoking and for the use of abuse more full - flavour 
 than even St Xavier 's have ever hear . he learn to wash himself 
 with the levitical scrupulosity of the native - bear , who in his 
 heart consider the Englishman rather dirty . he play the usual 
 trick on the patient cooly pull the punkah in the sleeping- 
 room where the boy thresh through the hot night tell tale 
 till the dawn ; and quietly he measure himself against his self- 
 reliant mate . 
 they be son of subordinate official in the Railway , Telegraph , 
 and Canal Services ; of warrant - officer , sometimes retire and 
 sometimes act as commander - in - chief to a feudatory Rajah 's 
 army ; of captain of the Indian Marine Government pensioner , 
 planter , presidency shopkeeper , and missionary . a few be 
 cadet of the old eurasian house that have take strong root in 
 Dhurrumtollah - Pereiras , De Souzas , and D'Silvas . their parent 
 could well have educate they in England , but they love the school 
 that have serve their own youth , and generation follow sallow- 
 hue generation at St Xavier 's . their home range from Howrah of 
 the railway people to abandon cantonment like Monghyr and 
 Chunar ; lose tea - garden shillong - way ; village where their father 
 be large landholder in Oudh or the Deccan ; mission - station a 
 week from the near railway line ; seaport a thousand mile 
 south , face the brazen indian surf ; and cinchona - plantation 
 south of all . the mere story of their adventure , which to they 
 be no adventure , on their road to and from school would have 
 crisp a western boy 's hair . they be use to jog off alone 
 through a hundred mile of jungle , where there be always the 
 delightful chance of be delay by tiger ; but they would no 
 more have bath in the English Channel in an English August than 
 their brother across the world would have lain still while a 
 leopard snuff at their palanquin . there be boy of fifteen who 
 have spend a day and a half on an islet in the middle of a flooded 
 river , take charge , as by right , of a camp of frantic pilgrim 
 return from a shrine . there be senior who have requisition a 
 chance - meet Rajah 's elephant , in the name of St Francis Xavier , when 
 the Rains once blot out the cart - track that lead to their 
 father 's estate , and have all but lose the huge beast in a 
 quicksand . there be a boy who , he say , and none doubt , have 
 help his father to beat off with rifle from the veranda a rush 
 of Akas in the day when those head - hunter be bold against 
 lonely plantation . 
 and every tale be tell in the even , passionless voice of the 
 native - bear , mix with quaint reflection , borrow unconsciously 
 from native foster - mother , and turn of speech that show they 
 have be that instant translate from the vernacular . Kim watch , 
 listen , and approve . this be not insipid , single - word talk of 
 drummer - boy . it deal with a life he know and in part understand . 
 the atmosphere suit he , and he throve by inch . they give he a 
 white drill suit as the weather warm , and he rejoice in the new- 
 find bodily comfort as he rejoice to use his sharpened mind over 
 the task they set he . his quickness would have delight an 
 english master ; but at St Xavier 's they know the first rush of 
 mind develop by sun and surrounding , as they know the half- 
 collapse that set in at twenty - two or twenty - three . 
 none the less he remember to hold himself lowly . when tale be 
 tell of hot night , Kim do not sweep the board with his 
 reminiscence ; for St Xavier 's look down on boy who ' go native 
 all - together . ' one must never forget that one be a Sahib , and that 
 some day , when examination be pass , one will command native . 
 Kim make a note of this , for he begin to understand where 
 examination lead . 
 then come the holiday from August to October - the long holiday 
 impose by the heat and the Rains . Kim be inform that he would 
 go north to some station in the hill behind Umballa , where Father 
 Victor would arrange for he . 
 ' a barrack - school ? ' say Kim , who have ask many question and 
 think more . 
 ' yes , I suppose so , ' say the master . ' it will not do you any harm 
 to keep you out of mischief . you can go up with young De Castro as 
 far as Delhi . ' 
 Kim consider it in every possible light . he have be diligent , 
 even as the Colonel advise . a boy 's holiday be his own property - 
 of so much the talk of his companion have advise he , - and a 
 barrack - school would be torment after St Xavier 's . moreover - this 
 be magic worth anything else - he could write . in three month he 
 have discover how man can speak to each other without a third 
 party , at the cost of half an anna and a little knowledge . no word 
 have come from the lama , but there remain the Road . Kim yearn 
 for the caress of soft mud squish up between the toe , as his 
 mouth water for mutton stew with butter and cabbage , for rice 
 speckle with strong scented cardamom , for the saffron - tint 
 rice , garlic and onion , and the forbidden greasy sweetmeat of the 
 bazar . they would feed he raw beef on a platter at the barrack- 
 school , and he must smoke by stealth . but again , he be a Sahib and 
 be at St Xavier 's , and that pig Mahbub Ali ... no , he would not 
 test Mahbub 's hospitality - and yet ... he think 
 it out alone in the dormitory , and come to the conclusion he have 
 be unjust to Mahbub . 
 the school be empty ; nearly all the master have go away ; Colonel 
 Creighton 's railway pass lie in his hand , and Kim puff himself 
 that he have not spend Colonel Creighton 's or Mahbub 's money in 
 riotous living . he be still lord of two rupee seven anna . his 
 new bullock - trunk , mark ' K. o'h. ' , and bed - roll lay in the 
 empty sleeping - room . 
 ' Sahibs be always tie to their baggage , ' 
 say Kim , nod at they . ' you will stay here ' he go out into 
 the warm rain , smile sinfully , and seek a certain house whose 
 outside he have note down some time before ... 
 ' Arre ' ! dost thou know what manner of woman we be in this quarter ? 
 oh , shame ! ' 
 ' be I bear yesterday ? ' Kim squat native - fashion on the cushion 
 of that upper room . ' a little dyestuff and three yard of cloth to 
 help out a jest . be it much to ask ? ' 
 ' who be she ? thou art full young , as Sahibs go , for this devilry . ' 
 ' oh , she ? she be the daughter of a certain schoolmaster of a 
 regiment in the cantonment . he have beat I twice because I 
 go over their wall in these clothe . now I would go as a 
 gardener 's boy . old man be very jealous . ' 
 ' that be true . hold thy face still while I dab on the juice . ' 
 ' not too black , Naikan . I would not appear to she as a hubshi 
  nigger . ' 
 ' oh , love make nought of these thing . and how old be she ? ' 
 ' twelve year , I think , ' say the shameless Kim . ' spread it also on 
 the breast . it may be her father will tear my clothe off I , and 
 if I be piebald - ' he laugh . 
 the girl work busily , dab a twist of cloth into a little 
 saucer of brown dye that hold long than any walnut - juice . 
 ' now send out and get I a cloth for the turban . Woe be I , my head 
 be all unshaved ! and he will surely knock off my turban . ' 
 ' I be not a barber , but I will make shift . Thou wast bear to be a 
 breaker of heart ! all this disguise for one evening ? remember , the 
 stuff do not wash away . ' she shake with laughter till her 
 bracelet and anklet jingle . ' but who be to pay I for this ? 
 Huneefa herself could not have give thee well stuff . ' 
 ' trust in the Gods , my sister , ' say Kim gravely , screw his face 
 round as the stain dry . ' besides , hast thou ever help to paint 
 a Sahib thus before ? ' 
 ' never indeed . but a jest be not money . ' 
 ' it be worth much more . ' 
 ' child , thou art beyond all dispute the most shameless son of 
 Shaitan that I have ever know to take up a poor girl 's time with 
 this play , and then to say : " be not the jest enough ? " thou wilt go 
 very far in this world . ' she give the dancing - girl ' salutation in 
 mockery . 
 ' all one . make haste and rough - cut my head . ' Kim shift from foot 
 to foot , his eye ablaze with mirth as he think of the fat day 
 before he . he give the girl four anna , and run down the stair in 
 the likeness of a low - caste Hindu boy - perfect in every detail . a 
 cookshop be his next point of call , where he feast in 
 extravagance and greasy luxury . 
 on Lucknow station platform he watch young De Castro , all cover 
 with prickly - heat , get into a second - class compartment . Kim 
 patronize a third , and be the life and soul of it . he explain 
 to the company that he be assistant to a juggler who have leave he 
 behind sick with fever , and that he would pick up his master at 
 Umballa . as the occupant of the carriage change , he vary this 
 tale , or adorn it with all the shoot of a bud fancy , the 
 more rampant for be hold off native speech so long . in all India 
 that night be no human be so joyful as Kim . at Umballa he get 
 out and head eastward , plash over the sodden field to the 
 village where the old soldier live . 
 about this time Colonel Creighton at Simla be advise from Lucknow 
 by wire that young O'Hara have disappear . Mahbub Ali be in town 
 selling horse , and to he the Colonel confide the affair one 
 morning canter round Annandale racecourse . 
 ' oh , that be nothing , ' say the horse - dealer . ' man be like horse . 
 at certain time they need salt , and if that salt be not in the 
 manger they will lick it up from the earth . he have go back to 
 the Road again for a while . the madrissak weary he . I know it 
 would . another time , I will take he upon the Road myself . do not 
 be trouble , Creighton Sahib . it be as though a polo - pony , breaking 
 loose , run out to learn the game alone . ' 
 ' then he be not dead , think you ? ' 
 ' fever might kill he . I do not fear for the boy otherwise . a 
 monkey do not fall among tree . ' 
 next morning , on the same course , Mahbub 's stallion range 
 alongside the Colonel . 
 ' it be as I have think , ' say the horse - dealer . ' he have come 
 through Umballa at least , and there he have write a letter to I , 
 have learn in the bazar that I be here . ' 
 ' read , ' say the Colonel , with a sigh of relief . it be absurd that 
 a man of his position should take an interest in a little country- 
 breed vagabond ; but the Colonel remember the conversation in the 
 train , and often in the past few month have catch himself think 
 of the queer , silent , self - possess boy . his evasion , of course , 
 be the height of insolence , but it argue some resource and nerve . 
 Mahbub 's eye twinkle as he rein out into the centre of the 
 cramp little plain , where none could come near unseen . 
 ' " the Friend of the Stars , who be the Friend of all the World - " ' 
 ' what be this ? ' 
 ' a name we give he in Lahore city . " the Friend of all the World 
 take leave to go to his own place . he will come back upon the 
 appoint day . let the box and the bed - roll be send for ; and if 
 there have be a fault , let the Hand of Friendship turn aside the 
 Whip of Calamity . " there be yet a little more , but - ' 
 ' no matter , read . ' 
 ' " certain thing be not know to those who eat with fork . it be 
 well to eat with both hand for a while . speak soft word to 
 those who do not understand this that the return may be 
 propitious . " now the manner in which that be cast be , of course , 
 the work of the letter - writer , but see how wisely the boy have 
 devise the matter of it so that no hint be give except to those 
 who know ! ' 
 ' be this the Hand of Friendship to avert the Whip of Calamity ? ' 
 laugh the Colonel . 
 ' see how wise be the boy . he would go back to the Road again , as I 
 say . not know yet thy trade - ' 
 ' I be not at all sure of that , ' the Colonel mutter . 
 ' he turn to I to make a peace between you . be he not wise ? he 
 say he will return . he be but perfect his knowledge . think , 
 Sahib ! he have be three month at the school . and he be not 
 mouthed to that bit . for my part , I rejoice . the pony learn the 
 game . ' 
 ' ay , but another time he must not go alone . ' 
 ' why ? he go alone before he come under the Colonel Sahib 's 
 protection . when he come to the Great Game he must go alone - 
 alone , and at peril of his head . then , if he spit , or sneeze , or 
 sit down other than as the people do whom he watch , he may be 
 slain . why hinder he now ? remember how the Persians say : the 
 jackal that live in the wild of Mazanderan can only be catch by 
 the hound of Mazanderan . ' 
 ' true . it be true , Mahbub Ali . and if he come to no harm , I do not 
 desire anything well . but it be great insolence on his part . ' 
 ' he do not tell I , even , whither he go , ' say Mahbub . ' he be 
 no fool . when his time be accomplish he will come to I . it be 
 time the healer of pearl take he in hand . he ripen too quickly - 
 as Sahibs reckon . ' 
 this prophecy be fulfil to the letter a month later . Mahbub have 
 go down to Umballa to bring up a fresh consignment of horse , and 
 Kim meet he on the Kalka road at dusk rid alone , beg an alm 
 of he , be swear at , and reply in English . there be nobody 
 within earshot to hear Mahbub 's gasp of amazement . 
 ' Oho ! and where hast thou be ? ' 
 ' up and down - down and up . ' 
 ' come under a tree , out of the wet , and tell . ' 
 ' I stay for a 
 while with an old man near Umballa ; anon with a household of my 
 acquaintance in Umballa . with one of these I go as far as Delhi 
 to the southward . that be a wondrous city . then I drive a bullock 
 for a teli   an oilman   come north ; but I hear of a great feast 
 forward in Patiala , and thither go I in the company of a 
 firework - maker . it be a great feast '   Kim rub his stomach . ' I 
 see Rajahs , and elephant with gold and silver trapping ; and they 
 light all the firework at once , whereby eleven man be kill , my 
 fire - work - maker among they , and I be blow across a tent but take 
 no harm . then I come back to the rel with a Sikh horseman , to whom 
 I be groom for my bread ; and so here . ' 
 ' shabash ! ' say Mahbub Ali . 
 ' but what do the Colonel Sahib say ? I do not wish to be beat . ' 
 ' the Hand of Friendship have avert the Whip of Calamity ; but 
 another time , when thou tak the Road it will be with I . this be 
 too early . ' 
 ' late enough for I . I have learn to read and to write English a 
 little at the madrissah . I shall soon be altogether a Sahib . ' 
 ' hear he ! ' laugh Mahbub , look at the little drench figure 
 dancing in the wet . ' Salaam - Sahib , ' and he salute ironically . 
 ' well , art tired of the Road , or wilt thou come on to Umballa with 
 I and work back with the horse ? ' 
 ' I come with thee , Mahbub Ali . ' 
 chapter 8 
 something I owe to the soil that grow - 
 More to the life that feed - 
 but most to Allah who give I two 
 separate side to my head . 
 I would go without shirt or shoe , 
 friend , tobacco or bread 
 soon than for an instant lose 
 either side of my head . ' 
 the two - sided Man . 
 ' then in God 's name take blue for red , ' say Mahbub , allude to 
 the Hindu colour of Kim 's disreputable turban . 
 Kim counter with the old proverb , ' I will change my faith and my 
 bedding , but thou must pay for it . ' 
 the dealer laugh till he nearly fall from his horse . at a shop on 
 the outskirt of the city the change be make , and Kim stand up , 
 externally at least , a Mohammedan . 
 Mahbub hire a room over against the railway station , send for a 
 cook meal of the fine with the almond - curd sweet - meat 
  balushai we call it   and fine - chop Lucknow tobacco . 
 ' this be well than some other meat that I eat with the Sikh , ' 
 say Kim , grin as he squat , ' and assuredly they give no such 
 victual at my madrissah . ' 
 ' I have a desire to hear of that same madrissah . ' Mahbub stuff 
 himself with great bolus of spice mutton fry in fat with 
 cabbage and golden - brown onion . ' but tell I first , altogether and 
 truthfully , the manner of thy escape . for , o Friend of all the 
 World , ' - he loose his crack belt - ' I do not think it be 
 often that a Sahib and the son of a Sahib run away from there . ' 
 ' how should they ? they do not know the land . it be nothing , ' say 
 Kim , and begin his tale . when he come to the disguisement and the 
 interview with the girl in the bazar , Mahbub Ali 's gravity go 
 from he . he laugh aloud and beat his hand on his thigh . 
 ' Shabash ! shabash ! oh , well do , little one ! what will the healer 
 of turquoise say to this ? now , slowly , let we hear what befell 
 afterwards - step by step , omit nothing . ' 
 step by step then , Kim tell his adventure between cough as the 
 full - flavour tobacco catch his lung . 
 ' I say , ' growl Mahbub Ali to himself , ' I say it be the pony 
 break out to play polo . the fruit be ripe already -except that 
 he must learn his distance and his pacing , and his rod and his 
 compass . listen now . I have turn aside the Colonel 's whip from 
 thy skin , and that be no small service . ' 
 ' true . ' Kim pull serenely . ' that be true . ' 
 ' but it be not to be think that this run out and in be any 
 way good . ' 
 ' it be my holiday , Hajji . I be a slave for many week . why should 
 I not run away when the school be shut ? look , too , how I , live 
 upon my friend or work for my bread , as I do with the Sikh , 
 have save the Colonel Sahib a great expense . ' 
 Mahbub 's lip twitch under his well - prune Mohammedan moustache . 
 ' what be a few rupee ' - the Pathan throw out his open hand 
 carelessly - ' to the Colonel Sahib ? he spend they for a purpose , 
 not in any way for love of thee . ' 
 ' that , ' say Kim slowly , ' I know a very long time ago . ' 
 ' who tell ? ' 
 ' the Colonel Sahib himself . not in those many word , but plainly 
 enough for one who be not altogether a mud - head . yea , he tell I in 
 the te - rain when we go down to Lucknow . ' 
 ' be it so . then I will tell thee more , Friend of all the World , 
 though in the telling I lend thee my head . ' 
 ' it be forfeit to I , ' say Kim , with deep relish , ' in Umballa , 
 when thou didst pick I up on the horse after the drummer - boy beat 
 I . ' 
 ' speak a little plainer . all the world may tell lie save thou and 
 I. for equally be thy life forfeit to I if I choose to raise my 
 finger here . ' 
 ' and this be know to I also , ' say Kim , readjust the live 
 charcoal - ball on the weed . ' it be a very sure tie between we . 
 indeed , thy hold be surer even than mine ; for who would miss a boy 
 beat to death , or , it may be , throw into a well by the roadside ? 
 Most people here and in Simla and across the pass behind the 
 Hills would , on the other hand , say : " what have come to Mahbub Ali ? " 
 if he be find dead among his horse . surely , too , the Colonel 
 Sahib would make inquiry . but again,'- Kim 's face pucker with 
 cunning , - ' he would not make overlong inquiry , lest people should 
 ask : " what have this Colonel Sahib to do with that horse - dealer ? " 
 but I - if I live - ' 
 ' as thou wouldst surely die - ' 
 ' maybe ; but I say , if I live , I , and I alone , would know that one 
 have come by night , as a common thief perhaps , to Mahbub Ali 's 
 bulkhead in the serai , and there have slay he , either before or 
 after that thief have make a full search into his saddlebag and 
 between the sol of his slipper . be that news to tell to the 
 Colonel , or would he say to I -   I have not forget when he send 
 I back for a cigar - case that he have not leave behind he   - " what 
 be Mahbub Ali to I ? " ? ' 
 up go a gout of heavy smoke . there be a long pause : then Mahbub 
 Ali speak in admiration : ' and with these thing on thy mind , dost 
 thou lie down and rise again among all the Sahibs ' little son at 
 the madrissah and meekly take instruction from thy teacher ? ' 
 ' it be an order , ' say Kim blandly . ' who be I to dispute an order ? ' 
 ' a most finished Son of Eblis , ' say Mahbub Ali . ' but what be this 
 tale of the thief and the search ? ' 
 ' that which I see , ' say Kim , ' the night that my lama and I lay 
 next thy place in the Kashmir Seral . the door be leave unlocked , 
 which I think be not thy custom , Mahbub . he come in as one assure 
 that thou wouldst not soon return . my eye be against a knot - hole 
 in the plank . he search as it be for something - not a rug , not 
 stirrup , nor a bridle , nor brass pot - something little and most 
 carefully hid . else why do he prick with an iron between the sol 
 of thy slipper ? ' 
 ' ha ! ' Mahbub Ali smile gently . ' and see these thing , what tale 
 didst thou fashion to thyself , well of the truth ? ' 
 ' none . I put my hand upon my amulet , which lie always next to my 
 skin , and , remember the pedigree of a white stallion that I have 
 bite out of a piece of Mussalmani bread , I go away to Umballa 
 perceive that a heavy trust be lay upon I . at that hour , have I 
 choose , thy head be forfeit . it need only to say to that man , " I 
 have here a paper concern a horse which I can not read . " and 
 then ? ' Kim peer at Mahbub under his eyebrow . 
 ' then thou wouldst have drunk water twice - perhaps thrice , 
 afterwards . I do not think more than thrice , ' say Mahbub simply . 
 ' it be true . I think of that a little , but most I think that I 
 love thee , Mahbub . therefore I go to Umballa , as thou know , 
 but   and this thou dost not know   I lie hid in the garden - grass to 
 see what Colonel Creighton Sahib might do upon read the white 
 stallion 's pedigree . ' 
 ' and what do he ? ' for Kim have bite off the conversation . 
 ' dost thou give news for love , or dost thou sell it ? ' Kim ask . 
 ' I sell and - I buy . ' Mahbub take a four - anna piece out of his belt 
 and hold it up . 
 ' eight ! ' say Kim , mechanically follow the huckster instinct of 
 the East . 
 Mahbub laugh , and put away the coin . ' it be too easy to deal in 
 that market , Friend of all the World . tell I for love . our life 
 lie in each other 's hand . ' 
 ' very good . I see the Jang - I - Lat Sahib   the Commander - in - Chief 
 come to a big dinner . I see he in Creighton Sahib 's office . I see 
 the two read the white stallion 's pedigree . I hear the very order 
 give for the opening of a great war . ' 
 ' hah ! ' Mahbub nod with deep eye afire . ' the game be well 
 play . that war be do now , and the evil , we hope , nip before 
 the flower - thank to I - and thee . what didst thou later ? ' 
 ' I make the news as it be a hook to catch I victual and honour 
 among the villager in a village whose priest drug my lama . but 
 I bear away the old man 's purse , and the Brahmin find nothing . so 
 next morning he be angry . Ho ! Ho ! and I also use the news when I 
 fall into the hand of that white Regiment with their Bull ! ' 
 ' that be foolishness . ' Mahbub scowl . ' news be not mean to be 
 throw about like dung - cake , but use sparingly - like bhang . ' 
 ' so I think now , and moreover , it do I no sort of good . but that 
 be very long ago , ' he make as to brush it all away with a thin 
 brown hand - ' and since then , and especially in the night under 
 the punkah at the madrissah , I have think very greatly . ' 
 ' be it permit to ask whither the Heaven - bear 's thought might 
 have lead ? ' say Mahbub , with an elaborate sarcasm , smooth his 
 scarlet beard . 
 ' it be permit , ' say Kim , and throw back the very tone . ' they 
 say at Nucklao that no Sahib must tell a black man that he have make 
 a fault . ' 
 Mahbub 's hand shoot into his bosom , for to call a Pathan a ' black 
 man '   kala admi   be a blood - insult . then he remember and laugh . 
 ' Speak , Sahib . thy black man hear . ' 
 ' but , ' say Kim , ' I be not a Sahib , and I say I make a fault to 
 curse thee , Mahbub Ali , on that day at Umballa when I think I be 
 betray by a Pathan . I be senseless ; for I be but newly catch , 
 and I wish to kill that low - caste drummer - boy . I say now , Hajji , 
 that it be well do ; and I see my road all clear before I to a 
 good service . I will stay in the madrissah till I be ripe . ' 
 ' well say . especially be distance and number and the manner of 
 use compass to be learn in that game . one wait in the Hills 
 above to show thee . ' 
 ' I will learn their teaching upon a condition - that my time be 
 give to I without question when the madrissah be shut . ask that 
 for I of the Colonel . ' 
 ' but why not ask the Colonel in the Sahibs ' tongue ? ' 
 ' the Colonel be the servant of the Government . he be send hither 
 and yon at a word , and must consider his own advancement .   see how 
 much I have already learn at Nucklao !   moreover , the Colonel I 
 know since three month only . I have know one Mahbub Ali for six 
 year . so ! to the madrissah I will go . at the madrissah I will 
 learn . in the madrissah I will be a Sahib . but when the madrissah 
 be shut , then must I be free and go among my people . otherwise I 
 die ! ' 
 ' and who be thy people , Friend of all the World ? ' 
 ' this great and beautiful land , ' say Kim , wave his paw round the 
 little clay - wall room where the oil - lamp in its niche burn 
 heavily through the tobacco - smoke . ' and , far , I would see my 
 lama again . and , far , I need money . ' 
 ' that be the need of everyone , ' say Mahbub ruefully . ' I will give 
 thee eight anna , for much money be not pick out of horse ' 
 hoof , and it must suffice for many day . as to all the rest , I be 
 well pleased , and no further talk be need . make haste to learn , 
 and in three year , or it may be less , thou wilt be an aid - even 
 to I . ' 
 ' have I be such a hindrance till now ? ' say Kim , with a boy 's 
 giggle . 
 ' do not give answer , ' Mahbub grunt . ' thou art my new horse - boy . 
 go and bed among my man . they be near the north end of the 
 station , with the horse . ' 
 ' they will beat I to the south end of the station if I come 
 without authority . ' 
 Mahbub feel in his belt , wet his thumb on a cake of chinese ink , 
 and dab the impression on a piece of soft native paper . from 
 Balkh to Bombay man know that rough - ridged print with the old scar 
 run diagonally across it . 
 ' that be enough to show my headman . I come in the morning . ' 
 ' by which road ? ' say Kim . 
 ' by the road from the city . there be but one , and then we return to 
 Creighton Sahib . I have save thee a beating . ' 
 ' Allah ! what be a beating when the very head be loose on the 
 shoulder ? ' 
 Kim slide out quietly into the night , walk half round the house , 
 keep close to the wall , and head away from the station for a 
 mile or so . then , fetch a wide compass , he work back at 
 leisure , for he need time to invent a story if any of Mahbub 's 
 retainer ask question . 
 they be camp on a piece of waste ground beside the railway , 
 and , be native , have not , of course , unload the two truck in 
 which Mahbub 's animal stand among a consignment of country - bred 
 buy by the Bombay tram - company . the headman , a break - down , 
 consumptive - look Mohammedan , promptly challenge Kim , but be 
 pacify at sight of Mahbub 's sign - manual . 
 ' the Hajji have of his favour give I service , ' say Kim testily . 
 ' if this be doubt , wait till he come in the morning . meantime , a 
 place by the fire . ' 
 follow the usual aimless babble that every low - caste native must 
 raise on every occasion . it die down , and Kim lie out behind the 
 little knot of Mahbub 's follower , almost under the wheel of a 
 horse - truck , a borrow blanket for cover . now a bed among 
 brickbat and ballast - refuse on a damp night , between overcrowded 
 horse and unwashed baltis , would not appeal to many white boy ; 
 but Kim be utterly happy . change of scene , service , and 
 surrounding be the breath of his little nostril , and thinking 
 of the neat white cot of St Xavier 's all arow under the punkah 
 give he joy as keen as the repetition of the multiplication - table 
 in English . 
 ' I be very old , ' he think sleepily . ' every month I become a year 
 more old . I be very young , and a fool to boot , when I take 
 Mahbub 's message to Umballa . even when I be with that white 
 regiment I be very young and small and have no wisdom . but now I 
 learn every day , and in three year the Colonel will take I out of 
 the madrissah and let I go upon the Road with Mahbub hunt for 
 horse ' pedigree , or maybe I shall go by myself ; or maybe I shall 
 find the lama and go with he . yes ; that be good . to walk again as 
 a chela with my lama when he come back to Benares . ' 
 the thought 
 come more slowly and disconnectedly . he be plunge into a 
 beautiful dreamland when his ear catch a whisper , thin and sharp , 
 above the monotonous babble round the fire . it come from behind the 
 iron - skin horse - truck . 
 ' he be not here , then ? ' 
 ' where should he be but roystere in the city . who look for a rat 
 in a frog - pond ? come away . he be not our man . ' 
 ' he must not go back beyond the Passes a second time . it be the 
 order . ' 
 ' hire some woman to drug he . it be a few rupee only , and there be 
 no evidence . ' 
 ' except the woman . it must be more certain ; and remember the price 
 upon his head . ' 
 ' ay , but the police have a long arm , and we be far from the 
 Border . if it be in Peshawur , now ! ' 
 ' yes - in Peshawur , ' the second voice sneer . ' Peshawur , full of 
 his blood - kin - full of bolt - hole and woman behind whose clothe 
 he will hide . yes , Peshawur or Jehannum would suit we equally 
 well . ' 
 ' then what be the plan ? ' 
 ' o fool , have I not tell it a hundred time ? wait till he come to 
 lie down , and then one sure shot . the truck be between we and 
 pursuit . we have but to run back over the line and go our way . 
 they will not see whence the shot come . wait here at least till the 
 dawn . what manner of fakir art thou , to shiver at a little 
 watch ? ' 
 ' oho ! ' think Kim , behind close - shut eye . ' once again it be 
 Mahbub . indeed a white stallion 's pedigree be not a good thing to 
 peddle to Sahibs ! or maybe Mahbub have be sell other news . now 
 what be to do , Kim ? I know not where Mahbub house , and if he come 
 here before the dawn they will shoot he . that would be no profit 
 for thee , Kim . and this be not a matter for the police . that would 
 be no profit for Mahbub ; and ' - he giggle almost aloud - ' I do not 
 remember any lesson at Nucklao which will help I . Allah ! here be 
 Kim and yonder be they . first , then , Kim must wake and go away , so 
 that they shall not suspect . a bad dream wake a man - thus - ' 
 he throw the blanket off his face , and raise himself suddenly with 
 the terrible , bubble , meaningless yell of the Asiatic rouse by 
 nightmare . 
 ' urr - urr - urr - urr ! ya - la - la - la - la ! narain ! the churel ! the churel ! ' 
 a churel be the peculiarly malignant ghost of a woman who have die 
 in child - bed . she haunt lonely road , her foot be turn 
 backwards on the ankle , and she lead man to torment . 
 Louder rise Kim 's quavering howl , till at last he leap to his 
 foot and stagger off sleepily , while the camp curse he for 
 wake they . some twenty yard far up the line he lie down 
 again , take care that the whisperer should hear his grunt and 
 groan as he recompose himself . after a few minute he roll 
 towards the road and steal away into the thick darkness . 
 he paddle along swiftly till he come to a culvert , and drop 
 behind it , his chin on a level with the cop - stone . here he could 
 command all the night - traffic , himself unseen . 
 two or three cart pass , jingle out to the suburb ; a coughing 
 policeman and a hurrying foot - passenger or two who sing to keep off 
 evil spirit . then rap the shod foot of a horse . 
 ' ah ! this be more like Mahbub , ' think Kim , as the beast shy at 
 the little head above the culvert . 
 ' Ohe ' , Mahbub Ali , ' he whisper , ' have a care ! ' 
 the horse be rein back almost on its haunch , and force 
 towards the culvert . 
 ' never again , ' say Mahbub , ' will I take a shod horse for night- 
 work . they pick up all the bone and nail in the city . ' he stoop 
 to lift its forefoot , and that bring his head within a foot of 
 Kim 's . 
 ' down - keep down , ' he mutter . ' the night be full of 
 eye . ' 
 ' two man wait thy come behind the horse - truck . they will shoot 
 thee at thy lie down , because there be a price on thy head . I 
 hear , sleep near the horse . ' 
 ' didst thou see they ? ... hold still , Sire of devil ! ' this 
 furiously to the horse . 
 ' no . ' 
 ' be one dress belike as a fakir ? ' 
 ' one say to the other , " what manner of fakir art thou , to shiver 
 at a little watching ? " ' 
 ' good . go back to the camp and lie down . I do not die tonight . ' 
 Mahbub wheel his horse and vanish . Kim tear back down the ditch 
 till he reach a point opposite his second resting - place , slip 
 across the road like a weasel , and re - coil himself in the 
 blanket . 
 ' at least Mahbub know , ' he think contentedly . ' and certainly he 
 speak as one expect it . I do not think those two man will profit 
 by tonight 's watch . ' 
 an hour pass , and , with the good will in the world to keep awake 
 all night , he sleep deeply . now and again a night train roar 
 along the metal within twenty foot of he ; but he have all the 
 Oriental 's indifference to mere noise , and it do not even weave a 
 dream through his slumber . 
 Mahbub be anything but asleep . it annoy he vehemently that 
 people outside his tribe and unaffected by his casual amour should 
 pursue he for the life . his first and natural impulse be to cross 
 the line low down , work up again , and , catch his well - wisher 
 from behind , summarily slay they . here , he reflect with sorrow , 
 another branch of the Government , totally unconnected with Colonel 
 Creighton , might demand explanation which would be hard to supply ; 
 and he know that south of the Border a perfectly ridiculous fuss be 
 make about a corpse or so . he have not be trouble in this way 
 since he send Kim to Umballa with the message , and hop that 
 suspicion have be finally divert . 
 then a most brilliant notion strike he . 
 ' the English do eternally tell the truth , ' he say , ' therefore we 
 of this country be eternally make foolish . by Allah , I will tell 
 the truth to an Englishman ! of what use be the Government police if 
 a poor Kabuli be rob of his horse in their very truck . this be 
 as bad as Peshawur ! I should lay a complaint at the station . well 
 still , some young Sahib on the Railway ! they be zealous , and if 
 they catch thief it be remember to their honour . ' 
 he tie up his horse outside the station , and stride on to the 
 platform . 
 ' Hullo , Mahbub Ali ' say a young Assistant District Traffic 
 Superintendent who be wait to go down the line - a tall , tow- 
 haired , horsey youth in dingy white linen . ' what be you do 
 here ? sell weed - eh ? ' 
 ' no ; I be not troubled for my horse . I come to look for Lutuf 
 Ullah . I have a truck - load up the line . could anyone take they out 
 without the Railway 's knowledge ? ' 
 ' should not   think so , Mahbub . you can claim against we if they do . ' 
 ' I have see two man crouch under the wheel of one of the 
 truck nearly all night . fakir do not steal horse , so I give they 
 no more thought . I would find Lutuf Ullah , my partner . ' 
 ' the deuce you do ? and you do not   bother your head about it ? ' Pon 
 my word , it be just almost as well that I meet you . what be they 
 like , eh ? ' 
 ' they be only fakir . they will no more than take a little grain , 
 perhaps , from one of the truck . there be many up the line . the 
 State will never miss the dole . I come here seek for my partner , 
 Lutuf Ullah . ' 
 ' never mind your partner . where be your horse - truck ? ' 
 ' a little to this side of the farth place where they make lamp 
 for the train . ' 
 ' the signal - box ! yes . ' 
 ' and upon the rail near to the road upon the right - hand side - 
 look up the line thus . but as regard Lutuf Ullah - a tall man 
 with a broken nose , and a persian greyhound Aie ! ' 
 the boy have hurry off to wake up a young and enthusiastic 
 policeman ; for , as he say , the Railway have suffer much from 
 depredation in the good - yard . Mahbub Ali chuckle in his dyed 
 beard . 
 ' they will walk in their boot , make a noise , and then they will 
 wonder why there be no fakir . they be very clever boy - Barton 
 Sahib and Young Sahib . ' 
 he wait idly for a few minute , expect to see they hurry up 
 the line girt for action . a light engine slide through the station , 
 and he catch a glimpse of young Barton in the cab . 
 ' I do that child an injustice . he be not altogether a fool , ' say 
 Mahbub Ali . ' to take a fire - carriage for a thief be a new game ! ' 
 when Mahbub Ali come to his camp in the dawn , no one think it 
 worth while to tell he any news of the night . no one , at least , 
 but one small horseboy , newly advanced to the great man 's service , 
 whom Mahbub call to his tiny tent to assist in some packing . 
 ' it be all know to I , ' whisper Kim , bend above saddlebag . 
 ' two Sahibs come up on a te - train . I be run to and fro in the 
 dark on this side of the truck as the te - train move up and down 
 slowly . they fall upon two man sit under this truck - Hajji , 
 what shall I do with this lump of tobacco ? wrap it in paper and put 
 it under the salt - bag ? yes - and strike they down . but one man 
 strike at a Sahib with a fakir 's buck 's horn '   Kim mean the 
 conjoin black - buck horn , which be a fakir 's sole temporal 
 weapon   - ' the blood come . so the other Sahib , first smite his 
 own man senseless , smote the stabber with a short gun which have 
 roll from the first man 's hand . they all rag as though mad 
 together . ' 
 Mahbub smile with heavenly resignation . ' no ! that be not so much 
 dewanee   madness , or a case for the civil court - the word can be 
 pun upon both way   as nizamut   a criminal case . a gun , sayest 
 thou ? ten good year in jail . ' 
 ' then they both lay still , but I think they be nearly dead when 
 they be put on the te - train . their head move thus . and there be 
 much blood on the line . come and see ? ' 
 ' I have see blood before . jail be the sure place - and assuredly 
 they will give false name , and assuredly no man will find they for 
 a long time . they be unfriend of mine . thy fate and mine seem on 
 one string . what a tale for the healer of pearl ! now swiftly with 
 the saddle - bag and the cooking - platter . we will take out the 
 horse and away to Simla . ' 
 swiftly - as oriental understand speed - with long explanation , 
 with abuse and windy talk , carelessly , amid a hundred check for 
 little thing forget , the untidy camp break up and lead the half- 
 dozen stiff and fretful horse along the Kalka road in the fresh of 
 the rain - sweep dawn . Kim , regard as Mahbub Ali 's favourite by all 
 who wish to stand well with the Pathan , be not call upon to 
 work . they stroll on by the easy of stage , halt every few 
 hour at a wayside shelter . very many Sahibs travel along the Kalka 
 road ; and , as Mahbub Ali say , every young Sahib must need esteem 
 himself a judge of a horse , and , though he be over head in debt to 
 the money - lender , must make as if to buy . that be the reason that 
 Sahib after Sahib , roll along in a stage - carriage , would stop 
 and open talk . some would even descend from their vehicle and feel 
 the horse ' leg ; ask inane question , or , through sheer 
 ignorance of the vernacular , grossly insult the imperturbable 
 trader . 
 ' when first I deal with Sahibs , and that be when Colonel Soady 
 Sahib be Governor of Fort Abazai and flood the Commissioner 's 
 camping - ground for spite , ' Mahbub confide to Kim as the boy fill 
 his pipe under a tree , ' I do not know how greatly they be fool , 
 and this make I wroth . as thus - , ' and he tell Kim a tale of an 
 expression , misuse in all innocence , that double Kim up with 
 mirth . ' now I see , however , ' - he exhale smoke slowly - ' that it 
 be with they as with all man - in certain matter they be wise , 
 and in other most foolish . very foolish it be to use the wrong 
 word to a stranger ; for though the heart may be clean of offence , 
 how be the strange to know that ? he be more like to search truth 
 with a dagger . ' 
 ' true . true talk , ' say Kim solemnly . ' fool speak of a cat when a 
 woman be bring to bed , for instance . I have hear they . ' 
 ' therefore , in one situate as thou art , it particularly behove 
 thee to remember this with both kind of face . among Sahibs , never 
 forget thou art a Sahib ; among the folk of Hind , always 
 remember thou art - ' he pause , with a puzzled smile . 
 ' what be I ? Mussalman , Hindu , Jain , or Buddhist ? that be a hard 
 knot . ' 
 ' thou art beyond question an unbeliever , and therefore thou wilt be 
 damned . so say my Law - or I think it do . but thou art also my 
 Little Friend of all the World , and I love thee . so say my heart . 
 this matter of creed be like horseflesh . the wise man know horse 
 be good - that there be a profit to be make from all ; and for 
 myself - but that I be a good sunni and hate the man of Tirah - I 
 could believe the same of all the Faiths . now manifestly a 
 Kathiawar mare take from the sand of her birthplace and remove 
 to the west of bengal founder - nor be even a Balkh stallion   and 
 there be no well horse than those of Balkh , be they not so 
 heavy in the shoulder   of any account in the great northern desert 
 beside the snow - camel I have see . therefore I say in my heart the 
 Faiths be like the horse . each have merit in its own country . ' 
 ' but my lama say altogether a different thing . ' 
 ' oh , he be an old dreamer of dream from Bhotiyal . my heart be a 
 little angry , Friend of all the World , that thou shouldst see such 
 worth in a man so little known . ' 
 ' it be true , Hajji ; but that worth do I see , and to he my heart be 
 draw . ' 
 ' and his to thine , I hear . heart be like horse . they come and 
 they go against bit or spur . shout Gul Sher Khan yonder to drive in 
 that bay stallion 's picket more firmly . we do not want a horse- 
 fight at every resting - stage , and the dun and the black will be 
 lock in a little ... now hear I . be it necessary to the 
 comfort of thy heart to see that lama ? ' 
 ' it be one part of my bond , ' say Kim . ' if I do not see he , and if 
 he be take from I , I will go out of that madrissah in Nucklao 
 and , and - once go , who be to find I again ? ' 
 ' it be true . never be colt hold on a light heel - rope than thou . ' 
 Mahbub nod his head . 
 ' do not be afraid . ' Kim speak as though he could have vanish on 
 the moment . ' my lama have say that he will come to see I at the 
 madrissah - ' 
 ' a beggar and his bowl in the presence of those young Sa - ' 
 ' not all ! ' Kim cut in with a snort . ' their eye be blue and their 
 nail be blacken with low - caste blood , many of they . son of 
 mehteranee - brother - in - law to the bhungi   sweeper . ' 
 we need not follow the rest of the pedigree ; but Kim make his 
 little point clearly and without heat , chew a piece of sugar- 
 cane the while . 
 ' Friend of all the world , ' say Mahbub , push over the pipe for 
 the boy to clean , ' I have meet many man , woman , and boy , and not a 
 few Sahibs . I have never in all my day meet such an imp as thou 
 art . ' 
 ' and why ? when I always tell thee the truth . ' 
 ' perhaps the very reason , for this be a world of danger to honest 
 man . ' Mahbub Ali haul himself off the ground , girt in his belt , 
 and go over to the horse . 
 ' or sell it ? ' 
 there be that in the tone that make Mahbub halt and turn . ' what 
 new devilry ? ' 
 ' eight anna , and I will tell , ' say Kim , grin . ' it touch thy 
 peace . ' 
 ' o Shaitan ! ' Mahbub give the money . 
 ' rememberest thou the little business of the thief in the dark , 
 down yonder at Umballa ? ' 
 ' see they seek my life , I have not altogether forget . why ? ' 
 ' rememberest thou the Kashmir Serai ? ' 
 ' I will twist thy ear in a moment - Sahib . ' 
 ' no need - Pathan . only , the second fakir , whom the Sahibs beat 
 senseless , be the man who come to search thy bulkhead at Lahore . I 
 see his face as they help he on the engine . the very same man . ' 
 ' why didst thou not tell before ? ' 
 ' oh , he will go to jail , and be safe for some year . there be no 
 need to tell more than be necessary at any one time . besides , I do 
 not then need money for sweetmeat . ' 
 ' Allah kerim ! ' say Mahbub Ah . ' wilt thou some day sell my head for 
 a few sweetmeat if the fit take thee ? ' 
 Kim will remember till he die that long , lazy journey from 
 Umballa , through Kalka and the Pinjore Gardens near by , up to 
 Simla . a sudden spate in the Gugger River sweep down one horse 
  the most valuable , be sure , and nearly drown Kim among the 
 dancing boulder . far up the road the horse be stampede by 
 a Government elephant , and be in high condition of grass food , 
 it cost a day and a half to get they together again . then they meet 
 Sikandar Khan come down with a few unsaleable screw - remnant 
 of his string - and Mahbub , who have more of horse - cop in his 
 little fingernail than Sikandar Khan in all his tent , must need 
 buy two of the bad , and that mean eight hour ' laborious 
 diplomacy and untold tobacco . but it be all pure delight - the 
 wandering road , climbing , dipping , and sweep about the grow 
 spur ; the flush of the morning lay along the distant snow ; the 
 branch cacti , tier upon tier on the stony hillside ; the voice 
 of a thousand water - channel ; the chatter of the monkey ; the 
 solemn deodar , climb one after another with down - droop 
 branch ; the vista of the Plains roll out far beneath they ; the 
 incessant twanging of the tonga - horn and the wild rush of the lead 
 horse when a tonga swing round a curve ; the halt for prayer 
  Mahbub be very religious in dry - washing and bellowing when time 
 do not press ; the evening conference by the halting - place , when 
 camel and bullock chew solemnly together and the stolid driver 
 tell the news of the Road - all these thing lift Kim 's heart to 
 song within he . 
 ' but , when the singing and dancing be do , ' say Mahbub Ali , 
 ' come the Colonel Sahib 's , and that be not so sweet . ' 
 ' a fair land - a most beautiful land be this of Hind - and the land 
 of the Five Rivers be fair than all , ' Kim half chant . ' into it 
 I will go again if Mahbub Ali or the Colonel lift hand or foot 
 against I . once go , who shall find I ? look , Hajji , be yonder 
 the city of Simla ? Allah , what a city ! ' 
 ' my father 's brother , and he be an old man when Mackerson Sahib 's 
 well be new at Peshawur , could recall when there be but two 
 house in it . ' 
 he lead the horse below the main road into the low Simla bazar - 
 the crowded rabbit - warren that climb up from the valley to the 
 Town Hall at an angle of forty - five . a man who know his way there 
 can defy all the police of India 's summer capital , so cunningly 
 do veranda communicate with veranda , alley - way with alley - way , 
 and bolt - hole with bolt - hole . here live those who minister to the 
 want of the glad city - jhampanis who pull the pretty lady ' 
 ' rickshaw by night and gamble till the dawn ; grocer , oil - seller , 
 curio - vendors , firewood - dealer , priest , pickpocket , and native 
 employee of the Government . here be discuss by courtesan the 
 thing which be suppose to be profound secret of the India 
 Council ; and here gather all the sub - sub - agent of half the Native 
 States . here , too , Mahbub Ali rent a room , much more securely 
 locked than his bulkhead at Lahore , in the house of a Mohammedan 
 cattle - dealer . it be a place of miracle , too , for there go in 
 at twilight a Mohammedan horseboy , and there come out an hour later 
 a eurasian lad - the Lucknow girl 's dye be of the good - in badly- 
 fitting shop - clothe . 
 ' I have speak with Creighton Sahib , ' quoth Mahbub Ali , ' and a 
 second time have the Hand of Friendship avert the Whip of 
 Calamity . he say that thou hast altogether waste sixty day upon 
 the Road , and it be too late , therefore , to send thee to any hill- 
 school . ' 
 ' I have say that my holiday be my own . I do not go to school 
 twice over . that be one part of my bond . ' 
 ' the Colonel Sahib be not yet aware of that contract . thou art to 
 lodge in Lurgan Sahib 's house till it be time to go again to 
 Nucklao . ' 
 ' I have soon lodge with thee , Mahbub . ' 
 ' thou dost not know the honour . Lurgan Sahib himself ask for 
 thee . thou wilt go up the hill and along the road atop , and there 
 thou must forget for a while that thou hast ever see or speak to 
 I , Mahbub Ali , who sell horse to Creighton Sahib , whom thou dost 
 not know . remember this order . ' 
 Kim nod . ' good , ' say he , ' and who be Lurgan Sahib ? Nay ' - he 
 catch Mahbub 's sword - keen glance - ' indeed I have never hear his 
 name . be he by chance - he lower his voice - ' one of we ? ' 
 ' what talk be this of we , Sahib ? ' Mahbub Ali return , in the tone 
 he use towards Europeans . ' I be a Pathan ; thou art a Sahib and the 
 son of a Sahib . Lurgan Sahib have a shop among the european shop . 
 all Simla know it . ask there ... and , Friend of all the World , he 
 be one to be obey to the last wink of his eyelash . man say he 
 do magic , but that should not touch thee . go up the hill and ask . 
 here begin the Great Game . ' 
 chapter 9 
 S ' doak be son of Yelth the wise - 
 Chief of the Raven clan . 
 itswoot the Bear have he in care 
 to make he a medicine - man . 
 he be quick and quick to learn - 
 Bold and bolder to dare : 
 he dance the dread Kloo - Kwallie Dance 
 to tickle Itswoot the Bear ! 
 Oregon Legend 
 Kim fling himself whole - heartedly upon the next turn of the wheel . 
 he would be a Sahib again for a while . in that idea , so soon as he 
 have reach the broad road under Simla Town Hall , he cast about for 
 one to impress . a Hindu child , some ten year old , squat under a 
 lamp - post . 
 ' where be Mr Lurgan 's house ? ' demand Kim . 
 ' I do not understand English , ' be the answer , and Kim shift his 
 speech accordingly . 
 ' I will show . ' 
 together they set off through the mysterious dusk , full of the 
 noise of a city below the hillside , and the breath of a cool wind 
 in deodar - crown Jakko , shoulder the star . the house - light , 
 scatter on every level , make , as it be , a double firmament . 
 some be fix , other belong to the ' rickshaw of the careless , 
 open - speak English folk , go out to dinner . 
 ' it be here , ' say Kim 's guide , and halt in a veranda flush with 
 the main road . no door stay they , but a curtain of bead reed 
 that split up the lamplight beyond . 
 ' he be come , ' say the boy , in a voice little louder than a sigh , 
 and vanish . Kim feel sure that the boy have be post to guide 
 he from the first , but , put a bold face on it , part the 
 curtain . a black - bearded man , with a green shade over his eye , sit 
 at a table , and , one by one , with short , white hand , pick up 
 globule of light from a tray before he , thread they on a 
 glance silken string , and hum to himself the while . Kim be 
 conscious that beyond the circle of light the room be full of 
 thing that smell like all the temple of all the East . a whiff of 
 musk , a puff of sandal - wood , and a breath of sickly jessamine - oil 
 catch his open nostril . 
 ' I be here , ' say Kim at last , speak in the vernacular : the 
 smell make he forget that he be to be a Sahib . 
 ' seventy - nine , eighty , eighty - one , ' the man count to himself , 
 string pearl after pearl so quickly that Kim could scarcely 
 follow his finger . he slide off the green shade and look fixedly 
 at Kim for a full half - minute . the pupil of the eye dilate and 
 close to pin - prick , as if at will . there be a fakir by the 
 Taksali Gate who have just this gift and make money by it , 
 especially when curse silly woman . Kim star with interest . his 
 disreputable friend could far twitch his ear , almost like a 
 goat , and Kim be disappoint that this new man could not imitate 
 he . 
 ' do not be afraid , ' say Lurgan Sahib suddenly . 
 ' why should I fear ? ' 
 ' thou wilt sleep here tonight , and stay with I till it be time to 
 go again to Nucklao . it be an order . ' 
 ' it be an order , ' Kim repeat . ' but where shall I sleep ? ' 
 ' here , in this room . ' Lurgan Sahib wave his hand towards the 
 darkness behind he . 
 ' so be it , ' say Kim composedly . ' now ? ' 
 he nod and hold the lamp above his head . as the light sweep 
 they , there leap out from the wall a collection of tibetan 
 devil - dance mask , hang above the fiend - embroider drapery of 
 those ghastly function - horn mask , scowl mask , and mask 
 of idiotic terror . in a corner , a japanese warrior , mail and 
 plume , menace he with a halberd , and a score of lance and 
 khanda and kuttar give back the unsteady gleam . but what 
 interested Kim more than all these thing - he have see devil - dance 
 mask at the Lahore Museum - be a glimpse of the soft - eyed Hindu 
 child who have leave he in the doorway , sit cross - legged under 
 the table of pearl with a little smile on his scarlet lip . 
 ' I think that Lurgan Sahib wish to make I afraid . and I be sure 
 that that devil 's brat below the table wish to see I afraid . 
 ' this place , ' he say aloud , ' be like a Wonder House . where be my 
 bed ? ' 
 Lurgan Sahib point to a native quilt in a corner by the loathsome 
 mask , pick up the lamp , and leave the room black . 
 ' be that Lurgan Sahib ? ' Kim ask as he cuddle down . no answer . 
 he could hear the Hindu boy breathing , however , and , guide by the 
 sound , crawl across the floor , and cuff into the darkness , 
 cry : ' give answer , devil ! be this the way to lie to a Sahib ? ' 
 from the darkness he fancy he could hear the echo of a chuckle . 
 it could not be his soft - fleshed companion , because he be weep . 
 so Kim lift up his voice and call aloud : 
 ' Lurgan Sahib ! o Lurgan Sahib ! be it an order that thy servant do 
 not speak to I ? ' 
 ' it be an order . ' the voice come from behind he and he start . 
 ' very good . but remember , ' he mutter , as he resought the quilt , 
 ' I will beat thee in the morning . I do not love Hindus . ' 
 that be no cheerful night ; the room be overfull of voice and 
 music . Kim be wake twice by someone call his name . the second 
 time he set out in search , and end by bruise his nose against a 
 box that certainly speak with a human tongue , but in no sort of 
 human accent . it seem to end in a tin trumpet and to be join by 
 wire to a small box on the floor - so far , at least , as he could 
 judge by touch . and the voice , very hard and whirring , come out of 
 the trumpet . Kim rub his nose and grow furious , thinking , as 
 usual , in Hindi . 
 ' this with a beggar from the bazar might be good , but - I be a 
 Sahib and the son of a Sahib and , which be twice as much more 
 beside , a student of Nucklao . Yess '   here he turn to English , 
 ' a boy of St Xavier 's . Damn Mr Lurgan 's eye ! - it be some sort of 
 machinery like a sewing - machine . oh , it be a great cheek of he - 
 we be not frightened that way at Lucknow - no ! ' then in Hindi : 
 ' but what do he gain ? he be only a trader - I be in his 
 shop . but Creighton Sahib be a Colonel - and I think Creighton 
 Sahib give order that it should be do . how I will beat that 
 Hindu in the morning ! what be this ? ' 
 the trumpet - box be pour out a string of the most elaborate 
 abuse that even Kim have ever hear , in a high uninterested voice , 
 that for a moment lift the short hair of his neck . when the vile 
 thing draw breath , Kim be reassure by the soft , sewing - machine- 
 like whirr . 
 ' Chup !   be still ' he cry , and again he hear a chuckle that 
 decide he . ' Chup - or I break your head . ' 
 the box take no heed . Kim wrench at the tin trumpet and something 
 lift with a click . he have evidently raise a lid . if there be a 
 devil inside , now be its time , for - he sniff -thus do the 
 sewing - machine of the bazar smell . he would clean that shaitan . he 
 slip off his jacket , and plunge it into the box 's mouth . 
 something long and round bent under the pressure , there be a whirr 
 and the voice stop - as voice must if you ram a thrice - double 
 coat on to the wax cylinder and into the work of an expensive 
 phonograph . Kim finish his slumber with a serene mind . 
 in the morning he be aware of Lurgan Sahib look down on he . 
 ' Oah ! ' say Kim , firmly resolve to cling to his Sahib - dom . ' there 
 be a box in the night that give I bad talk . so I stop it . be 
 it your box ? ' 
 the man hold out his hand . 
 ' shake hand , O'Hara , ' he say . ' yes , it be my box . I keep such 
 thing because my friend the Rajahs like they . that one be break , 
 but it be cheap at the price . yes , my friend , the king , be very 
 fond of toy - and so be I sometimes . ' 
 Kim look he over out of the corner of his eye . he be a Sahib 
 in that he wear Sahib 's clothe ; the accent of his Urdu , the 
 intonation of his English , show that he be anything but a Sahib . 
 he seem to understand what move in Kim 's mind ere the boy open 
 his mouth , and he take no pain to explain himself as do Father 
 Victor or the Lucknow master . sweetest of all - he treat Kim as 
 an equal on the asiatic side . 
 ' I be sorry you can not beat my boy this morning . he say he will 
 kill you with a knife or poison . he be jealous , so I have put he 
 in the corner and I shall not speak to he today . he have just try 
 to kill I . you must help I with the breakfast . he be almost too 
 jealous to trust , just now . ' 
 now a genuine import Sahib from England would have make a great 
 to - do over this tale . Lurgan Sahib state it as simply as Mahbub 
 Ali be use to record his little affair in the North . 
 the back veranda of the shop be build out over the sheer hillside , 
 and they look down into their neighbour ' chimney - pot , as be the 
 custom of Simla . but even more than the purely persian meal cook 
 by Lurgan Sahib with his own hand , the shop fascinate Kim . the 
 Lahore Museum be large , but here be more wonder - ghost- 
 dagger and prayer - wheel from Tibet ; turquoise and raw amber 
 necklace ; green jade bangle ; curiously pack incense - stick in 
 jar crust over with raw garnet ; the devil - mask of overnight 
 and a wall full of peacock - blue drapery ; gilt figure of Buddha , 
 and little portable lacquer altar ; russian samovar with 
 turquoise on the lid ; egg - shell china set in quaint octagonal 
 cane box ; yellow ivory crucifix - from Japan of all place in 
 the world , so Lurgan Sahib say ; carpet in dusty bale , smell 
 atrociously , push back behind torn and rotten screen of 
 geometrical work ; persian water - jug for the hand after meal ; 
 dull copper incense - burner neither chinese nor Persian , with 
 frieze of fantastic devil run round they ; tarnished silver 
 belt that knot like raw hide ; hairpin of jade , ivory , and 
 plasma ; arm of all sort and kind , and a thousand other oddment 
 be case , or pile , or merely throw into the room , leave a 
 clear space only round the rickety deal table , where Lurgan Sahib 
 work . 
 ' those thing be nothing , ' say his host , follow Kim 's glance . 
 ' I buy they because they be pretty , and sometimes I sell - if I 
 like the buyer 's look . my work be on the table - some of it . ' 
 it blaze in the morning light - all red and blue and green 
 flash , pick out with the vicious blue - white spurt of a diamond 
 here and there . Kim open his eye . 
 ' oh , they be quite well , those stone . it will not hurt they to 
 take the sun . besides , they be cheap . but with sick stone it be 
 very different . ' he pile Kim 's plate anew . ' there be no one but I 
 can doctor a sick pearl and re - blue turquoise . I grant you opal - 
 any fool can cure an opal - but for a sick pearl there be only I . 
 suppose I be to die ! then there would be no one ... oh no ! you 
 can not do anything with jewel . it will be quite enough if you 
 understand a little about the Turquoise - some day . ' 
 he move to the end of the veranda to refill the heavy , porous clay 
 water - jug from the filter . 
 ' do you want drink ? ' 
 Kim nod . Lurgan Sahib , fifteen foot off , lay one hand on the 
 jar . next instant , it stand at Kim 's elbow , full to within half an 
 inch of the brim - the white cloth only show , by a small 
 wrinkle , where it have slide into place . 
 ' Wah ! ' say Kim in most utter amazement . ' that be magic . ' Lurgan 
 Sahib 's smile show that the compliment have go home . 
 ' throw it back . ' 
 ' it will break . ' 
 ' I say , throw it back . ' 
 Kim pitch it at random . it fall short and crash into fifty 
 piece , while the water drip through the rough veranda boarding . 
 ' I say it would break . ' 
 ' all one . look at it . look at the large piece . ' 
 that lie with a sparkle of water in its curve , as it be a star on 
 the floor . Kim look intently . Lurgan Sahib lay one hand gently 
 on the nape of his neck , stroke it twice or thrice , and whisper : 
 ' look ! it shall come to life again , piece by piece . first the big 
 piece shall join itself to two other on the right and the leave - 
 on the right and the left . look ! ' 
 to save his life , Kim could not have turn his head . the light 
 touch hold he as in a vice , and his blood tingle pleasantly 
 through he . there be one large piece of the jar where there have 
 be three , and above they the shadowy outline of the entire 
 vessel . he could see the veranda through it , but it be thickening 
 and darken with each beat of his pulse . yet the jar - how slowly 
 the thought come ! - the jar have be smash before his eye . 
 another wave of prickle fire race down his neck , as Lurgan Sahib 
 move his hand . 
 ' look ! it be come into shape , ' say Lurgan Sahib . 
 so far Kim have be think in Hindi , but a tremor come on he , 
 and with an effort like that of a swimmer before shark , who hurl 
 himself half out of the water , his mind leap up from a darkness 
 that be swallow it and take refuge in - the multiplication- 
 table in English ! 
 ' look ! it be come into shape , ' whisper Lurgan Sahib . 
 the jar have be smash - yess , smash - not the native word , he 
 would not think of that - but smash - into fifty piece , and 
 twice three be six , and thrice three be nine , and four time 
 three be twelve . he cling desperately to the repetition . the 
 shadow - outline of the jar clear like a mist after rub eye . 
 there be the broken shard ; there be the spilt water dry in 
 the sun , and through the crack of the veranda show , all rib , 
 the white house - wall below - and thrice twelve be thirty - six ! 
 ' look ! be it come into shape ? ' ask Lurgan Sahib . 
 ' but it be smash - smash , ' he gasp - Lurgan Sahib have be 
 mutter softly for the last half - minute . Kim wrench his head 
 aside . ' look ! Dekho ! it be there as it be there . ' 
 ' it be there as it be there , ' say Lurgan , watch Kim closely 
 while the boy rub his neck . ' but you be the first of many who 
 have ever see it so . ' he wipe his broad forehead . 
 ' be that more magic ? ' Kim ask suspiciously . the tingle have go 
 from his vein ; he feel unusually wide awake . 
 ' no , that be not magic . it be only to see if there be - a flaw 
 in a jewel . sometimes very fine jewel will fly all to piece if a 
 man hold they in his hand , and know the proper way . that be why 
 one must be careful before one set they . tell I , do you see the 
 shape of the pot ? ' 
 ' for a little time . it begin to grow like a flower from the 
 ground . ' 
 ' and then what do you do ? I mean , how do you think ? ' 
 ' Oah ! I know it be break , and so , I think , that be what I 
 think - and it be break . ' 
 ' hm ! have anyone ever do that same sort of magic to you before ? ' 
 ' if it be , ' say Kim ' do you think I should let it again ? I should 
 run away . ' 
 ' and now you be not afraid - eh ? ' 
 ' not now . ' 
 Lurgan Sahib look at he more closely than ever . ' I shall ask 
 Mahbub Ali - not now , but some day later , ' he mutter . ' I be 
 pleased with you - yes ; and I be pleased with you - no . you be the 
 first that ever save himself . I wish I know what it be that ... 
 but you be right . you should not tell that - not even to I . ' 
 he turn into the dusky gloom of the shop , and sit down at the 
 table , rub his hand softly . a small , husky sob come from 
 behind a pile of carpet . it be the Hindu child obediently face 
 towards the wall . his thin shoulder work with grief . 
 ' ah ! he be jealous , so jealous . I wonder if he will try to poison 
 I again in my breakfast , and make I cook it twice . 
 ' Kubbee - kubbee nahin   never - never . no ! ' , come the break 
 answer . 
 ' and whether he will kill this other boy ? ' 
 ' Kubbee - kubbee nahin . ' 
 ' what do you think he will do ? ' he turn suddenly on Kim . 
 ' Oah ! I do not know . let he go , perhaps . why do he want to poison 
 you ? ' 
 ' because he be so fond of I . suppose you be fond of someone , and 
 you see someone come , and the man you be fond of be more pleased 
 with he than he be with you , what would you do ? ' 
 Kim think . Lurgan repeat the sentence slowly in the vernacular . 
 ' I should not poison that man , ' say Kim reflectively , ' but I 
 should beat that boy - if that boy be fond of my man . but first , I 
 would ask that boy if it be true . ' 
 ' ah ! he think everyone must be fond of I . ' 
 ' then I think he be a fool . ' 
 ' Hearest thou ? ' say Lurgan Sahib to the shake shoulder . ' the 
 Sahib 's son think thou art a little fool . come out , and next time 
 thy heart be troubled , do not try white arsenic quite so openly . 
 surely the Devil Dasim be lord of our table - cloth that day ! it 
 might have make I ill , child , and then a stranger would have 
 guard the jewel . come ! ' 
 the child , heavy - eyed with much weeping , creep out from behind the 
 bale and fling himself passionately at Lurgan Sahib 's foot , with an 
 extravagance of remorse that impress even Kim . 
 ' I will look into the ink - pool - I will faithfully guard the 
 jewel ! oh , my Father and my Mother , send he away ! ' he indicate 
 Kim with a backward jerk of his bare heel . 
 ' not yet - not yet . in a little while he will go away again . but 
 now he be at school - at a new madrissah - and thou shalt be his 
 teacher . play the play of the Jewels against he . I will keep 
 tally . ' 
 the child dry his tear at once , and dash to the back of the 
 shop , whence he return with a copper tray . 
 ' give I ! ' he say to Lurgan Sahib . ' let they come from thy hand , 
 for he may say that I know they before . ' 
 ' gently - gently , ' the man reply , and from a drawer under the 
 table deal a half - handful of clatter trifle into the tray . 
 ' now , ' say the child , wave an old newspaper . ' look on they as 
 long as thou wilt , strange . count and , if need be , handle . one 
 look be enough for I . ' he turn his back proudly . 
 ' but what be the game ? ' 
 ' when thou hast count and handle and art sure that thou canst 
 remember they all , I cover they with this paper , and thou must tell 
 over the tally to Lurgan Sahib . I will write mine . ' 
 ' Oah ! ' the instinct of competition wake in his breast . he bend 
 over the tray . there be but fifteen stone on it . ' that be easy , ' 
 he say after a minute . the child slip the paper over the 
 wink jewel and scribble in a native account - book . 
 ' there be under that paper five blue stone - one big , one 
 small , and three small , ' say Kim , all in haste . ' there be four 
 green stone , and one with a hole in it ; there be one yellow stone 
 that I can see through , and one like a pipe - stem . there be two red 
 stone , and - and - I make the count fifteen , but two I have 
 forget . no ! give I time . one be of ivory , little and brownish ; 
 and - and - give I time ... ' 
 ' one - two ' - Lurgan Sahib count he out up to ten . Kim shake his 
 head . 
 ' hear my count ! ' the child burst in , trill with laughter . 
 ' first , be two flawed sapphire - one of two ruttee and one of 
 four as I should judge . the four - ruttee sapphire be chip at the 
 edge . there be one Turkestan turquoise , plain with black vein , and 
 there be two inscribe - one with a name of God in gilt , and the 
 other be crack across , for it come out of an old ring , I 
 can not read . we have now all five blue stone . four flawed emerald 
 there be , but one be drill in two place , and one be a little 
 carven- ' 
 ' their weight ? ' say Lurgan Sahib impassively . 
 ' three - five - five - and four ruttee as I judge it . there be one 
 piece of old greenish pipe amber , and a cut topaz from Europe . 
 there be one ruby of Burma , of two ruttee , without a flaw , and 
 there be a balas - ruby , flawed , of two ruttee . there be a carved 
 ivory from China represent a rat suck an egg ; and there be 
 last - ah ha ! - a ball of crystal as big as a bean set on a gold 
 leaf . ' 
 he clap his hand at the close . 
 ' he be thy master , ' say Lurgan Sahib , smile . 
 ' huh ! he know the name of the stone , ' say Kim , flush . ' try 
 again ! with common thing such as he and I both know . ' 
 they heap the tray again with odd and end gather from the 
 shop , and even the kitchen , and every time the child win , till Kim 
 marvel . 
 ' bind my eye - let I feel once with my finger , and even then I 
 will leave thee open - eyed behind , ' he challenge . 
 Kim stamp with vexation when the lad make his boast good . 
 ' if it be man - or horse , ' he say , ' I could do well . this 
 playing with tweezer and knife and scissor be too little . ' 
 ' learn first - teach later , ' say Lurgan Sahib . ' be he thy master ? ' 
 ' truly . but how be it do ? ' 
 ' by do it many time over till it be do perfectly - for it be 
 worth do . ' 
 the Hindu boy , in high feather , actually pat Kim on the back . 
 ' do not despair , ' he say . ' I myself will teach thee . ' 
 ' and I will see that thou art well teach , ' say Lurgan Sahib , 
 still speak in the vernacular , ' for except my boy here - it be 
 foolish of he to buy so much white arsenic when , if he have ask , 
 I could have give it - except my boy here I have not in a long 
 time meet with one well worth teaching . and there be ten day 
 more ere thou canst return to Lucknao where they teach nothing - at 
 the long price . we shall , I think , be friend . ' 
 they be a most mad ten day , but Kim enjoy himself too much to 
 reflect on their craziness . in the morning they play the Jewel 
 Game - sometimes with veritable stone , sometimes with pile of 
 sword and dagger , sometimes with photo - graph of native . through 
 the afternoon he and the Hindu boy would mount guard in the shop , 
 sit dumb behind a carpet - bale or a screen and watch Mr 
 Lurgan 's many and very curious visitor . there be small Rajahs , 
 escort cough in the veranda , who come to buy curiosity - such 
 as phonograph and mechanical toy . there be lady in search of 
 necklace , and man , it seem to Kim - but his mind may have be 
 vitiate by early training - in search of the lady ; native from 
 independent and feudatory court whose ostensible business be the 
 repair of broken necklace - river of light pour out upon the 
 table - but whose true end seem to be to raise money for angry 
 Maharanees or young rajah . there be Babus to whom Lurgan Sahib 
 talk with austerity and authority , but at the end of each 
 interview he give they money in coin silver and currency note . 
 there be occasional gathering of long - coat theatrical native 
 who discuss metaphysic in English and Bengali , to Mr Lurgan 's 
 great edification . he be always interested in religion . at the 
 end of the day , Kim and the Hindu boy - whose name vary at 
 Lurgan 's pleasure - be expect to give a detailed account of all 
 that they have see and hear - their view of each man 's character , 
 as show in his face , talk , and manner , and their notion of his 
 real errand . after dinner , Lurgan Sahib 's fancy turn more to what 
 might be call dressing - up , in which game he take a most inform 
 interest . he could paint face to a marvel ; with a brush - dab here 
 and a line there change they past recognition . the shop be full 
 of all manner of dress and turban , and Kim be apparelle 
 variously as a young Mohammedan of good family , an oilman , and once 
 - which be a joyous evening - as the son of an Oudh landholder in 
 the full of full dress . Lurgan Sahib have a hawk 's eye to detect 
 the least flaw in the make - up ; and lie on a worn teak - wood couch , 
 would explain by the half - hour together how such and such a caste 
 talk , or walk , or cough , or spat , or sneeze , and , since 
 ' how s ' matter little in this world , the ' why ' of everything . the 
 Hindu child play this game clumsily . that little mind , keen as an 
 icicle where tally of jewel be concern , could not temper itself 
 to enter another 's soul ; but a demon in Kim wake up and sing with 
 joy as he put on the change dress , and change speech and 
 gesture therewith . 
 carry away by enthusiasm , he volunteer to show Lurgan Sahib one 
 evening how the disciple of a certain caste of fakir , old Lahore 
 acquaintance , beg dole by the roadside ; and what sort of 
 language he would use to an Englishman , to a punjabi farmer go 
 to a fair , and to a woman without a veil . Lurgan Sahib laugh 
 immensely , and beg Kim to stay as he be , immobile for half an 
 hour - cross - legged , ash - smear , and wild - eye , in the back room . 
 at the end of that time enter a hulking , obese Babu whose 
 stockinge leg shake with fat , and Kim open on he with a shower 
 of wayside chaff . Lurgan Sahib - this annoyed Kim - watch the 
 Babu and not the play . 
 ' I think , ' say the Babu heavily , light a cigarette , ' I be of 
 opeenion that it be most extraordinary and effeecient performance . 
 except that you have tell I I should have opine that- that- that 
 you be pull my leg . how soon can he become approximately 
 effeecient chain - man ? because then I shall indent for he . ' 
 ' that be what he must learn at Lucknow . ' 
 ' then order he to be jolly - dam'-quick . good - night , Lurgan . ' the 
 Babu swing out with the gait of a bogge cow . 
 when they be tell over the day 's list of visitor , Lurgan 
 Sahib ask Kim who he think the man might be . 
 ' God know ! ' say Kim cheerily . the tone might almost have deceive 
 Mahbub Ali , but it fail entirely with the healer of sick pearl . 
 ' that be true . God , he know ; but I wish to know what you think . ' 
 Kim glance sideways at his companion , whose eye have a way of 
 compelling truth . 
 ' i - I think he will want I when I come from the school , but ' - 
 confidentially , as Lurgan Sahib nod approval - ' I do not 
 understand how he can wear many dress and talk many tongue . ' 
 ' thou wilt understand many thing later . he be a writer of tale 
 for a certain Colonel . his honour be great only in Simla , and it be 
 noticeable that he have no name , but only a number and a letter - 
 that be a custom among we . ' 
 ' and be there a price upon his head too - as upon Mah - all the 
 other ? ' 
 ' not yet ; but if a boy rise up who be now sit here and go - 
 look , the door be open ! - as far as a certain house with a red- 
 paint veranda , behind that which be the old theatre in the Lower 
 Bazar , and whisper through the shutter : " Hurree Chunder 
 Mookerjee bear the bad news of last month " , that boy might take 
 away a belt full of rupee . ' 
 ' how many ? ' say Kim promptly . 
 ' five hundred - a thousand - as many as he might ask for . ' 
 ' good . and for how long might such a boy live after the news be 
 tell ? ' he smile merrily at Lurgan 's Sahib 's very beard . 
 ' ah ! that be to be well think of . perhaps if he be very clever , 
 he might live out the day - but not the night . by no means the 
 night . ' 
 ' then what be the Babu 's pay if so much be put upon his head ? ' 
 ' eighty - perhaps a hundred - perhaps a hundred and fifty rupee ; 
 but the pay be the least part of the work . from time to time , 
 God cause man to be bear - and thou art one of they - who have a 
 lust to go abroad at the risk of their life and discover news - 
 today it may be of far - off thing , tomorrow of some hide mountain , 
 and the next day of some near - by man who have do a foolishness 
 against the State . these soul be very few ; and of these few , not 
 more than ten be of the good . among these ten I count the Babu , 
 and that be curious . how great , therefore , and desirable must be a 
 business that brazen the heart of a Bengali ! ' 
 ' true . but the day go slowly for I . I be yet a boy , and it be only 
 within two month I learn to write Angrezi . even now I can not 
 read it well . and there be yet year and year and long year 
 before I can be even a chain - man . ' 
 ' have patience , Friend of all the World ' - Kim start at the title . 
 ' would I have a few of the year that so irk thee . I have prove thee 
 in several small way . this will not be forget when I make my 
 report to the Colonel Sahib . ' then , change suddenly into English 
 with a deep laugh : 
 ' by Jove ! O'Hara , I think there be a great deal in you ; but you must 
 not become proud and you must not talk . you must go back to Lucknow 
 and be a good little boy and mind your book , as the English say , and 
 perhaps , next holiday if you care , you can come back to I ! ' Kim 's 
 face fall . ' oh , I mean if you like . I know where you want to go . ' 
 four day later a seat be book for Kim and his small trunk at the 
 rear of a Kalka tonga . his companion be the whale - like Babu , who , 
 with a fringe shawl wrap round his head , and his fat openwork- 
 stockinge left leg tuck under he , shiver and grunt in the 
 morning chill . 
 ' how come it that this man be one of we ? ' think Kim consider 
 the jelly back as they jolt down the road ; and the reflection 
 throw he into most pleasant day - dream . Lurgan Sahib have give he 
 five rupee - a splendid sum - as well as the assurance of his 
 protection if he work . unlike Mahbub , Lurgan Sahib have speak most 
 explicitly of the reward that would follow obedience , and Kim be 
 content . if only , like the Babu , he could enjoy the dignity of a 
 letter and a number - and a price upon his head ! some day he would 
 be all that and more . some day he might be almost as great as Mahbub 
 Ali ! the housetop of his search should be half India ; he would 
 follow king and minister , as in the old day he have follow 
 vakil and lawyer ' tout across Lahore city for Mahbub Ali 's sake . 
 meantime , there be the present , and not at all unpleasant , fact of 
 St Xavier 's immediately before he . there would be new boy to 
 condescend to , and there would be tale of holiday adventure to 
 hear . Young Martin , son of the tea - planter at Manipur , have boast 
 that he would go to war , with a rifle , against the head - hunter . 
 that might be , but it be certain young Martin have not be blow 
 half across the forecourt of a Patiala palace by an explosion of 
 firework ; nor have he ... Kim fall to tell himself the story of 
 his own adventure through the last three month . he could paralyse 
 St Xavier 's - even the big boy who shave - with the recital , 
 be that permit . but it be , of course , out of the question . 
 there would be a price upon his head in good time , as Lurgan Sahib 
 have assure he ; and if he talk foolishly now , not only would that 
 price never be set , but Colonel Creighton would cast he off - and 
 he would be leave to the wrath of Lurgan Sahib and Mahbub Ali - for 
 the short space of life that would remain to he . 
 ' so I should lose Delhi for the sake of a fish , ' be his proverbial 
 philosophy . it behove he to forget his holiday   there would 
 always remain the fun of invent imaginary adventure   and , as 
 Lurgan Sahib have say , to work . of all the boy hurry back to St 
 Xavier 's , from Sukkur in the sand to Galle beneath the palm , none 
 be so fill with virtue as Kimball O'Hara , jiggete down to 
 Umballa behind Hurree Chunder Mookerjee , whose name on the book of 
 one section of the Ethnological Survey be R.17 . 
 and if additional spur be need , the Babu supply it . after a 
 huge meal at Kalka , he speak uninterruptedly . be Kim go to 
 school ? then he , an M A of Calcutta University , would explain the 
 advantage of education . there be mark to be gain by due 
 attention to Latin and Wordsworth 's Excursion   all this be greek to 
 Kim . french , too be vital , and the good be to be pick up in 
 Chandernagore a few mile from Calcutta . also a man might go far , as 
 he himself have do , by strict attention to play call Lear and 
 Julius Caesar , both much in demand by examiner . Lear be not so 
 full of historical allusion as Julius Caesar ; the book cost four 
 anna , but could be buy second - hand in Bow Bazar for two . still 
 more important than Wordsworth , or the eminent author , Burke and 
 Hare , be the art and science of mensuration . a boy who have pass 
 his examination in these branch - for which , by the way , there 
 be no cram - book - could , by merely march over a country with a 
 compass and a level and a straight eye , carry away a picture of that 
 country which might be sell for large sum in coin silver . but as 
 it be occasionally inexpedient to carry about measuring - chain a 
 boy would do well to know the precise length of his own foot - pace , 
 so that when he be deprive of what Hurree Chunder call 
 adventitious aid ' he might still tread his distance . to keep count 
 of thousand of pace , Hurree Chunder 's experience have show he 
 nothing more valuable than a rosary of eighty - one or a hundred and 
 eight bead , for ' it be divisible and sub - divisible into many 
 multiple and sub - multiple ' . through the volleying drift of 
 English , Kim catch the general trend of the talk , and it interest 
 he very much . here be a new craft that a man could tuck away in 
 his head and by the look of the large wide world unfold itself 
 before he , it seem that the more a man know the well for he . 
 say the Babu when he have talk for an hour and a half ' I hope some 
 day to enjoy your offeecial acquaintance . ad interim , if I may be 
 pardon that expression , I shall give you this betel - box , which be 
 highly valuable article and cost I two rupee only four year ago . ' 
 it be a cheap , heart - shape brass thing with three compartment for 
 carry the eternal betel - nut , lime and pan - leaf ; but it be fill 
 with little tabloid - bottle . 
 ' that be reward of merit for your 
 performance in character of that holy man . you see , you be so young 
 you think you will last for ever and not take care of your body . it 
 be great nuisance to go sick in the middle of business . I be fond of 
 drug myself , and they be handy to cure poor people too . these be 
 good departmental drug - quinine and so on . I give it you for 
 souvenir . now good - bye . I have urgent private business here by the 
 roadside . ' 
 he slip out noiselessly as a cat , on the Umballa road , hail a 
 pass cart and jingle away , while Kim , tongue - tie , twiddle the 
 brass betel - box in his hand . 
 the record of a boy 's education interest few save his parent , and , 
 as you know , Kim be an orphan . it be write in the book of St 
 Xavier 's in Partibus that a report of Kim 's progress be forward 
 at the end of each term to Colonel Creighton and to Father Victor , 
 from whose hand duly come the money for his schooling . it be 
 far record in the same book that he show a great aptitude 
 for mathematical study as well as map - making , and carry away a 
 prize   the Life of Lord Lawrence , tree - calf , two vol . , nine rupee , 
 eight anna   for proficiency therein ; and the same term play in St 
 Xavier 's eleven against the Alighur Mohammedan College , his age 
 be fourteen year and ten month . he be also re - vaccinate   from 
 which we may assume that there have be another epidemic of smallpox 
 at Lucknow   about the same time . pencil note on the edge of an old 
 muster - roll record that he be punish several time for 
 ' converse with improper person ' , and it seem that he be once 
 sentence to heavy pain for ' absent himself for a day in the 
 company of a street beggar ' . that be when he get over the gate and 
 plead with the lama through a whole day down the bank of the 
 Gumti to accompany he on the Road next holiday - for one month - 
 for a little week ; and the lama set his face as a flint against it , 
 aver that the time have not yet come . Kim 's business , say the 
 old man as they eat cake together , be to get all the wisdom of the 
 Sahibs and then he would see . the Hand of Friendship must in some 
 way have avert the Whip of Calamity , for six week later Kim seem 
 to have pass an examination in elementary surveying ' with great 
 credit ' , his age be fifteen year and eight month . from this 
 date the record be silent . his name do not appear in the year 's 
 batch of those who enter for the subordinate Survey of India , but 
 against it stand the word ' remove on appointment . ' 
 several time in those three year , cast up at the Temple of the 
 Tirthankars in benare the lama , a little thin and a shade 
 yellower , if that be possible , but gentle and untainted as ever . 
 sometimes it be from the South that he come - from south of 
 Tuticorin , whence the wonderful fire - boat go to Ceylon where be 
 priest who know Pali ; sometimes it be from the wet green West and 
 the thousand cotton - factory chimney that ring Bombay ; and once from 
 the North , where he have double back eight hundred mile to talk for 
 a day with the Keeper of the Images in the Wonder House . he would 
 stride to his cell in the cool , cut marble - the priest of the 
 Temple be good to the old man , - wash off the dust of travel , make 
 prayer , and depart for Lucknow , well accustom now to the way of 
 the rail , in a third - class carriage . return , it be noticeable , 
 as his friend the Seeker point out to the head - priest , that he 
 cease for a while to mourn the loss of his River , or to draw 
 wondrous picture of the Wheel of Life , but prefer to talk of the 
 beauty and wisdom of a certain mysterious chela whom no man of the 
 Temple have ever see . yes , he have follow the trace of the bless 
 foot throughout all India .   the Curator have still in his possession 
 a most marvellous account of his wandering and meditation .   there 
 remain nothing more in life but to find the River of the Arrow . 
 yet it be show to he in dream that it be a matter not to be 
 undertake with any hope of success unless that seeker have with he 
 the one chela appoint to bring the event to a happy issue , and 
 verse in great wisdom - such wisdom as white - haired keeper of 
 Images possess . for example   here come out the snuff - gourd , and the 
 kindly Jain priest make haste to be silent : 
 ' long and long ago , when Devadatta be king of Benares - let all 
 listen to the Tataka ! - an elephant be capture for a time by the 
 king 's hunter and ere he break free , beringe with a grievous 
 legiron . this he strove to remove with hate and frenzy in his heart , 
 and hurry up and down the forest , besought his brother - elephant 
 to wrench it asunder . one by one , with their strong trunk , they 
 try and fail . at the last they give it as their opinion that the 
 ring be not to be break by any bestial power . and in a thicket , 
 new - bear , wet with moisture of birth , lie a day - old calf of the herd 
 whose mother have die . the fettered elephant , forget his own 
 agony , say : " if I do not help this suckle it will perish under 
 our foot . " so he stand above the young thing , make his leg 
 buttress against the uneasily move herd ; and he beg milk of a 
 virtuous cow , and the calf throve , and the ring elephant be the 
 calf 's guide and defence . now the day of an elephant - let all 
 listen to the Tataka ! - be thirty - five year to his full strength , 
 and through thirty - five Rains the ring elephant befriend the 
 young , and all the while the fetter eat into the flesh . 
 ' then one day the young elephant see the half - bury iron , and 
 turn to the elder say : " what be this ? " " it be even my sorrow , " 
 say he who have befriend he . then that other put out his trunk 
 and in the twinkling of an eyelash abolish the ring , say : " the 
 appoint time have come . " so the virtuous elephant who have wait 
 temperately and do kind act be relieve , at the appoint time , 
 by the very calf whom he have turn aside to cherish - let all 
 listen to the Tataka ! for the Elephant be Ananda , and the Calf 
 that break the ring be none other than the Lord Himself ... ' 
 then he would shake his head benignly , and over the ever - click 
 rosary point out how free that elephant - calf be from the sin of 
 pride . he be as humble as a chela who , see his master sit in 
 the dust outside the Gates of Learning , over - leapt the gate   though 
 they be lock   and take his master to his heart in the presence 
 of the proud - stomach city . Rich would be the reward of such a 
 master and such a chela when the time come for they to seek freedom 
 together ! 
 so do the lama speak , come and go across India as softly as a 
 bat . a sharp - tongue old woman in a house among the fruit - tree 
 behind Saharunpore honour he as the woman honour the prophet , 
 but his chamber be by no mean upon the wall . in an apartment of 
 the forecourt overlook by coo dove he would sit , while she 
 lay aside her useless veil and chatter of spirit and fiend of 
 Kulu , of grandchild unborn , and of the free - tongue brat who have 
 talk to she in the resting - place . once , too , he stray alone from 
 the Grand Trunk Road below Umballa to the very village whose priest 
 have try to drug he ; but the kind Heaven that guard lama send 
 he at twilight through the crop , absorb and unsuspicious , to the 
 Rissaldar 's door . here be like to have be a grave 
 misunderstanding , for the old soldier ask he why the Friend of 
 the Stars have go that way only six day before . 
 ' that may not be , ' say the lama . ' he have go back to his own 
 people . ' 
 ' he sit in that corner tell a hundred merry tale five night 
 ago , ' his host insist . ' true , he vanish somewhat suddenly in the 
 dawn after foolish talk with my granddaughter . he grow apace , but 
 he be the same friend of the Stars as bring I true word of the 
 war . have ye part ? ' 
 ' yes - and no , ' the lama reply . ' we - we have not altogether 
 part , but the time be not ripe that we should take the road 
 together . he acquire wisdom in another place . we must wait . ' 
 ' all one - but if it be not the boy how do he come to speak so 
 continually of thee ? ' 
 ' and what say he ? ' ask the lama eagerly . 
 ' sweet word - an hundred thousand - that thou art his father and 
 mother and such all . pity that he do not take the Qpeen 's service . 
 he be fearless . ' 
 this news amaze the lama , who do not then know how religiously Kim 
 keep to the contract make with Mahbub Ali , and perforce ratify by 
 Colonel Creighton ... 
 ' there be no hold the young pony from the game , ' say the horse- 
 dealer when the Colonel point out that vagabond over India in 
 holiday time be absurd . ' if permission be refuse to go and come as 
 he choose , he will make light of the refusal . then who be to catch 
 he ? Colonel Sahib , only once in a thousand year be a horse bear so 
 well fit for the game as this our colt . and we need man . ' 
 chapter 10 
 your tiercel be too long at hack , Sire . he be no eyass 
 but a passage - hawk that foot ere we catch he , 
 dangerously free o ' the air . faith ! be he mine 
  as mine be the glove he bind to for his tiring 
 I would fly he with a make - hawk . he be in yarak 
 Plumed to the very point - so manned , so weather ... 
 give he the firmament God make he for , 
 and what shall take the air of he ? 
 Gow 's Watch 
 Lurgan Sahib do not use as direct speech , but his advice tally 
 with Mahbub 's ; and the upshot be good for Kim . he know well now 
 than to leave Lucknow city in native garb , and if Mahbub be 
 anywhere within reach of a letter , it be to Mahbub 's camp he 
 head , and make his change under the Pathan 's wary eye . could 
 the little Survey paint - box that he use for map - tinting in term- 
 time have find a tongue to tell of holiday doing , he might have 
 be expel . once Mahbub and he go together as far as the 
 beautiful city of Bombay , with three truckload of tram - horse , and 
 Mahbub nearly melt when Kim propose a sail in a dhow across the 
 Indian Ocean to buy Gulf Arabs , which , he understand from a hanger- 
 on of the dealer Abdul Rahman , fetch well price than mere 
 Kabulis . 
 he dip his hand into the dish with that great trader when Mahbub 
 and a few co - religionist be invite to a big Haj dinner . they 
 come back by way of Karachi by sea , when Kim take his first 
 experience of sea - sickness sit on the fore - hatch of a coasting- 
 steamer , well persuade he have be poison . the Babu 's famous 
 drug - box prove useless , though Kim have restock it at Bombay . 
 Mahbub have business at Quetta , and there Kim , as Mahbub admit , 
 earn his keep , and perhaps a little over , by spend four curious 
 day as scullion in the house of a fat Commissariat sergeant , from 
 whose office - box , in an auspicious moment , he remove a little 
 vellum ledger which he copy out - it seem to deal entirely with 
 cattle and camel sale - by moonlight , lie behind an outhouse , all 
 through one hot night . then he return the ledger to its place , 
 and , at Mahbub 's word , leave that service unpaid , rejoin he six 
 mile down the road , the clean copy in his bosom . 
 ' that soldier be a small fish , ' Mahbub Ali explain , ' but in time 
 we shall catch the large one . he only sell oxen at two price - 
 one for himself and one for the Government - which I do not think be 
 a sin . ' 
 ' why could not I take away the little book and be do with it ? ' 
 ' then he would have be frighten , and he would have tell his 
 master . then we should miss , perhaps , a great number of new rifle 
 which seek their way up from Quetta to the North . the Game be so 
 large that one see but a little at a time . ' 
 ' oho ! ' say Kim , and hold his tongue . that be in the monsoon 
 holiday , after he have take the prize for mathematic . the 
 Christmas holiday he spend - deduct ten day for private 
 amusement - with Lurgan Sahib , where he sit for the most part in 
 front of a roar wood - fire - Jakko road be four foot deep in snow 
 that year - and - the small Hindu have go away to be marry - 
 help Lurgan to thread pearl . he make Kim learn whole chapter of 
 the Koran by heart , till he could deliver they with the very roll 
 and cadence of a mullah . moreover , he tell Kim the name and 
 property of many native drug , as well as the rune proper to 
 recite when you administer they . and in the evening he write charm 
 on parchment - elaborate pentagram crown with the name of devil 
 - Murra , and Awan the companion of king - all fantastically write 
 in the corner . More to the point , he advise Kim as to the care of 
 his own body , the cure of fever - fit , and simple remedy of the 
 Road . a week before it be time to go down , Colonel Creighton Sahib 
 - this be unfair - send Kim a write examination paper that 
 concern itself solely with rod and chain and link and angle . 
 next holiday he be out with Mahbub , and here , by the way , he 
 nearly die of thirst , plod through the sand on a camel to the 
 mysterious city of Bikanir , where the well be four hundred foot 
 deep , and line throughout with camel - bone . it be not an amusing 
 trip from Kim 's point of view , because - in defiance of the contract 
 - the Colonel order he to make a map of that wild , walled city ; 
 and since Mohammedan horse - boy and pipe - tender be not expect to 
 drag survey - chain round the capital of an independent Native State , 
 Kim be force to pace all his distance by mean of a bead rosary . 
 he use the compass for bearing as occasion serve - after dark 
 chiefly , when the camel have be feed - and by the help of his 
 little Survey paint - box of six colour - cake and three brush , he 
 achieve something not remotely unlike the city of Jeysulmir . Mahbub 
 laugh a great deal , and advise he to make up a write report as 
 well ; and in the back of the big account - book that lie under the 
 flap of Mahbub 's pet saddle Kim fall to work .. 
 ' it must hold everything that thou hast see or touch or 
 consider . write as though the Jung - i - Lat Sahib himself have come by 
 stealth with a vast army outsette to war . ' 
 ' how great an army ? ' 
 ' oh , half a lakh of man . ' 
 ' Folly ! remember how few and bad be the well in the sand . not a 
 thousand thirsty man could come near by here . ' 
 ' then write that down - also all the old breach in the wall and 
 whence the firewood be cut - and what be the temper and disposition 
 of the king . I stay here till all my horse be sell . I will hire a 
 room by the gateway , and thou shalt be my accountant . there be a 
 good lock to the door . ' 
 the report in its unmistakable St Xavier 's running script , and the 
 brown , yellow , and lake - daub map , be on hand a few year ago   a 
 careless clerk file it with the rough note of E 's second Seistan 
 survey , but by now the pencil character must be almost illegible . 
 Kim translate it , sweat under the light of an oil - lamp , to 
 Mahbub , the second day of their return - journey . 
 the Pathan rise and stoop over his dapple saddle - bag . 
 ' I know it would be worthy a dress of honour , and so I make one 
 ready , ' he say , smile . ' be I Amir of Afghanistan   and some day 
 we may see he , I would fill thy mouth with gold . ' he lay the 
 garment formally at Kim 's foot . there be a gold - embroider 
 Peshawur turban - cap , rise to a cone , and a big turban - cloth end 
 in a broad fringe of gold . there be a Delhi embroider waistcoat 
 to slip over a milky white shirt , fasten to the right , ample and 
 flow ; green pyjama with twisted silk waist - string ; and that 
 nothing might be lack , russia - leather slipper , smell 
 divinely , with arrogantly curl tip . 
 ' upon a Wednesday , and in the morning , to put on new clothe be 
 auspicious , ' say Mahbub solemnly . ' but we must not forget the 
 wicked folk in the world . so ! ' 
 he cap all the splendour , that be take Kim 's delighted breath 
 away , with a mother - of - pearl , nickel - plat , self - extract .450 
 revolver . 
 ' I have think of a small bore , but reflect that this take 
 Government bullet . a man can always come by those - especially 
 across the border . stand up and let I look . ' he clap Kim on the 
 shoulder . ' may you never be tired , Pathan ! oh , the heart to be 
 break ! oh , the eye under the eyelash , look sideways ! ' 
 Kim turn about , point his toe , stretch , and feel mechanically 
 for the moustache that be just begin . then he stoop towards 
 Mahbub 's foot to make proper acknowledgment with flutter , quick- 
 pat hand ; his heart too full for word . Mahbub forestall and 
 embrace he . 
 ' my son , say he , ' what need of word between we ? but be not the 
 little gun a delight ? all six cartridge come out at one twist . it 
 be bear in the bosom next the skin , which , as it be , keep it 
 oil . never put it elsewhere , and please God , thou shalt some day 
 kill a man with it . ' 
 ' Hai mai ! ' say Kim ruefully . ' if a Sahib kill a man he be hang 
 in the jail . ' 
 ' true : but one pace beyond the Border , man be wise . put it away ; 
 but fill it first . of what use be a gun unfed ? ' 
 ' when I go back to the madrissah I must return it . they do not allow 
 little gun . thou wilt keep it for I ? ' 
 ' Son , I be weary of that madrissah , where they take the good year 
 of a man to teach he what he can only learn upon the Road . the 
 folly of the Sahibs have neither top nor bottom . no matter . maybe thy 
 write report shall save thee further bondage ; and God he know we 
 need man more and more in the Game . ' 
 they march , jaw - bind against blow sand , across the salt desert 
 to Jodhpur , where Mahbub and his handsome nephew Habib Ullah do 
 much trading ; and then sorrowfully , in european clothe , which he 
 be fast outgrowing , Kim go second - class to St Xavier 's . three 
 week later , Colonel Creighton , price tibetan ghost - dagger at 
 Lurgan 's shop , face Mahbub Ali openly mutinous . Lurgan Sahib 
 operate as support in reserve . 
 ' the pony be make - finish - mouthed and pace , Sahib ! from now 
 on , day by day , he will lose his manner if he be keep at trick . 
 drop the rein on his back and let go , ' say the horse - dealer . ' we 
 need he . ' 
 ' but he be so young , Mahbub - not more than sixteen - be he ? ' 
 ' when I be fifteen , I have shoot my man and begot my man , Sahib . ' 
 ' you impenitent old heathen ! ' Creighton turn to Lurgan . the black 
 beard nod assent to the wisdom of the Afghan 's dye scarlet . 
 ' I should have use he long ago , ' say Lurgan . ' the young the 
 well . that be why I always have my really valuable jewel watch 
 by a child . you send he to I to try . I try he in every way : he 
 be the only boy I could not make to see thing . ' 
 ' in the crystal - in the ink - pool ? ' demand Mahbub . 
 ' no . under my hand , as I tell you . that have never happen before . 
 it mean that he be strong enough - but you think it skittle , 
 Colonel Creighton - to make anyone do anything he want . and that be 
 three year ago . I have teach he a good deal since , Colonel 
 Creighton . I think you waste he now . ' 
 ' hmm ! maybe you be right . but , as you know , there be no Survey work 
 for he at present . ' 
 ' let he out let he go , ' Mahbub interrupt . ' who expect any colt 
 to carry heavy weight at first ? let he run with the caravans - like 
 our white camel - colt - for luck . I would take he myself , but - ' 
 ' there be a little business where he would be most useful - in the 
 South , ' say Lurgan , with peculiar suavity , drop his heavy blue 
 eyelid . 
 ' e.23 have that in hand , ' say Creighton quickly . ' he must not go down 
 there . besides , he know no Turki . ' 
 ' only tell he the shape and the smell of the letter we want and he 
 will bring they back , ' Lurgan insist . 
 ' no . that be a man 's job , ' say Creighton . 
 it be a wry - neck matter of unauthorized and incendiary 
 correspondence between a person who claim to be the ultimate 
 authority in all matter of the Mohammedan religion throughout the 
 world , and a young member of a royal house who have be bring to 
 book for kidnap woman within british territory . the Moslem 
 Archbishop have be emphatic and over - arrogant ; the young prince be 
 merely sulky at the curtailment of his privilege , but there be no 
 need he should continue a correspondence which might some day 
 compromise he . one letter indeed have be procure , but the finder 
 be later find dead by the roadside in the habit of an arab trader , 
 as E.23 , take up the work , duly report . 
 these fact , and a few other not to be publish , make both Mahbub 
 and Creighton shake their head . 
 ' let he go out with his Red Lama , ' say the horse - dealer with 
 visible effort . ' he be fond of the old man . he can learn his pace 
 by the rosary at least . ' 
 ' I have have some dealing with the old man - by letter , ' say 
 Colonel Creighton , smile to himself . ' whither go he ? ' 
 ' up and down the land , as he have these three year . he seek a River 
 of Healing . God 's curse upon all - ' Mahbub check himself . ' he bed 
 down at the Temple of the Tirthankars or at Buddh Gaya when he be in 
 from the Road . then he go to see the boy at the madrissah , as we 
 know for the boy be punish for it twice or thrice . he be quite 
 mad , but a peaceful man . I have meet he . the Babu also have have 
 dealing with he . we have watch he for three year . Red Lamas 
 be not so common in Hind that one lose track . ' 
 ' Babus be very curious , ' say Lurgan meditatively . ' do you know 
 what Hurree Babu really want ? he want to be make a member of the 
 Royal Society by take ethnological note . I tell you , I tell he 
 about the lama everything which Mahbub and the boy have tell I . 
 Hurree Babu go down to Benares - at his own expense , I think . ' 
 ' I do not , ' say Creighton briefly . he have pay Hurree 's travel 
 expense , out of a most lively curiosity to learn what the lama 
 might be . 
 ' and he apply to the lama for information on lamaism , and devil- 
 dance , and spell and charm , several time in these few year . 
 Holy Virgin ! I could have tell he all that yeear ago . I think 
 Hurree Babu be get too old for the Road . he like well to 
 collect manner and custom information . yes , he want to be an FRS . 
 ' Hurree think well of the boy , do not   he ? ' 
 ' oh , very indeed - we have have some pleasant evening at my little 
 place - but I think it would be waste to throw he away with Hurree 
 on the ethnological side . ' 
 ' not for a first experience . how do that strike you , Mahbub ? let 
 the boy run with the lama for six month . after that we can see . he 
 will get experience . ' 
 ' he have it already , Sahib - as a fish control the water he swim 
 in . but for every reason it will be well to loose he from the 
 school . ' 
 ' very good , then , ' say Creighton , half to himself . ' he can go with 
 the lama , and if Hurree Babu care to keep an eye on they so much 
 the well . he will not   lead the boy into any danger as Mahbub would . 
 Curious - his wish to be an F R S. very human , too . he be good on 
 the ethnological side - Hurree . ' 
 no money and no preferment would have draw Creighton from his work 
 on the Indian Survey , but deep in his heart also lie the ambition to 
 write ' F R S ' after his name . honour of a sort he know could be 
 obtain by ingenuity and the help of friend , but , to the good of 
 his belief , nothing save work - paper represent a life of it - 
 take a man into the Society which he have bombard for year with 
 monograph on strange asiatic cult and unknown custom . nine man 
 out of ten would flee from a Royal Society soiree in extremity of 
 boredom ; but Creighton be the tenth , and at time his soul yearn 
 for the crowd room in easy London where silver - haired , bald- 
 head gentleman who know nothing of the Army move among 
 spectroscopic experiment , the less plant of the frozen tundra , 
 electric flight - measure machine , and apparatus for slice into 
 fractional millimetre the left eye of the female mosquito . by all 
 right and reason , it be the Royal Geographical that should have 
 appeal to he , but man be as chancy as child in their choice 
 of plaything . so Creighton smile , and think the well of Hurree 
 Babu , move by like desire . 
 he drop the ghost - dagger and look up at Mahbub . 
 ' how soon can we get the colt from the stable ? ' say the horse- 
 dealer , read his eye . 
 ' hmm ! if I withdraw he by order now - what will he do , think you ? I 
 have never before assist at the teaching of such an one . ' 
 ' he will come to I , ' say Mahbub promptly . ' Lurgan Sahib and I will 
 prepare he for the Road . ' 
 ' so be it , then . for six month he shall run at his choice . but who 
 will be his sponsor ? ' 
 Lurgan slightly incline his head . ' he will not tell anything , if 
 that be what you be afraid of , Colonel Creighton . ' 
 ' it be only a boy , after all . ' 
 ' ye - es ; but first , he have nothing to tell ; and secondly , he know 
 what would happen . also , he be very fond of Mahbub , and of I a 
 little . ' 
 ' will he draw pay ? ' demand the practical horse - dealer . 
 ' food and water allowance only . twenty rupee a month . ' 
 one advantage of the Secret Service be that it have no worrying 
 audit . that Service be ludicrously starve , of course , but the fund 
 be administer by a few man who do not call for voucher or 
 present itemized account . Mahbub 's eye light with almost a 
 Sikh 's love of money . even Lurgan 's impassive face change . he 
 consider the year to come when Kim would have be enter and 
 make to the Great Game that never cease day and night , throughout 
 India . he foresee honour and credit in the mouth of a choose few , 
 come to he from his pupil . Lurgan Sahib have make e.23 what E.23 be , 
 out of a bewilder , impertinent , lie , little North - West Province 
 man . 
 but the joy of these master be pale and smoky beside the joy of 
 Kim when St Xavier 's Head call he aside , with word that Colonel 
 Creighton have send for he . 
 ' I understand , O'Hara , that he have find you a place as an assistant 
 chain - man in the Canal Department : that come of take up 
 mathematic . it be great luck for you , for you be only sixteen ; but 
 of course you understand that you do not become pukka   permanent 
 till you have pass the autumn examination . so you must not think 
 you be go out into the world to enjoy yourself , or that your 
 fortune be make . there be a great deal of hard work before you . 
 only , if you succeed in become pukka , you can rise , you know , to 
 four hundred and fifty a month . ' whereat the Principal give he much 
 good advice as to his conduct , and his manner , and his moral ; and 
 other , his elder , who have not be waft into billet , talk as 
 only anglo - indian lad can , of favouritism and corruption . indeed , 
 young Cazalet , whose father be a pensioner at Chunar , hint very 
 broadly that Colonel Creighton 's interest in Kim be directly 
 paternal ; and Kim , instead of retaliate , do not even use 
 language . he be think of the immense fun to come , of Mahbub 's 
 letter of the day before , all neatly write in English , make 
 appointment for that afternoon in a house the very name of which 
 would have crisp the Principal 's hair with horror ... 
 say Kim to Mahbub in Lucknow railway station that evening , above 
 the luggage - scale : ' I fear lest at the last , the roof would fall 
 upon I and cheat I . it be indeed all finish , o my father ? ' 
 Mahbub snap his finger to show the utterness of that end , and 
 his eye blaze like red coal . 
 ' then where be the pistol that I may wear it ? ' 
 ' softly ! a half - year , to run without heel - rope . I beg that much 
 from Colonel Creighton Sahib . at twenty rupee a month . old Red Hat 
 know that thou art come . ' 
 ' I will pay thee dustoorie   commission   on my pay for three month , ' 
 say Kim gravely . ' yea , two rupee a month . but first we must get 
 rid of these . ' he pluck his thin linen trouser and drag at his 
 collar . ' I have bring with I all that I need on the Road . my 
 trunk have go up to Lurgan Sahib 's . ' 
 ' who send his salaam to thee - Sahib . ' 
 ' Lurgan Sahib be a very clever man . but what dost thou do ? ' 
 ' I go North again , upon the Great Game . what else ? be thy mind still 
 set on follow old Red Hat ? ' 
 ' do not forget he make I that I be - though he do not know it . 
 year by year , he send the money that teach I . ' 
 ' I would have do as much - have it strike my thick head , ' Mahbub 
 growl . ' come away . the lamp be light now , and none will mark thee 
 in the bazar . we go to Huneefa 's house . ' 
 on the way thither , Mahbub give he much the same sort of advice as 
 his mother give to Lemuel , and curiously enough , Mahbub be exact to 
 point out how Huneefa and her like destroy king . 
 ' and I remember , ' he quote maliciously , ' one who say , " trust a 
 snake before an harlot , and an harlot before a Pathan , Mahbub Ali . " 
 now , except as to Pathans , of whom I be one , all that be true . 
 Most true be it in the Great Game , for it be by mean of woman that 
 all plan come to ruin and we lie out in the dawning with our 
 throat cut . so it happen to such a one . ' he give the reddest 
 particular . 
 ' then why - ? ' Kim pause before a filthy staircase that climb to 
 the warm darkness of an upper chamber , in the ward that be behind 
 Azim Ullah 's tobacco - shop . those who know it call it the Birdcage - 
 it be so full of whispering and whistling and chirruping . 
 the room , with its dirty cushion and half - smoke hookah , smell 
 abominably of stale tobacco . in one corner lie a huge and shapeless 
 woman clothe in greenish gauze , and deck , brow , nose , ear , neck , 
 wrist , arm , waist , and ankle with heavy native jewellery . when she 
 turn it be like the clashing of copper pot . a lean cat in the 
 balcony outside the window mew hungrily . Kim check , bewilder , 
 at the door - curtain . 
 ' be that the new stuff , Mahbub ? ' say Huneefa lazily , scarce 
 troubling to remove the mouthpiece from her lip . ' o Buktanoos ! ' - 
 like most of her kind , she swear by the Djinns - ' O Buktanoos ! he be 
 very good to look upon . ' 
 ' that be part of the selling of the horse , ' Mahbub explain to Kim , 
 who laugh . 
 ' I have hear that talk since my Sixth day , ' he reply , squat 
 by the light . ' whither do it lead ? ' 
 ' to protection . tonight we change thy colour . this sleep under 
 roof have blanch thee like an almond . but Huneefa have the secret 
 of a colour that catch . no painting of a day or two . also , we 
 fortify thee against the chance of the Road . that be my gift to 
 thee , my son . take out all metal on thee and lie they here . make 
 ready , Huneefa . ' 
 Kim drag forth his compass , Survey paint - box , and the new - fill 
 medicine - box . they have all accompany his travel , and boylike he 
 value they immensely . 
 the woman rise slowly and move with her hand a little spread 
 before she . then Kim see that she be blind . ' no , no , ' she mutter , 
 ' the Pathan speak truth - my colour do not go in a week or a 
 month , and those whom I protect be under strong guard . ' 
 ' when one be far off and alone , it would not be well to grow 
 blotch and leprous of a sudden , ' say Mahbub . ' when thou wast with 
 I I could oversee the matter . besides , a Pathan be a fair - skin . 
 Strip to the waist now and look how thou art whiten . ' Huneefa feel 
 her way back from an inner room . ' it be no matter , she can not see . ' 
 he take a pewter bowl from her ringed hand . 
 the dye - stuff show blue and gummy . Kim experiment on the back of 
 his wrist , with a dab of cotton - wool ; but Huneefa hear he . 
 ' no , no , ' she cry , ' the thing be not do thus , but with the 
 proper ceremony . the colouring be the least part . I give thee the 
 full protection of the Road . ' 
 ' Tadoo ?   magic , ' say Kim , with a half start . he do not like the 
 white , sightless eye . Mahbub 's hand on his neck bow he to the 
 floor , nose within an inch of the board . 
 ' be still . no harm come to thee , my son . I be thy sacrifice ! ' 
 he could not see what the woman be about , but hear the dish - clash 
 of her jewellery for many minute . a match light up the darkness ; he 
 catch the well - know purr and fizzle of grain of incense . then the 
 room fill with smoke - heavy aromatic , and stupefy . through 
 grow drowse he hear the name of devil - of Zulbazan , Son of 
 Eblis , who live in bazar and paraos , make all the sudden lewd 
 wickedness of wayside halt ; of Dulhan , invisible about mosque , 
 the dweller among the slipper of the faithful , who hinder folk 
 from their prayer ; and Musboot , Lord of lie and panic . Huneefa , 
 now whisper in his ear , now talk as from an immense distance , 
 touch he with horrible soft finger , but Mahbub 's grip never 
 shift from his neck till , relax with a sigh , the boy lose his 
 sens . 
 ' Allah ! how he fight ! we should never have do it but for the 
 drug . that be his white blood , I take it , ' say Mahbub testily . 
 ' go on with the dawut   invocation . give he full Protection . ' 
 ' o hearer ! thou that hearest with ear , be present . listen , O 
 Hearer ! ' Huneefa moan , her dead eye turn to the west . the dark 
 room fill with moaning and snorting . 
 from the outer balcony , a ponderous figure raise a round bullet 
 head and cough nervously . 
 ' do not interrupt this ventriloquial necromanciss , my friend , ' it 
 say in English . ' I opine that it be very disturbing to you , but no 
 enlighten observer be jolly - well upset . ' 
 ' .......... I will lay a plot for their ruin ! o Prophet , bear with 
 the unbeliever . let they alone awhile ! ' Huneefa 's face , turn to 
 the northward , work horribly , and it be as though voice from the 
 ceiling answer she . 
 Hurree Babu return to his note - book , balance on the window - sill , 
 but his hand shake . Huneefa , in some sort of drug ecstasy , 
 wrench herself to and fro as she sit cross - legged by Kim 's still 
 head , and call upon devil after devil , in the ancient order of the 
 ritual , bind they to avoid the boy 's every action . 
 ' with he be the key of the secret thing ! none knoweth they 
 besides himself he knoweth that which be in the dry land and in the 
 sea ! ' again break out the unearthly whistle response . 
 ' i - I apprehend it be not at all malignant in its operation ? ' say 
 the Babu , watch the throat - muscle quiver and jerk as Huneefa 
 speak with tongue . ' it - it be not likely that she have kill the 
 boy ? if so , I decline to be witness at the trial ..... what be the 
 last hypothetical devil mention ? ' 
 ' Babuji , ' say Mahbub in the vernacular . ' I have no regard for the 
 devil of Hind , but the Sons of Eblis be far otherwise , and whether 
 they be jumalee   well - affect   or jullalee   terrible   they love not 
 Kafirs . ' 
 ' then you think I have well go ? ' say Hurree Babu , half rise . 
 ' they be , of course , dematerialized phenomena . Spencer say ' 
 Huneefa 's crisis pass , as these thing must , in a paroxysm of 
 howling , with a touch of froth at the lip . she lie spend and 
 motionless beside Kim , and the crazy voice cease . 
 ' Wah ! that work be do . may the boy be well for it ; and Huneefa 
 be surely a mistress of dawut . help haul she aside , Babu . do not be 
 afraid . ' 
 ' how be I to fear the absolutely non - existent ? ' say Hurree Babu , 
 talk English to reassure himself . it be an awful thing still to 
 dread the magic that you contemptuously investigate -to collect 
 folk - lore for the Royal Society with a lively belief in all Powers 
 of Darkness . 
 Mahbub chuckle . he have be out with Hurree on the Road ere now . 
 ' let we finish the colouring , ' say he . ' the boy be well protect 
 if - if the Lords of the Air have ear to hear . I be a Sufi   free- 
 thinker , but when one can get blind - side of a woman , a stallion , 
 or a devil , why go round to invite a kick ? set he upon the way , 
 Babu , and see that old Red Hat do not lead he beyond our reach . I 
 must get back to my horse . ' 
 ' all raight , ' say Hurree Babu . ' he be at present curious 
 spectacle . ' 
 about third cockcrow , Kim wake after a sleep of thousand of year . 
 Huneefa , in her corner , snore heavily , but Mahbub be go . 
 ' I hope you be not frightened , ' say an oily voice at his elbow . 
 ' I superintend entire operation , which be most interesting from 
 ethnological point of view . it be high - class dawut . ' 
 ' huh ! ' say Kim , recognize Hurree Babu , who smile ingratiatingly . 
 ' and also I have honour to bring down from Lurgan your present 
 costume . I be not in the habit offeecially of carry such gauds to 
 subordinate , but ' - he giggle - ' your case be note as exceptional 
 on the book . I hope Mr Lurgan will note my action . ' 
 Kim yawn and stretch himself . it be good to turn and twist 
 within loose clothe once again . 
 ' what be this ? ' he look curiously at the heavy duffle - stuff load 
 with the scent of the far North . 
 ' Oho ! that be inconspicuous dress of chela attach to service of 
 lamaistic lama . complete in every particular , ' say Hurree Babu , 
 roll into the balcony to clean his tooth at a goglet . ' I be of 
 opeenion it be not your old gentleman 's precise releegion , but 
 rather sub - variant of same . I have contribute reject note to 
 whom it May concern : Asiatic Quarterly Review on these subject . now 
 it be curious that the old gentleman himself be totally devoid of 
 releegiosity . he be not a dam ' particular . ' 
 ' do you know he ? ' 
 Hurree Babu hold up his hand to show he be engage in the 
 prescribe rite that accompany tooth - cleaning and such thing among 
 decently breed Bengalis . then he recite in English an Arya - Somaj 
 prayer of a theistical nature , and stuff his mouth with pan and 
 betel . 
 ' oah yes . I have meet he several time at benare , and also at Buddh 
 Gaya , to interrogate he on releegious point and devil - worship . he 
 be pure agnostic - same as I . ' 
 Huneefa stir in her sleep , and Hurree Babu jump nervously to 
 the copper incense - burner , all black and discolour in morning- 
 light , rub a finger in the accumulate lamp - black , and draw it 
 diagonally across his face . 
 ' who have die in thy house ? ' ask Kim in the vernacular . 
 ' none . but she may have the Evil Eye - that sorceress , ' the Babu 
 reply . 
 ' what dost thou do now , then ? ' 
 ' I will set thee on thy way to Benares , if thou goest thither , and 
 tell thee what must be know by we . ' 
 ' I go . at what hour run the te - rain ? ' he rise to his foot , look 
 round the desolate chamber and at the yellow - wax face of Huneefa as 
 the low sun steal across the floor . ' be there money to be pay that 
 witch ? ' 
 ' no . she have charm thee against all devil and all danger in the 
 name of her devil . it be Mahbub 's desire . ' in English : ' he be 
 highly obsolete , I think , to indulge in such supersteetion . why , it 
 be all ventriloquy . belly - speak - eh ? ' 
 Kim snap his finger mechanically to avert whatever evil - 
 Mahbub , he know , meditate none - might have creep in through 
 Huneefa 's ministration ; and Hurree giggle once more . but as he 
 cross the room he be careful not to step in Huneefa 's blotch , 
 squat shadow on the board . witch -when their time be on they - 
 can lay hold of the heel of a man 's soul if he do that . 
 ' now you must well listen , ' say the Babu when they be in the 
 fresh air . ' part of these ceremony which we witness they include 
 supply of effeecient amulet to those of our Department . if you feel 
 in your neck you will find one small silver amulet , verree cheap . 
 that be ours . do you understand ? ' 
 ' oah yes , hawa - dilli   a heart - lifter , ' say Kim , feel at his 
 neck . 
 ' Huneefa she make they for two rupee twelve anna with - oh , all 
 sort of exorcism . they be quite common , except they be partially 
 black enamel , and there be a paper inside each one full of name of 
 local saint and such thing . Thatt be Huneefa 's look - out , you see ? 
 Huneefa make they onlee for we , but in case she do not , when we 
 get they we put in , before issue , one small piece of turquoise . Mr 
 Lurgan he give they . there be no other source of supply ; but it be 
 I invent all this . it be strictly unoffeecial of course , but 
 convenient for subordinate . Colonel Creighton he do not know . he 
 be european . the turquoise be wrap in the paper ... yes , that 
 be road to railway station ... now suppose you go with the lama , 
 or with I , I hope , some day , or with Mahbub . suppose we get into a 
 dam'-tight place . I be a fearful man - most fearful - but I tell you 
 I have be in dam'-tight place more than hair on my head . you 
 say : " I be Son of the Charm . " verree good . ' 
 ' I do not understand quite . we must not be hear talk English 
 here . ' 
 ' that be all raight . I be only Babu show off my English to you . 
 all we Babus talk English to show off ; ' say Hurree , fling his 
 shoulder - cloth jauntily . ' as I be about to say , " Son of the Charm " 
 mean that you may be member of the Sat Bhai - the Seven Brothers , 
 which be Hindi and Tantric . it be popularly suppose to be extinct 
 Society , but I have write note to show it be still extant . you 
 see , it be all my invention . verree good . Sat Bhai have many member , 
 and perhaps before they jolly - well - cut - your - throat they may give you 
 just a chance of life . that be useful , anyhow . and moreover , these 
 foolish native - if they be not too excited - they always stop to 
 think before they kill a man who say he belong to any speecific 
 organization . you see ? you say then when you be in tight place , " I 
 be Son of the Charm " , and you get - perhaps - ah -your second wind . 
 that be only in extreme instance , or to open negotiation with a 
 stranger . can you quite see ? verree good . but suppose now , I , or any 
 one of the Department , come to you dress quite different . you 
 would not know I at all unless I choose , I bet you . some day I will 
 prove it . I come as Ladakhi trader - oh , anything - and I say to 
 you : " you want to buy precious stone ? " you say : " do I look like a 
 man who buy precious stone ? " then I say : " even verree poor man can 
 buy a turquoise or tarkeean . " ' 
 ' that be kichree - vegetable curry , ' say Kim . 
 ' of course it be . you say : " let I see the tarkeean . " then I say : 
 " it be cook by a woman , and perhaps it be bad for your caste . " 
 then you say : " there be no caste when man go to - look for 
 tarkeean . " you stop a little between those word , " to - look " . that 
 be thee whole secret . the little stop before the word . ' 
 Kim repeat the test - sentence . 
 ' that be all right . then I will show you my turquoise if there be 
 time , and then you know who I be , and then we exchange view and 
 document and those - all thing . and so it be with any other man of 
 we . we talk sometimes about turquoise and sometimes about tarkeean , 
 but always with that little stop in the word . it be verree easy . 
 first , " Son of the Charm " , if you be in a tight place . perhaps that 
 may help you - perhaps not . then what I have tell you about the 
 tarkeean , if you want to transact offeecial business with a strange 
 man . of course , at present , you have no offeecial business . you be 
 - ah ha ! - supernumerary on probation . quite unique speciman . if you 
 be asiatic of birth you might be employ right off ; but this 
 half - year of leave be to make you de englishized , you see ? the lama 
 he expect you , because I have demi - offeecially inform he you 
 have pass all your examination , and will soon obtain government 
 appointment . oh ho ! you be on acting - allowance , you see : so if you 
 be call upon to help Sons of the Charm mind you jolly - well try . 
 now I shall say good - bye , my dear fellow , and I hope you - ah - will 
 come out top - side all raight . ' 
 Hurree Babu step back a pace or two into the crowd at the 
 entrance of Lucknow station and - be go . Kim draw a deep breath 
 and hug himself all over . the nickel - plat revolver he could 
 feel in the bosom of his sad - coloured robe , the amulet be on his 
 neck ; beg - gourd , rosary , and ghost - dagger   Mr Lurgan have 
 forget nothing   be all to hand , with medicine , paint - box , and 
 compass , and in a worn old purse - belt embroider with porcupine- 
 quill pattern lie a month 's pay . king could be no rich . he 
 buy sweetmeat in a leaf - cup from a Hindu trader , and eat they 
 with glad rapture till a policeman order he off the step . 
 chapter ll 
 give the man who be not make 
 to his trade 
 sword to fling and catch again , 
 coin to ring and snatch again , 
 man to harm and cure again , 
 snake to charm and lure again - 
 he will be hurt by his own blade , 
 by his serpent disobey , 
 by his clumsiness bewray , ' 
 by the people mock to scorn - 
 so ' tis not with juggler bear ! 
 pinch of dust or withered flower , 
 Chance - fling fruit or borrow staff , 
 serve his need and shore his power , 
 bind the spell , or loose the laugh ! 
 but a man who , etc . 
 the Juggler 's Song , op . 15 
 follow a sudden natural reaction . 
 ' now be I alone - all alone , ' he think . ' in all India be no one so 
 alone as I ! if I die today , who shall bring the news -and to whom ? 
 if I live and God be good , there will be a price upon my head , for I 
 be a Son of the Charm - I , Kim . ' 
 a very few white people , but many Asiatics , can throw themselves 
 into a mazement as it be by repeat their own name over and 
 over again to themselves , let the mind go free upon speculation 
 as to what be call personal identity . when one grow old , the 
 power , usually , depart , but while it last it may descend upon a man 
 at any moment . 
 ' who be Kim - Kim - Kim ? ' 
 he squat in a corner of the clanging waiting - room , rapt from all 
 other thought ; hand fold in lap , and pupil contract to pin- 
 point . in a minute - in another half - second - he feel he would 
 arrive at the solution of the tremendous puzzle ; but here , as always 
 happen , his mind drop away from those height with a rush of a 
 wound bird , and pass his hand before his eye , he shake his 
 head . 
 a long - haired hindu bairagi   holy man , who have just buy a 
 ticket , halt before he at that moment and star intently . 
 ' I also have lose it , ' he say sadly . ' it be one of the Gates to the 
 Way , but for I it have be shut many year . ' 
 ' what be the talk ? ' say Kim , abash . 
 ' thou wast wonder there in thy spirit what manner of thing thy 
 soul might be . the seizure come of a sudden . I know . who should know 
 but I ? Whither goest thou ? ' 
 ' Toward Kashi   Benares . ' 
 ' there be no Gods there . I have prove they . I go to Prayag 
  Allahabad   for the fifth time - seek the Road to Enlightenment . 
 of what faith art thou ? ' 
 ' I too be a Seeker , ' say Kim , use one of the lama 's pet word . 
 ' Though'- he forget his northern dress for the moment - ' though 
 Allah alone knoweth what I seek . ' 
 the old fellow slip the bairagi 's crutch under his armpit and sit 
 down on a patch of ruddy leopard 's skin as Kim rise at the call for 
 the Benares train . 
 ' go in hope , little brother , ' he say . ' it be a long road to the 
 foot of the one ; but thither do we all travel . ' 
 Kim do not feel so lonely after this , and ere he have sit out twenty 
 mile in the crowded compartment , be cheer his neighbour with a 
 string of most wonderful yarn about his own and his master 's 
 magical gift . 
 benare strike he as a peculiarly filthy city , though it be 
 pleasant to find how his cloth be respect . at least one - third of 
 the population pray eternally to some group or other of the many 
 million deity , and so revere every sort of holy man . Kim be 
 guide to the Temple of the Tirthankars , about a mile outside the 
 city , near Sarnath , by a chance - meet Punjabi farmer - a Kamboh from 
 Jullundur - way who have appeal in vain to every God of his homestead 
 to cure his small son , and be try benare as a last resort . 
 ' thou art from the North ? ' he ask , shoulder through the press 
 of the narrow , stink street much like his own pet bull at home . 
 ' ay , I know the Punjab . my mother be a pahareen , but my father come 
 from Amritzar - by Jandiala , ' say Kim , oil his ready tongue for 
 the need of the Road . 
 ' Jandiala - Jullundur ? Oho ! then we be neighbour in some sort , as 
 it be . ' he nod tenderly to the wail child in his arm . ' whom 
 dost thou serve ? ' 
 ' a most holy man at the Temple of the Tirthankers . ' 
 ' they be all most holy and - most greedy , ' say the Jat with 
 bitterness . ' I have walk the pillar and trodden the temple till 
 my foot be flay , and the child be no whit well . and the mother 
 be sick too ... hush , then , little one ... we change his name 
 when the fever come . we put he into girl 's clothe . there be 
 nothing we do not do , except - I say to his mother when she 
 bundle I off to Benares -she should have come with I - I say 
 Sakhi Sarwar Sultan would serve we well . we know his generosity , but 
 these down - country Gods be stranger . ' 
 the child turn on the cushion of the huge cord arm and look 
 at Kim through heavy eyelid . 
 ' and be it all worthless ? ' Kim ask , with easy interest . 
 ' all worthless - all worthless , ' say the child , lip crack with 
 fever . 
 ' the Gods have give he a good mind , at least ' say the father 
 proudly . ' to think he should have listen so cleverly . yonder be 
 thy Temple . now I be a poor man - many priest have deal with I - 
 but my son be my son , and if a gift to thy master can cure he - I 
 be at my very wit ' end . ' 
 Kim consider for a while , tingle with pride . three year ago he 
 would have make prompt profit on the situation and go his way 
 without a thought ; but now , the very respect the Jat pay he prove 
 that he be a man . moreover , he have taste fever once or twice 
 already , and know enough to recognize starvation when he see it . 
 ' call he forth and I will give he a bond on my good yoke , so that 
 the child be cure . ' 
 Kim halt at the carve outer door of the temple . a white - clothe 
 Oswal banker from Ajmir , his sin of usury new wipe out , ask 
 he what he do . 
 ' I be chela to Teshoo Lama , an Holy one from Bhotiyal -within there . 
 he bid I come . I wait . tell he . ' 
 ' do not forget the child , ' cry the importunate Jat over his 
 shoulder , and then bellow in Punjabi ; ' o Holy one - o disciple of 
 the Holy One - o Gods above all the Worlds -behold affliction 
 sit at the gate ! ' that cry be so common in Benares that the 
 passer never turn their head . 
 the Oswal , at peace with mankind , carry the message into the 
 darkness behind he , and the easy , uncounted eastern minute slide 
 by ; for the lama be asleep in his cell , and no priest would wake 
 he . when the click of his rosary again break the hush of the inner 
 court where the calm image of the Arhats stand , a novice whisper , 
 ' Thy chela be here , ' and the old man stride forth , forget the 
 end of that prayer . 
 hardly have the tall figure show in the doorway than the Jat run 
 before he , and , lift up the child , cry : ' look upon this , Holy 
 one ; and if the Gods will , he live - he live ! ' 
 he fumble in his waist - belt and draw out a small silver coin . 
 ' what be now ? ' the lama 's eye turn to Kim . it be noticeable he 
 speak far clear Urdu than long ago , under ZamZammah ; but 
 father would allow no private talk . 
 ' it be no more than a fever , ' say Kim . ' the child be not well feed . ' 
 ' he sicken at everything , and his mother be not here . ' 
 ' if it be permit , I may cure , Holy One . ' 
 ' what ! have they make thee a healer ? wait here , ' say the lama , and 
 he sit down by the Jat upon the low step of the temple , while 
 Kim , look out of the corner of his eye , slowly open the little 
 betel - box . he have dream dream at school of return to the lama 
 as a Sahib - of chaff the old man before he reveal himself - 
 boy 's dream all . there be more drama in this abstract , brow- 
 pucker search through the tabloid - bottle , with a pause here and 
 there for thought and a muttered invocation between while . quinine 
 he have in tablet , and dark brown meat - lozenge - beef most 
 probably , but that be not his business . the little thing would not 
 eat , but it suck at a lozenge greedily , and say it like the salt 
 taste . 
 ' take then these six . ' Kim hand they to the man . ' praise the Gods , 
 and boil three in milk ; other three in water . after he have drink the 
 milk give he this '   it be the half of a quinine pill , ' and wrap 
 he warm . give he the water of the other three , and the other half 
 of this white pill when he wake . meantime , here be another brown 
 medicine that he may suck at on the way home . ' 
 ' god , what wisdom ! ' say the Kamboh , snatch . 
 it be as much as Kim could remember of his own treatment in a bout 
 of autumn malaria - if you except the patter that he add to 
 impress the lama . 
 ' now go ! come again in the morning . ' 
 ' but the price - the price , ' say the Jat , and throw back his sturdy 
 shoulder . ' my son be my son . now that he will be whole again , how 
 shall I go back to his mother and say I take help by the wayside and 
 do not even give a bowl of curd in return ? ' 
 ' they be alike , these Jats , ' say Kim softly . ' the Jat stand on his 
 dunghill and the King 's elephant go by . " o driver , " say he , 
 " what will you sell those little donkey for ? " ' 
 the Jat burst into a roar of laughter , stifle with apology to the 
 lama . ' it be the saying of my own country the very talk of it . so 
 be we Jats all . I will come tomorrow with the child ; and the 
 blessing of the Gods of the Homesteads - who be good little Gods - 
 be on you both ... now , son , we grow strong again . do not spit it 
 out , little princeling ! king of my heart , do not spit it out , and we 
 shall be strong man , wrestler and club - wielder , by morning . ' 
 he move away , croon and mumbling . the lama turn to Kim , and 
 all the love old soul of he look out through his narrow eye . 
 ' to heal the sick be to acquire merit ; but first one get knowledge . 
 that be wisely do , o Friend of all the World . ' 
 ' I be make wise by thee , Holy One , ' say Kim , forget the little 
 play just end ; forget St Xavier 's ; forget his white blood ; 
 forget even the Great Game as he stoop , Mohammedan - fashion , to 
 touch his master 's foot in the dust of the Jain temple . ' my teaching 
 I owe to thee . I have eat thy bread three year . my time be 
 finish . I be loose from the school . I come to thee . ' 
 ' Herein be my reward . enter ! enter ! and be all well ? ' they pass to 
 the inner court , where the afternoon sun slop golden across . 
 ' stand that I may see . so ! ' he peer critically . ' it be no long a 
 child , but a man , ripen in wisdom , walk as a physician . I do 
 well - I do well when I give thee up to the armed man on that black 
 night . dost thou remember our first day under Zam - Zammah ? ' 
 ' ay , ' say Kim . ' dost thou remember when I leapt off the carriage 
 the first day I go to - ' 
 ' the Gates of Learning ? truly . and the day that we eat the cake 
 together at the back of the river by Nucklao . aha ! many time hast 
 thou beg for I , but that day I beg for thee . ' 
 ' good reason , ' quoth Kim . ' I be then a scholar in the Gates of 
 Learning , and attire as a Sahib . do not forget , Holy One , ' he go 
 on playfully . ' I be still a Sahib - by thy favour . ' 
 ' true . and a Sahib in most high esteem . come to my cell , chela . ' 
 ' how be that know to thee ? ' 
 the lama smile . ' first by mean of letter from the kindly priest 
 whom we meet in the camp of armed man ; but he be now go to his own 
 country , and I send the money to his brother . ' Colonel Creighton , 
 who have succeed to the trusteeship when Father Victor go to 
 England with the Mavericks , be hardly the Chaplain 's brother . ' but 
 I do not well understand Sahibs ' letter . they must be interpret 
 to I . I choose a surer way . many time when I return from my 
 search to this Temple , which have always be a nest to I , there 
 come one seek Enlightenment - a man from Leh - that have be , he 
 say , a Hindu , but weary of all those Gods . ' the lama point to 
 the Arhats . 
 ' a fat man ? ' say Kim , a twinkle in his eye . 
 ' very fat ; but I perceive in a little his mind be wholly give up 
 to useless thing - such as devil and charm and the form and 
 fashion of our tea - drinking in the monastery , and by what road we 
 initiate the novice . a man abound in question ; but he be a 
 friend of thine , chela . he tell I that thou wast on the road to 
 much honour as a scribe . and I see thou art a physician . ' 
 ' yes , that be I - a scribe , when I be a Sahib , but it be set aside 
 when I come as thy disciple . I have accomplish the year appoint 
 for a Sahib . ' 
 ' as it be a novice ? ' say the lama , nod his head . ' art thou 
 free from the school ? I would not have thee unripe . ' 
 ' I be all free . in due time I take service under the Government as a 
 scribe - ' 
 ' not as a warrior . that be well . ' 
 ' but first I come to wander with thee . therefore I be here . who 
 beg for thee , these day ? ' he go on quickly . the ice be thin . 
 ' very often I beg myself ; but , as thou know , I be seldom here , 
 except when I come to look again at my disciple . from one end to 
 another of Hind have I travel afoot and in the te - rain . a great 
 and a wonderful land ! but here , when I put in , be as though I be 
 in my own Bhotiyal . ' 
 he look round the little clean cell complacently . a low cushion 
 give he a seat , on which he have dispose himself in the cross- 
 legged attitude of the Bodhisat emerge from meditation ; a black 
 teak - wood table , not twenty inch high , set with copper tea - cup , 
 be before he . in one corner stand a tiny altar , also of heavily 
 carve teak , bear a copper - gilt image of the seat Buddha and 
 front by a lamp , an incense - holder , and a pair of copper flower- 
 pot . 
 ' the Keeper of the Images in the Wonder House acquire merit by 
 give I these a year since , ' he say , follow Kim 's eye . ' when 
 one be far from one 's own land such thing carry remembrance ; and we 
 must reverence the Lord for that he show the Way . see ! ' he point 
 to a curiously - build mound of coloured rice crown with a fantastic 
 metal ornament . ' when I be Abbot in my own place - before I come to 
 well knowledge I make that offer daily . it be the Sacrifice of 
 the Universe to the Lord . thus do we of Bhotiyal offer all the world 
 daily to the Excellent Law . and I do it even now , though I know that 
 the Excellent One be beyond all pinching and patting . ' he snuff 
 from his gourd . 
 ' it be well do , Holy One , ' Kim murmur , sink at ease on the 
 cushion , very happy and rather tired . 
 ' and also , ' the old man chuckle , ' I write picture of the Wheel of 
 Life . three day to a picture . I be busy on it - or it may be I 
 shut my eye a little - when they bring word of thee . it be good 
 to have thee here : I will show thee my art - not for pride 's sake , 
 but because thou must learn . the Sahibs have not all this world 's 
 wisdom . ' 
 he draw from under the table a sheet of strangely scented yellow 
 chinese paper , the brush , and slab of indian ink . in clean , 
 severe outline he have trace the Great Wheel with its six spoke , 
 whose centre be the conjoin Hog , Snake , and Dove   Ignorance , 
 Anger , and Lust , and whose compartment be all the Heavens and 
 Hells , and all the chance of human life . man say that the Bodhisat 
 himself first draw it with grain of rice upon dust , to teach his 
 disciple the cause of thing . many age have crystallize it into a 
 most wonderful convention crowd with hundred of little figure 
 whose every line carry a meaning . few can translate the picture- 
 parable ; there be not twenty in all the world who can draw it 
 surely without a copy : of those who can both draw and expound be 
 but three . 
 ' I have a little learn to draw , ' say Kim . ' but this be a marvel 
 beyond marvel . ' 
 ' I have write it for many year , ' say the lama . ' time be when I 
 could write it all between one lamp - lighting and the next . I will 
 teach thee the art - after due preparation ; and I will show thee the 
 meaning of the Wheel . ' 
 ' we take the road , then ? ' 
 ' the Road and our search . I be but wait for thee . it be make 
 plain to I in a hundred dream - notably one that come upon the 
 night of the day that the Gates of Learning first shut that without 
 thee I should never find my River . again and again , as thou know , 
 I put this from I , fear an illusion . therefore I would not take 
 thee with I that day at Lucknow , when we eat the cake . I would not 
 take thee till the . time be ripe and auspicious . from the Hills to 
 the Sea , from the Sea to the Hills have I go , but it be vain . 
 then I remember the Tataka . ' 
 he tell Kim the story of the elephant with the leg - iron , as he have 
 tell it so often to the Jam priest . 
 ' further testimony be not need , ' he end serenely . ' thou wast 
 send for an aid . that aid remove , my Search come to naught . 
 therefore we will go out again together , and our search sure . ' 
 ' whither go we ? ' 
 ' what matter , Friend of all the World ? the search , I say , be sure . 
 if need be , the River will break from the ground before we . I 
 acquire merit when I send thee to the Gates of Learning , and give 
 thee the jewel that be Wisdom . Thou didst return , I see even now , a 
 follower of Sakyamuni , the Physician , whose altar be many in 
 Bhotiyal . it be sufficient . we be together , and all thing be as 
 they be - friend of all the World - Friend of the Stars - my 
 chela ! ' 
 then they talk of matter secular ; but it be noticeable that the 
 lama never demand any detail of life at St Xavier 's , nor show 
 the faint curiosity as to the manner and custom of Sahibs . his 
 mind move all in the past , and he revive every step of their 
 wonderful first journey together , rub his hand and chuckle , 
 till it please he to curl himself up into the sudden sleep of old 
 age . 
 Kim watch the last dusty sunshine fade out of the court , and 
 play with his ghost - dagger and rosary . the clamour of Benares , 
 old of all earth 's city awake before the Gods , day and night , 
 beat round the wall as the sea 's roar round a breakwater . now and 
 again , a Jain priest cross the court , with some small offering to 
 the image , and sweep the path about he lest by chance he should 
 take the life of a live thing . a lamp twinkle , and there follow 
 the sound of a prayer . Kim watch the star as they rise one after 
 another in the still , sticky dark , till he fall asleep at the foot 
 of the altar . that night he dream in Hindustani , with never an 
 english word ... 
 ' Holy One , there be the child to whom we give the medicine , ' he 
 say , about three o'clock in the morning , when the lama , also wake 
 from dream , would have fare forth on pilgrimage . ' the Jat will be 
 here at the light . ' 
 ' I be well answer . in my haste I would have do a wrong . ' he sit 
 down on the cushion and return to his rosary . ' surely old folk 
 be as child , ' he say pathetically . ' they desire a matter - 
 behold , it must be do at once , or they fret and weep ! many time 
 when I be upon the Road I have be ready to stamp with my foot at 
 the hindrance of an ox - cart in the way , or a mere cloud of dust . 
 it be not so when I be a man - a long time ago . none the less it 
 be wrongful - ' 
 ' but thou art indeed old , Holy One . ' 
 ' the thing be do . a Cause be put out into the world , and , old or 
 young , sick or sound , know or unknowing , who can rein in the 
 effect of that Cause ? do the Wheel hang still if a child spin it - 
 or a drunkard ? Chela , this be a great and a terrible world . ' 
 ' I think it good , ' Kim yawn . ' what be there to eat ? I have not 
 eat since yesterday even . ' 
 ' I have forget thy need . yonder be good Bhotiyal tea and cold 
 rice . ' 
 ' we can not walk far on such stuff . ' Kim feel all the European 's lust 
 for flesh - meat , which be not accessible in a Jain temple . yet , 
 instead of go out at once with the begging - bowl , he stay his 
 stomach on slab of cold rice till the full dawn . it bring the 
 farmer , voluble , stutter with gratitude . 
 ' in the night the fever break and the sweat come , ' he cry . ' feel 
 here - his skin be fresh and new ! he esteem the salt lozenge , and 
 take milk with greed . ' he draw the cloth from the child 's face , and 
 it smile sleepily at Kim . a little knot of Jain priest , silent 
 but all - observant , gather by the temple door . they know , and Kim 
 know that they know , how the old lama have meet his disciple . be 
 courteous folk , they have not obtrude themselves overnight by 
 presence , word , or gesture . wherefore Kim repay they as the sun 
 rise . 
 ' thank the Gods of the Jains , brother , ' he say , not know how 
 those Gods be name . ' the fever be indeed break . ' 
 ' look ! see ! ' the lama beam in the background upon his host of 
 three year . ' be there ever such a chela ? he follow our Lord the 
 Healer . ' 
 now the Jains officially recognize all the Gods of the Hindu creed , 
 as well as the Lingam and the Snake . they wear the brahminical 
 thread ; they adhere to every claim of Hindu caste - law . but , because 
 they know and love the lama , because he be an old man , because he 
 seek the Way , because he be their guest , and because he collogue 
 long of night with the head - priest - as free - think a 
 metaphysician as ever split one hair into seventy - they murmur 
 assent . 
 ' remember , ' - Kim bend over the child - . ' this trouble may come 
 again . ' 
 ' not if thou hast the proper spell , ' say the father . 
 ' but in a little while we go away . ' 
 ' true , ' say the lama to all the Jains . ' we go now together upon the 
 Search whereof I have often speak . I wait till my chela be ripe . 
 behold he ! we go north . never again shall I look upon this place of 
 my rest , o people of good will . ' 
 ' but I be not a beggar . ' the cultivator rise to his foot , clutch 
 the child . 
 ' be still . do not trouble the Holy One , ' a priest cry . 
 ' go , ' Kim whisper . ' meet we again under the big railway bridge , 
 and for the sake of all the Gods of our Punjab , bring food - curry , 
 pulse , cake fry in fat , and sweetmeat . specially sweetmeat . be 
 swift ! ' 
 the pallor of hunger suit Kim very well as he stand , tall and 
 slim , in his sand - colour , sweeping robe , one hand on his rosary 
 and the other in the attitude of benediction , faithfully copy from 
 the lama . an english observer might have say that he look rather 
 like the young saint of a stain - glass window , whereas he be but a 
 grow lad faint with emptiness . 
 long and formal be the farewell , thrice end and thrice renew . 
 the Seeker - he who have invite the lama to that haven from far- 
 away Tibet , a silver - face , hairless ascetic -took no part in it , 
 but meditate , as always , alone among the image . the other be 
 very human ; press small comfort upon the old man - a betel - box , 
 a fine new iron pencase , a food - bag , and such - like - warn he 
 against the danger of the world without , and prophesy a happy 
 end to the search . Meantime Kim , lonely than ever , squat on the 
 step , and swear to himself in the language of St Xavier 's . 
 ' but it be my own fault , ' he conclude . ' with Mahbub , I eat Mahbub 's 
 bread , or Lurgan Sahib 's . at St Xavier 's , three meal a day . here I 
 must jolly - well look out for myself . besides , I be not in good 
 training . how I could eat a plate of beef now ! ... be it finish , 
 Holy one ? ' 
 the lama , both hand raise , intone a final blessing in ornate 
 Chinese . ' I must lean on thy shoulder , ' say he , as the temple gate 
 close . ' we grow stiff , I think . ' 
 the weight of a six - foot man be not light to steady through mile of 
 crowded street , and Kim , load down with bundle and package for 
 the way , be glad to reach the shadow of the railway bridge . 
 ' here we eat , ' he say resolutely , as the Kamboh , blue - rob and 
 smile , hove in sight , a basket in one hand and the child in the 
 other . 
 ' fall to , Holy Ones ! ' he cry from fifty yard .   they be by the 
 shoal under the first bridge - span , out of sight of hungry priest . 
 ' Rice and good curry , cake all warm and well scented with hing 
  asafoetida , curd and sugar . king of my field , ' -thi to the 
 small son - ' let we show these holy man that we Jats of Jullundur 
 can pay a service ... I have hear the Jains would eat nothing that 
 they have not cook , but truly ' - he look away politely over the 
 broad river - ' where there be no eye there be no caste . ' 
 ' and we , ' say Kim , turn his back and heap a leafplatter for 
 the lama , ' be beyond all caste . ' 
 they gorge themselves on the good food in silence . nor till he have 
 lick the last of the sticky sweetstuff from his little finger do 
 Kim note that the Kamboh too be girt for travel . 
 ' if our road lie together , ' he say roughly , ' I go with thee . one 
 do not often find a worker of miracle , and the child be still 
 weak . but I be not altogether a reed . ' he pick up his lathi - a 
 five - foot male - bamboo ring with band of polished iron - and 
 flourish it in the air . ' the Jats be call quarrel - some , but 
 that be not true . except when we be cross , we be like our own 
 buffalo . ' 
 ' so be it , ' say Kim . ' a good stick be a good reason . ' 
 the lama gaze placidly up - stream , where in long , smudged 
 perspective the ceaseless column of smoke go up from the burning- 
 ghat by the river . now and again , despite all municipal 
 regulation , the fragment of a half - burn body bob by on the 
 full current . 
 ' but for thee , ' say the Kamboh to Kim , draw the child into his 
 hairy breast , ' I might today have go thither - with this one . the 
 priest tell we that Benares be holy - which none doubt - and 
 desirable to die in . but I do not know their Gods , and they ask for 
 money ; and when one have do one worship a shave - head vow it be of 
 none effect except one do another . wash here ! wash there ! pour , 
 drink , lave , and scatter flower - but always pay the priest . no , 
 the Punjab for I , and the soil of the Jullundur - doab for the good 
 soil in it . ' 
 ' I have say many time - in the Temple , I think - that if need be , 
 the River will open at our foot . we will therefore go north , ' say 
 the lama , rise . ' I remember a pleasant place , set about with 
 fruit - tree , where one can walk in meditation - and the air be 
 cool there . it come from the Hills and the snow of the Hills . ' 
 ' what be the name ? ' say Kim . 
 ' how should I know ? didst thou not - no , that be after the Army 
 rise out of the earth and take thee away . I abode there in 
 meditation in a room against the dovecot - except when she talk 
 eternally . ' 
 ' Oho ! the woman from Kulu . that be by Saharunpore . ' Kim laugh . 
 ' how do the spirit move thy master ? do he go afoot , for the sake 
 of past sin ? ' the Jat demand cautiously . ' it be a far cry to 
 Delhi . ' 
 ' no , ' say Kim . ' I will beg a tikkut for the te - rain . ' one do not 
 own to the possession of money in India . 
 ' then , in the name of the Gods , let we take the fire - carriage . my 
 son be good in his mother 's arm . the Government have bring on we 
 many taxis , but it give we one good thing - the te - rain that join 
 friend and unite the anxious . a wonderful matter be the te - rain . ' 
 they all pile into it a couple of hour later , and sleep through 
 the heat of the day . the Kamboh ply Kim with ten thousand 
 question as to the lama 's walk and work in life , and receive some 
 curious answer . Kim be content to be where he be , to look out 
 upon the flat north - western landscape , and to talk to the 
 change mob of fellow - passenger . even today , ticket and ticket- 
 clipping be dark oppression to indian rustic . they do not 
 understand why , when they have pay for a magic piece of paper , 
 stranger should punch great piece out of the charm . so , long and 
 furious be the debate between traveller and eurasian ticket- 
 collector . Kim assist at two or three with grave advice , mean to 
 darken counsel and to show off his wisdom before the lama and the 
 admire Kamboh . but at Somna Road the Fates send he a matter to 
 think upon . there tumble into the compartment , as the train be 
 move off , a mean , lean little person - a Mahratta , so far as Kim 
 could judge by the cock of the tight turban . his face be cut , his 
 muslin upper - garment be badly tear , and one leg be bandage . he 
 tell they that a country - cart have upset and nearly slay he : he 
 be go to Delhi , where his son live . Kim watch he closely . 
 if , as he assert , he have be roll over and over on the earth , 
 there should have be sign of gravel - rash on the skin . but all his 
 injury seem clean cut , and a mere fall from a cart could not 
 cast a man into such extremity of terror . as , with shake finger , 
 he knot up the torn cloth about his neck he lay bare an amulet 
 of the kind call a keeper - up of the heart . now , amulet be common 
 enough , but they be not generally string on square - plait copper 
 wire , and still few amulet bear black enamel on silver . there 
 be none except the Kamboh and the lama in the compartment , which , 
 luckily , be of an old type with solid end . Kim make as to scratch 
 in his bosom , and thereby lift his own amulet . the Mahratta 's face 
 change altogether at the sight , and he dispose the amulet fairly on 
 his breast . 
 ' yes , ' he go on to the Kamboh , ' I be in haste , and the cart , 
 drive by a bastard , bind its wheel in a water - cut , and besides the 
 harm do to I there be lose a full dish of tarkeean . I be not a 
 Son of the Charm   a lucky man   that day . ' 
 ' that be a great loss , ' say the Kamboh , withdraw interest . his 
 experience of Benares have make he suspicious . 
 ' who cook it ? ' say Kim . 
 ' a woman . ' the Mahratta raise his eye . 
 ' but all woman can cook tarkeean , ' say the Kamboh . ' it be a good 
 curry , as I know . ' 
 ' oh yes , it be a good curry , ' say the Mahratta . 
 ' and cheap , ' say Kim . ' but what about caste ? ' 
 ' oh , there be no caste where man go to - look for tarkeean , ' the 
 Mahratta reply , in the prescribed cadence . ' of whose service art 
 thou ? ' 
 ' of the service of this Holy One . ' Kim point to the happy , drowsy 
 lama , who wake with a jerk at the well - love word . 
 ' ah , he be send from Heaven to aid I . he be call the Friend of 
 all the World . he be also call the Friend of the Stars . he walk 
 as a physician - his time be ripe . great be his wisdom . ' 
 ' and a Son of the Charm , ' say Kim under his breath , as the Kamboh 
 make haste to prepare a pipe lest the Mahratta should beg . 
 ' and who be that ? ' the Mahratta ask , glance sideway nervously . 
 ' one whose child i - we have cure , who lie under great debt to we . 
 sit by the window , man from Jullundur . here be a sick one . ' 
 ' Humph ! I have no desire to mix with chance - meet wastrel . my ear 
 be not long . I be not a woman wish to overhear secret . ' the Jat 
 slide himself heavily into a far corner . 
 ' art thou anything of a healer ? I be ten league deep in calamity , ' 
 cry the Mahratta , pick up the cue . 
 ' this man be cut and bruise all over . I go about to cure he , ' Kim 
 retort . ' none interfere between thy babe and I . ' 
 ' I be rebuke , ' say the Kamboh meekly . ' I be thy debtor for the 
 life of my son . thou art a miracle - worker - I know it . ' 
 ' show I the cut . ' Kim bend over the Mahratta 's neck , his heart 
 nearly choke he ; for this be the Great Game with a vengeance . 
 ' now , tell thy tale swiftly , brother , while I say a charm . ' 
 ' I come from the South , where my work lay . one of we they slay by 
 the roadside . Hast thou hear ? ' Kim shake his head . he , of course , 
 know nothing of E 's predecessor , slay down south in the habit of an 
 arab trader . ' have find a certain letter which I be send to 
 seek , I come away . I escape from the city and run to Mhow . so sure 
 be I that none know , I do not change my face . at Mhow a woman 
 bring charge against I of theft of jewellery in that city which I 
 have leave . then I see the cry be out against I . I run from Mhow by 
 night , bribe the police , who have be bribe to hand I over 
 without question to my enemy in the South . then I lay in old 
 Chitor city a week , a penitent in a temple , but I could not get rid 
 of the letter which be my charge . I bury it under the Queen 's 
 Stone , at Chitor , in the place know to we all . ' 
 Kim do not know , but not for world would he have break the 
 thread . 
 ' at Chitor , look you , I be all in king ' country ; for Kotah to the 
 east be beyond the Queen 's law , and east again lie Jaipur and 
 Gwalior . neither love spy , and there be no justice . I be hunt 
 like a wet jackal ; but I break through at Bandakui , where I hear 
 there be a charge against I of murder in the city I have leave - of 
 the murder of a boy . they have both the corpse and the witness 
 wait . ' 
 ' but can not the Government protect ? ' 
 ' we of the Game be beyond protection . if we die , we die . our name 
 be blot from the book . that be all . at Bandakui , where live one 
 of Us , I think to slip the scent by change my face , and so make 
 I a Mahratta . then I come to Agra , and would have turn back to 
 Chitor to recover the letter . so sure I be I have slip they . 
 therefore I do not send a tar   telegram   to any one say where 
 the letter lie . I wish the credit of it all . ' 
 Kim nod . he understand that feel well . 
 ' but at Agra , walk in the street , a man cry a debt against I , 
 and approach with many witness , would hale I to the court 
 then and there . oh , they be clever in the South ! he recognize I 
 as his agent for cotton . may he burn in Hell for it ! ' 
 ' and wast thou ? ' 
 ' o fool ! I be the man they seek for the matter of the letter ! I 
 run into the flesher ' Ward and come out by the House of the Jew , 
 who fear a riot and push I forth . I come afoot to Somna Road - 
 I have only money for my tikkut to Delhi - and there , while I lay in 
 a ditch with a fever , one spring out of the bush and beat I and 
 cut I and search I from head to foot . within earshot of the te- 
 rain it be ! ' 
 ' why do he not slay thee out of hand ? ' 
 ' they be not so foolish . if I be take in Delhi at the instance of 
 lawyer , upon a proven charge of murder , my body be hand over to 
 the State that desire it . I go back guard , and then - I die 
 slowly for an example to the rest of we . the South be not my 
 country . I run in circle - like a goat with one eye . I have not 
 eat for two day . I be mark ' - he touch the filthy bandage on 
 his leg - ' so that they will know I at Delhi . ' 
 ' thou art safe in the te - rain , at least . ' 
 ' live a year at the Great Game and tell I that again ! the wire 
 will be out against I at Delhi , describe every tear and rag upon 
 I . twenty - a hundred , if need be - will have see I slay that 
 boy . and thou art useless ! ' 
 Kim know enough of native method of attack not to doubt that the 
 case would be deadly complete - even to the corpse . the Mahratta 
 twitch his finger with pain from time to time . the Kamboh in his 
 corner glare sullenly ; the lama be busy over his bead ; and Kim , 
 fumble doctor - fashion at the man 's neck , think out his plan 
 between invocation . 
 ' Hast thou a charm to change my shape ? else I be dead . five - ten 
 minute alone , if I have not be so pressed , and I might - ' 
 ' be he cure yet , miracle - worker ? ' say the Kamboh jealously . ' Thou 
 hast chant long enough . ' 
 ' Nay . there be no cure for his hurt , as I see , except he sit for 
 three day in the habit of a bairagi . ' this be a common penance , 
 often impose on a fat trader by his spiritual teacher . 
 ' one priest always go about to make another priest , ' be the 
 retort . like most grossly superstitious folk , the Kamboh could not 
 keep his tongue from deride his Church . 
 ' will thy son be a priest , then ? it be time he take more of my 
 quinine . ' 
 ' we Jats be all buffalo , ' say the Kamboh , soften anew . 
 Kim rub a finger - tip of bitterness on the child 's trust little 
 lip . ' I have ask for nothing , ' he say sternly to the father , 
 ' except food . dost thou grudge I that ? I go to heal another man . 
 have I thy leave - Prince ? ' 
 up fly the man 's huge paw in supplication . ' nay - nay . do not mock 
 I thus . ' 
 ' it please I to cure this sick one . Thou shalt acquire merit by 
 aid . what colour ash be there in thy pipe - bowl ? White . that be 
 auspicious . be there raw turmeric among thy foodstuff ? ' 
 ' i - I - ' 
 ' open thy bundle ! ' 
 it be the usual collection of small oddment : bit of cloth , quack 
 medicine , cheap fairing , a clothful of atta - greyish , rough- 
 ground native flour - twist of down - country tobacco , tawdry pipe- 
 stem , and a packet of curry - stuff , all wrap in . a quilt . Kim 
 turn it over with the air of a wise warlock , mutter a 
 Mohammedan invocation . 
 ' this be wisdom I learn from the Sahibs , ' he whisper to the 
 lama ; and here , when one think of his training at Lurgan 's , he 
 speak no more than the truth . ' there be a great evil in this man 's 
 fortune , as show by the Stars , which - which trouble he . shall I 
 take it away ? ' 
 ' Friend of the Stars , thou hast do well in all thing . let it be 
 at thy pleasure . be it another healing ? ' 
 ' quick ! be quick ! ' gasp the Mahratta . ' the train may stop . ' 
 ' a healing against the shadow of death , ' say Kim , mix the 
 Kamboh 's flour with the mingled charcoal and tobacco ash in the red- 
 earth bowl of the pipe . E , without a word , slip off his turban 
 and shake down his long black hair . 
 ' that be my food - priest , ' the jat growl . 
 ' a buffalo in the temple ! hast thou dare to look even thus far ? ' 
 say Kim . ' I must do mystery before fool ; but have a care for 
 thine eye . be there a film before they already ? I save the babe , 
 and for return thou - oh , shameless ! ' the man flinch at the direct 
 gaze , for Kim be wholly in earnest . 
 ' shall I curse thee , or shall I - ' he pick up the outer cloth of 
 the bundle and throw it over the bow head . ' dare so much as to 
 think a wish to see , and - and - even I can not save thee . sit ! be dumb ! ' 
 ' I be blind - dumb . forbear to curse ! Co - come , child ; we will 
 play a game of hiding . do not , for my sake , look from under the 
 cloth . ' 
 ' I see hope , ' say E23 . ' what be thy scheme ? ' 
 ' this come next , ' say Kim , pluck the thin body - shirt . e23 
 hesitate , with all a North - West man 's dislike of bar his body . 
 ' what be caste to a cut throat ? ' say Kim , rend it to the waist . 
 ' we must make thee a yellow Saddhu all over . Strip - strip 
 swiftly , and shake thy hair over thine eye while I scatter the ash . 
 now , a caste - mark on thy forehead . ' he draw from his bosom the 
 little Survey paint - box and a cake of crimson lake . 
 ' art thou only a beginner ? ' say E23 , labour literally for the 
 dear life , as he slide out of his body - wrapping and stand clear in 
 the loin - cloth while Kim splash in a noble caste - mark on the ash- 
 smear brow . 
 ' but two day enter to the Game , brother , ' Kim reply . ' smear 
 more ash on the bosom . ' 
 ' Hast thou meet - a physician of sick pearl ? ' he switch out his 
 long , tight - roll turban - cloth and , with swift hand , roll it 
 over and under about his loin into the intricate device of a 
 Saddhu 's cincture . 
 ' hah ! dost thou know his touch , then ? he be my teacher for a 
 while . we must bar thy leg . Ash cure wound . smear it again . ' 
 ' I be his pride once , but thou art almost well . the Gods be 
 kind to we ! give I that . ' 
 it be a tin box of opium pill among the rubbish of the Jat 's 
 bundle . e23 gulp down a half handful . ' they be good against 
 hunger , fear , and chill . and they make the eye red too , ' he 
 explain . ' now I shall have heart to play the Game . we lack only 
 a Saddhu 's tong . what of the old clothe ? ' 
 Kim roll they small , and stuff they into the slack fold of his 
 tunic . with a yellow - ochre paint cake he smear the leg and the 
 breast , great streak against the background of flour , ash , and 
 turmeric . 
 ' the blood on they be enough to hang thee , brother . ' 
 ' maybe ; but no need to throw they out of the window ... it be 
 finish . ' his voice thrill with a boy 's pure delight in the Game . 
 ' turn and look , o Jat ! ' 
 ' the Gods protect we , ' say the hooded Kamboh , emerge like a 
 buffalo from the reed . ' but - whither go the Mahratta ? what hast 
 thou do ? ' 
 Kim have be train by Lurgan Sahib ; E23 , by virtue of his 
 business , be no bad actor . in place of the tremulous , shrink 
 trader there loll against the corner an all but naked , ash- 
 smear , ochre - bar , dusty - haired Saddhu , his swollen eye - opium 
 take quick effect on an empty stomach - luminous with insolence and 
 bestial lust , his leg cross under he , Kim 's brown rosary round 
 his neck , and a scant yard of worn , flower chintz on his 
 shoulder . the child bury his face in his amazed father 's arm . 
 ' look up , princele ! we travel with warlock , but they will not 
 hurt thee . oh , do not cry ... what be the sense of cure a child 
 one day and kill he with fright the next ? ' 
 ' the child will be fortunate all his life . he have see a great 
 healing . when I be a child I make clay man and horse . ' 
 ' I have make they too . Sir Banas , he come in the night and make 
 they all alive at the back of our kitchen - midden , ' pip the child . 
 ' and so thou art not frighten at anything . eh , Prince ? ' 
 ' I be frightened because my father be frightened . I feel his arm 
 shake . ' 
 ' oh , chicken - man ! ' say Kim , and even the abashed Jat laugh . ' I 
 have do a healing on this poor trader . he must forsake his gain 
 and his account - book , and sit by the wayside three night to 
 overcome the malignity of his enemy . the Stars be against he . ' 
 ' the few money - lender the well , say I ; but , Saddhu or no 
 Saddhu , he should pay for my stuff on his shoulder . ' 
 ' so ? but that be thy child on thy shoulder - give over to the 
 burning - ghat not two day ago . there remain one thing more . I do 
 this charm in thy presence because need be great . I change his 
 shape and his soul . none the less , if , by any chance , o man from 
 Jullundur , thou rememberest what thou hast see , either among the 
 elder sit under the village tree , or in thine own house , or in 
 company of thy priest when he bless thy cattle , a murrain will 
 come among the buffalo , and a fire in thy thatch , and rat in the 
 corn - bin , and the curse of our Gods upon thy field that they may 
 be barren before thy foot and after thy ploughshare . ' 
 this be part 
 of an old curse pick up from a fakir by the Taksali Gate in the 
 day of Kim 's innocence . it lose nothing by repetition . 
 ' Cease , Holy One ! in mercy , cease ! ' cry the Jat . ' do not curse 
 the household . I see nothing ! I hear nothing ! I be thy cow ! ' and 
 he make to grab at Kim 's bare foot beat rhythmically on the 
 carriage floor . ' but since thou hast be permit to aid I in the 
 matter of a pinch of flour and a little opium and such trifle as I 
 have honour by use in my art , so will the Gods return a 
 blessing , ' and he give it at length , to the man 's immense relief . it 
 be one that he have learn from Lurgan Sahib . 
 the lama star through his spectacle as he have not star at the 
 business of disguisement . ' friend of the star , ' he say at last , 
 ' thou hast acquire great wisdom . beware that it do not give birth 
 to pride . no man have the Law before his eye speak hastily of 
 any matter which he have see or encounter . ' 
 ' no - no - no , indeed , ' cry the farmer , fearful lest the master 
 should be minded to improve on the pupil . E23 , with relaxed mouth , 
 give himself up to the opium that be meat , tobacco , and medicine to 
 the spend Asiatic . 
 so , in a silence of awe and great miscomprehension , they slide into 
 Delhi about lamp - lighting time . 
 chapter 12 
 who hath desire the Sea - the sight of salt - water unbounded ? 
 the heave and the halt and the hurl and the crash of the comber 
 wind - hound ? 
 the sleek - barrel swell before storm - grey , foamless , enormous , 
 and grow ? 
 Stark calm on the lap of the Line - or the crazy - eyed hurricane 
 blow ? 
 his Sea in no showing the same - his Sea and the same ' neath all 
 show - 
 his Sea that his be fulfil ? 
 so and no otherwise - so and no otherwise hill - man desire their 
 Hills ! 
 the Sea and the Hills . 
 ' I have find my heart again , ' say E23 , under cover of the 
 platform 's tumult . ' hunger and fear make man daze , or I might have 
 thought of this escape before . I be right . they come to hunt for 
 I . Thou hast save my head . ' 
 a group of yellow - trousere Punjab policeman , head by a hot and 
 perspire young Englishman , part the crowd about the carriage . 
 behind they , inconspicuous as a cat , amble a small fat person who 
 look like a lawyer 's tout . 
 ' see the young Sahib read from a paper . my description be in his 
 hand , ' say E23 . ' thev go carriage by carriage , like fisher - folk 
 net a pool . ' 
 when the procession reach their compartment , E23 be count his 
 bead with a steady jerk of the wrist ; while Kim jeer at he for 
 be so drug as to have lose the ringed fire - tong which be the 
 Saddhu 's distinguishing mark . the lama , deep in meditation , star 
 straight before he ; and the farmer , glance furtively , gather up 
 his belonging . 
 ' nothing here but a parcel of holy - bolie , ' say the Englishman 
 aloud , and pass on amid a ripple of uneasiness ; for native police 
 mean extortion to the native all India over . 
 ' the trouble now , ' whisper E23 , ' lie in send a wire as to the 
 place where I hide that letter I be send to find . I can not go to the 
 tar - office in this guise . ' 
 ' be it not enough I have save thy neck ? ' 
 ' not if the work be leave unfinished . do never the healer of sick 
 pearl tell thee so ? come another Sahib ! ah ! ' 
 this be a tallish , sallowish District Superintendent of Police - 
 belt , helmet , polished spur and all - strut and twirl his 
 dark moustache . 
 ' what fool be these Police Sahibs ! ' say Kim genially . 
 E23 glance up under his eyelid . ' it be well say , ' he mutter in 
 a changed voice . ' I go to drink water . keep my place . ' 
 he blunder out almost into the Englishman 's arm , and be bad- 
 word in clumsy Urdu . 
 ' tum mut ? you drunk ? you must not   bang about as though Delhi 
 station belong to you , my friend . ' 
 E23 , not move a muscle of his countenance , answer with a stream 
 of the filthy abuse , at which Kim naturally rejoice . it remind 
 he of the drummer - boy and the barrack - sweeper at Umballa in the 
 terrible time of his first schooling . 
 ' my good fool , ' the Englishman drawl . ' Nickle - jao ! go back to 
 your carriage . ' 
 step by step , withdraw deferentially and drop his voice , the 
 yellow Saddhu clomb back to the carriage , curse the D.S.P. to 
 remotest posterity , by - here Kim almost jump - by the curse of 
 the Queen 's Stone , by the writing under the Queen 's Stone , and by an 
 assortment of Gods " with wholly , new name . 
 ' I do not   know what you be say , ' - the Englishman flush angrily 
 - ' but it be some piece of blasted impertinence . come out of that ! ' 
 E23 , affect to misunderstand , gravely produce his ticket , which 
 the Englishman wrench angrily from his hand . 
 ' oh , zoolum ! what oppression ! ' growl the Jat from his corner . 
 ' all for the sake of a jest too . ' he have be grin at the 
 freedom of the Saddhu 's tongue . ' thy charm do not work well today , 
 Holy One ! ' 
 the Saddhu follow the policeman , fawn and supplicate . the 
 ruck of passenger , busy , with their baby and their bundle , have 
 not notice the affair . Kim slip out behind he ; for it flash 
 through his head that he have hear this angry , stupid Sahib 
 discourse loud personality to an old lady near Umballa three 
 year ago . 
 ' it be well ' , the Saddhu whisper , jam in the calling , 
 shouting , bewildered press - a persian greyhound between his foot 
 and a cageful of yell hawk under charge of a Rajput falconer in 
 the small of his back . ' he have go now to send word of the letter 
 which I hide . they tell I he be in Peshawur . I might have know 
 that he be like the crocodile - always at the other ford . he have 
 save I from present calamity , but I owe my life to thee . ' 
 ' be he also one of we ? ' Kim duck under a Mewar camel - driver 's 
 greasy armpit and cannon off a covey of jabber Sikh matron . 
 ' not less than the great . we be both fortunate ! I will make 
 report to he of what thou hast do . I be safe under his 
 protection . ' 
 he bore through the edge of the crowd besiege the carriage , and 
 squat by the bench near the telegraph - office . 
 ' Return , or they take thy place ! have no fear for the work , brother 
 - or my life . thou hast give I breathing - space , and Strickland 
 Sahib have pull I to land . we may work together at the Game yet . 
 farewell ! ' 
 Kim hurry to his carriage : elated , bewilder , but a little 
 nettled in that he have no key to the secret about he . 
 ' I be only a beginner at the Game , that be sure . I could not have 
 leap into safety as do the Saddhu . he know it be darkest under 
 the lamp . I could not have think to tell news under pretence of 
 cursing ... and how clever be the Sahib ! no matter , I save the 
 life of one ... where be the Kamboh gone , Holy one ? ' he whisper , 
 as he take his seat in the now crowded compartment . 
 ' a fear grip he , ' the lama reply , with a touch of tender 
 malice . ' he see thee change the Mahratta to a Saddhu in the 
 twinkling of an eye , as a protection against evil . that shake he . 
 then he see the Saddhu fall sheer into the hand of the poli - all 
 the effect of thy art . then he gather up his son and flee ; for he 
 say that thou didst change a quiet trader into an impudent bandier 
 of word with the Sahibs , and he fear a like fate . where be the 
 Saddhu ? ' 
 ' with the poli , ' say Kim ... ' yet I save the Kamboh 's child . ' 
 the lama snuff blandly . 
 ' ah , chela , see how thou art overtake ! Thou didst cure the 
 Kamboh 's child solely to acquire merit . but thou didst put a spell 
 on the Mahratta with prideful working - I watch thee - and with 
 sidelong glance to bewilder an old old man and a foolish farmer : 
 whence calamity and suspicion . ' 
 Kim control himself with an effort beyond his year . not more 
 than any other youngster do he like to eat dirt or to be misjudge , 
 but he see himself in a cleft stick . the train roll out of Delhi 
 into the night . 
 ' it be true , ' he murmur . ' where I have offend thee I have do 
 wrong . ' 
 ' it be more , chela . Thou hast loose an Act upon the world , and as 
 a stone throw into a pool so spread the consequence thou canst not 
 tell how far . ' 
 this ignorance be well both for Kim 's vanity and for the lama 's 
 peace of mind , when we think that there be then be hand in at 
 Simla a code - wire report the arrival of E23 at Delhi , and , more 
 important , the whereabouts of a letter he have be commission to - 
 abstract . incidentally , an over - zealous policeman have arrest , on 
 charge of murder do in a far southern State , a horribly indignant 
 Ajmir cotton - broker , who be explain himself to a Mr Strickland 
 on Delhi platform , while E23 be paddle through byway into the 
 locked heart of Delhi city . in two hour several telegram have 
 reach the angry minister of a southern State report that all 
 trace of a somewhat bruise Mahratta have be lose ; and by the time 
 the leisurely train halt at Saharunpore the last ripple of the 
 stone Kim have help to heave be lap against the step of a 
 mosque in far - away Roum - where it disturb a pious man at prayer . 
 the lama make his in ample form near the dewy bougainvillea - trellis 
 near the platform , cheer by the clear sunshine and the presence of 
 his disciple . ' we will put these thing behind we , ' he say , 
 indicate the brazen engine and the gleam track . ' the jolting of 
 the te - rain - though a wonderful thing - have turn my bone to 
 water . we will use clean air henceforward . ' 
 ' let we go to the Kulu woman 's house ' say Kim , and step forth 
 cheerily under the bundle . early morning saharunpore - way be clean 
 and well scented . he think of the other morning at St Xavier 's , 
 and it top his already thrice - heap contentment . 
 ' where be this new haste bear from ? wise man do not run about like 
 chicken in the sun . we have come hundred upon hundred of koss 
 already , and , till now , I have scarcely be alone with thee an 
 instant . how canst thou receive instruction all jostle of crowd ? 
 how can I , whelm by a flux of talk , meditate upon the Way ? ' 
 ' her tongue grow no short with the year , then ? ' the disciple 
 smile . 
 ' nor her desire for charm . I remember once when I speak of the 
 Wheel of Life ' - the lama fumble in his bosom for his late copy - 
 ' she be only curious about the devil that besiege child . she 
 shall acquire merit by entertain we - in a little while - at an 
 after - occasion - softly , softly . now we will wander loose - foot , 
 wait upon the Chain of thing . the Search be sure . ' 
 so they travel very easily across and among the broad bloomful 
 fruit - garden - by way of Aminabad , Sahaigunge , Akrola of the Ford , 
 and little Phulesa - the line of the siwalik always to the north , 
 and behind they again the snow . after long , sweet sleep under the 
 dry star come the lordly , leisurely passage through a wake 
 village - beg - bowl hold forth in silence , but eye rove in 
 defiance of the Law from sky 's edge to sky 's edge . then would Kim 
 return soft - footed through the soft dust to his master under the 
 shadow of a mango - tree or the thin shade of a white Doon siris , 
 to eat and drink at ease . at mid - day , after talk and a little 
 wayfaring , they sleep ; meet the world refresh when the air be 
 cool . night find they adventure into new territory - some 
 choose village spy three hour before across the fat land , and 
 much discuss upon the road . 
 there they tell their tale - a new one each evening so far as Kim 
 be concern - and there be they make welcome , either by priest 
 or headman , after the custom of the kindly East . 
 when the shadow shorten and the lama lean more heavily upon 
 Kim , there be always the Wheel of Life to draw forth , to hold flat 
 under wipe stone , and with a long straw to expound cycle by cycle . 
 here sit the Gods on high - and they be dream of dream . here be 
 our Heaven and the world of the demi - Gods - horseman fight among 
 the hill . here be the agony do upon the beast , soul 
 ascend or descend the ladder and therefore not to be 
 interfere with . here be the Hells , hot and cold , and the abode 
 of torment ghost . let the chela study the trouble that come from 
 over - eat - bloated stomach and burn bowel . obediently , then , 
 with bow head and brown finger alert to follow the pointer , do 
 the chela study ; but when they come to the Human World , busy and 
 profitless , that be just above the Hells , his mind be distract ; 
 for by the roadside trundle the very Wheel itself , eat , 
 drinking , trading , marrying , and quarrel - all warmly alive . 
 often the lama make the living picture the matter of his text , 
 bid Kim - too ready - note how the flesh take a thousand 
 shape , desirable or detestable as man reckon , but in truth of no 
 account either way ; and how the stupid spirit , bond - slave to the 
 Hog , the dove , and the Serpent - lusting after betel - nut , a new yoke 
 of oxen , woman , or the favour of king - be bind to follow the body 
 through all the Heavens and all the Hells , and strictly round again . 
 sometimes a woman or a poor man , watch the ritual - it be 
 nothing less - when the great yellow chart be unfold , would throw 
 a few flower or a handful of cowry upon its edge . it suffice 
 these humble one that they have meet a Holy One who might be move to 
 remember they in his prayer . 
 ' cure they if they be sick , ' say the lama , when Kim 's sporting 
 instinct wake . ' cure they if they have fever , but by no mean work 
 charm . remember what befell the Mahratta . ' 
 ' then all Doing be evil ? ' Kim reply , lie out under a big tree at 
 the fork of the Doon road , watch the little ant run over his 
 hand . 
 ' to abstain from action be well - except to acquire merit . ' 
 ' at the Gates of Learning we be teach that to abstain from action 
 be unbefitte a Sahib . and I be a Sahib . ' 
 ' friend of all the world , ' - the lama look directly at Kim - ' I be 
 an old man - pleased with show as be child . to those who 
 follow the way there be neither black nor white , Hind nor Bhotiyal . 
 we be all soul seek escape . no matter what thy wisdom learn 
 among Sahibs , when we come to my River thou wilt be free from all 
 illusion - at my side . Hai ! my bone ache for that River , as they 
 ache in the te - rain ; but my spirit sit above my bone , wait . 
 the Search be sure ! ' 
 ' I be answer . be it permit to ask a question ? ' 
 the lama incline his stately head . 
 ' I eat thy bread for three year - as thou know . Holy One , 
 whence come - ? ' 
 ' there be much wealth , as man count it , in Bhotiyal , ' the lama 
 return with composure . ' in my own place I have the illusion of 
 honour . I ask for that I need . I be not concerned with the account . 
 that be for my monastery . ai ! the black high seat in the 
 monastery , and novice all in order ! ' 
 and he tell story , trace with a finger in the dust , of the 
 immense and sumptuous ritual of avalanche - guard cathedral ; of 
 procession and devil - dance ; of the changing of monk and nun into 
 swine ; of holy city fifteen thousand foot in the air ; of intrigue 
 between monastery and monastery ; of voice among the hill , and of 
 that mysterious mirage that dance on dry snow . he speak even of 
 Lhassa and of the Dalai Lama , whom he have see and adore . 
 each long , perfect day rise behind Kim for a barrier to cut he off 
 from his race and his mother - tongue . he slip back to thinking 
 and dream in the vernacular , and mechanically follow the lama 's 
 ceremonial observance at eating , drinking , and the like . the old 
 man 's mind turn more and more to his monastery as his eye turn 
 to the steadfast snow . his River trouble he nothing . now and 
 again , indeed , he would gaze long and long at a tuft or a twig , 
 expect , he say , the earth to cleave and deliver its blessing ; 
 but he be content to be with his disciple , at ease in the temperate 
 wind that come down from the Doon . this be not Ceylon , nor Buddh 
 Gaya , nor Bombay , nor some grass - tangle ruin that he seem to 
 have stumble upon two year ago . he speak of those place as a 
 scholar remove from vanity , as a Seeker walk in humility , as an 
 old man , wise and temperate , illumine knowledge with brilliant 
 insight . bit by bit , disconnectedly , each tale call up by some 
 wayside thing , he speak of all his wandering up and down Hind ; till 
 Kim , who have love he without reason , now love he for fifty good 
 reason . so they enjoy themselves in high felicity , abstain , 
 as the Rule demand , from evil word , covetous desire ; not over- 
 eating , not lie on high bed , nor wear rich clothe . their 
 stomach tell they the time , and the people bring they their food , 
 as the saying be . they be lord of the village of Aminabad , 
 Sahaigunge , Akrola of the Ford , and little Phulesa , where Kim give 
 the soulless woman a blessing . 
 but news travel fast in India , and too soon shuffle across the 
 crop - land , bear a basket of fruit with a box of Kabul grape and 
 gilt orange , a white - whisker servitor - a lean , dry Oorya - 
 beg they to bring the honour of their presence to his mistress , 
 distressed in her mind that the lama have neglect she so long . 
 ' now do I remember ' - the lama speak as though it be a wholly new 
 proposition . ' she be virtuous , but an inordinate talker . ' 
 Kim be sit on the edge of a cow 's manger , tell story to a 
 village smith 's child . 
 ' she will only ask for another son for her daughter . I have not 
 forget she , ' he say . ' let her acquire merit . send word that we 
 will come . ' 
 they cover eleven mile through the field in two day , and be 
 overwhelm with attention at the end ; for the old lady hold a fine 
 tradition of hospitality , to which she force her son - in - law , who 
 be under the thumb of his woman - folk and buy peace by borrowing 
 of the money - lender . Age have not weaken her tongue or her memory , 
 and from a discreetly bar upper window , in the hearing of not 
 less than a dozen servant , she pay Kim compliment that would have 
 fling european audience into unclean dismay . 
 ' but thou art still the shameless beggar - brat of the parao , ' she 
 shrill . ' I have not forget thee . wash ye and eat . the father of 
 my daughter 's son be go away awhile . so we poor woman be dumb and 
 useless . ' 
 for proof , she harangue the entire household unsparingly till food 
 and drink be bring ; and in the evening - the smoke - scent 
 evening , copper - dun and turquoise across the field - it please she 
 to order her palanquin to be set down in the untidy forecourt by 
 smoky torchlight ; and there , behind not too closely draw curtain , 
 she gossip . 
 ' have the Holy One come alone , I should have receive he otherwise ; 
 but with this rogue , who can be too careful ? ' 
 ' maharanee , ' say Kim , choose as always the ample title , ' be it 
 my fault that none other than a Sahib - a polis - Sahib - call the 
 Maharanee whose face he - ' 
 ' Chutt ! that be on the pilgrimage . 
 when we travel - thou know the proverb . ' 
 ' call the Maharanee a Breaker of Hearts and a Dispenser of 
 Delights ? ' 
 ' to remember that ! it be true . so he do . that be in the time of 
 the bloom of my beauty . ' she chuckle like a content parrot above 
 the sugar lump . ' now tell I of thy going and coming - as much as 
 may be without shame . how many maid , and whose wife , hang upon 
 thine eyelash ? ye hail from benare ? I would have go there again 
 this year , but my daughter - we have only two son . Phaii ! such be 
 the effect of these low plain . now in Kulu man be elephant . but I 
 would ask thy Holy One - stand aside , rogue - a charm against most 
 lamentable windy colic that in mango - time overtake my daughter 's 
 eld . two year back he give I a powerful spell . ' 
 ' oh , Holy One ! ' say Kim , bubble with mirth at the lama 's rueful 
 face . 
 ' it be true . I give she one against wind . ' 
 ' Teeth - tooth - tooth , ' snap the old woman . 
 " ' cure they if they be sick , " ' Kim quote relishingly , " ' but by no 
 mean work charm . remember what befell the Mahratta . " ' 
 ' that be two Rains ago ; she weary I with her continual 
 importunity . ' the lama groan as the Unjust Judge have groan 
 before he . ' thus it come - take note , my chela - that even those 
 who would follow the way be thrust aside by idle woman . three day 
 through , when the child be sick , she talk to I . ' 
 ' Arre ! and to whom else should I talk ? the boy 's mother know 
 nothing , and the father - in the night of the cold weather it be - 
 " pray to the Gods , " say he , forsooth , and turn over , snore ! ' 
 ' I give she the charm . what be an old man to do ? ' 
 " ' to abstain from action be well - except to acquire merit . " ' 
 ' ah chela , if thou desertest I , I be all alone . ' 
 ' he find his milk - tooth easily at any rate , ' say the old lady . 
 ' but all priest be alike . ' 
 Kim cough severely . be young , he do not approve of her 
 flippancy . ' to importune the wise out of season be to invite 
 calamity . ' 
 ' there be a talk mynah ' - the thrust come back with the 
 well - remember snap of the jewel fore - finger - ' over the stable 
 which have pick up the very tone of the family priest . maybe I 
 forget honour to my guest , but if ye have see he double his fist 
 into his belly , which be like a half - grow gourd , and cry : " here be 
 the pain ! " ye would forgive . I be half minded to take the hakim 's 
 medicine . he sell it cheap , and certainly it make he fat as 
 Shiv 's own bull . he do not deny remedy , but I doubt for the 
 child because of the in - auspicious colour of the bottle . ' 
 the lama , under cover of the monologue , have fade out into the 
 darkness towards the room prepare . 
 ' Thou hast anger he , belike , ' say Kim . 
 ' not he . he be weary , and I forget , be a grandmother .   none 
 but a grandmother should ever oversee a child . mother be only fit 
 for bearing .   tomorrow , when he see how my daughter 's son be grow , 
 he will write the charm . then , too , he can judge of the new hakim 's 
 drug . ' 
 ' who be the hakim , Maharanee ? ' 
 ' a wanderer , as thou art , but a most sober Bengali from Dacca - a 
 master of medicine . he relieve I of an oppression after meat by 
 mean of a small pill that work like a devil unchain . he 
 travel about now , vend preparation of great value . he have even 
 paper , print in Angrezi , tell what thing he have do for 
 weak - back man and slack woman . he have be here four day ; but 
 hear ye be come   hakim and priest be snake and tiger the 
 world over   he have , as I take it , go to cover . ' 
 while she draw breath after this volley , the ancient servant , 
 sit unrebuke on the edge of the torchlight , mutter : ' this 
 house be a cattle - pound , as it be , for all charlatan and - 
 priest . let the boy stop eat mango ... but who can argue with 
 a grandmother ? ' he raise his voice respectfully : ' Sahiba , the hakim 
 sleep after his meat . he be in the quarter behind the dovecote . ' 
 Kim bristle like an expectant terrier . to outface and down - talk a 
 Calcutta - teach Bengali , a voluble Dacca drug - vendor , would be a 
 good game . it be not seemly that the lama , and incidentally 
 himself , should be throw aside for such an one . he know those 
 curious bastard english advertisement at the back of native 
 newspaper . St Xavier 's boy sometimes bring they in by stealth to 
 snigger over among their mate ; for the language of the grateful 
 patient recount his symptom be most simple and revealing . the 
 Oorya , not unanxious to play off one parasite against the other , 
 slunk away towards the dovecote . 
 ' yes , ' say Kim , with measured scorn . ' their stock - in - trade be a 
 little coloured water and a very great shamelessness . their prey be 
 break - down king and overfe Bengalis . their profit be in child 
 - who be not bear . ' the old lady chuckle . ' do not be envious . 
 charm be well , eh ? I never gainsay it . see that thy Holy One 
 write I a good amulet by the morning . ' 
 ' none but the ignorant deny ' - a thick , heavy voice boom through 
 the darkness , as a figure come to rest squatting - ' none but the 
 ignorant deny the value of charm . none but the ignorant deny the 
 value of medicine . ' 
 ' a rat find a piece of turmeric . say he : " I will open a grocer 's 
 shop , " ' Kim retort . 
 Battle be fairly join now , and they hear the old lady stiffen to 
 attention . 
 ' the priest 's son know the name of his nurse and three Gods . say 
 he : " hear I , or I will curse you by the three million Great Ones . " ' 
 decidedly this invisible have an arrow or two in his quiver . he go 
 on : ' I be but a teacher of the alphabet . I have learn all the 
 wisdom of the Sahibs . ' 
 ' the Sahibs never grow old . they dance and they play like child 
 when they be grandfather . a strong - back breed , ' pip the voice 
 inside the palanquin . 
 ' I have , too , our drug which loosen humour of the head in hot and 
 angry man . Sina well compound when the moon stand in the proper 
 House ; yellow earth I have - arplan from China that make a man 
 renew his youth and astonish his household ; saffron from Kashmir , 
 and the good salep of Kabul . many people have die before - ' 
 ' that I surely believe , ' say Kim . 
 ' they know the value of my drug . I do not give my sick the mere 
 ink in which a charm be write , but hot and rend drug which 
 descend and wrestle with the evil . ' 
 ' very mightily they do so , ' sigh the old lady . 
 the voice launch into an immense tale of misfortune and 
 bankruptcy , stud with plentiful petition to the Government . ' but 
 for my fate , which overrule all , I have be now in Government 
 employ . I bear a degree from the great school at Calcutta - whither , 
 maybe , the son of this House shall go . ' 
 ' he shall indeed . if our neighbour 's brat can in a few year be 
 make an F A '   First Arts - she use the english word , of which she 
 have hear so often , ' how much more shall child clever as some 
 that I know bear away prize at rich Calcutta . ' 
 ' never , ' say the voice , ' have I see such a child ! bear in an 
 auspicious hour , and - but for that colic which , alas ! turn into 
 black choler , may carry he off like a pigeon - destine to many 
 year , he be enviable . ' 
 ' Hai mai ! ' say the old lady . ' to praise child be inauspicious , 
 or I could listen to this talk . but the back of the house be 
 unguarded , and even in this soft air man think themselves to be man , 
 and woman we know ... the child 's father be away too , and I must be 
 chowkedar   watchman   in my old age . up ! up ! take up the palanquin . 
 let the hakim and the young priest settle between they whether 
 charm or medicine most avail . Ho ! worthless people , fetch tobacco 
 for the guest , and - round the homestead go I ! ' 
 the palanquin reel off , follow by straggle torch and a horde 
 of dog . twenty village know the Sahiba - her failing , her tongue , 
 and her large charity . twenty village cheat she after immemorial 
 custom , but no man would have steal or rob within her 
 jurisdiction for any gift under heaven . none the less , she make 
 great parade of her formal inspection , the riot of which could be 
 hear half - way to Mussoorie . 
 Kim relax , as one augur must when he meet another . the hakim , 
 still squat , slide over his hookah with a friendly foot , and Kim 
 pull at the good weed . the hanger - on expect grave professional 
 debate , and perhaps a little free doctoring . 
 ' to discuss medicine before the ignorant be of one piece with 
 teach the peacock to sing , ' say the hakim . 
 ' true courtesy , ' Kim echo , ' be very often inattention . ' 
 these , be it understand , be company - manner , design to impress . 
 ' hi ! I have an ulcer on my leg , ' cry a scullion . ' look at it ! ' 
 ' get hence ! remove ! ' say the hakim . ' be it the habit of the place 
 to pester honour guest ? ye crowd in like buffalo . ' 
 ' if the Sahiba know - ' Kim begin . 
 ' ai ! ai ! come away . they be meat for our mistress . when her young 
 Shaitan 's colic be cure perhaps we poor people may be suffer to 
 - ' 
 ' the mistress feed thy wife when thou wast in jail for break the 
 money - lender 's head . who speak against she ? ' the old servitor 
 curl his white moustache savagely in the young moonlight . ' I be 
 responsible for the honour of this house . go ! ' and he drive the 
 underling before he . 
 say the hakim , hardly more than shape the word with his lip : 
 ' how do you do , Mister O'Hara ? I be jolly glad to see you again . ' 
 Kim 's hand clench about the pipe - stem . anywhere on the open road , 
 perhaps , he would not have be astonish ; but here , in this quiet 
 backwater of life , he be not prepare for Hurree Babu . it annoy 
 he , too , that he have be hoodwink . 
 ' ah ha ! I tell you at Lucknow - resurgam - I shall rise again and 
 you shall not know I . how much do you bet - eh ? ' 
 he chew leisurely upon a few cardamom seed , but he breathe 
 uneasily . 
 ' but why come here , Babuji ? ' 
 ' ah ! Thatt be the question , as Shakespeare hath it . I come to 
 congratulate you on your extraordinary effeecient performance at 
 Delhi . Oah ! I tell you we be all proud of you . it be verree 
 neat and handy . our mutual friend , he be old friend of mine . he have 
 be in some dam'-tight place . now he will be in some more . he 
 tell I ; I tell Mr Lurgan ; and he be pleased you graduate so nicely . 
 all the Department be pleased . ' 
 for the first time in his life , Kim thrill to the clean pride   it 
 can be a deadly pitfall , none the less   of Departmental praise - 
 ensnare praise from an equal of work appreciate by 
 fellow - worker . Earth have nothing on the same plane to compare with it . 
 but , cry the Oriental in he , Babus do not travel far to retail 
 compliment . 
 ' tell thy tale , Babu , ' he say authoritatively . 
 ' Oah , it be nothing . Onlee I be at Simla when the wire come in 
 about what our mutual friend say he have hide , and old Creighton - ' he look to see how Kim 
 would take this piece of audacity . 
 ' the Colonel Sahib , ' the boy from St Xavier 's correct . ' of 
 course . he find I at a loose string , and I have to go down to 
 Chitor to find that beastly letter . I do not like the South - too 
 much railway travel ; but I draw good travel allowance . ha ! ha ! I 
 meet our mutual at Delhi on the way back . he lie quiett just now , 
 and say Saddhu - disguise suit he to the ground . well , there I 
 hear what you have do so well , so quickly , upon the instantaneous 
 spur of the moment . I tell our mutual you take the bally bun , by 
 Jove ! it be splendid . I come to tell you so . ' 
 ' Umm ! ' 
 the frog be busy in the ditch , and the moon slide to she 
 set . some happy servant have go out to commune with the night 
 and to beat upon a drum . Kim 's next sentence be in the vernacular . 
 ' how didst thou follow we ? ' 
 ' Oah . Thatt be nothing . I know from our mutual friend you go to 
 Saharunpore . so I come on . red Lamas be not inconspicuous person . 
 I buy myself my drug - box , and I be very good doctor really . I go to 
 Akrola of the Ford , and hear all about you , and I talk here and talk 
 there . all the common people know what you do . I know when the 
 hospitable old lady send the dooli . they have great recollection of 
 the old lama 's visit here . I know old lady can not keep their 
 hand from medicine . so I be a doctor , and - you hear my talk ? I 
 think it be verree good . my word , Mister O'Hara , they know about 
 you and the lama for fifty mile - the common people . so I come . do 
 you mind ? ' 
 ' Babuji , ' say Kim , look up at the broad , grin face , ' I be a 
 Sahib . ' 
 ' my dear Mister O'Hara - ' 
 ' and I hope to play the Great Game . ' 
 ' you be subordinate to I departmentally at present . ' 
 ' then why talk like an ape in a tree ? man do not come after one from 
 Simla and change their dress , for the sake of a few sweet word . I 
 be not a child . Talk Hindi and let we get to the yolk of the egg . 
 thou art here - speak not one word of truth in ten . why art thou 
 here ? give a straight answer . ' 
 ' that be so verree disconcerting of the Europeans , Mister O'Hara . 
 you should know a heap well at your time of life . ' 
 ' but I want to know , ' say Kim , laugh . ' if it be the Game , I may 
 help . how can I do anything if you bukh   babble   all round the 
 shop ? ' 
 Hurree Babu reach for the pipe , and suck it till it gurgle 
 again . 
 ' now I will speak vernacular . you sit tight , Mister O'Hara ... it 
 concern the pedigree of a white stallion . ' 
 ' still ? that be finish long ago . ' 
 ' when everyone be dead the Great Game be finish . not before . 
 listen to I till the end . there be five king who prepare a 
 sudden war three year ago , when thou wast give the stallion 's 
 pedigree by Mahbub Ali . upon they , because of that news , and ere 
 they be ready , fall our Army . ' 
 ' Ay - eight thousand man with gun . I remember that night . ' 
 ' but the war be not push . that be the Government custom . the 
 troop be recall because the Government believe the five king 
 be cow ; and it be not cheap to feed man among the high Passes . 
 Hilas and Bunar - Rajahs with gun - undertake for a price to guard 
 the pass against all come from the North . they protest both 
 fear and friendship . ' he break off with a giggle into English : ' of 
 course , I tell you this unoffeecially to elucidate political 
 situation , Mister O'Hara . offeecially , I be debar from 
 criticize any action of superior . now I go on . - this please the 
 Government , anxious to avoid expense , and a bond be make for so 
 many rupee a month that Hilas and Bunar should guard the Passes as 
 soon as the State 's troop be withdraw . at that time - it be 
 after we two meet - I , who have be sell tea in Leh , become a 
 clerk of account in the Army . when the troop be withdraw , I 
 be leave behind to pay the cooly who make new road in the Hills . 
 this road - making be part of the bond between Bunar , Hilas , and the 
 Government . ' 
 ' so ? and then ? ' 
 ' I tell you , it be jolly - beastly cold up there too , after summer , ' 
 say Hurree Babu confidentially . ' I be afraid these Bunar man would 
 cut my throat every night for thee pay - chest . my native sepoy - guard , 
 they laugh at I ! by Jove ! I be such a fearful man . nevar mind 
 thatt . I go on colloquially ... I send word many time that these 
 two king be sell to the North ; and Mahbub Ali , who be yet 
 far North , amply confirm it . nothing be do . only my foot 
 be frozen , and a toe drop off . I send word that the road for 
 which I be pay money to the digger be be make for the foot 
 of stranger and enemy . ' 
 ' for ? ' 
 ' for the Russians . the thing be an open jest among the cooly . 
 then I be call down to tell what I know by speech of tongue . 
 Mahbub come south too . see the end ! over the Passes this year after 
 snow - melt ' - he shiver afresh - ' come two stranger under cover 
 of shoot wild goat . they bear gun , but they bear also chain 
 and level and compass . ' 
 ' oho ! the thing get clear . ' 
 ' they be well receive by Hilas and Bunar . they make great 
 promise ; they speak as the mouthpiece of a Kaisar with gift . up 
 the valley , down the valley go they , say , " here be a place to 
 build a breastwork ; here can ye pitch a fort . here can ye hold the 
 road against an army " - the very road for which I pay out the 
 rupee monthly . the Government know , but do nothing . the three 
 other king , who be not pay for guard the pass , tell they by 
 runner of the bad faith of Bunar and Hilas . when all the evil be 
 do , look you - when these two stranger with the level and the 
 compass make the five king to believe that a great army will 
 sweep the Passes tomorrow or the next day - Hill - people be all 
 fool - come the order to I , Hurree Babu , " go north and see what 
 those stranger do . " I say to Creighton Sahib , " this be not a 
 lawsuit , that we go about to collect evidence . " ' Hurree return to 
 his English with a jerk : " ' by Jove , " I say , " why the dooce do you 
 not issue demi - offeecial order to some brave man to poison they , 
 for an example ? it be , if you permit the observation , most 
 reprehensible laxity on your part . " and Colonel Creighton , he 
 laugh at I ! it be all your beastly english pride . you think no 
 one dare conspire ! that be all tommy - rott . ' 
 Kim smoke slowly , revolve the business , so far as he understand 
 it , in his quick mind . 
 ' then thou goest forth to follow the stranger ? ' 
 ' no . to meet they . they be come in to Simla to send down their 
 horn and head to be dress at Calcutta . they be exclusively 
 sporting gentleman , and they be allow special faceelitie by the 
 Government . of course , we always do that . it be our british pride . ' 
 ' then what be to fear from they ? ' 
 ' by Jove , they be not black people . I can do all sort of thing 
 with black people , of course . they be Russians , and highly 
 unscrupulous people . I - I do not want to consort with they without 
 a witness . ' 
 ' will they kill thee ? ' 
 ' Oah , thatt be nothing . I be good enough Herbert Spencerian , I 
 trust , to meet little thing like death , which be all in my fate , you 
 know . but - but they may beat I . ' 
 ' why ? ' 
 Hurree Babu snap his finger with irritation . ' of course I shall 
 affeeliate myself to their camp in supernumerary capacity as perhaps 
 interpreter , or person mentally impotent and hungree , or some such 
 thing . and then I must pick up what I can , I suppose . that be as 
 easy for I as play Mister Doctor to the old lady . Onlee - onlee 
 - you see , Mister O'Hara , I be unfortunately asiatic , which be 
 serious detriment in some respect . and all - so I be Bengali - a 
 fearful man . ' 
 ' God make the Hare and the Bengali . what shame ? ' say Kim , quote 
 the proverb . 
 ' it be process of Evolution , I think , from Primal Necessity , but 
 the fact remain in all the cui bono . I be , oh , awfully fearful ! - I 
 remember once they want to cut off my head on the road to Lhassa . 
  no , I have never reach to Lhassa .   I sit down and cry , Mister 
 O'Hara , anticipate chinese torture . I do not suppose these two 
 gentleman will torture I , but I like to provide for possible 
 contingency with european assistance in emergency . ' he cough and 
 spit out the cardamom . ' it be purely unoffeecial indent , to which 
 you can say " no , Babu " . if you have no press engagement with your 
 old man - perhaps you might divert he ; perhaps I can seduce his 
 fancy - I should like you to keep in departmental touch with I 
 till I find those sporting cove . I have great opeenion of you 
 since I meet my friend at Delhi . and also I will embody your name in 
 my offeecial report when matter be finally adjudicate . it will be 
 a great feather in your cap . that be why I come really . ' 
 ' Humph ! the end of the tale , I think , be true ; but what of the 
 fore - part ? ' 
 ' about the five king ? Oah ! there be ever so much truth in it . a 
 lot more than you would suppose , ' say Hurree earnestly . ' you come 
 - eh ? I go from here straight into the Doon . it be verree verdant 
 and paint mead . I shall go to Mussoorie to good old Munsoorie 
 Pahar , as the gentleman and lady say . then by Rampur into Chini . 
 that be the only way they can come . I do not like wait in the 
 cold , but we must wait for they . I want to walk with they to Simla . 
 you see , one Russian be a Frenchman , and I know my french pretty 
 well . I have friend in Chandernagore . ' 
 ' he would certainly rejoice to see the Hills again , ' say Kim 
 meditatively . ' all his speech these ten day past have be of little 
 else . if we go together - ' 
 ' Oah ! we can be quite stranger on the road , if your lama prefer . I 
 shall just be four or five mile ahead . there be no hurry for Hurree 
 - that be an Europe pun , ha ! ha ! - and you come after . there be 
 plenty of time ; they will plot and survey and map , of course . I 
 shall go tomorrow , and you the next day , if you choose . eh ? you go 
 think on it till morning . by Jove , it be near morning now . ' he 
 yawn ponderously , and with never a civil word lumber off to his 
 sleeping - place . but Kim sleep little , and his thought run in 
 Hindustani : 
 ' well be the Game call great ! I be four day a scullion at 
 Quetta , wait on the wife of the man whose book I stole . and that 
 be part of the Great Game ! from the South - God know how far - 
 come up the Mahratta , play the Great Game in fear of his life . 
 now I shall go far and far into the North play the Great Game . 
 truly , it run like a shuttle throughout all Hind . and my share and 
 my joy ' - he smile to the darkness- ' I owe to the lama here . also to 
 Mahbub Ali - also to Creighton Sahib , but chiefly to the Holy One . 
 he be right - a great and a wonderful world - and I be Kim - Kim - 
 Kim - alone - one person - in the middle of it all . but I will see 
 these stranger with their level and chain ... ' 
 ' what be the upshot of last night 's babble ? ' say the lama , after 
 his orison 
 ' there come a stroll seller of drug - a hanger - on of the 
 Sahiba 's . he I abolish by argument and prayer , prove that 
 our charm be worthy than his coloured water . ' 
 ' alas , my charm ! be the virtuous woman still bend upon a new one ? ' 
 ' very strictly . ' 
 ' then it must be write , or she will deafen I with her clamour . ' 
 he fumble at his pencase . 
 ' in the plain , ' say Kim , ' be always too many people . in the 
 Hills , as I understand , there be few . ' 
 ' oh ! the Hills , and the snow upon the Hills . ' the lami tear off a 
 tiny square of paper fit to go in an amulet . ' but what dost thou 
 know of the Hills ? ' 
 ' they be very close . ' Kim thrust open the door and look at the 
 long , peaceful line of the Himalayas flush in morning - gold . 
 ' except in the dress of a Sahib , I have never set foot among they . ' 
 the lama snuff the wind wistfully . 
 ' if we go north , ' - Kim put the question to the wake sunrise - 
 ' would not much mid - day heat be avoid by walk among the low 
 hill at least ? ... be the charm make , Holy one ? ' 
 ' I have write the name of seven silly devil - not one of whom be 
 worth a grain of dust in the eye . thus do foolish woman drag we 
 from the Way ! ' 
 Hurree Babu come out from behind the dovecote wash his tooth with 
 ostentatious ritual . full - flesh , heavy - haunche , bull - neck , and 
 deep - voice , he do not look like ' a fearful man ' . Kim sign 
 almost imperceptibly that matter be in good train , and when the 
 morning toilet be over , Hurree Babu , in flowery speech , come to do 
 honour to the lama . they eat , of course , apart , and afterwards the 
 old lady , more or less veil behind a window , return to the vital 
 business of green - mango colic in the young . the lama 's knowledge of 
 medicine be , of course , sympathetic only . he believe that the 
 dung of a black horse , mix with sulphur , and carry in a snake- 
 skin , be a sound remedy for cholera ; but the symbolism interest 
 he far more than the science . Hurree Babu defer to these view 
 with enchant politeness , so that the lama call he a courteous 
 physician . Hurree Babu reply that he be no more than an inexpert 
 dabbler in the mystery ; but at least - he thank the Gods 
 therefore - he know when he sit in the presence of a master . he 
 himself have be teach by the Sahibs , who do not consider expense , 
 in the lordly hall of Calcutta ; but , as he be ever first to 
 acknowledge , there lie a wisdom behind earthly wisdom - the high and 
 lonely lore of meditation . Kim look on with envy . the Hurree Babu 
 of his knowledge - oily , effusive , and nervous - be go ; gone , 
 too , be the brazen drug - vendor of overnight . there remain - 
 polished , polite , attentive - a sober , learn son of experience and 
 adversity , gather wisdom from the lama 's lip . the old lady 
 confide to Kim that these rare level be beyond she . she like 
 charm with plenty of ink that one could wash off in water , swallow , 
 and be do with . else what be the use of the Gods ? she like man 
 and woman , and she speak of they - of kinglet she have know in the 
 past ; of her own youth and beauty ; of the depredation of leopard 
 and the eccentricity of love Asiatic ; of the incidence of 
 taxation , rack - rent , funeral ceremony , her son - in - law   this by 
 allusion , easy to be follow , the care of the young , and the age 's 
 lack of decency . and Kim , as interested in the life of this world as 
 she soon to leave it , squat with his foot under the hem of his 
 robe , drink all in , while the lama demolish one after another 
 every theory of body - curing put forward by Hurree Babu . 
 at noon the Babu strap up his brass - bind drug - box , take his 
 patent - leather shoe of ceremony in one hand , a gay blue - and - white 
 umbrella in the other , and set off northward to the Doon , where , he 
 say , he be in demand among the less king of those part . 
 ' we will go in the cool of the evening , chela , ' say the lama . ' that 
 doctor , learn in physic and courtesy , affirm that the people 
 among these low hill be devout , generous , and much in need of a 
 teacher . in a very short time - so say the hakim - we come to cool 
 air and the smell of pine . ' 
 ' ye go to the Hills ? and by Kulu road ? oh , thrice happy ! ' shrill 
 the old lady . ' but that I be a little press with the care of the 
 homestead I would take palanquin ... but that would be shameless , 
 and my reputation would be crack . Ho ! Ho ! I know the road - every 
 march of the road I know . Ye will find charity throughout - it be 
 not deny to the well - look . I will give order for provision . a 
 servant to set you forth upon your journey ? no ... then I will at 
 least cook ye good food . ' 
 ' what a woman be the Sahiba ! ' say the white - bearded Oorya , when a 
 tumult rise by the kitchen quarter . ' she have never forget a 
 friend : she have never forget an enemy in all her year . and her 
 cookery - wah ! ' he rub his slim stomach . 
 there be cake , there be sweetmeat , there be cold fowl stew 
 to rag with rice and prune - enough to burden Kim like a mule . 
 ' I be old and useless , ' she say . ' none now love I - and none 
 respect - but there be few to compare with I when I call on the 
 Gods and squat to my cooking - pot . come again , o people of good 
 will . Holy One and disciple , come again . the room be always 
 prepare ; the welcome be always ready ... see the woman do not 
 follow thy chela too openly . I know the woman of Kulu . take heed , 
 chela , lest he run away when he smell his Hills again ... hai ! do 
 not tilt the rice - bag upside down ... bless the household , Holy One , 
 and forgive thy servant her stupidity . ' 
 she wipe her red old eye on a corner of her veil , and cluck 
 throatily . 
 ' woman talk , ' say the lama at last , ' but that be a woman 's 
 infirmity . I give she a charm . she be upon the Wheel and wholly 
 give over to the show of this life , but none the less , chela , she 
 be virtuous , kindly , hospitable - of a whole and zealous heart . who 
 shall say she do not acquire merit ? ' 
 ' not i , Holy One , ' say Kim , reslinge the bountiful provision on 
 his shoulder . ' in my mind - behind my eye - I have try to 
 picture such an one altogether free from the Wheel - desiring 
 nothing , cause nothing - a nun , as it be . ' 
 ' and , o imp ? ' the lama almost laugh aloud . 
 ' I can not make the picture . ' 
 ' nor I. but there be many , many million of life before she . she 
 will get wisdom a little , it may be , in each one . ' 
 ' and will she forget how to make stew with saffron upon that road ? ' 
 ' thy mind be set on thing unworthy . but she have skill . I be 
 refresh all over . when we reach the low hill I shall be yet 
 strong . the hakim speak truly to I this morn when he say a 
 breath from the snow blow away twenty year from the life of a 
 man . we will go up into the Hills - the high hill - up to the 
 sound of snow - water and the sound of the tree - for a little 
 while . the hakim say that at any time we may return to the Plains , 
 for we do no more than skirt the pleasant place . the hakim be full 
 of learn ; but he be in no way proud . I speak to he - when thou 
 wast talk to the Sahiba - of a certain dizziness that lay hold 
 upon the back of my neck in the night , and he say it rise from 
 excessive heat - to be cure by cool air . upon consideration , I 
 marvel that I have not think of such a simple remedy . ' 
 ' didst thou tell he of thy Search ? ' say Kim , a little jealously . 
 he prefer to sway the lama by his own speech - not through the 
 wile of Hurree Babu . 
 ' Assuredly . I tell he of my dream , and of the manner by which I have 
 acquire merit by cause thee to be teach wisdom . ' 
 ' thou didst not say I be a Sahib ? ' 
 ' what need ? I have tell thee many time we be but two soul seek 
 escape . he say - and he be just herein - that the River of Healing 
 will break forth even as I dream - at my foot , if need be . have 
 find the Way , seest thou , that shall free I from the Wheel , need I 
 trouble to find a way about the mere field of earth - which be 
 illusion ? that be senseless . I have my dream , night upon night 
 repeat ; I have Jataka ; and I have thee , Friend of all the World . 
 it be write in thy horoscope that a Red Bull on a green field - I 
 have not forget - should bring thee to honour . who but I see that 
 prophecy accomplish ? indeed , I be the instrument . thou shalt find 
 I my River , be in return the instrument . the Search be sure ! ' 
 he set his ivory - yellow face , serene and untroubled , towards the 
 beckon Hills ; his shadow shoulder far before he in the dust . 
 chapter 13 
 who hath desire the Sea - the immense and contemptuous surge ? 
 the shudder , the stumble , the swerve ere the star - stab bowsprit 
 merge - 
 the orderly cloud of the Trades and the ridged roar 
 sapphire thereunder - 
 Unheralded cliff - lurk flaw and the head - sail ' low - volley 
 thunder ? 
 his Sea in no wonder the same - his Sea and the same in each wonder 
 - 
 his Sea that his be fulfil ? 
 so and no otherwise - so and no otherwise hill - man desire their 
 hill ! 
 the Sea and the Hills . 
 ' who go to the hill go to his mother . ' 
 they have cross the Siwaliks and the half - tropical Doon , leave 
 Mussoorie behind they , and head north along the narrow hill - road . 
 Day after day they strike deeply into the huddled mountain , and day 
 after day Kim watch the lama return to a man 's strength . among the 
 terrace of the Doon he have lean on the boy 's shoulder , ready to 
 profit by wayside halt . under the great ramp to Mussoorie he draw 
 himself together as an old hunter face a well - remember bank , and 
 where he should have sink exhausted swing his long drapery about 
 he , draw a deep double - lungful of the diamond air , and walk as 
 only a hillman can . Kim , plain - breed and plain - fed , sweat and 
 pant astonished . ' this be my country , ' say the lama . ' beside 
 such - zen , this be flat than a rice - field ' ; and with steady , 
 drive stroke from the loin he stride upwards . but it be on the 
 steep downhill march , three thousand foot in three hour , that he 
 go utterly away from Kim , whose back ache with hold back , and 
 whose big toe be nigh cut off by his grass sandal - string . through 
 the speckled shadow of the great deodar - forest ; through oak 
 feather and plume with fern ; birch , ilex , rhododendron , and 
 pine , out on to the bare hillside ' slippery sunburnt grass , and 
 back into the woodland ' coolth again , till oak give way to bamboo 
 and palm of the valley , the lama swung untiring . 
 glance back in the twilight at the huge ridge behind he and the 
 faint , thin line of the road whereby they have come , he would lay 
 out , with a hillman 's generous breadth of vision , fresh march for 
 the morrow ; or , halt in the neck of some uplifted pass that give 
 on Spiti and Kulu , would stretch out his hand yearningly towards 
 the high snow of the horizon . in the dawn they flare windy - red 
 above stark blue , as Kedar- nath and Badrinath - king of that 
 wilderness - take the first sunlight . all day long they lay like 
 molten silver under the sun , and at evening put on their jewel 
 again . at first they breathe temperately upon the traveller , wind 
 good to meet when one crawl over some gigantic hog' - back ; but in 
 a few day , at a height of nine or ten thousand foot , those breeze 
 bit ; and Kim kindly allow a village of hillman to acquire merit by 
 give he a rough blanket - coat . the lama be mildly surprised that 
 anyone should object to the knife - edge breeze which have cut the 
 year off his shoulder . 
 ' these be but the low hill , chela . there be no cold till we come 
 to the true Hills . ' 
 ' air and water be good , and the people be devout enough , but the 
 food be very bad , ' Kim growl ; ' and we walk as though we be mad - 
 or English . it freeze at night , too . ' 
 ' a little , maybe ; but only enough to make old bone rejoice in the 
 sun . we must not always delight in soft bed and rich food . ' 
 ' we might at least keep to the road . ' 
 Kim have all a plainsman 's affection for the well - trodden track , not 
 six foot wide , that snake among the mountain ; but the lama , be 
 Tibetan , could not refrain from short cut over spur and the rim 
 of gravel - strew slope . as he explain to his limp disciple , a 
 man breed among mountain can prophesy the course of a mountain - road , 
 and though low - lie cloud might be a hindrance to a short - cut 
 stranger , they make no earthly difference to a thoughtful man . thus , 
 after long hour of what would be reckon very fair mountaineering 
 in civilized country , they would pant over a saddle - back , sidle 
 past a few landslip , and drop through forest at an angle of forty- 
 five onto the road again . along their track lie the village of the 
 hillfolk - mud and earth hut , timber now and then rudely carve 
 with an axe - clinging like swallow ' nest against the steep , 
 huddle on tiny flat half - way down a three - thousand - foot glissade ; 
 jam into a corner between cliff that funnel and focus every 
 wandering blast ; or , for the sake of summer pasture , cower down 
 on a neck that in winter would be ten foot deep in snow . and the 
 people - the sallow , greasy , duffle - clothe people , with short bare 
 leg and face almost Esquimaux - would flock out and adore . the 
 Plains - kindly and gentle - have treat the lama as a holy man 
 among holy man . but the Hills worship he as one in the 
 confidence of all their devil . Theirs be an almost obliterate 
 Buddhism , overlay with a nature - worship fantastic as their own 
 landscape , elaborate as the terracing of their tiny field ; but 
 they recognize the big hat , the click rosary , and the rare 
 chinese text for great authority ; and they respect the man 
 beneath the hat . 
 ' we see thee come down over the black Breasts of Eua , ' say a Betah 
 who give they cheese , sour milk , and stone - hard bread one evening . 
 ' we do not use that often - except when calve cow stray in 
 summer . there be a sudden wind among those stone that cast man 
 down on the still day . but what should such folk care for the 
 Devil of Eua ! ' 
 then do Kim , ache in every fibre , dizzy with look down , 
 footsore with cramp desperate toe into inadequate cranny , take 
 joy in the day 's march - such joy as a boy of St Xavier 's who have 
 win the quarter - mile on the flat might take in the praise of his 
 friend . the hill sweat the ghi and sugar suet off his bone ; 
 the dry air , take sobbingly at the head of cruel pass , firm and 
 build out his upper rib ; and the tilt level put new hard muscle 
 into calf and thigh . 
 they meditate often on the Wheel of Life - the more so since , as 
 the lama say , they be free from its visible temptation . except 
 the grey eagle and an occasional far - see bear grub and root 
 on the hillside ; a vision of a furious paint leopard meet at dawn 
 in a still valley devour a goat ; and now and again a bright- 
 coloured bird , they be alone with the wind and the grass singing 
 under the wind . the woman of the smoky hut over whose roof the 
 two walk as they descend the mountain , be unlovely and 
 unclean , wife of many husband , and afflict with goitre . the man 
 be woodcutter when they be not farmer - meek , and of an 
 incredible simplicity . but that suitable discourse might not fail , 
 Fate send they , overtake and overtake upon the road , the 
 courteous Dacca physician , who pay for his food in ointment good 
 for goitre and counsel that restore peace between man and woman . he 
 seem to know these hill as well as he know the hill dialect , and 
 give the lama the lie of the land towards Ladakh and Tibet . he say 
 they could return to the Plains at any moment . meantime , for such as 
 love mountain , yonder road might amuse . this be not all reveal 
 in a breath , but at evening encounter on the stone threshing- 
 floor , when , patient dispose of , the doctor would smoke and the 
 lama snuff , while Kim watch the wee cow graze on the housetop , 
 or throw his soul after his eye across the deep blue gulfs between 
 range and range . and there be talk apart in the dark wood , when 
 the doctor would seek herb , and Kim , as bud physician , must 
 accompany he . 
 ' you see , Mister O'Hara , I do not know what the deuce - an ' all I 
 shall do when I find our sporting friend ; but if you will kindly 
 keep within sight of my umbrella , which be fine fix point for 
 cadastral survey , I shall feel much well . ' 
 Kim look out across the jungle of peak . ' this be not my country , 
 hakim . easy , I think , to find one louse in a bear - skin . ' 
 ' Oah , thatt be my strong point . there be no hurry for Hurree . they 
 be at Leh not so long ago . they say they have come down from the 
 Karakorum with their head and horn and all . I be onlee afraid they 
 will have send back all their letter and compromise thing from 
 Leh into russian territoree . of course they will walk away as far to 
 the East as possible - just to show that they be never among the 
 Western States . you do not know the Hills ? ' he scratch with a twig 
 on the earth . ' look ! they should have come in by Srinagar or 
 Abbottabad . Thatt be their short road - down the river by Bunji and 
 Astor . but they have make mischief in the West . so ' - he draw a 
 furrow from left to right - ' they march and they march away East to 
 Leh   ah ! it be cold there , and down the Indus to Hanle   I know that 
 road , and then down , you see , to Bushahr and Chini valley . that be 
 ascertain by process of elimination , and also by ask question 
 from people that I cure so well . our friend have be a long time 
 play about and produce impression . so they be well know from 
 far off . you will see I catch they somewhere in Chini valley . 
 please keep your eye on the umbrella . ' 
 it nod like a wind - blow harebell down the valley and round the 
 mountain side , and in due time the lama and Kim , who steer by 
 compass , would overhaul it , vend ointment and powder at 
 eventide . ' we come by such and such a way ! ' the lama would throw a 
 careless finger backward at the ridge , and the umbrella would 
 expend itself in compliment . 
 they cross a snowy pass in cold moonlight , when the lama , mildly 
 chaff Kim , go through up to his knee , like a bactrian camel - 
 the snow - breed , shag - haired sort that come into the Kashmir Serai . 
 they dip across bed of light snow and snow - powder shale , where 
 they take refuge from a gale in a camp of Tibetans hurry down 
 tiny sheep , each laden with a bag of borax . they come out upon 
 grassy shoulder still snow - speckle , and through forest , to grass 
 anew . for all their marching , Kedarnath and Badrinath be not 
 impressed ; and it be only after day of travel that Kim , uplifted 
 upon some insignificant ten - thousand - foot hummock , could see that a 
 shoulder - knot or horn of the two great lord have - ever so slightly 
 - change outline . 
 at last they enter a world within a world - a valley of league 
 where the high hill be fashion of a mere rubble and refuse from 
 off the knee of the mountain . here one day 's march carry they no 
 far , it seem , than a dreamer 's clogged pace bear he in a 
 nightmare . they skirt a shoulder painfully for hour , and , 
 behold , it be but an outlying boss in an outlying buttress of the 
 main pile ! a rounded meadow reveal itself , when they have reach 
 it , for a vast tableland run far into the valley . three day 
 later , it be a dim fold in the earth to southward . 
 ' surely the Gods live here ! ' say Kim , beat down by the silence 
 and the appalling sweep and dispersal of the cloud - shadow after 
 rain . ' this be no place for man ! ' 
 ' long and long ago , ' say the lama , as to himself , ' it be ask of 
 the Lord whether the world be everlaste . on this the Excellent 
 one return no answer ... when I be in Ceylon , a wise Seeker 
 confirm that from the gospel which be write in Pali . certainly , 
 since we know the way to Freedom , the question be unprofitable , 
 but - look , and know illusion , chela ! these - be the true Hills ! 
 they be like my hill by Suchzen . never be such hill ! ' 
 above they , still enormously above they , earth tower away towards 
 the snow - line , where from east to west across hundred of mile , 
 rule as with a ruler , the last of the bold birch stop . above 
 that , in scarps and block upheave , the rock strove to fight their 
 head above the white smother . above these again , changeless since 
 the world 's beginning , but change to every mood of sun and cloud , 
 lie out the eternal snow . they could see blots and blur on its face 
 where storm and wandering wullie - wa get up to dance . below they , as 
 they stand , the forest slide away in a sheet of blue - green for mile 
 upon mile ; below the forest be a village in its sprinkle of 
 terrace field and steep grazing - ground . below the village they 
 know , though a thunderstorm worried and growl there for the 
 moment , a pitch of twelve or fifteen hundred foot give to the moist 
 valley where the stream gather that be the mother of young 
 Sutluj . 
 as usual , the lama have lead Kim by cow - track and by - road , far from 
 the main route along which Hurree Babu , that ' fearful man ' , have 
 bucket three day before through a storm to which nine englishman 
 out of ten would have give full right of way . Hurree be no game- 
 shoot - the snick of a trigger make he change colour - but , as he 
 himself would have say , he be ' fairly effeecient stalker ' , and he 
 have rake the huge valley with a pair of cheap binocular to some 
 purpose . moreover , the white of worn canvas tent against green 
 carry far . Hurree Babu have see all he want to see when he sit 
 on the threshing - floor of Ziglaur , twenty mile away as the eagle 
 fly , and forty by road - that be to say , two small dot which one 
 day be just below the snow - line , and the next have move downward 
 perhaps six inch on the hillside . once clean out and set to the 
 work , his fat bare leg could cover a surprising amount of ground , 
 and this be the reason why , while Kim and the lama lie in a leaky 
 hut at Ziglaur till the storm should be over - past , an oily , wet , but 
 always smile Bengali , talk the good of English with the vilest 
 of phrase , be ingratiate himself with two sodden and rather 
 rheumatic foreigner . he have arrive , revolve many wild scheme , 
 on the heel of a thunderstorm which have split a pine over against 
 their camp , and so convince a dozen or two forcibly impressed 
 baggage - cooly the day be inauspicious for farther travel that 
 with one accord they have throw down their load and jibbed . they 
 be subject of a Hill Rajah who farm out their service , as be 
 the custom , for his private gain ; and , to add to their personal 
 distress , the strange Sahibs have already threaten they with 
 rifle . the most of they know rifle and Sahibs of old : they be 
 tracker and shikarris of the northern valley , keen after bear and 
 wild goat ; but they have never be thus treat in their life . so 
 the forest take they to her bosom , and , for all oath and clamour , 
 refuse to restore . there be no need to feign madness or - the Babu 
 have think of another mean of secure a welcome . he wring out his 
 wet clothe , slip on his patent - leather shoe , open the blue- 
 and - white umbrella , and with mince gait and a heart beat 
 against his tonsil appear as ' agent for his Royal Highness , the 
 Rajah of Rampur , gentleman . what can I do for you , please ? ' 
 the gentleman be delighted . one be visibly french , the other 
 Russian , but they speak English not much inferior to the Babu 's . 
 they beg his kind office . their native servant have go sick at 
 Leh . they have hurry on because they be anxious to bring the 
 spoil of the chase to Simla ere the skin grow moth - eat . they 
 bear a general letter of introduction   the Babu salaam to it 
 orientally   to all Government official . no , they have not meet any 
 other shooting - party en route . they do for themselves . they have 
 plenty of supply . they only wish to push on as soon as might be . 
 at this he waylay a cower hillman among the tree , and after 
 three minute ' talk and a little silver   one can not be economical 
 upon State service , though Hurree 's heart bleed at the waste   the 
 eleven cooly and the three hanger - on reappear . at least the 
 Babu would be a witness to their oppression . 
 ' my royal master , he will be much annoyed , but these people be 
 onlee common people and grossly ignorant . if your honour will 
 kindly overlook unfortunate affair , I shall be much pleased . in a 
 little while rain will stop and we can then proceed . you have be 
 shooting , eh ? that be fine performance ! ' 
 he skip nimbly from one kilta to the next , make pretence to 
 adjust each conical basket . the Englishman be not , as a rule , 
 familiar with the Asiatic , but he would not strike across the wrist 
 a kindly Babu who have accidentally upset a kilta with a red oilskin 
 top . on the other hand , he would not press drink upon a Babu be 
 he never so friendly , nor would he invite he to meat . the 
 stranger do all these thing , and ask many question - about 
 woman mostly - to which Hurree return gay and unstudied answer . 
 they give he a glass of whitish fluid like to gin , and then more ; 
 and in a little time his gravity depart from he . he become 
 thickly treasonous , and speak in term of sweeping indecency of a 
 government which have force upon he a white man 's education and 
 neglect to supply he with a white man 's salary . he babble tale 
 of oppression and wrong till the tear run down his cheek for the 
 misery of his land . then he stagger off , sing love - song of 
 Lower Bengal , and collapse upon a wet tree - trunk . never be so 
 unfortunate a product of english rule in India more unhappily thrust 
 upon alien . 
 ' they be all just of that pattern , ' say one sportsman to the other 
 in French . ' when we get into India proper thou wilt see . I should 
 like to visit his Rajah . one might speak the good word there . it be 
 possible that he have hear of we and wish to signify his good- 
 will . ' 
 ' we have not time . we must get into Simla as soon as may be , ' his 
 companion reply . ' for my own part , I wish our report have be 
 send back from Hilas , or even Leh . ' 
 ' the english post be well and safe . remember we be give all 
 facility - and name of God ! - they give they to we too ! be it 
 unbelievable stupidity ? ' 
 ' it be pride - pride that deserve and will receive punishment . ' 
 ' yes ! to fight a fellow - continental in our game be something . there 
 be a risk attach , but these people - bah ! it be too easy . ' 
 ' pride - all pride , my friend . ' 
 ' now what the deuce be good of Chandernagore be so close to 
 Calcutta and all , ' say Hurree , snore open - mouthed on the sodden 
 moss , ' if I can not understand their French ? they talk so 
 particularly fast ! it would have be much well to cut their 
 beastly throat . ' 
 when he present himself again he be rack with a headache - 
 penitent , and volubly afraid that in his drunkenness he might have 
 be indiscreet . he love the British Government - it be the source 
 of all prosperity and honour , and his master at Rampur hold the very 
 same opinion . upon this the man begin to deride he and to quote 
 past word , till step by step , with deprecate smirk , oily grin , 
 and leer of infinite cunning , the poor Babu be beat out of his 
 defence and force to speak - truth . when Lurgan be tell the tale 
 later , he mourn aloud that he could not have be in the place of 
 the stubborn , inattentive cooly , who with grass mat over their 
 head and the raindrop puddle in their footprint , wait on the 
 weather . all the Sahibs of their acquaintance - rough - clothe man 
 joyously return year after year to their choose gullies - have 
 servant and cook and orderly , very often hillman . these Sahibs 
 travel without any retinue . therefore they be poor Sahibs , and 
 ignorant ; for no Sahib in his sens would follow a Bengali 's 
 advice . but the Bengali , appear from somewhere , have give they 
 money , and could make shift with their dialect . use to 
 comprehensive ill - treatment from their own colour , they suspect a 
 trap somewhere , and stand by to run if occasion offer . 
 then through the new - wash air , steam with delicious earth- 
 smell , the Babu lead the way down the slope - walk ahead of the 
 cooly in pride ; walk behind the foreigner in humility . his 
 thought be many and various . the least of they would have 
 interest his companion beyond word . but he be an agreeable 
 guide , ever keen to point out the beauty of his royal master 's 
 domain . he people the hill with anything thev have a mind to slay - 
 thar , ibex , or markhor , and bear by Elisha 's allowance . he 
 discourse of botany and ethnology with unimpeachable inaccuracy , 
 and his store of local legend - he have be a trusted agent of the 
 State for fifteen year , remember - be inexhaustible . 
 ' decidedly this fellow be an original , ' say the taller of the two 
 foreigner . ' he be like the nightmare of a viennese courier . ' 
 ' he represent in little India in transition - the monstrous 
 hybridism of East and West , ' the Russian reply . ' it be we who can 
 deal with Orientals . ' 
 ' he have lose his own country and have not acquire any other . but he 
 have a most complete hatred of his conqueror . listen . he confide to 
 I last night , ' say the other . 
 under the striped umbrella Hurree Babu be strain ear and brain 
 to follow the quick - pour French , and keep both eye on a kilta 
 full of map and document - an extra - large one with a double red 
 oil - skin cover . he do not wish to steal anything . he only desire 
 to know what to steal , and , incidentally , how to get away when he 
 have steal it . he thank all the Gods of Hindustan , and Herbert 
 Spencer , that there remain some valuable to steal . 
 on the second day the road rise steeply to a grass spur above the 
 forest ; and it be here , about sunset , that they come across an aged 
 lama - but they call he a bonze - sit cross - legged above a 
 mysterious chart hold down by stone , which he be explain to a 
 young man , evidently a neophyte , of singular , though unwashen , 
 beauty . the striped umbrella have be sight half a march away , and 
 Kim have suggest a halt till it come up to they . 
 ' ha ! ' say Hurree Babu , resourceful as Puss - in - Boots . ' that be 
 eminent local holy man . probably subject of my royal master . ' 
 ' what be he do ? it be very curious . ' 
 ' he be expound holy picture - all hand - work . ' 
 the two man stand bareheade in the wash of the afternoon sunlight 
 low across the gold - colour grass . the sullen cooly , glad of the 
 check , halt and slide down their load . 
 ' look ! ' say the Frenchman . ' it be like a picture for the birth of a 
 religion - the first teacher and the first disciple . be he a 
 Buddhist ? ' 
 ' of some debase kind , ' the other answer . ' there be no true 
 Buddhists among the Hills . but look at the fold of the drapery . 
 look at his eye - how insolent ! why do this make one feel that we 
 be so young a people ? ' the speaker strike passionately at a tall 
 weed . ' we have nowhere leave our mark yet . nowhere ! that , do you 
 understand , be what disquiet I . ' he scowl at the placid face , 
 and the monumental calm of the pose . 
 ' have patience . we shall make your mark together - we and you young 
 people . meantime , draw his picture . ' 
 the Babu advance loftily ; his back out of all keep with his 
 deferential speech , or his wink towards Kim . 
 ' Holy One , these be Sahibs . my medicine cure one of a flux , and I 
 go into Simla to oversee his recovery . they wish to see thy picture 
 - ' 
 ' to heal the sick be always good . this be the Wheel of Life , ' say 
 the lama , ' the same I show thee in the hut at Ziglaur when the 
 rain fall . ' 
 ' and to hear thee expound it . ' 
 the lama 's eye light at the prospect of new listener . ' to 
 expound the most Excellent way be good . have they any knowledge of 
 Hindi , such as have the Keeper of Images ? ' 
 ' a little , maybe . ' 
 Hereat , simply as a child engross with a new game , the lama throw 
 back his head and begin the full - throate invocation of the doctor 
 of Divinity ere he open the full doctrine . the stranger lean on 
 their alpenstock and listen . Kim , squat humbly , watch the 
 red sunlight on their face , and the blend and parting of their long 
 shadow . they wear un - english legging and curious girt - in belt 
 that remind he hazily of the picture in a book in St Xavier 's 
 library " the Adventures of a Young Naturalist in Mexico " be its 
 name . yes , they look very like the wonderful M. Sumichrast of that 
 tale , and very unlike the ' highly unscrupulous folk ' of Hurree 
 Babu 's imagining . the cooly , earth - colour and mute , crouch 
 reverently some twenty or thirty yard away , and the Babu , the slack 
 of his thin gear snap like a marking - flag in the chill breeze , 
 stand by with an air of happy proprietorship . 
 ' these be the man , ' Hurree whisper , as the ritual go on and the 
 two white follow the grass - blade sweep from Hell to Heaven and 
 back again . ' all their book be in the large kilta with the reddish 
 top - book and report and map - and I have see a King 's letter 
 that either Hilas or Bunar have write . they guard it most 
 carefully . they have send nothing back from Hilas or Leh . that be 
 sure . ' 
 ' who be with they ? ' 
 ' only the beegar - cooly . they have no servant . they be so close 
 they cook their own food . ' 
 ' but what be I to do ? ' 
 ' wait and see . only if any chance come to I thou wilt know where 
 to seek for the paper . ' 
 ' this be well in Mahbub Ali 's hand than a Bengali 's , ' say Kim 
 scornfully . 
 ' there be more way of get to a sweetheart than butt down a 
 wall . ' 
 ' see here the Hell appoint for avarice and greed . flank upon the 
 one side by Desire and on the other by weariness . ' the lama warm 
 to his work , and one of the stranger sketch he in the quick- 
 fading light . 
 ' that be enough , ' the man say at last brusquely . ' I can not 
 understand he , but I want that picture . he be a well artist than 
 i. ask he if he will sell it . ' 
 ' he say " no , sar , " ' the Babu reply . the lama , of course , would no 
 more have part with his chart to a casual wayfarer than an 
 archbishop would pawn the holy vessel of his cathedral . all Tibet 
 be full of cheap reproduction of the Wheel ; but the lama be an 
 artist , as well as a wealthy Abbot in his own place . 
 ' perhaps in three day , or four , or ten , if I perceive that the 
 Sahib be a Seeker and of good understanding , I may myself draw he 
 another . but this be use for the initiation of a novice . tell he 
 so , hakim . ' 
 ' he wish it now - for money . ' 
 the lama shake his head slowly and begin to fold up the Wheel . the 
 Russian , on his side , see no more than an unclean old man haggle 
 over a dirty piece of paper . he draw out a handful of rupee , and 
 snatch half - jestingly at the chart , which tear in the lama 's grip . 
 a low murmur of horror go up from the cooly - some of whom be 
 Spiti man and , by their light , good buddhist . the lama rise at the 
 insult ; his hand go to the heavy iron pencase that be the priest 's 
 weapon , and the Babu dance in agony . 
 ' now you see - you see why I want witness . they be highly 
 unscrupulous people . oh , sar ! sar ! you must not hit holyman ! ' 
 ' Chela ! he have defile the Written Word ! ' 
 it be too late . before Kim could ward he off , the russian strike 
 the old man full on the face . next instant he be roll over and 
 over downhill with Kim at his throat . the blow have wake every 
 unknown irish devil in the boy 's blood , and the sudden fall of his 
 enemy do the rest . the lama drop to his knee , half - stun ; the 
 cooly under their load flee up the hill as fast as plainsman run 
 aross the level . they have see sacrilege unspeakable , and it behove 
 they to get away before the Gods and devil of the hill take 
 vengeance . the Frenchman run towards the lama , fumble at his 
 revolver with some notion of make he a hostage for his companion . 
 a shower of cut stone - hillman be very straight shot - drive 
 he away , and a coolie from Ao - chung snatch the lama into the 
 stampede . all come about as swiftly as the sudden mountain - darkness . 
 ' they have take the baggage and all the gun , ' yell the 
 Frenchman , fire blindly into the twilight . 
 ' all right , sar ! all right ! do not   shoot . I go to rescue , ' and 
 Hurree , pound down the slope , cast himself bodily upon the 
 delighted and astonish Kim , who be bang his breathless foe 's 
 head against a boulder . 
 ' go back to the cooly , ' whisper the Babu in his ear . ' they have 
 the baggage . the paper be in the kilta with the red top , but look 
 through all . take their paper , and specially the murasla   King 's 
 letter . go ! the other man come ! ' 
 Kim tear uphill . a revolver - bullet rang on a rock by his side , and 
 he cower partridge - wise . 
 ' if you shoot , ' shout Hurree , ' they will descend and annihilate 
 we . I have rescue the gentleman , sar . this be particularly 
 dangerous . ' 
 ' by Jove ! ' Kim be think hard in English . ' this be dam'-tight 
 place , but I think it be self - defence . ' he feel in his bosom for 
 Mahbub 's gift , and uncertainly - save for a few practice shot in 
 the Bikanir desert , he have never use the little gun -pulle the 
 trigger . 
 ' what do I say , sar ! ' the Babu seem to be in tear . ' come down 
 here and assist to resuscitate . we be all up a tree , I tell you . ' 
 the shot cease . there be a sound of stumble foot , and Kim 
 hurry upward through the gloom , swear like a cat - or a 
 country - breed . 
 ' do they wound thee , chela ? ' call the lama above he . 
 ' no . and thou ? ' he dive into a clump of stunt fir . 
 ' Unhurt . come away . we go with these folk to Shamlegh - under - the- 
 Snow . ' 
 ' but not before we have do justice , ' a voice cry . ' I have get 
 the Sahibs ' gun - all four . let we go down . ' 
 ' he strike the Holy One - we see it ! our cattle will be barren - our 
 wife will cease to bear ! the snow will slide upon we as we go home 
 ... atop of all other oppression too ! ' 
 the little fir - clump fill with clamour cooly - panic- 
 stricken , and in their terror capable of anything . the man from 
 Ao - chung click the breech - bolt of his gun impatiently , and make as 
 to go downhill . 
 ' wait a little , Holy one ; they can not go far . wait till I return , ' 
 say he . 
 ' it be this person who have suffer wrong , ' say the lama , his hand 
 over his brow . 
 ' for that very reason , ' be the reply . 
 ' if this person overlook it , your hand be clean . moreover , ye 
 acquire merit by obedience . ' 
 ' wait , and we will all go to Shamlegh together , ' the man insist . 
 for a moment , for just so long as it need to stuff a cartridge into 
 a breech - loader , the lama hesitate . then he rise to his foot , and 
 lay a finger on the man 's shoulder . 
 ' Hast thou hear ? I say there shall be no killing - I who be Abbot 
 of such - zen . be it any lust of thine to be re - bear as a rat , or a 
 snake under the eave - a worm in the belly of the most mean beast ? 
 be it thy wish to - ' 
 the man from Ao - chung fall to his knee , for the voice boom like a 
 tibetan devil - gong . 
 ' ai ! ai ! ' cry the Spiti man . ' do not curse we - do not curse he . 
 it be but his zeal , Holy One ! ... put down the rifle , fool ! ' 
 ' Anger on anger ! evil on evil ! there will be no killing . let the 
 priest - beater go in bondage to their own act . just and sure be the 
 Wheel , swerve not a hair ! they will be bear many time - in 
 torment . ' his head droop , and he lean heavily on Kim 's shoulder . 
 ' I have come near to great evil , chela , ' he whisper in that dead 
 hush under the pine . ' I be tempt to loose the bullet ; and truly , 
 in Tibet there would have be a heavy and a slow death for they ... 
 he strike I across the face ... upon the flesh ... ' he slide to the 
 ground , breathe heavily , and Kim could hear the over - drive heart 
 bump and check . 
 ' have they hurt he to the death ? ' say the Ao - chung man , while the 
 other stand mute . 
 Kim kneel over the body in deadly fear . ' nay , ' he cry 
 passionately , ' this be only a weakness . ' then he remember that he 
 be a white man , with a white man 's camp - fitting at his service . 
 ' open the kilta ! the Sahibs may have a medicine . ' 
 ' Oho ! then I know it , ' say the Ao - chung man with a laugh . ' not for 
 five year be I Yankling Sahib 's shikarri without know that 
 medicine . I too have taste it . Behold ! ' 
 he draw from his breast a bottle of cheap whisky - such as be sell 
 to explorer at Leh - and cleverly force a little between the 
 lama 's tooth . 
 ' so I do when Yankling Sahib twist his foot beyond Astor . aha ! I 
 have already look into their basket - but we will make fair 
 division at Shamlegh . give he a little more . it be good medicine . 
 feel ! his heart go well now . Lay his head down and rub a little 
 on the chest . if he have wait quietly while I account for the 
 Sahibs this would never have come . but perhaps the Sahibs may chase 
 we here . then it would not be wrong to shoot they with their own 
 gun , heh ? ' 
 ' one be pay , I think , already , ' say Kim between his tooth . ' I 
 kick he in the groin as we go downhill . would I have kill 
 he ! ' 
 ' it be well to be brave when one do not live in Rampur , ' say one 
 whose hut lie within a few mile of the Rajah 's rickety palace . ' if 
 we get a bad name among the Sahibs , none will employ we as shikarris 
 any more . ' 
 ' oh , but these be not Angrezi Sahibs - not merry - minded man like 
 Fostum Sahib or Yankling Sahib . they be foreigner - they can not 
 speak Angrezi as do Sahibs . ' 
 here the lama cough and sit up , grope for the rosary . 
 ' there shall be no killing , ' he murmur . ' just be the Wheel ! evil 
 on evil - ' 
 ' Nay , Holy One . we be all here . ' the Ao - chung man timidly pat 
 his foot . ' except by thy order , no one shall be slay . rest awhile . 
 we will make a little camp here , and later , as the moon rise , we go 
 to Shamlegh - under - the - Snow . ' 
 ' after a blow , ' say a Spiti man sententiously , ' it be good to 
 sleep . ' 
 ' there be , as it be , a dizziness at the back of my neck , and a 
 pinch in it . let I lay my head on thy lap , chela . I be an old 
 man , but not free from passion ... we must think of the Cause of 
 thing . ' 
 ' give he a blanket . we dare not light a fire lest the Sahibs see . ' 
 ' well get away to Shamlegh . none will follow we to Shamlegh . ' 
 this be the nervous Rampur man . 
 ' I have be Fostum Sahib 's shikarri , and I be Yankling Sahib 's 
 shikarri . I should have be with Yankling Sahib now but for this 
 cursed beegar   the corvee . let two man watch below with the gun 
 lest the Sahibs do more foolishness . I shall not leave this Holy 
 one . ' 
 they sit down a little apart from the lama , and , after listen 
 awhile , pass round a water - pipe whose receiver be an old day and 
 Martin blacking - bottle . the glow of the red charcoal as it go from 
 hand to hand light up the narrow , blink eye , the high chinese 
 cheek - bone , and the bull - throat that melt away into the dark 
 duffle fold round the shoulder . they look like kobold from some 
 magic mine - gnome of the hill in conclave . and while they talk , 
 the voice of the snow - water round they diminish one by one as 
 the night - frost choke and clog the runnel . 
 ' how he stand up against we ! ' say a Spiti man admire . ' I remember 
 an old ibex , out Ladakh - way , that Dupont Sahib miss on a shoulder- 
 shot , seven season back , stand up just like he . Dupont Sahib 
 be a good shikarri . ' 
 ' not as good as Yankling Sahib . ' the Ao - chung man take a pull at the 
 whisky - bottle and pass it over . ' now hear I - unless any other 
 man think he know more . ' 
 the challenge be not take up . 
 ' we go to Shamlegh when the moon rise . there we will fairly divide 
 the baggage between we . I be content with this new little rifle and 
 all its cartridge . ' 
 ' be the bear only bad on thy holding ? say a mate , suck at the 
 pipe . 
 ' no ; but musk - pod be worth six rupee apiece now , and thy woman 
 can have the canvas of the tent and some of the cooking - gear . we 
 will do all that at Shamlegh before dawn . then we all go our way , 
 remembering that we have never see or take service with these 
 Sahibs , who may , indeed , say that we have steal their baggage . ' 
 ' that be well for thee , but what will our Rajah say ? ' 
 ' who be to tell he ? those Sahibs , who can not speak our talk , or 
 the Babu , who for his own end give we money ? will he lead an army 
 against we ? what evidence will remain ? that we do not need we shall 
 throw on Shamlegh - midden , where no man have yet set foot . ' 
 ' who be at Shamlegh this summer ? ' the place be only a graze centre 
 of three or four hut . ' 
 ' the Woman of Shamlegh . she have no love for Sahibs , as we know . the 
 other can be pleased with little present ; and here be enough for 
 we all . ' he pat the fat side of the near basket . 
 ' but - but - ' 
 ' I have say they be not true Sahibs . all their skin and head 
 be buy in the bazar at Leh . I know the mark . I show they to 
 ye last march . ' 
 ' true . they be all buy skin and head . some have even the moth 
 in they . ' 
 that be a shrewd argument , and the Ao - chung man know his fellow . 
 ' if the bad come to the bad , I shall tell Yankling Sahib , who 
 be a man of a merry mind , and he will laugh . we be not do any 
 wrong to any Sahibs whom we know . they be priest - beater . they 
 frighten we . we flee ! who know where we drop the baggage ? do 
 ye think Yankling Sahib will permit down - country police to wander 
 all over the hill , disturb his game ? it be a far cry from Simla 
 to Chini , and far from Shamlegh to Shamlegh - midden . ' 
 ' so be it , but I carry the big kilta . the basket with the red top 
 that the Sahibs pack themselves every morning . ' 
 ' thus it be prove , ' say the Shamlegh man adroitly , ' that they be 
 Sahibs of no account . who ever hear of Fostum Sahib , or Yankling 
 Sahib , or even the little Peel Sahib that sit up of night to shoot 
 serow - I say , who , ever hear of these Sahibs come into the hill 
 without a down - country cook , and a bearer , and - and all manner of 
 well - pay , high - handed and oppressive folk in their tail ? how can 
 they make trouble ? what of the kilta ? ' 
 ' nothing , but that it be full of the Written Word - book and paper 
 in which they write , and strange instrument , as of worship . ' 
 ' shamlegh - midden will take they all . ' 
 ' true ! but how if we insult the Sahibs ' god thereby ! I do not like 
 to handle the Written Word in that fashion . and their brass idol 
 be beyond my comprehension . it be no plunder for simple hill - folk . ' 
 ' the old man still sleep . Hst ! we will ask his chela . ' the Ao - chung 
 man refresh himself , and swell with pride of leadership . 
 ' we have here , ' he whisper , ' a kilta whose nature we do not know . ' 
 ' but I do , ' say Kim cautiously . the lama draw breath in natural , 
 easy sleep , and Kim have be think of Hurree 's last word . as a 
 player of the Great Game , he be dispose just then to reverence the 
 Babu . ' it be a kilta with a red top full of very wonderful thing , 
 not to be handle by fool . ' 
 ' I say it ; I say it , ' cry the bearer of that burden . ' thinkest 
 thou it will betray we ? ' 
 ' not if it be give to I . I can draw out its magic . otherwise it 
 will do great harm . ' 
 ' a priest always take his share . ' Whisky be demoralize the Ao- 
 chung man . 
 ' it be no matter to I . ' Kim answer , with the craft of his mother- 
 country . ' share it among you , and see what come ! ' 
 ' not i. I be only jest . give the order . there be more than 
 enough for we all . we go our way from Shamlegh in the dawn . ' 
 they arrange and re - arrange their artless little plan for another 
 hour , while Kim shiver with cold and pride . the humour of the 
 situation tickle the Irish and the oriental in his soul . here be 
 the emissary of the dread Power of the North , very possibly as 
 great in their own land as Mahbub or Colonel Creighton , suddenly 
 smite helpless . one of they , he privately know , would be lame for 
 a time . they have make promise to king . tonight they lie out 
 somewhere below he , chartless , foodless , tentless , gunless - except 
 for Hurree Babu , guideless . and this collapse of their Great Game 
  Kim wonder to whom they would report it , this panicky bolt into 
 the night , have come about through no craft of Hurree 's or 
 contrivance of Kim 's , but simply , beautifully , and inevitably as the 
 capture of Mahbub 's fakir - friend by the zealous young policeman at 
 Umballa . 
 ' they be there - with nothing ; and , by Jove , it be cold ! I be here 
 with all their thing . oh , they will be angry ! I be sorry for Hurree 
 Babu . ' 
 Kim might have save his pity , for though at that moment the Bengali 
 suffer acutely in the flesh , his soul be puff and lofty . a mile 
 down the hill , on the edge of the pine - forest , two half - frozen man - 
 one powerfully sick at interval - be vary mutual 
 recrimination with the most poignant abuse of the Babu , who seem 
 distraught with terror . they demand a plan of action . he 
 explain that they be very lucky to be alive ; that their cooly , 
 if not then stalk they , have pass beyond recall ; that the Rajah , 
 his master , be ninety mile away , and , so far from lend they 
 money and a retinue for the Simla journey , would surely cast they 
 into prison if he hear that they have hit a priest . he enlarge on 
 this sin and its consequence till they bid he change the subject . 
 their one hope , say he , be unostentatious flight from village to 
 village till they reach civilization ; and , for the hundredth time 
 dissolve in tear , he demand of the high star why the Sahibs 
 ' have beat holy man ' . 
 ten step would have take Hurree into the creak gloom utterly 
 beyond their reach - to the shelter and food of the near village , 
 where glib - tongue doctor be scarce . but he prefer to endure 
 cold , belly - pinch , bad word , and occasional blow in the company of 
 his honoured employer . crouch against a tree - trunk , he sniff 
 dolefully . 
 ' and have you think , ' say the uninjured man hotly , ' what sort of 
 spectacle we shall present wander through these hill among these 
 aborigine ? ' 
 Hurree Babu have think of little else for some hour , but the 
 remark be not to his address . 
 ' we can not wander ! I can hardly walk , ' groan Kim 's victim . 
 ' perhaps the holy man will be merciful in loving - kindness , sar , 
 otherwise - ' 
 ' I promise myself a peculiar pleasure in empty my revolver into 
 that young bonze when next we meet , ' be the unchristian answer . 
 ' revolver ! Vengeance ! bonze ! ' Hurree crouch lower . the war be 
 break out afresh . ' have you no consideration for our loss ? the 
 baggage ! the baggage ! ' he could hear the speaker literally dance 
 on the grass . ' everything we bear ! everything we have secure ! our 
 gain ! eight month ' work ! do you know what that mean ? " decidedly 
 it be we who can deal with oriental ! " oh , you have do well . ' 
 they fall to it in several tongue , and Hurree smile . Kim be with 
 the kilta , and in the kilta lie eight month of good diplomacy . 
 there be no mean of communicate with the boy , but he could be 
 trust . for the rest , Hurree could so stage - manage the journey 
 through the hill that Hilas , Bunar , and four hundred mile of hill- 
 road should tell the tale for a generation . man who can not control 
 their own cooly be little respected in the Hills , and the hillman 
 have a very keen sense of humour . 
 ' if I have do it myself , ' think Hurree , ' it would not have be 
 well ; and , by Jove , now I think of it , of course I arrange it 
 myself . how quick I have be ! just when I run downhill I think 
 it ! thee outrage be accidental , but onlee I could have work it - 
 ah - for all it be dam'-well worth . consider the moral effect upon 
 these ignorant people ! no treaty - no paper - no write 
 document at all - and I to interpret for they . how I shall laugh 
 with the Colonel ! I wish I have their paper also : but you can not 
 occupy two place in space simultaneously . Thatt be axiomatic . ' 
 chapter 14 
 my brother kneel   so saith Kabir 
 to stone and brass in heathen wise , 
 but in my brother 's voice I hear 
 my own unanswered agony . 
 his God be as his Fates assign - 
 his prayer be all the world 's - and mine . 
 the Prayer . 
 at moonrise the cautious cooly get under way . the lama , refresh 
 by his sleep and the spirit , need no more than Kim 's shoulder to 
 bear he along - a silent , swift - stride man . they hold the shale- 
 sprinkle grass for an hour , sweep round the shoulder of an immortal 
 cliff , and climb into a new country entirely block off from all 
 sight of Chini valley . a huge pasture - ground run up fan - shaped to 
 the live snow . at its base be perhaps half an acre of flat land , 
 on which stand a few soil and timber hut . behind they - for , hill- 
 fashion , they be perch on the edge of all thing - the ground 
 fall sheer two thousand foot to Shamlegh - midden , where never yet man 
 have set foot . 
 the man make no motion to divide the plunder till they have see the 
 lama bed down in the good room of the place , with Kim shampoo 
 his foot , Mohammedan - fashion . 
 ' we will send food , ' say the Ao - chung man , ' and the red - top 
 kilta . by dawn there will be none to give evidence , one way or the 
 other . if anything be not need in the kilta - see here ! ' 
 he point through the window - opening into space that be fill 
 with moonlight reflect from the snow - and throw out an empty 
 whisky - bottle . 
 ' no need to listen for the fall . this be the world 's end , ' he say , 
 and go out . the lama look forth , a hand on either sill , with 
 eye that shine like yellow opal . from the enormous pit before he 
 white peak lift themselves yearn to the moonlight . the rest 
 be as the darkness of interstellar space . 
 ' these , ' he say slowly , ' be indeed my Hills . thus should a man 
 abide , perch above the world , separate from delight , consider 
 vast matter . ' 
 ' yes ; if he have a chela to prepare tea for he , and to fold a 
 blanket for his head , and to chase out calve cow . ' 
 a smoky lamp burn in a niche , but the full moonlight beat it down ; 
 and by the mixed light , stoop above the food - bag and cup , Kim 
 move like a tall ghost . 
 ' ai ! but now I have let the blood cool , my head still beat and 
 drum , and there be a cord round the back of my neck . ' 
 ' no wonder . it be a strong blow . may he who deal it - ' 
 ' but for my own passion there would have be no evil . ' 
 ' what evil ? Thou hast save the Sahibs from the death they deserve 
 a hundred time . ' 
 ' the lesson be not well learn , chela . ' the lama come to rest on a 
 fold blanket , as Kim go forward with his evening routine . ' the 
 blow be but a shadow upon a shadow . evil in itself - my leg weary 
 apace these latter day ! - it meet evil in I : anger , rage , and a lust 
 to return evil . these work in my blood , wake tumult in my 
 stomach , and dazzle my ear . ' here he drink scald black - tea 
 ceremonially , take the hot cup from Kim 's hand . ' have I be 
 passionless , the evil blow would have do only bodily evil - a 
 scar , or a bruise - which be illusion . but my mind be not 
 abstract , for rush in straightway a lust to let the Spiti man 
 kill . in fight that lust , my soul be tear and wrench beyond a 
 thousand blow . not till I have repeat the blessing '   he mean the 
 Buddhist Beatitudes   ' do I achieve calm . but the evil plant in 
 I by that moment 's carelessness work out to its end . just be the 
 Wheel , swerve not a hair ! learn the lesson , chela . ' 
 ' it be too high for I , ' Kim mutter . ' I be still all shake . I be 
 glad I hurt the man . ' 
 ' I feel that , sleep upon thy knee , in the wood below . it 
 disquiet I in my dream - the evil in thy soul work through to 
 mine . yet on the other hand ' - he loose his rosary - ' I have 
 acquire merit by save two life - the life of those that wrong 
 I . now I must see into the Cause of thing . the boat of my soul 
 stagger . ' 
 ' sleep , and be strong . that be wisest . ' 
 ' I meditate . there be a need great than thou know . ' 
 till the dawn , hour after hour , as the moonlight pal on the high 
 peak , and that which have be belt blackness on the side of the 
 far hill show as tender green forest , the lama star fixedly at 
 the wall . from time to time he groan . outside the barred door , 
 where discomfited kine come to ask for their old stable , Shamlegh 
 and the cooly give itself up to plunder and riotous living . the 
 Ao - chung man be their leader , and once they have open the Sahibs ' 
 tin food and find that they be very good they dare not turn 
 back . Shamlegh kitchen - midden take the dunnage . 
 when Kim , after a night of bad dream , steal forth to brush his 
 tooth in the morning chill , a fair - coloured woman with turquoise- 
 stud headgear draw he aside . 
 ' the other have go . they leave thee this kilta as the promise be . 
 I do not love Sahibs , but thou wilt make we a charm in return for 
 it . we do not wish little Shamlegh to get a bad name on account of 
 the - accident . I be the Woman of Shamlegh . ' she look he over 
 with bold , bright eye , unlike the usual furtive glance of 
 hillwoman . 
 ' assuredly . but it must be do in secret . ' 
 she raise the heavy kilta like a toy and sling it into her own hut . 
 ' out and bar the door ! let none come near till it be finish , ' 
 say Kim . 
 ' but afterwards - we may talk ? ' 
 Kim tilt the kilta on the floor - a cascade of survey - instrument , 
 book , diary , letter , map , and queerly scented native 
 correspondence . at the very bottom be an embroidered bag cover a 
 seal , gild , and illuminate document such as one King send to 
 another . Kim catch his breath with delight , and review the 
 situation from a Sahib 's point of view . 
 ' the book I do not want . besides , they be logarithms - Survey , I 
 suppose . ' he lay they aside . ' the letter I do not understand , but 
 Colonel Creighton will . they must all be keep . the map - they draw 
 well map than I - of course . all the native letter - oho ! - and 
 particularly the murasla . ' he sniff the embroider bag . ' that 
 must be from Hilas or Bunar , and Hurree Babu speak truth . by Jove ! 
 it be a fine haul . I wish Hurree could know ... the rest must go 
 out of the window . ' he finger a superb prismatic compass and the 
 shiny top of a theodolite . but after all , a Sahib can not very well 
 steal , and the thing might be inconvenient evidence later . he 
 sort out every scrap of manuscript , every map , and the native 
 letter . they make one softish slab . the three lock ferril - back 
 book , with five wear pocket - book , he put aside . 
 ' the letter and the murasla I must carry inside my coat and under 
 my belt , and the hand - write book I must put into the food - bag . it 
 will be very heavy . no . I do not think there be anything more . if 
 there be , the cooly have throw it down the khud , so thatt be all 
 right . now you go too . ' he repacke the kilta with all he mean to 
 lose , and hove it up on to the windowsill . a thousand foot below lay 
 a long , lazy , round - shoulder bank of mist , as yet untouched by the 
 morning sun . a thousand foot below that be a hundred - year - old pine- 
 forest . he could see the green top look like a bed of moss when 
 a wind - eddy thin the cloud . 
 ' no ! I do not   think any one will go after you ! ' 
 the wheeling basket vomit its content as it drop . the 
 theodolite hit a jutting cliff - ledge and explode like a shell ; the 
 book , inkstand , paint - box , compass , and ruler show for a 
 few second like a swarm of bee . then they vanish ; and , though 
 Kim , hang half out of the window , strain his young ear , never 
 a sound come up from the gulf . 
 ' five hundred - a thousand rupee could not buy they , ' he think 
 sorrowfully . ' it be verree wasteful , but I have all their other 
 stuff - everything they do - I hope . now how the deuce be I to tell 
 Hurree Babu , and whatt the deuce be I to do ? and my old man be sick . 
 I must tie up the letter in oilskin . that be something to do first 
 - else they will get all sweat ... and I be all alone ! ' he bind 
 they into a neat packet , swedge down the stiff , sticky oilskin at 
 the comer , for his roving life have make he as methodical as an old 
 hunter in matter of the road . then with double care he pack away 
 the book at the bottom of the food - bag . 
 the woman rap at the door . 
 ' but thou hast make no charm , ' she say , look about . 
 ' there be no need . ' Kim have completely overlook the necessity for 
 a little patter - talk . the woman laugh at his confusion 
 irreverently . 
 ' none - for thee . thou canst cast a spell by the mere winking of an 
 eye . but think of we poor people when thou art go . they be all 
 too drunk last night to hear a woman . thou art not drunk ? ' 
 ' I be a priest . ' Kim have recover himself , and , the woman be 
 aught but unlovely , think well to stand on his office . 
 ' I warn they that the Sahibs will be angry and will make an 
 inquisition and a report to the Rajah . there be also the Babu with 
 they . clerk have long tongue . ' 
 ' be that all thy trouble ? ' the plan rise fully form in Kim 's mind , 
 and he smile ravishingly . 
 ' not all , ' quoth the woman , put out a hard brown hand all 
 cover with turquoise set in silver . 
 ' I can finish that in a breath , ' he go on quickly . ' the Babu be 
 the very hakim   thou hast hear of he ?   who be wander among the 
 hill by Ziglaur . I know he . ' 
 ' he will tell for the sake of a reward . Sahibs can not distinguish 
 one hillman from another , but Babus have eye for man - and woman . ' 
 ' carry a word to he from I . ' 
 ' there be nothing I would not do for thee . ' 
 he accept the compliment calmly , as man must in land where woman 
 make the love , tear a leaf from a note - book , and with a patent 
 indelible pencil write in gross Shikast - the script that bad little 
 boy use when they write dirt on wall : ' I have everything that they 
 have write : their picture of the country , and many letter . 
 especially the murasla . tell I what to do . I be at Shamlegh - under- 
 the - Snow . the old man be sick . ' 
 " take this to he . it will altogether shut his mouth . he can not have 
 go far . ' 
 ' indeed no . they be still in the forest across the spur . our 
 child go to watch they when the light come , and have cry the 
 news as they move . ' 
 Kim look his astonishment ; but from the edge of the sheep - pasture 
 float a shrill , kite - like trill . a child tend cattle have pick 
 it up from a brother or sister on the far side of the slope that 
 command Chini valley . 
 ' my husband be also out there gather wood . ' she draw a handful 
 of walnut from her bosom , split one neatly , and begin to eat . Kim 
 affect blank ignorance . 
 ' dost thou not know the meaning of the walnut - priest ? ' she say 
 coyly , and hand he the half - shell . 
 ' well think of . ' he slip the piece of paper between they 
 quickly . ' hast thou a little wax to close they on this letter ? ' 
 the woman sigh aloud , and Kim relent . 
 ' there be no payment till service have be render . carry this to 
 the Babu , and say it be send by the Son of the Charm . ' 
 ' ai ! truly ! truly ! by a magician - who be like a Sahib . ' 
 ' Nay , a Son of the Charm : and ask if there be any answer . ' 
 ' but if he offer a rudeness ? I - I be afraid . ' 
 Kim laugh . ' he be , I have no doubt , very tired and very hungry . 
 the Hills make cold bedfellow . Hai , my ' - it be on the tip of his 
 tongue to say Mother , but he turn it to Sister - ' thou art a wise 
 and witty woman . by this time all the village know what have 
 befall the Sahibs - eh ? ' 
 ' true . news be at Ziglaur by midnight , and by tomorrow should be at 
 Kotgarh . the village be both afraid and angry . ' 
 ' no need . tell the village to feed the Sahibs and pass they on , in 
 peace . we must get they quietly away from our valley . to steal be 
 one thing - to kill another . the Babu will understand , and there 
 will be no after - complaint . be swift . I must tend my master when he 
 wake . ' 
 ' so be it . after service - thou hast say ? - come the reward . I be 
 the Woman of Shamlegh , and I hold from the Rajah . I be no common 
 bearer of babe . Shamlegh be thine : hoof and horn and hide , milk and 
 butter . take or leave . ' 
 she turn resolutely uphill , her silver necklace click on her 
 broad breast , to meet the morning sun fifteen hundred foot above 
 they . this time Kim think in the vernacular as he wax down the 
 oilskin edge of the packet . 
 ' how can a man follow the way or the Great Game when he be so - always 
 pester by woman ? there be that girl at Akrola of the Ford ; and 
 there be the scullion 's wife behind the dovecot - not count the 
 other - and now come this one ! when I be a child it be well 
 enough , but now I be a man and they will not regard I as a man . 
 walnut , indeed ! Ho ! ho ! it be almond in the Plains ! ' 
 he go out to levy on the village - not with a begging - bowl , which 
 might do for down - country , but in the manner of a prince . Shamlegh 's 
 summer population be only three family - four woman and eight or 
 nine man . they be all full of tin meat and mixed drink , from 
 ammoniate quinine to white vodka , for they have take their full 
 share in the overnight loot . the neat continental tent have be cut 
 up and share long ago , and there be patent aluminium saucepan 
 abroad . 
 but they consider the lama 's presence a perfect safeguard against 
 all consequence , and impenitently bring Kim of their good - even 
 to a drink of chang - the barley - beer that come from Ladakh - way . 
 then they thaw out in the sun , and sit with their leg hang 
 over infinite abyss , chattering , laughing , and smoking . they 
 judge India and its government solely from their experience of 
 wander Sahibs who have employ they or their friend as 
 shikarris . Kim hear tale of shot miss upon ibex , serow , or 
 markhor , by Sahibs twenty year in their graf - every detail 
 light from behind like twig on tree - top see against lightning . 
 they tell he of their little disease , and , more important , the 
 disease of their tiny , sure - footed cattle ; of trip as far as 
 Kotgarh , where the strange missionary live , and beyond even to 
 marvellous Simla , where the street be pave with silver , and 
 anyone , look you , can get service with the Sahibs , who ride about in 
 two - wheel cart and spend money with a spade . presently , grave 
 and aloof , walk very heavily , the lama join himself to the 
 chatter under the eave , and they give he great room . the thin air 
 refresh he , and he sit on the edge of precipice with the good of 
 they , and , when talk languish , fling pebble into the void . thirty 
 mile away , as the eagle fly , lie the next range , seam and 
 channel and pit with little patch of brush - forest , each a 
 day 's dark march . behind the village , Shamlegh hill itself cut off 
 all view to southward . it be like sit in a swallow 's nest 
 under the eave of the roof of the world . 
 from time to time the lama stretch out his hand , and with a little 
 low - voice prompting would point out the road to Spiti and north 
 across the Parungla . 
 ' Beyond , where the hill lie thickest , lie De - ch'en '   he mean 
 Han - le ' , ' the great Monastery . s'tag - stan - ras - ch'en build it , and of 
 he there run this tale . ' Whereupon he tell it : a fantastic pile 
 narrative of bewitchment and miracle that set Shamlegh a - gasping . 
 turn west a little , he steer for the green hill of Kulu , and 
 seek Kailung under the glacier . ' for thither come I in the old , 
 old day . from Leh I come , over the Baralachi . ' 
 ' yes , yes ; we know it , ' say the far - fare people of Shamlegh . 
 ' and I sleep two night with the priest of Kailung . these be the 
 Hills of my delight ! shadow bless above all other shadow ! there 
 my eye open on this world ; there my eye be open to this 
 world ; there I find Enlightenment ; and there I girt my loin for my 
 search . out of the Hills I come - the high Hills and the strong 
 wind . oh , just be the Wheel ! ' he bless they in detail - the great 
 glacier , the naked rock , the pile moraine and tumbled shale ; dry 
 upland , hide salt - lake , age - old timber and fruitful water - shot 
 valley one after the other , as a die man bless his folk ; and Kim 
 marvel at his passion . 
 ' yes - yes . there be no place like our hill , ' say the people of 
 Shamlegh . and they fall to wonder how a man could live in the hot 
 terrible plain where the cattle run as big as elephant , unfit to 
 plough on a hillside ; where village touch village , they have hear , 
 for a hundred mile ; where folk go about steal in gang , and 
 what the robber spar the Police carry utterly away . 
 so the still forenoon wear through , and at the end of it Kim 's 
 messenger drop from the steep pasture as unbreathed as when she 
 have set out . 
 ' I send a word to the hakim , ' Kim explain , while she make 
 reverence . 
 ' he join himself to the idolater ? Nay , I remember he do a 
 healing upon one of they . he have acquire merit , though the heal 
 employ his strength for evil . just be the Wheel ! what of the 
 hakim ? ' 
 ' I fear that thou hadst be bruise and - and I know he be 
 wise . ' Kim take the waxed walnut - shell and read in English on the 
 back of his note : your favour receive . can not get away from present 
 company at present , but shall take they into Simla . after which , 
 hope to rejoin you . inexpedient to follow angry gentleman . return by 
 same road you come , and will overtake . highly gratified about 
 correspondence due to my forethought . ' he say , Holy One , that he 
 will escape from the idolater , and will return to we . shall we wait 
 awhile at Shamlegh , then ? ' 
 the lama look long and lovingly upon the hill and shake his head . 
 ' that may not be , chela . from my bone outward I do desire it , but 
 it be forbid . I have see the Cause of thing . ' 
 ' why ? when the Hills give thee back thy strength day by day ? 
 remember we be weak and faint down below there in the Doon . ' 
 ' I become strong to do evil and to forget . a brawler and a 
 swashbuckler upon the hillside be I. ' Kim bite back a smile . ' just 
 and perfect be the Wheel , swerve not a hair . when I be a man - a 
 long time ago - I do pilgrimage to Guru Ch'wan among the poplar ' 
  he point Bhotanwards , ' where they keep the Sacred Horse . ' 
 ' quiet , be quiet ! ' say Shamlegh , all arow . ' he speak of 
 Jam - lin - nin - k'or , the horse that can go Round the World in a day . ' 
 ' I speak to my chela only , ' say the lama , in gentle reproof , and 
 they scatter like frost on south eave of a morning . ' I do not 
 seek truth in those day , but the talk of doctrine . all illusion ! I 
 drink the beer and eat the bread of Guru Ch'wan . next day one say : 
 " we go out to fight Sangor Gutok down the valley to discover "   mark 
 again how Lust be tie to Anger !   " which Abbot shall bear rule in 
 the valley and take the profit of the prayer they print at Sangor 
 Gutok . " I go , and we fight a day . ' 
 ' but how , Holy one ? ' 
 ' with our long pencase as I could have show ... I say , we 
 fight under the poplar , both Abbots and all the monk , and one 
 lay open my forehead to the bone . see ! ' he tilt back his cap and 
 show a pucker silvery scar . ' just and perfect be the Wheel ! 
 yesterday the scar itch , and after fifty year I recall how it 
 be deal and the face of he who deal it ; dwell a little in 
 illusion . follow that which thou didst see - strife and stupidity . 
 just be the Wheel ! the idolater 's blow fall upon the scar . then I 
 be shake in my soul : my soul be darken , and the boat of my soul 
 rock upon the water of illusion . not till I come to Shamlegh 
 could I meditate upon the Cause of thing , or trace the run 
 grass - root of Evil . I strove all the long night . ' 
 ' but , Holy One , thou art innocent of all evil . may I be thy 
 sacrifice ! ' 
 Kim be genuinely distressed at the old man 's sorrow , and Mahbub 
 Ali 's phrase slip out unaware . 
 ' in the dawn , ' the lama go on more gravely , ready rosary clicking 
 between the slow sentence , ' come enlightenment . it be here ... I be 
 an old man ... hill - breed , hill - fed , never to sit down among my 
 Hills . three year I travel through Hind , but - can earth be 
 strong than Mother Earth ? my stupid body yearn to the Hills and 
 the snow of the Hills , from below there . I say , and it be true , 
 my Search be sure . so , at the Kulu woman 's house I turn hillward , 
 over - persuade by myself . there be no blame to the hakim . he - 
 follow Desire - foretell that the Hills would make I strong . 
 they strengthen I to do evil , to forget my search . I delight in 
 life and the lust of life . I desire strong slope to climb . I cast 
 about to find they . I measure the strength of my body , which be 
 evil , against the high Hills , I make a mock of thee when thy breath 
 come short under Jamnotri . I jest when thou wouldst not face the 
 snow of the pass . ' 
 ' but what harm ? I be afraid . it be just . I be not a hillman ; and I 
 love thee for thy new strength . ' 
 ' More than once I remember ' - he rest his cheek dolefully on his 
 hand - ' I seek thy praise and the hakim 's for the mere strength of 
 my leg . thus evil follow evil till the cup be full . just be the 
 Wheel ! all Hind for three year do I all honour . from the Fountain 
 of Wisdom in the Wonder House to ' - he smile - ' a little child 
 playing by a big gun - the world prepare my road . and why ? ' 
 ' because we love thee . it be only the fever of the blow . I myself 
 be still sick and shaken . ' 
 ' no ! it be because I be upon the way - tuned as be si - nen 
  cymbal   to the purpose of the Law . I depart from that ordinance . 
 the tune be break : follow the punishment . in my own hill , on 
 the edge of my own country , in the very place of my evil desire , 
 come the buffet - here ! '   he touch his brow .   ' as a novice be 
 beat when he misplace the cup , so be I beat , who be Abbot of 
 such - zen . no word , look you , but a blow , chela . ' 
 ' but the Sahibs do not know thee , Holy one ? ' 
 ' we be well match . ignorance and Lust meet Ignorance and lust 
 upon the road , and they begat Anger . the blow be a sign to I , who 
 be no well than a stray yak , that my place be not here . who can 
 read the Cause of an act be halfway to Freedom ! " back to the path , " 
 say the Blow . " the Hills be not for thee . thou canst not choose 
 freedom and go in bondage to the delight of life . " ' 
 ' would we have never meet that curse Russian ! ' 
 ' our Lord himself can not make the Wheel swing backward . and for my 
 merit that I have acquire I gain yet another sign . ' he put his hand 
 in his bosom , and draw forth the Wheel of Life . ' look ! I consider 
 this after I have meditate . there remain untorn by the idolater no 
 more than the breadth of my fingernail . ' 
 ' I see . ' 
 ' so much , then , be the span of my life in this body . I have serve 
 the Wheel all my day . now the Wheel serve I . but for the merit I 
 have acquire in guide thee upon the way , there would have be 
 add to I yet another life ere I have find my River . be it plain , 
 chela ? ' 
 Kim star at the brutally disfigured chart . from left to right 
 diagonally the rent run - from the Eleventh House where Desire give 
 birth to the child   as it be draw by Tibetans   - across the human 
 and animal world , to the Fifth House - the empty House of the 
 sens . the logic be unanswerable . 
 ' before our Lord win Enlightenment ' - the lama fold all away with 
 reverence - ' he be tempt . I too have be tempt , but it be 
 finish . the Arrow fall in the Plains - not in the Hills . 
 therefore , what make we here ? ' 
 ' shall we at least wait for the hakim ? ' 
 ' I know how long I shall live in this body . what can a hakim do ? ' 
 ' but thou art all sick and shaken . thou canst not walk . ' 
 ' how can I be sick if I see Freedom ? ' he rise unsteadily to his 
 foot . 
 ' then I must get food from the village . oh , the weary road ! ' Kim 
 feel that he too need rest . 
 ' that be lawful . let we eat and go . the Arrow fall in the Plains ... 
 but I yield to Desire . make ready , chela . ' 
 Kim turn to the woman with the turquoise headgear who have be 
 idly pitch pebble over the cliff . she smile very kindly . 
 ' I find he like a stray buffalo in a cornfield - the Babu ; 
 snort and sneeze with cold . he be so hungry that he forget his 
 dignity and give I sweet word . the Sahibs have nothing . ' she fling 
 out an empty palm . ' one be very sick about the stomach . thy work ? ' 
 Kim nod , with a bright eye . 
 ' I speak to the Bengali first - and to the people of a near - by 
 village after . the Sahibs will be give food as they need it - nor 
 will the people ask money . the plunder be already distribute . the 
 Babu make lie speech to the Sahibs . why do he not leave 
 they ? ' 
 ' out of the greatness of his heart . ' 
 " be never a Bengali yet have one big than a dry walnut . but it 
 be no matter ... now as to walnut . after service come reward . I 
 have say the village be thine . ' 
 ' it be my loss , ' Kim begin . ' even now I have plan desirable thing 
 in my heart which ' - there be no need to go through the compliment 
 proper to these occasion . he sigh deeply ... ' but my master , 
 lead by a vision - ' 
 ' huh ! what can old eye see except a full begging - bowl ? ' 
 ' - turn from this village to the Plains again . ' 
 ' bid he stay . ' 
 Kim shake his head . ' I know my Holy One , and his rage if he be 
 cross , ' he reply impressively . ' his curse shake the Hills . ' 
 ' pity they do not save he from a broken head ! I hear that thou 
 wast the tiger - hearte one who smite the Sahib . let he dream a 
 little long . stay ! ' 
 ' hillwoman , ' say Kim , with austerity that could not harden the 
 outline of his young oval face , ' these matter be too high for 
 thee . ' 
 ' the Gods be good to we ! since when have man and woman been other 
 than man and woman ? ' 
 ' a priest be a priest . he say he will go upon this hour . I be his 
 chela , and I go with he . we need food for the Road . he be an 
 honour guest in all the village , but ' - he break into a pure 
 boy 's grin - ' the food here be good . give I some . ' 
 ' what if I do not give it thee ? I be the woman of this village . ' 
 ' then I curse thee - a little - not greatly , but enough to 
 remember . ' he could not help smile . 
 ' Thou hast curse I already by the down - drop eyelash and the 
 uplifted chin . curse ? what should I care for mere word ? ' she 
 clench her hand upon her bosom ... ' but I would not have thee 
 to go in anger , think hardly of I - a gatherer of cow - dung and 
 grass at Shamlegh , but still a woman of substance . ' 
 ' I think nothing , ' say Kim , ' but that I be grieve to go , for I be 
 very weary ; and that we need food . here be the bag . ' 
 the woman snatch it angrily . ' I be foolish , ' say she . ' who be 
 thy woman in the Plains ? fair or black ? I be fair once . laugh 
 thou ? once , long ago , if thou canst believe , a Sahib look on I 
 with favour . once , long ago , I wear european clothe at the Mission - house 
 yonder . ' she point towards Kotgarh . ' once , long ago . I be 
 Ker - lis - ti - an and speak English - as the Sahibs speak it . yes . my 
 Sahib say he would return and we d I - yes , we d I . he go away - 
 I have nurse he when he be sick - but he never return . then I 
 see that the Gods of the Kerlistians lie , and I go back to my own 
 people ... I have never set eye on a Sahib since .   do not laugh 
 at I . the fit be past , little priestling .   thy face and thy walk 
 and thy fashion of speech put I in mind of my Sahib , though thou 
 art only a wandering mendicant to whom I give a dole . curse I ? Thou 
 canst neither curse nor bless ! ' she set her hand on her hip and 
 laugh bitterly . ' Thy Gods be lie ; thy work be lie ; thy word 
 be lie . there be no Gods under all the Heavens . I know it ... but 
 for awhile I think it be my Sahib come back , and he be my God . 
 yes , once I make music on a pianno in the Mission - house at Kotgarh . 
 now I give alm to priest who be heatthen . ' she wind up with the 
 english word , and tie the mouth of the brimming bag . 
 ' I wait for thee , chela , ' say the lama , lean against the door- 
 post . 
 the woman sweep the tall figure with her eye . ' he walk ! he can not 
 cover half a mile . Whither would old bone go ? ' 
 at this Kim , already perplex by the lama 's collapse and foresee 
 the weight of the bag , fairly lose his temper . 
 ' what be it to thee , woman of ill - oman , where he go ? ' 
 ' nothing - but something to thee , priest with a Sahib 's face . wilt 
 thou carry he on thy shoulder ? ' 
 ' I go to the Plains . none must hinder my return . I have wrestle 
 with my soul till I be strengthless . the stupid body be spend , and 
 we be far from the Plains . ' 
 ' Behold ! ' she say simply , and draw aside to let Kim see his own 
 utter helplessness . ' curse I . maybe it will give he strength . make 
 a charm ! call on thy great God . thou art a priest . ' she turn away . 
 the lama have squat limply , still hold by the door - post . one 
 can not strike down an old man that he recover again like a boy in 
 the night . weakness bow he to the earth , but his eye that hang 
 on Kim be alive and implore . 
 ' it be all well , ' say Kim . ' it be the thin air that weaken thee . 
 in a little while we go ! it be the mountain - sickness . I too be a 
 little sick at stomach , ' - and he kneel and comfort with such 
 poor word as come first to his lip . then the woman return , more 
 erect than ever . 
 ' thy Gods useless , heh ? try mine . I be the Woman of Shamlegh . ' she 
 hail hoarsely , and there come out of a cow - pen her two husband 
 and three other with a dooli , the rude native litter of the Hills , 
 that they use for carry the sick and for visit of state . ' these 
 cattle ' - she do not condescend to look at they - ' be thine for so 
 long as thou shalt need . ' 
 ' but we will not go Simla - way . we will not go near the Sahibs , ' 
 cry the first husband . 
 ' they will not run away as the other do , nor will they steal 
 baggage . two I know for weakling . stand to the rear - pole , Sonoo and 
 Taree . ' they obey swiftly . ' low now , and lift in that holy man . 
 I will see to the village and your virtuous wife till ye return . ' 
 ' when will that be ? ' 
 ' ask the priest . do not pester I . Lay the food - bag at the foot , it 
 balance well so . ' 
 ' oh , Holy One , thy Hills be kind than our Plains ! ' cry Kim , 
 relieve , as the lama totter to the litter . ' it be a very king 's 
 bed - a place of honour and ease . and we owe it to - ' 
 ' a woman of ill - omen . I need thy blessing as much as I do thy 
 curse . it be my order and none of thine . lift and away ! here ! Hast 
 thou money for the road ? ' 
 she beckon Kim to her hut , and stoop above a battered English 
 cash - box under her cot . 
 ' I do not need anything , ' say Kim , anger where he should have 
 be grateful . ' I be already rudely load with favour . ' 
 she look up with a curious smile and lay a hand on his shoulder . 
 ' at least , thank I . I be foul - faced and a hillwoman , but , as thy 
 talk go , I have acquire merit . shall I show thee how the Sahibs 
 render thank ? ' and her hard eye soften . 
 ' I be but a wandering priest , ' say Kim , his eye light in 
 answer . ' thou need neither my blessing nor my curse . ' 
 ' Nay . but for one little moment - thou canst overtake the dooli in 
 ten stride - if thou wast a Sahib , shall I show thee what thou 
 wouldst do ? ' 
 ' how if I guess , though ? ' say Kim , and put his arm round her 
 waist , he kiss she on the cheek , add in English : ' thank you 
 verree much , my dear . ' 
 kissing be practically unknown among Asiatics , which may have be 
 the reason that she lean back with wide - open eye and a face of 
 panic . 
 ' next time , ' Kim go on , ' you must not be so sure of your heatthen 
 priest . now I say good - bye . ' he hold out his hand english - fashion . 
 she take it mechanically . ' good - bye , my dear . ' 
 ' good - bye , and - and ' - she be remember her english word one by 
 one -'you will come back again ? good - bye , and - thee God bless you . ' 
 half an hour later , as the creak litter jolt up the hill path 
 that lead south - easterly from Shamlegh , Kim see a tiny figure at 
 the hut door wave a white rag . 
 ' she have acquire merit beyond all other , ' say the lama . ' for to 
 set a man upon the way to Freedom be half as great as though she have 
 herself find it . ' 
 ' Umm , ' say Kim thoughtfully , consider the past . ' it may be that 
 I have acquire merit also ... at least she do not treat I like a 
 child . ' he hitch the front of his robe , where lie the slab of 
 document and map , re - stow the precious food - bag at the lama 's 
 foot , lay his hand on the litter 's edge , and buckle down to the 
 slow pace of the grunt husband . 
 ' these also acquire merit , ' say the lama after three mile . 
 ' More than that , they shall be pay in silver , ' quoth Kim . the woman 
 of Shamlegh have give it to he ; and it be only fair , he argue , 
 that her man should earn it back again . 
 chapter 15 
 I would not give room for an Emperor - 
 I would hold my road for a King . 
 to the Triple Crown I would not bow down - 
 but this be a different thing ! 
 I will not fight with the Powers of Air - 
 Sentry , pass he through ! 
 Drawbridge let fall - he be the Lord of we all - 
 the Dreamer whose dream come true ! 
 the Siege of the Fairies . 
 two hundred mile north of Chini , on the blue shale of Ladakh , lie 
 Yankling Sahib , the merry - minded man , spy - glass wrathfully across 
 the ridge for some sign of his pet tracker - a man from Ao - chung . 
 but that renegade , with a new Mannlicher rifle and two hundred 
 cartridge , be elsewhere , shoot musk - deer for the market , and 
 Yankling Sahib will learn next season how very ill he have be . 
 up the valley of Bushahr - the far - behold eagle of the 
 Himalayas swerve at his new blue - and - white gored umbrella - hurry 
 a Bengali , once fat and well - look , now lean and weather - worn . he 
 have receive the thank of two foreigner of distinction , pilot 
 not unskilfully to Mashobra tunnel , which lead to the great and gay 
 capital of India . it be not his fault that , blanket by wet mist , 
 he convey they past the telegraph - station and european colony of 
 Kotgarh . it be not his fault , but that of the Gods , of whom he 
 discourse so engagingly , that he lead they into the border of 
 Nahan , where the Rahah of that State mistake they for deserting 
 british soldiery . Hurree Babu explain the greatness and glory , in 
 their own country , of his companion , till the drowsy kinglet 
 smile . he explain it to everyone who ask - many time - aloud - 
 variously . he beg food , arrange accommodation , prove a skilful 
 leech for an injury of the groin - such a blow as one may receive 
 roll down a rock - cover hillside in the dark - and in all thing 
 indispensable . the reason of his friendliness do he credit . with 
 million of fellow - serfs , he have learn to look upon Russia as the 
 great deliverer from the North . he be a fearful man . he have be 
 afraid that he could not save his illustrious employer from the 
 anger of an excited peasantry . he himself would just as lief hit a 
 holy man as not , but ... he be deeply grateful and sincerely 
 rejoice that he have do his ' little possible ' towards bring 
 their venture to - bar the lose baggage - a successful issue , he 
 have forget the blow ; deny that any blow have be deal that 
 unseemly first night under the pine . he ask neither pension nor 
 retain fee , but , if they deem he worthy , would they write he 
 a testimonial ? it might be useful to he later , if other , their 
 friend , come over the Passes . he beg they to remember he in 
 their future greatness , for he ' opine subtly ' that he , even he , 
 Mohendro Lal Dutt , MA of Calcutta , have ' do the State some 
 service ' . 
 they give he a certificate praise his courtesy , helpfulness , and 
 unerre skill as a guide . he put it in his waist - belt and sob 
 with emotion ; they have endure so many danger together . he lead they 
 at high noon along crowded Simla Mall to the Alliance Bank of Simla , 
 where they wish to establish their identity . thence he vanish 
 like a dawn - cloud on Jakko . 
 behold he , too fine - draw to sweat , too pressed to vaunt the drug 
 in his little brass - bind box , ascend Shamlegh slope , a just man 
 make perfect . watch he , all Babudom lay aside , smoke at noon on 
 a cot , while a woman with turquoise - stud headgear point south- 
 easterly across the bare grass . litter , she say , do not travel as 
 fast as single man , but his bird should now be in the Plains . the 
 holy man would not stay though Lispeth press he . the Babu groan 
 heavily , gird up his huge loin , and be off again . he do not care 
 to travel after dusk ; but his day ' march - there be none to enter 
 they in a book - would astonish folk who mock at his race . kindly 
 villager , remember the Dacca drug - vendor of two month ago , give 
 he shelter against evil spirit of the wood . he dream of Bengali 
 Gods , University text - book of education , and the Royal Society , 
 London , England . next dawn the bob blue - and - white umbrella go 
 forward . 
 on the edge of the Doon , Mussoorie well behind they and the Plains 
 spread out in golden dust before , rest a worn litter in which - all 
 the Hills know it - lie a sick lama who seek a River for his 
 healing . village have almost come to blow over the honour of 
 bear it , for not only have the lama give they blessing , but his 
 disciple good money - full one - third Sahibs ' price . twelve mile a 
 day have the dooli travel , as the greasy , rub pole - end show , 
 and by road that few Sahibs use . over the Nilang Pass in storm when 
 the drive snow - dust fill every fold of the impassive lama 's 
 drapery ; between the black horn of Raieng where they hear the 
 whistle of the wild goat through the cloud ; pitch and strain 
 on the shale below ; hard - hold between shoulder and clench jaw when 
 they round the hideous curve of the Cut Road under Bhagirati ; 
 swing and creak to the steady jog - trot of the descent into the 
 Valley of the Waters ; press along the steamy level of that locked 
 valley ; up , up and out again , to meet the roar gust off 
 Kedarnath ; set down of mid - day in the dun gloom of kindly oak- 
 forest ; pass from village to village in dawn - chill , when even 
 devotee may be forgive for swear at impatient holy man ; or by 
 torchlight , when the least fearful think of ghost - the dooli have 
 reach her last stage . the little hill - folk sweat in the modify 
 heat of the low siwalik , and gather round the priest for their 
 blessing and their wage . 
 ' ye have acquire merit , ' say the lama . ' merit great than your 
 knowing . and ye will return to the Hills , ' he sigh . 
 ' surely . the high Hills as soon as may be . ' the bearer rub his 
 shoulder , drink water , spit it out again , and readjust his grass 
 sandal . Kim - his face be draw and tired - pay very small silver 
 from his belt , heave out the food - bag , cram an oilskin packet - 
 they be holy writing - into his bosom , and help the lama to his 
 foot . the peace have come again into the old man 's eye , and he do 
 not look for the hill to fall down and crush he as he do that 
 terrible night when they be delay by the flooded river . 
 the man pick up the dooli and swing out of sight between the scrub 
 clump . 
 the lama raise a hand toward the rampart of the Himalayas . ' not 
 with you , o bless among all hill , fall the Arrow of our Lord ! and 
 never shall I breathe your air again ! ' 
 ' but thou art ten time the strong man in this good air , ' say 
 Kim , for to his wearied soul appeal the well - crop , kindly Plains . 
 ' here , or hereabouts , fall the Arrow , yes . we will go very softly , 
 perhaps , a koss a day , for the Search be sure . but the bag weigh 
 heavy . ' 
 ' ay , our search be sure . I have come out of great temptation . ' 
 it be never more than a couple of mile a day now , and Kim 's 
 shoulder bear all the weight of it - the burden of an old man , the 
 burden of the heavy food - bag with the locked book , the load of the 
 writing on his heart , and the detail of the daily routine . he 
 beg in the dawn , set blanket for the lama 's meditation , hold the 
 weary head on his lap through the noonday heat , fan away the 
 fly till his wrist ache , beg again in the evening , and 
 rub the lama 's foot , who reward he with promise of Freedom - 
 today , tomorrow , or , at furth , the next day . 
 ' never be such a chela . I doubt at time whether Ananda more 
 faithfully nurse our Lord . and thou art a Sahib ? when I be a man - 
 a long time ago - I forget that . now I look upon thee often , and 
 every time I remember that thou art a Sahib . it be strange . ' 
 ' Thou hast say there be neither black nor white . why plague I with 
 this talk , Holy one ? let I rub the other foot . it vex I . I be 
 not a Sahib . I be thy chela , and my head be heavy on my shoulder . ' 
 ' patience a little ! we reach Freedom together . then thou and I , upon 
 the far bank of the River , will look back upon our life as in the 
 Hills we see our day ' march lay out behind we . perhaps I be once 
 a Sahib . ' 
 " be never a Sahib like thee , I swear it . ' 
 ' I be certain the Keeper of the Images in the Wonder House be in 
 past life a very wise Abbot . but even his spectacle do not make my 
 eye see . there fall shadow when I would look steadily . no matter - 
 we know the trick of the poor stupid carcass - shadow change to 
 another shadow . I be bind by the illusion of Time and Space . how 
 far come we today in the flesh ? ' 
 ' perhaps half a koss . '   three quarter of a mile , and it be a 
 weary march . 
 ' half a koss . ha ! I go ten thousand thousand in the spirit . how , 
 we be all lap and swathe and swaddle in these senseless 
 thing . ' he look at his thin blue - veined hand that find the bead 
 so heavy . ' Chela , hast thou never a wish to leave I ? ' 
 Kim think of the oilskin packet and the book in the food - bag . if 
 someone duly authorize would only take delivery of they the Great 
 Game might play itself for aught he then care . he be tired and hot 
 in his head , and a cough that come from the stomach worry he . 
 ' no . ' he say almost sternly . ' I be not a dog or a snake to bite 
 when I have learn to love . ' 
 ' thou art too tender towards I . ' 
 ' not that either . I have move in one matter without consulting 
 thee . I have send a message to the Kulu woman by that woman who give 
 we the goat 's milk this morn , say that thou wast a little feeble 
 and wouldst need a litter . I beat myself in my mind that I do not 
 do it when we enter the Doon . we stay in this place till the 
 litter return . ' 
 ' I be content . she be a woman with a heart of gold , as thou sayest , 
 but a talker - something of a talker . ' 
 ' she will not weary thee . I have look to that also . Holy One , my 
 heart be very heavy for my many carelessness towards thee . ' an 
 hysterical catch rise in his throat . ' I have walk thee too far : I 
 have not pick good food always for thee ; I have not consider the 
 heat ; I have talk to people on the road and leave thee alone ... I 
 have - I have ... Hai mai ! but I love thee ... and it be all too 
 late ... I be a child ... oh , why be I not a man ? ... ' 
 overbear by strain , fatigue , and the weight beyond his year , Kim 
 break down and sob at the lama 's foot . 
 ' what a to - do be here ! ' say the old man gently . ' thou hast never 
 step a hair 's breadth from the way of obedience . neglect I ? 
 child , I have live on thy strength as an old tree live on the lime 
 of a new wall . day by day , since Shamlegh down , I have steal 
 strength from thee . therefore , not through any sin of thine , art 
 thou weaken . it be the Body - the silly , stupid body - that speak 
 now . not the assured soul . be comfort ! know at least the devil 
 that thou fight . they be earth - bear - child of illusion . we 
 will go to the woman from Kulu . she shall acquire merit in housing 
 we , and specially in tend I . Thou shalt run free till strength 
 return . I have forget the stupid body . if there be any blame , I 
 bear it . but we be too close to the Gates of Deliverance to weigh 
 blame . I could praise thee , but what need ? in a little - in a very 
 little - we shall sit beyond all need . ' 
 and so he pet and comfort Kim with wise saw and grave text on 
 that little - understand beast , our Body , who , be but a delusion , 
 insist on pose as the Soul , to the darkening of the Way , and the 
 immense multiplication of unnecessary devil . 
 ' Hai ! hai ! let we talk of the woman from Kulu . think you she will 
 ask another charm for her grandson ? when I be a young man , a very 
 long time ago , I be plague with these vapour - and some other - 
 and I go to an Abbot - a very holy man and a seeker after truth , 
 though then I know it not . sit up and listen , child of my soul ! my 
 tale be tell . say he to I , " Chela , know this . there be many lie 
 in the world , and not a few liar , but there be no liar like our 
 body , except it be the sensation of our body . " consider this 
 I be comfort , and of his great favour he suffer I to drink tea 
 in his presence . suffer I now to drink tea , for I be thirsty . ' 
 with a laugh across his tear , Kim kiss the lama 's foot , and set 
 about the tea - making . 
 ' thou leanest on I in the body , Holy One , but I lean on thee for 
 some other thing . dost know it ? ' 
 ' I have guess maybe , ' and the lama 's eye twinkle . ' we must 
 change that . ' 
 so , when with scuffling and scraping and a hot air of importance , 
 paddle up nothing less than the Sahiba 's pet palanquin send twenty 
 mile , with that same grizzle old Oorya servant in charge , and when 
 they reach the disorderly order of the long white ramble house 
 behind Saharunpore , the lama take his own measure . 
 say the Sahiba cheerily from an upper window , after compliment : 
 ' what be the good of an old woman 's advice to an old man ? I tell 
 thee - I tell thee , Holy One , to keep an eye upon the chela . how 
 didst thou do it ? never answer I ! I know . he have be run among 
 the woman . look at his eye - hollow and sunk - and the Betraying 
 Line from the nose down ! he have be sift out ! Fie ! Fie ! and a 
 priest , too ! ' 
 Kim look up , over - weary to smile , shake his head in denial . 
 ' do not jest , ' say the lama . ' that time be do . we be here upon 
 great matter . a sickness of soul take I in the Hills , and he a 
 sickness of the body . since then I have live upon his strength - 
 eat he . ' 
 ' child together - young and old , ' she sniff , but forbore to 
 make any new joke . ' may this present hospitality restore ye ! hold 
 awhile and I will come to gossip of the high good Hills . ' 
 at evening time - her son - in - law be return , so she do not need 
 to go on inspection round the farm - she win to the meat of the 
 matter , explain low - voicedly by the lama . the two old head nod 
 wisely together . Kim have reel to a room with a cot in it , and be 
 doze soddenly . the lama have forbid he to set blanket or get 
 food . 
 ' I know - I know . who but I ? ' she cackle . ' we who go down to the 
 burning - ghat clutch at the hand of those come up from the River 
 of Life with full water - jar - yes , brim water - jar . I do the 
 boy wrong . he lend thee his strength ? it be true that the old eat 
 the young daily . stand now we must restore he . ' 
 ' thou hast many time acquire merit - ' 
 ' my merit . what be it ? old bag of bone make curry for man 
 who do not ask " who cook this ? " now if it be store up for my 
 grandson - ' 
 ' he that have the belly - pain ? ' 
 ' to think the Holy One remember that ! I must tell his mother . it be 
 most singular honour ! " he that have the belly - pain " - straightway the 
 Holy One remember . she will be proud . ' 
 ' my chela be to I as be a son to the unenlightened . ' 
 ' say grandson , rather . mother have not the wisdom of our year . if 
 a child cry they say the heavens be fall . now a grandmother be 
 far enough separate from the pain of bearing and the pleasure of 
 give the breast to consider whether a cry be wickedness pure or 
 the wind . and since thou speak once again of wind , when last the 
 Holy One be here , maybe I offend in press for charm . ' 
 ' sister , ' say the lama , use that form of address a buddhist monk 
 may sometimes employ towards a nun , ' if charm comfort thee - ' 
 ' they be well than ten thousand doctor . ' 
 ' I say , if they comfort thee , I who be Abbot of such - zen , will make 
 as many as thou mayest desire . I have never see thy face - ' 
 ' that even the monkey who steal our loquat count for again . Hee ! 
 hee ! ' 
 ' but as he who sleep there say , ' - he nod at the shut door of 
 the guest - chamber across the forecourt - ' thou hast a heart of gold 
 ... and he be in the spirit my very " grandson " to I ' 
 ' good ! I be the Holy One 's cow . ' this be pure Hinduism , but the 
 lama never heed . ' I be old . I have bear son in the body . oh , 
 once I could please man ! now I can cure they . ' he hear her armlet 
 tinkle as though she bar arm for action . ' I will take over the 
 boy and dose he , and stuff he , and make he all whole . Hai ! hai ! 
 we old people know something yet . ' 
 wherefore when Kim , ache in every bone , open his eye , and would 
 go to the cook - house to get his master 's food , he find strong 
 coercion about he , and a veil old figure at the door , flank by 
 the grizzle manservant , who tell he very precisely the thing that 
 he be on no account to do . 
 ' Thou must have ? thou shalt have nothing . what ? a locked box in 
 which to keep holy book ? oh , that be another matter . heaven 
 forbid I should come between a priest and his prayer ! it shall be 
 bring , and thou shalt keep the key . ' 
 they push the coffer under his cot , and Kim shut away Mahbub 's 
 pistol , the oilskin packet of letter , and the locked book and 
 diary , with a groan of relief . for some absurd reason their weight 
 on his shoulder be nothing to their weight on his poor mind . his 
 neck ache under it of night . 
 ' Thine be a sickness uncommon in youth these day : since young folk 
 have give up tend their better . the remedy be sleep , and 
 certain drug , ' say the Sahiba ; and he be glad to give himself up 
 to the blankness that half menace and half soothe he . 
 she brew drink , in some mysterious asiatic equivalent to the 
 still - room - drenche that smell pestilently and taste worse . she 
 stand over Kim till they go down , and inquire exhaustively after 
 they have come up . she lay a taboo upon the forecourt , and enforce 
 it by mean of an armed man . it be true he be seventy odd , that his 
 scabbarde sword cease at the hilt ; but he represent the 
 authority of the Sahiba , and load wain , chatter servant , 
 calf , dog , hen , and the like , fetch a wide compass by those 
 part . good of all , when the body be clear , she cut out from the 
 mass of poor relation that crowd the back of the building - 
 house - hold dog , we name they - a cousin 's widow , skilled in what 
 Europeans , who know nothing about it , call massage . and the two of 
 they , lay he east and west , that the mysterious earth - current 
 which thrill the clay of our body might help and not hinder , take 
 he to piece all one long afternoon - bone by bone , muscle by 
 muscle , ligament by ligament , and lastly , nerve by nerve . knead to 
 irresponsible pulp , half hypnotize by the perpetual flick and 
 readjustment of the uneasy chudder that veil their eye , Kim slide 
 ten thousand mile into slumber - thirty - six hour of it - sleep 
 that soak like rain after drought . 
 then she feed he , and the house spin to her clamour . she cause 
 fowl to be slay ; she send for vegetable , and the sober , slow- 
 thinking gardener , nigh as old as she , sweat for it ; she take 
 spice , and milk , and onion , with little fish from the brooks - anon 
 lime for sherbet , fat quail from the pit , then chicken - liver 
 upon a skewer , with sliced ginger between . 
 ' I have see something of this world , ' she say over the crowd 
 tray , ' and there be but two sort of woman in it -those who take 
 the strength out of a man and those who put it back . once I be that 
 one , and now I be this . Nay - do not play the priestling with I . 
 mine be but a jest . if it do not hold good now , it will when thou 
 takest the road again . Cousin , ' - this to the poor relation , never 
 weary of extoll her patroness 's charity - ' he be get a bloom 
 on the skin of a new - curry horse . our work be like polish 
 jewel to be throw to a dance - girl - eh ? ' 
 Kim sit up and smile . the terrible weakness have drop from he 
 like an old shoe . his tongue itch for free speech again , and but a 
 week back the light word clog it like ash . the pain in his 
 neck   he must have catch it from the lama   have go with the heavy 
 dengue - ache and the evil taste in the mouth . the two old woman , a 
 little , but not much , more careful about their veil now , cluck as 
 merrily as the hen that have enter peck through the open door . 
 ' where be my Holy one ? ' he demand . 
 ' hear he ! Thy Holy One be well , ' she snap viciously . ' though 
 that be none of his merit . , Knew I a charm to make he wise , I would 
 sell my jewel and buy it . to refuse good food that I cook myself 
 - and go rove into the field for two night on an empty belly - 
 and to tumble into a brook at the end of it - call you that 
 holiness ? then , when he have nearly break what thou hast leave of my 
 heart with anxiety , he tell I that he have acquire merit . oh , how 
 like be all man ! no , that be not it - he tell I that he be free 
 from all sin . I could have tell he that before he wet himself 
 all over . he be well now - this happen a week ago - but burn I 
 such holiness ! a babe of three would do well . do not fret thyself 
 for the Holy One . he keep both eye on thee when he be not wad 
 our brook . ' 
 ' I do not remember to have see he . I remember that the day and 
 night pass like bar of white and black , opening and shutting . I 
 be not sick : I be but tired . " 
 ' a lethargy that come by right some few score year later . but it be 
 do now . ' 
 ' maharanee , ' Kim begin , but lead by the look in her eye , change it 
 to the title of plain love - ' Mother , I owe my life to thee . how 
 shall I make thank ? ten thousand blessing upon thy house and - ' 
 ' the house be unblesse ! '   it be impossible to give exactly the old 
 lady 's word .   ' thank the Gods as a priest if thou wilt , but thank 
 I , if thou carest , as a son . heaven above ! have I shift thee and 
 lift thee and slap and twist thy ten toe to find text fling 
 at my head ? somewhere a mother must have bear thee to break she 
 heart . what use thou to her - son ? ' 
 ' I have no mother , my mother , ' say Kim . ' she die , they tell I , 
 when I be young . ' 
 ' Hai mai ! then none can say I have rob she of any right if - when 
 thou tak the road again and this house be but one of a thousand 
 use for shelter and forget , after an easy - fling blessing . no 
 matter . I need no blessing , but - but - ' she stamp her foot at 
 the poor relation . ' take up the tray to the house . what be the good 
 of stale food in the room , o woman of ill - oman ? ' 
 ' I ha - have bear a son in my time too , but he die , ' whimper the 
 bow sister - figure behind the chudder . ' Thou know he die ! I 
 only wait for the order to take away the tray . ' 
 ' it be I that be the woman of ill - oman , ' cry the old lady 
 penitently . ' we that go down to the chattris   the big umbrella 
 above the burning - ghat where the priest take their last due 
 clutch hard at the bearer of the chattis   water - jar - young folk 
 full of the pride of life , she mean ; but the pun be clumsy . when 
 one can not dance in the festival one must e'en look out of the 
 window , and grandmothering take all a woman 's time . Thy master 
 give I all the charm I now desire for my daughter 's eld , by 
 reason - be it ? - that he be wholly free from sin . the hakim be 
 bring very low these day . he go about poison my servant for 
 lack of their better . ' 
 ' what hakim , mother ? ' 
 ' that very Dacca man who give I the pill which rent I in three 
 piece . he cast up like a stray camel a week ago , vow that he 
 and thou have be blood - brother together up Kulu - way , and feign 
 great anxiety for thy health . he be very thin and hungry , so I give 
 order to have he stuff too - he and his anxiety ! ' 
 ' I would see he if he be here . ' 
 ' he eat five time a day , and lance boil for my hind to save 
 himself from an apoplexy . he be so full of anxiety for thy health 
 that he stick to the cook - house door and stay himself with scrap . 
 he will keep . we shall never get rid of he . ' 
 ' send he here , mother ' - the twinkle return to Kim 's eye for a 
 flash - ' and I will try . ' 
 ' I will send he , but to chase he off be an ill turn . at least he have 
 the sense to fish the Holy One out of the brook ; thus , as the Holy 
 one do not say , acquire merit . ' 
 ' he be a very wise hakim . send he , mother . ' 
 ' Priest praise priest ? a miracle ! if he be any friend of thine   ye 
 squabble at your last meeting   I will hale he here with horse - rope 
 and - and give he a caste - dinner afterwards , my son ... get up and 
 see the world ! this lie abe be the mother of seventy devil ... 
 my son ! my son ! ' 
 she trot forth to raise a typhoon off the cook - house , and almost 
 on her shadow roll in the Babu , rob as to the shoulder like a 
 roman emperor , jowle like Titus , bare - head , with new patent- 
 leather shoe , in high condition of fat , exude joy and 
 salutation . 
 ' by Jove , Mister O'Hara , but I be jolly - glad to see you . I will 
 kindly shut the door . it be a pity you be sick . be you very sick ? ' 
 ' the paper - the paper from the kilta . the map and the murasla ! ' 
 he hold out the key impatiently ; for the present need on his soul 
 be to get rid of the loot . 
 ' you be quite right . that be correct departmental view to take . you 
 have get everything ? ' 
 ' all that be handwritten in the kilta I take . the rest I throw down 
 the hill . ' he could hear the key 's grate in the lock , the sticky 
 pull of the slow - rend oilskin , and a quick shuffling of paper . 
 he have be annoy out of all reason by the knowledge that they lay 
 below he through the sick idle day - a burden incommunicable . for 
 that reason the blood tingle through his body , when Hurree , 
 skip elephantinely , shake hand again . 
 ' this be fine ! this be fine ! Mister O'Hara ! you have - ha ! ha ! 
 swipe the whole bag of trick - lock , stock , and barrel . they 
 tell I it be eight month ' work go up the spout ! by Jove , how 
 they beat I ! ... look , here be the letter from Hilas ! ' he intone a 
 line or two of Court Persian , which be the language of authorize 
 and unauthorized diplomacy . ' Mister Rajah Sahib have just about put 
 his foot in the hole . he will have to explain offeecially how the 
 deuce - an'-all he be write love - letter to the Czar . and they be 
 very clever map ... and there be three or four Prime Ministers of 
 these part implicate by the correspondence . by Gad , sar ! the 
 British Government will change the succession in Hilas and Bunar , 
 and nominate new heir to the throne . " Trea - son most base " ... but 
 you do not understand ? eh ? ' 
 ' be they in thy hand ? ' say Kim . it be all he care for . 
 ' just you jolly - well bet yourself they be . ' he stow the entire 
 trove about his body , as only Orientals can . ' they be go up to 
 the office , too . the old lady think I be permanent fixture here , 
 but I shall go away with these straight off - immediately . Mr Lurgan 
 will be proud man . you be offeecially subordinate to I , but I 
 shall embody your name in my verbal report . it be a pity we be not 
 allow write report . we Bengalis excel in thee exact science . ' 
 he toss back the key and show the box empty . 
 ' good . that be good . I be very tired . my Holy One be sick , too . 
 and do he fall into - ' 
 ' oah yess . I be his good friend , I tell you . he be behave very 
 strange when I come down after you , and I think perhaps he might 
 have the paper . I follow he on his meditation , and to discuss 
 ethnological point also . you see , I be verree small person here 
 nowadays , in comparison with all his charm . by Jove , O'Hara , do you 
 know , he be afflict with infirmity of fit . yess , I tell you . 
 Cataleptic , too , if not also epileptic . I find he in such a state 
 under a tree in articulo mortem , and he jump up and walk into a 
 brook and he be nearly drown but for I . I pull he out . ' 
 ' because I be not there ! ' say Kim . ' he might have die . ' 
 ' yes , he might have die , but he be dry now , and assert he have 
 undergone transfiguration . ' the Babu tap his forehead knowingly . 
 ' I take note of his statement for Royal Society - in posse . you 
 must make haste and be quite well and come back to Simla , and I will 
 tell you all my tale at Lurgan 's . it be splendid . the bottom of 
 their trouser be quite tear , and old Nahan Rajah , he think they 
 be european soldier desert . ' 
 ' oh , the Russians ? how long be they with thee ? ' 
 ' one be a Frenchman . oh , day and day and day ! now all the hill- 
 people believe all Russians be all beggar . by Jove ! they have not 
 one dam'-thing that I do not get they . and I tell the common people 
 - oah , such tale and anecdote ! - I will tell you at old Lurgan 's 
 when you come up . we will have - ah - a night out ! it be feather in 
 both our cap ! yess , and they give I a certificate . that be 
 creaming joke . you should have see they at the Alliance Bank 
 identify themselves ! and thank Almighty God you get their paper 
 so well ! you do not laugh verree much , but you shall laugh when you 
 be well . now I will go straight to the railway and get out . you 
 shall have all sort of credit for your game . when do you come 
 along ? we be very proud of you though you give we great fright . 
 and especially Mahbub . ' 
 ' ay , Mahbub . and where be he ? ' 
 ' sell horse in this vi - cinity , of course . ' 
 ' here ! why ? speak slowly . there be a thickness in my head still . ' 
 the Babu look shyly down his nose . ' well , you see , I be fearful 
 man , and I do not like responsibility . you be sick , you see , and I 
 do not know where deuce - an'-all the paper be , and if so , how 
 many . so when I have come down here I slip in private wire to 
 Mahbub - he be at Meerut for race - and I tell he how case 
 stand . he come up with his man and he consort with the lama , and 
 then he call I a fool , and be very rude - ' 
 ' but wherefore - wherefore ? ' 
 ' that be what I ask . I only suggest that if anyone steal the paper 
 I should like some good strong , brave man to rob they back again . 
 you see , they be vitally important , and Mahbub Ali he do not know 
 where you be . ' 
 ' Mahbub Ali to rob the Sahiba 's house ? thou art mad , Babu , ' say 
 Kim with indignation . 
 ' I want the paper . suppose she have steal they ? it be only 
 practical suggestion , I think . you be not pleased , eh ? ' 
 a native proverb - unquotable - show the blackness of Kim 's 
 disapproval . 
 ' well , ' - Hurree shrug his shoulder - ' there be no accounting 
 for thee taste . Mahbub be angry too . he have sell horse all about 
 here , and he say old lady be pukka   thorough   old lady and would 
 not condescend to such ungentlemanly thing . I do not care . I have 
 get the paper , and I be very glad of moral support from Mahbub . I 
 tell you , I be fearful man , but , somehow or other , the more fearful 
 I be the more dam'-tight place I get into . so I be glad you come 
 with I to Chini , and I be glad Mahbub be close by . the old lady 
 she be sometimes very rude to I and my beautiful pill . ' 
 ' Allah be merciful ! ' say Kim on his elbow , rejoice . ' what a beast 
 of wonder be a Babu ! and that man walk alone - if he do walk - 
 with robbed and angry foreigner ! ' 
 ' Oah , thatt be nothing , after they have do beat I ; but if I 
 lose the paper it be pretty - jolly serious . Mahbub he nearly beat 
 I too , and he go and consort with the lama no end . I shall 
 stick to ethnological investigation henceforward . now good - bye , 
 Mister O'Hara . I can catch 4.25 p.m. to Umballa if I be quick . it 
 will be good time when we all tell thee tale up at Mr Lurgan 's . I 
 shall report you offeecially well . good - bye , my dear fallow , and 
 when next you be under thee emotion please do not use the 
 Mohammedan term with the tibetan dress . ' 
 he shake hand twice - a Babu to his boot - heel - and open the 
 door . with the fall of the sunlight upon his still triumphant face 
 he return to the humble Dacca quack . 
 ' he rob they , ' think Kim , forget his own share in the game . 
 ' he trick they . he lie to they like a Bengali . they give he a 
 chit   a testimonial . he make they a mock at the risk of his life - 
 I never would have go down to they after the pistol - shot - and 
 then he say he be a fearful man ... and he be a fearful man . I must 
 get into the world again . ' 
 at first his leg bent like bad pipe - stem , and the flood and rush 
 of the sunlit air dazzle he . he squat by the white wall , the 
 mind rummage among the incident of the long dooli journey , the 
 lama 's weakness , and , now that the stimulus of talk be remove , 
 his own self - pity , of which , like the sick , he have great store . the 
 unnerved brain edge away from all the outside , as a raw horse , once 
 rowel , sidle from the spur . it be enough , amply enough , that 
 the spoil of the kilta be away - off his hand - out of his 
 possession . he try to think of the lama - to wonder why he have 
 tumble into a brook - but the bigness of the world , see between 
 the forecourt gate , sweep link thought aside . then he look upon 
 the tree and the broad field , with the thatched hut hide among 
 crop - look with strange eye unable to take up the size and 
 proportion and use of thing - star for a still half - hour . all 
 that while he feel , though he could not put it into word , that his 
 soul be out of gear with its surrounding - a cog - wheel 
 unconnected with any machinery , just like the idle cog - wheel of a 
 cheap Beheea sugar - crusher lay by in a corner . the breeze fan 
 over he , the parrot shriek at he , the noise of the populate 
 house behind - squabble , order , and reproofs - hit on dead ear . 
 ' I be Kim . I be Kim . and what be Kim ? ' his soul repeat it again 
 and again . 
 he do not want to cry - have never feel less like cry in his life 
 - but of a sudden easy , stupid tear trickle down his nose , and 
 with an almost audible click he feel the wheel of his be lock up 
 anew on the world without . thing that ride meaningless on the 
 eyeball an instant before slide into proper proportion . road be 
 mean to be walk upon , house to be live in , cattle to be drive , 
 field to be till , and man and woman to be talk to . they be 
 all real and true - solidly plant upon the foot - perfectly 
 comprehensible - clay of his clay , neither more nor less . he shake 
 himself like a dog with a flea in his ear , and ramble out of the 
 gate . say the Sahiba , to whom watchful eye report this move : 
 ' let he go . I have do my share . Mother Earth must do the rest . 
 when the Holy One come back from meditation , tell he . ' 
 there stand an empty bullock - cart on a little knoll half a mile 
 away , with a young banyan tree behind - a look - out , as it be , 
 above some new - plough level ; and his eyelid , bath in soft air , 
 grow heavy as he near it . the ground be good clean dust - no new 
 herbage that , living , be half - way to death already , but the hopeful 
 dust that hold the seed of all life . he feel it between his toe , 
 pat it with his palm , and joint by joint , sigh luxuriously , 
 lay he down full length along in the shadow of the wooden - pin 
 cart . and Mother Earth be as faithful as the Sahiba . she breathe 
 through he to restore the poise he have lose lie so long on a cot 
 cut off from her good current . his head lie powerless upon she 
 breast , and his open hand surrender to her strength . the many- 
 root tree above he , and even the dead manhandle wood beside , 
 know what he seek , as he himself do not know . hour upon hour he 
 lie deep than sleep . 
 towards evening , when the dust of return kine make all the 
 horizon smoke , come the lama and Mahbub Ali , both afoot , walk 
 cautiously , for the house have tell they where he have go . 
 ' Allah ! what a fool 's trick to play in open country ! ' mutter the 
 horse - dealer . ' he could be shoot a hundred time - but this be not 
 the border . ' 
 ' and , ' say the lama , repeat a many - time - tell tale , ' never be 
 such a chela . temperate , kindly , wise , of ungrudge disposition , a 
 merry heart upon the road , never forget , learn , truthful , 
 courteous . great be his reward ! ' 
 ' I know the boy - as I have say . ' 
 ' and he be all those thing ? ' 
 ' some of they - but I have not yet find a Red Hat 's charm for 
 make he overly truthful . he have certainly be well nurse . ' 
 ' the Sahiba be a heart of gold , ' say the lama earnestly . ' she look 
 upon he as her son . ' 
 ' Hmph ! Half Hind seem that way dispose . I only wish to see that 
 the boy have come to no harm and be a free agent . as thou know , 
 he and I be old friend in the first day of your pilgrimage 
 together . ' 
 ' that be a bond between we . ' the lama sit down . ' we be at the end 
 of the pilgrimage . ' 
 ' no thank to thee thine be not cut off for good and all a week 
 back . I hear what the Sahiba say to thee when we bear thee up on 
 the cot . ' Mahbub laugh , and tug his newly dye beard . 
 ' I be meditate upon other matter that tide . it be the hakim 
 from Dacca break my meditation . ' 
 ' otherwise ' - this be in Pushtu for decency 's sake - ' thou wouldst 
 have end thy meditation upon the sultry side of Hell - be an 
 unbeliever and an idolater for all thy child 's simplicity . but now , 
 Red Hat , what be to be do ? ' 
 ' this very night , ' - the word come slowly , vibrate with triumph - 
 ' this very night he will be as free as I be from all taint of sin - 
 assure as I be , when he quit this body , of Freedom from the Wheel 
 of thing . I have a sign ' - he lay his hand above the torn chart in 
 his bosom - ' that my time be short ; but I shall have safeguard he 
 throughout the year . remember , I have reach Knowledge , as I tell 
 thee only three night back . ' 
 ' it must be true , as the Tirah priest say when I steal his cousin 's 
 wife , that I be a Sufi   a free - thinker ; for here I sit , ' say 
 Mahbub to himself , ' drink in blasphemy unthinkable ... I remember 
 the tale . on that , then , he go to Fannatu l'Adn   the Gardens of 
 Eden . but how ? wilt thou slay he or drown he in that wonderful 
 river from which the Babu drag thee ? ' 
 ' I be drag from no river , ' say the lama simply . ' Thou hast 
 forget what befell . I find it by Knowledge . ' 
 ' oh , ay . true , ' stammer Mahbub , divide between high indignation 
 and enormous mirth . ' I have forget the exact run of what happen . 
 Thou didst find it knowingly . ' 
 ' and to say that I would take life be - not a sin , but a madness 
 simple . my chela aid I to the River . it be his right to be 
 cleanse from sin - with I . ' 
 ' ay , he need cleanse . but afterwards , old man - afterwards ? ' 
 ' what matter under all the Heavens ? he be sure of Nibban - 
 enlighten - as I be . ' 
 ' well say . I have a fear he might mount Mohammed 's Horse and fly 
 away . ' 
 ' Nay - he must go forth as a teacher . ' 
 ' aha ! now I see ! that be the right gait for the colt . certainly he 
 must go forth as a teacher . he be somewhat urgently need as a 
 scribe by the State , for instance . ' 
 ' to that end he be prepare . I acquire merit in that I give alm 
 for his sake . a good deed do not die . he aid I in my search . I 
 aid he in his . just be the Wheel , o horse - seller from the North . 
 let he be a teacher ; let he be a scribe - what matter ? he will 
 have attain Freedom at the end . the rest be illusion . ' 
 ' what matter ? when I must have he with I beyond Balkh in six 
 month ! I come up with ten lame horse and three strong - back man - 
 thank to that chicken of a Babu - to break a sick boy by force out 
 of an old trot 's house . it seem that I stand by while a young Sahib 
 be hoist into Allah know what of an idolater 's Heaven by mean of 
 old Red Hat . and I be reckon something of a player of the Game 
 myself ! but the madman be fond of the boy ; and I must be very 
 reasonably mad too . ' 
 ' what be the prayer ? ' say the lama , as the rough Pushtu rumble 
 into the red beard . 
 ' no matter at all ; but now I understand that the boy , sure of 
 Paradise , can yet enter Government service , my mind be easy . I 
 must get to my horse . it grow dark . do not wake he . I have no 
 wish to hear he call thee master . ' 
 ' but he be my disciple . what else ? ' 
 ' he have tell I . ' Mahbub choke down his touch of spleen and rise 
 laugh . ' I be not altogether of thy faith , Red Hat - if so small a 
 matter concern thee . ' 
 ' it be nothing , ' say the lama . 
 ' I think not . therefore it will not move thee , sinless , new- 
 wash and three part drown to boot , when I call thee a good man 
 - a very good man . we have talk together some four or five 
 evening now , and for all I be a horse - coper I can still , as the 
 saying be , see holiness beyond the leg of a horse . yea , can see , 
 too , how our Friend of all the World put his hand in thine at the 
 first . use he well , and suffer he to return to the world as a 
 teacher , when thou hast - bath his leg , if that be the proper 
 medicine for the colt . ' 
 ' why not follow the way thyself , and so accompany the boy ? ' 
 Mahbub star stupefy at the magnificent insolence of the demand , 
 which across the border he would have pay with more than a blow . 
 then the humour of it touch his worldly soul . 
 ' softly - softly - one foot at a time , as the lame gelding go over 
 the Umballa jump . I may come to Paradise later - I have working 
 that way - great motion - and I owe they to thy simplicity . Thou 
 hast never lie ? ' 
 ' what need ? ' 
 ' o Allah , hear he ! " what need " in this Thy world ! nor ever harm a 
 man ? ' 
 ' once - with a pencase - before I be wise . ' 
 ' so ? I think the well of thee . Thy teaching be good . Thou hast 
 turn one man that I know from the path of strife . ' he laugh 
 immensely . ' he come here open - minded to commit a dacoity   a 
 house - robbery with violence . yes , to cut , rob , kill , and carry off what 
 he desire . ' 
 ' a great foolishness ! ' 
 ' oh ! black shame too . so he think after he have see thee - and a 
 few other , male and female . so he abandon it ; and now he go to 
 beat a big fat Babu man . ' 
 ' I do not understand . ' 
 ' Allah forbid it ! some man be strong in knowledge , Red Hat . Thy 
 strength be strong still . keep it - I think thou wilt . if the boy 
 be not a good servant , pull his ear off . ' 
 with a hitch of his broad Bokhariot belt the Pathan swagger off 
 into the gloaming , and the lama come down from his cloud so far as 
 to look at the broad back . 
 ' that person lack courtesy , and be deceive by the shadow of 
 appearance . but he speak well of my chela , who now enter upon his 
 reward . let I make the prayer ! ... wake , o fortunate above all bear 
 of woman . wake ! it be find ! ' 
 Kim come up from those deep well , and the lama attend his yawning 
 pleasure ; duly snap finger to head off evil spirit . 
 ' I have sleep a hundred year . where - ? Holy One , hast thou be 
 here long ? I go out to look for thee , but ' - he laugh drowsily - 
 ' I sleep by the way . I be all well now . Hast thou eat ? let we go 
 to the house . it be many day since I tend thee . and the Sahiba 
 feed thee well ? who shampoo thy leg ? what of the weakness - the 
 belly and the neck , and the beating in the ear ? ' 
 ' gone - all go . dost thou not know ? ' 
 ' I know nothing , but that I have not see thee in a monkey 's age . 
 know what ? ' 
 ' strange the knowledge do not reach out to thee , when all my 
 thought be theeward . ' 
 ' I can not see the face , but the voice be like a gong . have the Sahiba 
 make a young man of thee by her cookery ? ' 
 he peer at the cross - legged figure , outlined jet - black against the 
 lemon - colour drift of light . so do the stone Bodhisat sit who 
 look down upon the patent self - register turnstile of the Lahore 
 Museum . 
 the lama hold his peace . except for the click of the rosary and a 
 faint clop - clop of Mahbub 's retreating foot , the soft , smoky silence 
 of evening in India wrap they close . 
 ' hear I ! I bring news . ' 
 ' but let we - ' 
 out shoot the long yellow hand compelling silence . Kim tuck his 
 foot under his robe - edge obediently . 
 ' hear I ! I bring news ! the Search be finish . come now the Reward 
 ... thus . when we be among the Hills , I live on thy strength till 
 the young branch bow and nigh break . when we come out of the 
 Hills , I be trouble for thee and for other matter which I hold in 
 my heart . the boat of my soul lack direction ; I could not see into 
 the Cause of thing . so I give thee over to the virtuous woman 
 altogether . I take no food . I drink no water . still I see not the 
 Way . they press food upon I and cry at my shut door . so I 
 remove myself to a hollow under a tree . I take no food . I take no 
 water . I sit in meditation two day and two night , abstract my 
 mind ; inbreathe and outbreathing in the require manner ... upon 
 the second night - so great be my reward - the wise Soul loose 
 itself from the silly body and go free . this I have never before 
 attain , though I have stand on the threshold of it . consider , for 
 it be a marvel ! ' 
 ' a marvel indeed . two day and two night without food ! where be 
 the Sahiba ? ' say Kim under his breath . 
 ' yea , my Soul go free , and , wheel like an eagle , see indeed 
 that there be no Teshoo Lama nor any other soul . as a drop draw to 
 water , so my Soul draw near to the Great Soul which be beyond all 
 thing . at that point , exalt in contemplation , I see all Hind , 
 from Ceylon in the sea to the Hills , and my own Painted Rocks at 
 such - zen ; I see every camp and village , to the least , where we have 
 ever rest . I see they at one time and in one place ; for they be 
 within the Soul . by this I know the Soul have pass beyond the 
 illusion of Time and Space and of thing . by this I know that I be 
 free . I see thee lie in thy cot , and I see thee fall downhill 
 under the idolater - at one time , in one place , in my Soul , which , 
 as I say , have touch the Great Soul . also I see the stupid body of 
 Teshoo Lama lie down , and the hakim from Dacca kneel beside , 
 shout in its ear . then my Soul be all alone , and I see nothing , 
 for I be all thing , have reach the Great Soul . and I meditate 
 a thousand thousand year , passionless , well aware of the cause of 
 all thing . then a voice cry : " what shall come to the boy if thou 
 art dead ? " and I be shake back and forth in myself with pity for 
 thee ; and I say : " I will return to my chela , lest he miss the Way . " 
 upon this my Soul , which be the Soul of Teshoo Lama , withdraw itself 
 from the Great Soul with striving and yearning and retching and 
 agony not to be tell . as the egg from the fish , as the fish from 
 the water , as the water from the cloud , as the cloud from the thick 
 air , so put forth , so leap out , so draw away , so fume up the Soul 
 of Teshoo Lama from the Great Soul . then a voice cry : " the River ! 
 take heed to the River ! " and I look down upon all the world , which 
 be as I have see it before - one in time , one in place - and I see 
 plainly the River of the Arrow at my foot . at that hour my Soul be 
 hamper by some evil or other whereof I be not wholly cleanse , 
 and it lie upon my arm and coil round my waist ; but I put it 
 aside , and I cast forth as an eagle in my flight for the very place 
 of the River . I push aside world upon world for thy sake . I see 
 the River below I - the River of the Arrow - and , descending , the 
 water of it close over I ; and behold I be again in the body of 
 Teshoo Lama , but free from sin , and the hakim from Decca bear up my 
 head in the water of the River . it be here ! it be behind the mango- 
 tope here - even here ! ' 
 ' Allah kerim ! oh , well that the Babu be by ! Wast thou very wet ? ' 
 ' why should I regard ? I remember the hakim be concern for the 
 body of Teshoo Lama . he hale it out of the holy water in his hand , 
 and there come afterwards thy horse - seller from the North with a cot 
 and man , and they put the body on the cot and bear it up to the 
 Sahiba 's house . ' 
 ' what say the Sahiba ? ' 
 ' I be meditate in that body , and do not hear . so thus the search 
 be end . for the merit that I have acquire , the River of the Arrow 
 be here . it break forth at our foot , as I have say . I have find 
 it . Son of my Soul , I have wrench my Soul back from the Threshold 
 of Freedom to free thee from all sin - as I be free , and sinless ! 
 just be the Wheel ! Certain be our deliverance ! come ! ' 
 he cross his hand on his lap and smile , as a man may who have win 
 salvation for himself and his beloved . 
